Healthcare teams are often made up of many interprofessional members and can include (but are not limited to) a physician, nurse practitioner or physician assistant, pharmacist, and nurse. All such team members treating patients with avascular necrosis of the femoral head must be able to not only recognize the condition but also to participate in a competent management plan and obtain expert consultation when indicated. The pharmacist can help with assessing medication regimens, both leading up to AVN as well as attempts to treat AVN pharmaceutically, reporting any concerns to the physician.

If the patient requires surgery, an orthopedic specialist will lead the treatment, and nursing will assist in preparing the patient for surgery, monitor the patient during and after surgery, and check on treatment efficacy as well as administer post-operative medications, with an eye towards watching for adverse effects, which should be reported promptly.

The primary care clinicians, including nurses, should educate patients about the harms of alcohol. Also, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective dose of corticosteroids. Nursing and physicians should ask patients on long term corticosteroids should be asked about hip symptoms at every clinic visit. The pharmacist should provide patient education on the necessity to quit smoking and can work with the physician on pharmaceutical aids to assist with smoking cessation. Patients should receive training about the symptoms of AVN so that they can seek help early.

Improved awareness and knowledge of avascular necrosis of the femoral head for each interprofessional healthcare team member will improve patient care and prognostic outcomes. [Level V]