**Acute Adrenal Crisis**

- Is a medical emergency

- Initial management should be fluid resuscitation: Intravenous (IV) bolus of isotonic sodium chloride solution (20 mL/kg). Repeated boluses may be needed.

- Administer dextrose if the patient is hypoglycemic and must be rehydrated with fluid after the bolus dose to prevent hypoglycemia

- Stress doses of hydrocortisone (100 mg/m2 per day) are vital in the management and should be given as early as possible, concomitant with IV fluid treatment.

- Central access and vasopressors, along with higher glucose concentrations, may be required in profoundly ill patients.

- Life-threatening hyperkalemia may require additional therapy with potassium-lowering resin, IV calcium, insulin, and bicarbonate.

**Positive Newborn Screen**

Newborn screening for CAH is routinely performed in all 50 US states and at least 40 other countries.

- A positive newborn screening test for CAH must be confirmed by a second plasma sample (17-hydroxyprogesterone), and serum electrolytes should be measured**.**

- After the confirmatory blood sample is obtained, treatment doses of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid should be initiated in all infants in whom CAH is a consideration, to prevent the potentially life-threatening manifestations of an adrenal crisis.

- If the physician chooses not to initiate treatment while awaiting confirmatory steroid hormone measurements, serum electrolytes should be measured daily.

- A pediatric endocrinologist should manage these patients.

**Long-Term Management**

The goal of therapy is to reduce excessive androgen secretion by replacing the deficient hormones. Proper treatment prevents adrenal crisis and virilization, allowing normal growth and development, normal pubertal development, sexual function, and fertility.

**Glucocorticoids**

- Cortisol replacement: Oral hydrocortisone, in three divided doses of 10 to 20 mg/m2 per day.

- Patients with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency require long-term glucocorticoid treatment to inhibit excessive secretion of CRH and ACTH and reduce the abnormally high serum concentrations of adrenal androgens.

- Hydrocortisone is the treatment of choice because of its short half-life and minimal growth-suppressive effect.

- The efficacy of treatment is best assessed by monitoring ACTH, 17-OHP, DHEA, and androstenedione. A target 17-OHP range of 500 to 1000 ng/dL, although still higher than normal, helps to avoid the adverse effects of overtreatment. Children also should have an annual bone age radiograph and careful monitoring of linear growth

- Older children and adolescents, where growth is complete, may be treated with prednisone (5 to 7.5 mg daily in 2 divided doses ) or once-daily dexamethasone (0.25 to 0.5 mg).

**Mineralocorticoids**

- Infants born with the salt-wasting form of 21OHD require replacement with mineralocorticoids. Fludrocortisone (usually 0.1 to 0.2 mg, but occasionally patients require up to 0.4 mg per day) and sodium chloride (1 to 2 g, each gram of sodium chloride contains 17 mEq of sodium)

- The sodium content of human milk or most infant formulas are about eight mEq/L, and is insufficient to compensate for sodium loses in these infants.

- Plasma Renin activity levels may be used to monitor the effectiveness of mineralocorticoid and sodium replacement. Hypotension, hyperkalemia, and elevated renin levels suggest the need to increase the dose, whereas hypertension, tachycardia, and suppressed PRA production are clinical signs of overtreatment.

- Excessive increases in fludrocortisone dosage also may retard growth.

**Surgical Care**

Infants with ambiguous genitalia require a surgical evaluation and, if needed, plans for corrective surgery. Risks and benefits of surgery should be fully discussed with parents of affected females.

Significantly virilized females usually undergo surgery before 1 year of age. If there is severe clitoromegaly, the clitoris is reduced, with partial excision of the corporal bodies and preservation of the neurovascular bundle. Vaginoplasty and correction of the urogenital sinus usually are performed at the time of clitoral surgery. Revision in adolescence is often necessary.

Bilateral adrenalectomy for CAH is controversial. May be considered only in select cases that have failed medical therapy, especially in rare cases of adult females with salt-wasting CAH and infertility. The risk for noncompliance must be considered before surgery.