The procedure is begun by first marking the location of the implant site, which is at the postauricular region just below linea temporalis at 50-55 mm from the EAC opening; a template for the device (dummy) can be used to secure correct placement and avoid sound processor from touching the auricle. Next, mark the vertical incision line, which will roughly extend 4-5 cm long with the proposed implant site in its midpoint. The incision will be 20-30 mm from the posterior auricle border and approximately 10 mm anterior to the implant-marked site. Hair at the postauricular region around the area of incision is shaved. The patient can then undergo prepping in a sterile fashion with adequate drape. Then skin and soft tissue thickness are measured using a 27-gauge needle, which is inserted perpendicularly at the implant site. When the bone is encountered by the needle, it can be marked with a hemostat. Retrieve the needle and measure distance with a ruler to adequately select the abutment length of the implant device. The patient is then injected with 1% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:100,000 at marked sites, and the amount will depend if the procedure is performed under local or general anesthesia.

A vertical incision is performed at the skin with a 15-blade scalpel down to the periosteum; it is important to limit bipolar cauterization in this step. Self-retractors are used to facilitate periosteal exposure. When adequate exposure is achieved, perform cruciate incision at periosteum and raise the edge with raspatorium to expose approximately 6 mm of bone. After obtaining adequate bone exposure for implant, proceed to drill a fixture guide hole. First, attach drill bit to 3mm spacer drill. Then set up the manufacturer drill unit to a high-speed setting of 2,000 rpm. Proceed to place the guide drill in a perpendicular position. Then drill the fixture hole to 3 mm depth; verify that there is bone underneath the drill site and constantly irrigate to avoid osteocyte injury. After 3mm depth is reached, make sure no dura has been exposed; remove the spacer-attachment on the 3-mm guide drill and continue to drill in the same fashion until 4 mm depth is reached. Once adequate implant depth is reached, proceed to use the widening drill, also known as countersink drill, to widen the area of the implant. Before drilling is begun, revise that the drilling unit is at high speed 2,000 rpm.

The countersink drill is performed in the same fashion as above until the countersink is created at a depth of 0.5 mm; avoid making the hole larger than it is as it may risk implant instability. Proceed to place implant and abutment by first setting the drill to low speed 15-30 rpm with adequate torque drill setting 20-40 Ncm (Newton centimeter). Then proceed to attach the hand-piece to the abutment inserter; this will be used to retrieve the abutment-implant device. It is important not to contaminate the implant while retrieving or placing it in the skull. Place implant-abutment and rotate until the adequate depth is reached (drill engine will stop at adequate depth). Remove handpiece and abutment inserter gently. Wound closure is achieved with 4-0 vicryl for the deep layers of skin and is followed by a running 5-0 fast absorbing plain gut. Perform a punch biopsy (5mm) in skin overlying abutment. Once the abutment is exposed, attach a healing cap with a plug. Then place a thin dressing cover in bacitracin ointment below the healing cap. Finally, cover the healing cap with a mastoid dressing.