Two endodermal buds give rise to primitive pancreatic tissue during the fifth embryonic week. A small ventral bud projects from the hepatic diverticulum and becomes the pancreatic head and uncinate process. A larger dorsal bud originates from foregut endoderm and becomes the pancreatic neck, body, and tail. In the sixth week, the dorsal bud grows laterally left until it enters the dorsal mesentery where the pancreatic tail is intraperitoneal. Developmental forces in the embryonic gut reposition the ventral bud and allow for union with the dorsal bud by the seventh week in utero. As the hepatic diverticulum and foregut tube grow, the ventral bud and common bile duct are pulled counter-clockwise around the primitive duodenum into a dorsal position. There, the pancreatic buds unite as one organ and integrate with the common bile duct and duodenum. By approximately gestational day 33, the dorsal bud develops a microscopic luminal network that becomes the acinar, ductal system responsible for handling exocrine secretions. Although the dorsal pancreas forms the bulk of the organ, its associated duct becomes the accessory pancreatic duct of Santorini. Conversely, the duct from the smaller ventral pancreas becomes the main pancreatic duct of Wirsung. Both ducts fuse in the seventh intrauterine week. After birth, exocrine juices preferentially flow through the main pancreatic duct because the portion of the accessory duct distal to its union with the main duct becomes stenotic or obliterates in most humans.

During embryogenesis, the nascent pancreatic endoderm is pluripotent. All pancreatic cells, endocrine and exocrine, are derived from the endodermal buds. Insulin secreted from fetal islets is detectable during the first trimester, but the majority of fetal glucose regulation occurs through active transport of maternal glucose at the placenta. Nonetheless, transplantation studies in murine models have demonstrated that an eight-week embryonic pancreas is capable of full differentiation and produces functioning beta cells capable of controlling hyperglycemia. By the tenth week post-conception, the primitive islets become vascularized. By the thirteenth week post-conception, a full complement of alpha, beta, and delta cells are present in the islets.

A host of genetic and molecular factors drive the morphologic development in the pancreas. Comprehensive discussions appear in Jennings et al. and Larson et al. where they present detailed, up-to-date evidence.SOX-9, PDX1, and GATA4, all of which facilitate parenchymal growth. Expression of transcription factor neurogenin 3 (Neurog3) surges at the end of the first trimester and serves as the trigger for pancreatic progenitor cells to undergo endocrine differentiation.SHH).