The term "laryngopharyngeal reflux" (LPR) describes the anatomical location of the disease process as well as its cause. According to Sataloff, “laryngopharyngeal reflux incorporates a complex spectrum of abnormalities,” but what brings most patients in for evaluation is the effect of reflux on the vocal cords or the glottis.

In healthy individuals, there are four barriers to reflux encroaching on the larynx: the lower esophageal sphincter, upper esophageal sphincter, esophageal peristalsis, and epithelial resistance factors. Dysfunction in any of the above will lead to symptoms of LPR. The upper esophageal sphincter is the final gatekeeper against reflux of gastric contents. The distal pharynx and upper esophageal sphincter should only open under specific physiologic conditions, such as swallowing, and should otherwise remain closed. The complex of muscles that constitute this barrier to acid consist of the cricopharyngeus, the thyropharyngeus, and the proximal cervical esophageal musculature, forming a c-shaped sling that attaches to the cricoid cartilage. The tonic pressure induced by these muscles can be decreased, however, with general anesthesia, sleep, and cigarette consumption.

The lower esophageal sphincter is located at the gastroesophageal junction, and its contraction leads to circular closure and prevention of stomach acid egress. The diaphragmatic crura constitute a critical part this antireflux mechanism, which is why the presence of a hiatal hernia can be so instrumental in the development of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). The esophagus, with the help of gravity and peristalsis, can generally clear the acid that makes its way proximally past the lower esophageal sphincter. A mucus layer is also present on the esophageal mucosa and serves as a barrier to large molecules, such as pepsin, but does not help prevent acid penetration. Lying on the mucus layer, there is an additional aqueous layer, which further helps protect the tissue by forming an alkaline buffer.