Post-vasectomy pain syndrome has been associated with histological findings such as thickened cellular basement membranes, testicular interstitial fibrosis, and degeneration of the spermatids. The actual mechanism of pain in these patients is thought to be multifactorial and includes direct spermatic cord damage, inflammation of spermatic cord nerves, epididymal congestion, perineural fibrosis, epididymal blowout, and the development of anti-sperm antibodies as well as possible psychological factors.

The precise pathophysiology of chronic orchialgia pain is not well understood, although the prevailing theory is a hypersensitivity of sensory fibers in the peripheral neural pathways possibly due to plasticity or repeated stimulation. This has both a central and peripheral effect where a lower stimulatory threshold is established which allows for easier activation of the action potential with increased frequency and shorter latency time which ultimately results in autonomous nerve firing even without a specific stimulus.

Another theory is Wallerian degeneration in the pelvic peripheral nerves. Wallerian degeneration describes a disorder where there is auto-destruction of the nerve cell axon. It activates and utilizes neutrophils, cytokines, and macrophages, but it ultimately leads to neural hypersensitivity and chronic pain. This process clears inhibitory debris which can then support axonal regrowth and recovery. The net result is patients feel pain with a lower level of stimulation in areas affected by neuronal Wallerian degeneration (a lower pain threshold).

Wallerian degeneration has been found in 3 specific locations in the spermatic cord of patients with chronic orchialgia. These are the cremasteric muscle fibers, perivasal sheath and tissues, and the posterior peri-arterial lipomatous tissue. Ablation or surgical removal of these sites has been suggested as the basis for the high success rate of microsurgical dissection of the spermatic cord (MDSC) in relieving pain in chronic orchialgia. Patients with chronic orchialgia have shown a markedly greater number of nerve axons undergoing Wallerian degeneration in their spermatic cords compared to the general male population.

The most commonly affected nerves include the ilioinguinal, the pudendal, the iliohypogastric and the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerves.