**The Cochlear Nerve and Auditory System**

The cochlear nerve is responsible for transmitting auditory signals from the inner ear to the cochlear nuclei within the brainstem and ultimately to the primary auditory cortex within the temporal lobe.

The cochlea is a spiral, fluid-filled cavity in the bony auditory labyrinth that contains the organ of Corti along its basilar membrane. The bipolar neurons making up the spiral (cochlear) ganglion create the link between the central nervous system (CNS) and the organ of Corti. The spiral ganglion is located at the spiral canal of the modiolus. Type I and Type II neurons populate the spiral ganglion, and both send peripheral processes to the ciliated hair cells of the organ of Corti and central processes that join together to form the cochlear nerve. Type 1 neurons are comparatively larger, myelinated, and account for 90% of cochlear nerve cells. Type 2 neurons are smaller and nonmyelinated. Type I neurons project to the inner hair cells of the organ of Corti, while Type II neurons project to the outer hair cells.

Central projections from the spiral ganglion form the cochlear nerve before entering the IAC. Within the IAC, the cochlear nerve joins the vestibular nerve to form CN VIII. The nerve fibers run past the CPA and enter the brainstem at the pontomedullary junction to innervate the cochlear nuclei within the rostral pole of the upper medulla. There are three divisions of the cochlear nuclei: anteroventral (AVCN), dorsal (DCN), and posteroventral (PVCN).

Upon entering the brainstem, the cochlear nerve separates from the vestibular nerve and branches into anterior and posterior divisions. The anterior division innervates the AVCN, while the posterior division innervates the DCN and PVCN. Cochlear nerve fibers are characterized tonotopically. Afferent nerve fibers from hair cells at the base of the cochlea transmit high frequencies. The afferents from the apex of the cochlea transmit low frequencies. This organization is preserved within the cochlear nuclei.

After the cochlear nuclei, the fibers cross and join the contralateral lateral lemniscus toward the midbrain inferior colliculus. Next, the fibers reach the thalamic medial geniculate nucleus before traveling to the primary auditory cortex, within the temporal lobe.

**The Vestibular Nerve and Vestibular System**

The vestibular nerve relays information related to motion and position. The vestibular system involves coordinated communication between the vestibular apparatus (semicircular canals, saccule, utricle), ocular muscles, postural muscles, brainstem, and cerebral cortex.

The peripheral vestibular apparatus is located within the temporal bone, and it consists of a bony and membranous labyrinth. The membranous labyrinth contains the sensory neuroepithelium and is located within the bony labyrinth, suspended in perilymph. The vestibular apparatus has five components: the utricle, saccule, and three semicircular ducts (contained within the semicircular canals). The two types of neuroepithelium are the macula and crista ampullaris, which both contain sensory hair cells. The utricle and saccule contain macula, while the semicircular canals contain crista ampullaris.

The utricle and saccule sense the positioning of the head in space. Hair cells within the utricle respond to horizontal acceleration, while the hair cells within the saccule respond to vertical acceleration. The hair cells within the three semicircular ducts (lateral, superior, and posterior) respond to angular acceleration or head rotation.

The stimulation of the hair cells results in depolarization and increased calcium (Ca) influx, leading to increased firing of afferent vestibular nerve fibers. Those fibers travel to the vestibular ganglion (Scarpa’s ganglion), located in the IAC. The ganglion is composed of bipolar neurons that send peripheral processes to the vestibular apparatus and central processes that join together to form the vestibular nerve. The ganglion is separated into superior and inferior divisions. The superior division receives input from the utricle and superior and lateral semicircular ducts. The inferior division receives input from the saccule and posterior semicircular duct.

The superior and inferior post-ganglionic extensions join to form the vestibular nerve, which joins the cochlear nerve to become the CN VIII within the IAC. CN VIII runs past the CPA and enters the brainstem at the pontomedullary junction. The vestibular nerve separates from the cochlear nerve before reaching the vestibular nuclear complex. The vestibular nuclear complex consists of four nuclei: medial, lateral, superior, and inferior. These nuclei range from the caudal pons to the rostral medulla in two columns and are closely related to the floor of the fourth ventricle

The medial nucleus receives input from the lateral semicircular ducts. It sends ascending fibers to the motor nuclei of the extraocular muscles ipsilaterally and contralateral via the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), which helps facilitate the vestibulo-ocular reflex. The medial nucleus also helps mediate the vestibulospinal reflex by controlling head and neck movements.

The superior nucleus receives input from the superior and posterior semicircular ducts and mediates the vestibulo-ocular reflex.

The lateral nucleus receives input from all components of the vestibular apparatus and the vestibulocerebellum. Descending projections become the lateral vestibular tract within the ipsilateral spinal cord. This tract helps mediate the vestibulospinal reflex and maintain posture and balance.

The inferior nucleus receives input from the utricle and saccule and sends fibers to the other three vestibular nuclei and the cerebellum.

It has also been suggested that the auditory stimuli interact with the vestibular system to influence postural control.

Specifics regarding vestibular cortical connections are not well understood, but studies have suggested that the vestibular cortical area is adjacent to the parietal or insular cortex.