**Surgical**

The mainstay of curative treatment usually involves surgical excision. The extent of surgery will depend on the size and staging of cancer but will usually involve a wide local excision. If there is a local invasion or lymph node spread, additional lymph node excision or neck dissection may be indicated or undertaken electively. Histological examination of excised tumors will be undertaken to ensure that there are clear margins. A temporary tracheostomy may be required in order to provide a safe airway following upper airway swelling from the operation. For more extensive resections, a free flap reconstruction may be required.

**Chemoradiotherapy**

Chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or both may be used in conjunction with surgery in order to eliminate any further malignant cells; this is usually done post-operatively. Its use is associated with multiple short and long-term side effects including xerostomia, nausea, dysphagia, mucositis, hair loss.

**Monoclonal Antibodies**

Cetuximab, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor can also be used in conjunction with radiotherapy. This is usually used for locally advanced, recurrent, or metastatic disease.

**Palliation**

For aggressive or advanced tumors or when a patient has other significant co-morbidities that precludes them from curative treatment, it may be felt that a palliative approach is in the patient’s best interest. This most often involves palliative radiotherapy, as well as anticipatory medications for symptom control and end of life care.