**Serum Biomarkers:**High sensitivity troponin T (Tn-T) and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) levels are elevated in bicuspid aortic valve disease.

**Chest X-Ray:**Chest X-ray can reveal LVH, left atrial enlargement, and heart failure (pulmonary edema).

**ECG:**Conduction abnormalities, atrial fibrillation (AF,) left ventricular hypertrophy, and left atrial hypertrophy are seen in both aortic valvular disease and HOCM.

**2D-Echo:**Echocardiography is the main diagnostic tool for diagnosing mixed aortic valve disease and HOCM. Assessment of valve morphology, determination of the aortic regurgitation jet, aortic regurgitation quantification, and measurement of the aortic root and ascending aorta can be done with 2D echocardiography. It helps in left ventricular assessment and measurement of its dimensions in valvular disease and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It also can be used to assess the morphology of the aorta and determine the feasibility of aortic surgery or valve repair.

**MRI:**Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is increasingly used to assess regurgitant lesion severity and ventricular function. Advances in noninvasive imaging help in objective measurements of valve disease severity, hemodynamic fluctuation, and structural complications. MRI is also used increasingly in accurately quantifying left ventricular (LV) remodeling. Cardiac MRI is the gold standard test in assessing patients with HOCM.

**CT:**Cardiac and vascular CT has become an indispensable tool for the appropriate planning of transcatheter interventions. Useful in acquiring intracardiac and vascular access route dimensions with accuracy.

**Nuclear Imaging and Fluoroscopy:**The extent of local infectious activity, metabolic activity, and the extent of calcium deposits can be evaluated with nuclear imaging and fluoroscopy.