A thorough history and physical exam should be performed on every patient suspected of having an Aspergillus infection. Care should be taken to understand a patient’s risk factors for invasive disease and focus on eliciting all history related to immunosuppression. A careful history of any chemotherapy, glucocorticoids, and immunosuppressants received should be elicited. Attention should be paid to any history of malignancy with detailed treatment history, including a history of ibrutinib, fludarabine, venetoclax use, or history of CAR-T therapy.

Transplant history should be noted with a careful review of the post-transplant course, including the history of graft versus host disease and length and depth of any neutropenia. A history of lung disease and any environmental exposures, such as construction work, gardening, or work in wastewater treatment, should be noted carefully. History should also delve into recent pulmonary infections like COVID-19 or influenza. Finally, the clinician should investigate in-depth current and past medical problems to assess the potential for an immunocompromised state, including taking a detailed sexual history to assess the likelihood of HIV and carefully reviewing the history for frequent infections that could raise concern for immunodeficiency, such as chronic granulomatous disease.

The invasive aspergillosis patient will often be critically ill with immunocompromised status. This condition should also be considered in critically ill patients with underlying lung disease. The most common initial symptoms of pulmonary infection include fever, worsening dyspnea, increased sputum production, hemoptysis, and pleuritic chest pain. Fever may not manifest in the severely immunocompromised; therefore, fever can be absent, despite progressive infection.

Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis most commonly presents with a cough.

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis will present with recurrent asthma exacerbations, with the most prominent finding being dyspnea and wheezing, along with coughing up large amounts of sputum with brown plugs.

Physical examination findings vary depending on the infected area. There may be sinus tenderness, nasal discharge, pallor or necrosis of the oral or nasal mucosa or conjunctiva, new mobility or hypesthesia of teeth, proptosis, or cranial nerve abnormalities in invasive fungal rhinosinusitis.