**Cardiovascular****Findings**

- Arrhythmias

- Congestive heart failure

- Dilated cardiomyopathy

**Arrhythmias: **Cardiac arrhythmias are even more significant in patients with muscular dystrophy. The typical electrocardiogram (ECG) shows increased net RS in lead V1; deep, narrow Q waves from the precordial leads, with tall right precordial R waves in V1.

**Congestive Heart Failure: **Congestive heart failure seldom occurs except with severe stress, such as pneumonia.

**Dilated Cardiomyopathy: **Genetic dilated cardiomyopathies account for 30 to 40% of cases of nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathies.

**Musculoskeletal****Findings**

- Contractures

- Delayed motor milestones

- Expressionless Facies

- Fractures

- Gait instability

- Gower's sign

- Muscle wasting

- Myotonia

- Pseudohypertrophy

- Proximal muscle weakness

- Scoliosis

- Toe walking

**Contractures: **Most patients have joint contractures of varying degrees at elbows, hips, knees, and ankles. Contractures that present at birth are referred to as arthrogryposis. Contractures of both the heel cords and iliotibial bands manifest by age six years when toe walking is associated with a lordotic posture. joint contractures and limitations of hip flexion and extension of the knee, elbow, and wrist are made worse by prolonged sitting.

**Delayed Motor Milestones: **Duchenne muscular dystrophy is usually identified in children at approximately three years of age when the parents first notice slow motor development.

**Expressionless Facies: **The inability to close the eyes completely may be noted from early childhood. The face is expressionless, and the pouting of the lips makes whistling impossible. The muscular weakness and wasting produce a" drooping expression." In myotonic dystrophy, the face is hatchet-shaped due to the facial wasting and weakness, and there is bilateral partial ptosis. With bilateral facial palsy, although very rare, it is important to rule out all other possible diagnoses for facial weakness, including upper motor neuron and lower motor neuron disorders, with thorough diagnostic tests.

**Fractures: **Muscle weakness and inactivity, particularly once a person is in a wheelchair full time, lead to osteoporosis and pathologic fractures. If a fracture occurs, bisphosphonates may help to strengthen bone, although there are no long-term studies on safety in this population.

**Gait Instability: **The boys stumble repeatedly and have trouble keeping up with friends when playing. Running, jumping, and hopping is always abnormal.

**Gower's Sign: **This clinical sign can be evoked by asking the child to stand from a sitting position.

**Muscle Wasting: **Muscular weakness always begins in the pelvic girdle, causing a "waddling" gait.

**Myotonia: **TThe word myotonia applies to a prolonged unconscious muscle contraction demonstrated through not being able to loosen grasp. The patient may have a delay in releasing grip when shaking hands. A pause in opening and closing the fists is observable. Myotonia emerges typically at the age of 5 years and is demonstrable through percussion of the thenar eminence, jaw, and musculature of the forearm. Upon forced voluntary closures, myotonia triggers a sluggish relaxation. As muscle deterioration progresses, so does the difficulty of detecting myotonia. It is difficult for people with myotonic dystrophy to relax their grip, in particular whenever the subject is cold.

**Pseudohypertrophy:**Pseudohypertrophy of the muscle extends to the toes.

**Proximal Muscle Weakness: **Proximal muscle weakness may be remarkably apparent when contrasted to distal weakness in many of the conditions listed.

Between 8 and 10 years of age, walking may require the use of braces. Clinical instability originates in the pelvic girdle, first generating difficulty standing from the floor (Gower sign), climbing stairs, and a waddling gait as a result of the weakness in the lumbar and gluteal muscles.

Interestingly, contrary to the mechanism of weakness, proximal muscles continue to become more powerful throughout the course in myotonic dystrophy. There is, however, preferential atrophy and weakness of quadriceps muscles in myotonic dystrophy.

**Scoliosis: **Once scoliosis begins, it is relentlessly progressive. Curves of more than 20 degrees require surgical intervention to maintain pulmonary function.

**Toe Walking: **The foot assumes an equinovarus position, and the child tends to walk on the toes because of the weakness of the anterior tibial and peroneal muscles.

**Neurological Findings**

- Cognitive dysfunction

- Hypersomnia

- Seizures

- Visual disturbances

**Cognitive Dysfunction: **Mild to moderate cognitive problems are common but not universal.

**Hypersomnia: **The excessive urge to sleep and daytime somnolence is common.

**Seizures:**In merosin and FKRP deficiency, only a small number of patients have mental retardation and seizures.

**Visual Disturbances:**Ocular abnormalities due to eye muscle dysfunction lead to impaired vision.

**Other Findings**

- Bladder instability

- Cataracts

- Frontal baldness

- Generalized digestive complaints

- Gonadal atrophy and hypogonadism

- Insulin resistance

**Bladder Instability: **Bladder functions are often mildly affected with urinary urgency as a frequent symptom.

**Cataracts: **The affected individual may be referred from an ophthalmologist after a recent examination, which revealed the potential for an underlying disorder such as myotonic dystrophy (iridescent spots).

**Frontal Baldness: **This is characteristic of myotonic dystrophy, possibly due to gonadal atrophy and subsequent hypogonadism.

**Generalized Digestive Complaints: **Smooth muscle dysfunction may cause megacolon, volvulus, cramping pain, and malabsorption in the gastrointestinal tract.

**Gonadal Atrophy and Hypogonadism: **Small soft testes suggesting atrophy are associated with myotonic dystrophy leading to hypogonadism.

**Insulin Resistance: **Diabetes is commonly associated with muscular dystrophy.

**Respiratory Findings**

- Chest deformity

- Recurrent pulmonary infections

- Respiratory insufficiency

- Sleep apnea

**Chest Deformity: **The chest deformity with scoliosis impairs pulmonary function, which is already diminished by muscle weakness.

**Recurrent Pulmonary Infections: **By age 16 to 18 years, patients are predisposed to serious, sometimes fatal pulmonary infections.

**Respiratory Insufficiency: **Respiratory failure is the commonest cause of death.

**Sleep Apnea: **An increased need or desire for sleep is common, as is diminished motivation.