Sevoflurane poses a potential risk of hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and neurotoxicity.

**Hepatotoxicity**

Several proposed mechanisms for post-operative hepatic dysfunction have been proposed, including viral hepatitis, impaired hepatic perfusion, and intrahepatic cholestasis. However, newer evidence suggests an immune-mediated mechanism. Like other volatile anesthetics, sevoflurane is partially oxidized in the liver by a specific CYP enzyme (2E1) to a metabolite, fluoro acetic acid. This specific metabolite has been found to modify liver microsomal proteins that subsequently act as triggering antigens for an immune-mediated antibody response. Although this response is rare due to the low percentage of sevoflurane metabolized in this fashion, the theoretical risk exists.

**Nephrotoxicity**

The potential nephrotoxic effect of sevoflurane is attributable to two factors. The first factor is the metabolite discussed above, fluoro acetic acid, which has demonstrated nephrotoxicity, as well as hepatotoxicity. The second is the creation of Compound A. Compound A is another fluorinated byproduct created from an exothermic reaction between sevoflurane and the carbon dioxide absorbents utilized in anesthetic delivery systems, which can reportedly cause mild and reversible renal injury in animal studies.

**Neurotoxicity**

Currently, there are no anesthetic agents, including sevoflurane, that must be avoided during pregnancy, in neonates, or the pediatric population due to concerns regarding neurotoxicity. At this time, there are several animal studies suggesting sevoflurane to induce neurotoxicity via microRNA manipulation.