In its Standards of Care 7 document, the WPATH did not promulgate specific criteria for performing facial gender affirmation surgery in transgender patients, nor did it explicitly categorize facial surgery as either medically necessary or cosmetic. That said, facial surgery is a cornerstone of gender transition, particularly in male to female transitions, in which hormone therapy makes less of a definitive difference in the face.

Even though there are no particular WPATH recommendations for either duration of hormone therapy or for behavioral health evaluation, there is a role for both in establishing candidacy for facial gender affirmation surgery. Many surgeons prefer that patients, especially transgender females, undergo at least 12 months of hormone therapy before surgery to permit changes in skin thickness and hair growth to become apparent preoperatively. Likewise, evaluation for psychological suitability for surgery may be helpful to decrease the risk of postoperative depression, or even the risk of suicide, as recovery from surgery can be very stressful for patients.

For patients who have received hormone therapy of appropriate duration and are emotionally prepared for surgery, the choice of which procedures to undergo will be based on personal preference and a thorough discussion of goals and expectations with the surgeon. Each patient will have different needs, but frontal cranioplasty with brow ridge reduction and hairline advancement as well as mandibular angle reduction and genioplasty are very common interventions for the male to female transition. Lip lifting, rhinoplasty, and laryngeal chondroplasty are frequently selected as well, and many patients, particularly older transgender women, will also benefit from concomitant fat transfer, or cheek implants, and rhytidectomy.

Patients transitioning from female to male are less likely to require facial surgery because of the effects of testosterone therapy but may still benefit from augmentation of the buccal fat pads or mandible. In either case, vocal surgery may also be helpful occasionally, although speech therapy to adopt more feminine cadence and intonation may be adequate on its own. Testosterone therapy will often deepen the voice sufficiently to obviate the need for voice masculinization procedures.