Ocrelizumab is a new biological agent, and even though it has shown a positive risk/benefit trade-off in clinical trials, it does require close monitoring for safety; thus, besides the prescribing clinician, both nurses and pharmacists are responsible for educating the patient on the potential side effects of the drug.

During IV administration, the drug has shown infusion reactions in more than one-third of patients; therefore, it is essential to monitor side effects such as coughing, dizziness, fast heart rate, fatigue, feeling faint, fever, flushing, headache, hives, itchy skin, nausea, rash, shortness of breath, swelling of the throat, throat irritation or pain, tiredness, trouble breathing and wheezing. In clinical trials, there was an incidence of life-threatening bronchospasm (which recovered with treatment) during the initial infusion of ocrelizumab.

Since some adverse effects are delayed-onset, including opportunistic infections and malignancies, an outpatient neurology nurse should continue to follow the patients and coordinate additional surveillance between infusions. The nurses and pharmacists should regularly check immune titers to monitor immunosuppression. While there are no reported cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) to date (which has happened in other anti-CD20 antibodies and immunosuppressant therapies), the entire healthcare team must be on the lookout for clinical signs and symptoms, including hemiparesis, clumsiness, visual changes, memory/thinking changes, and personality changes.

Pharmacists should also work with the prescriber and nursing to ensure proper dosing, preclude drug interactions, and educate the patient and nursing staff on potential adverse reactions. This information will allow nursing to administer the drug effectively and monitor for any adverse reactions and inform the ordering clinician should they encounter any concerns. This collaborative paradigm exemplifies the kind of interprofessional teamwork the healthcare team requires to administer ocrelizumab effectively to achieve optimal patient outcomes while minimizing patient risks. [Level 5]

Finally, the drug is prohibitively expensive, and insurance health plans do not always cover the cost. Without long-term data available, clinicians should always consider other similar cost-effective agents first.

Interprofessional communication between the primary treatment team and the patient’s primary care provider essential to make sure such screenings occur as estimates are that roughly one-third of women do not get an appropriate annual screening.