Inflammatory back pain is a chronic condition characterized by insidious onset at an age less than 40 years, persisting for three months or more, associated with morning stiffness, and improving with exercise. It is strongly associated with, but not diagnostic of, spondyloarthropathies that involve the axial skeleton. As a chronic back pain condition, it shares similarities with treatment with mechanical back pain; however, identifying the characteristic profile of symptoms of inflammatory back pain should prompt further evaluation of HLA-B27 and imaging, particularly by MRI. With positive lab values and/or presence of sacroiliitis by imaging, consultation, or referral to a rheumatologic specialist would be appropriate. It is strongly recommended that an interprofessional team approach to inflammatory back pain be employed, including clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nursing staff, [pharmacists, and therapists, all coordinating their activities and openly sharing information to bring about the best possible patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Patients with inflammatory back pain either in isolation or associated with a diagnosed spondyloarthropathy have shown symptomatic relief with NSAID therapy. Physical therapy has also been shown to improve symptoms of inflammatory back pain, and this should be part of a multi-system approach to treatment.

While inflammatory back pain may occur independently of a diagnosed spondyloarthropathy, it may serve as a sentinel to identify associated conditions such as ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, or reactive arthritis creating a bridge to complete therapy in treating an underlying illness. Appropriate consultation, patient education by the primary care provider and nurse practitioner, pharmacotherapy, and physical therapy can significantly improve patient outcomes and quality of life.