There are two main surgical techniques for carotid endarterectomy: the classical/conventional method and the eversion method.

**Classical/Conventional Method**

The surgeon makes an incision alongside the medial aspect of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, cutting through fat, the platysma muscle, dissecting deeply to reach the carotid sheath. After carefully incising the sheath, the carotid arteries are exposed. The internal carotid artery is clamped proximal and distal to the plaque temporarily stop blood flow. The surgeon will open along the length of the internal carotid artery, progressing proximally and distally to locate both ends of the plaque. The clamps are released one at a time and a flexible bypass stent is placed to temporarily shunt blood around the endarterectomy site while the blockage is removed. The artery then repaired with a patch that will widen the vessel lumen, and the bypass stent is removed. There are different patch materials available including autologous vein, bovine patch, or synthetics (Dacron). After the vessel is repaired, satisfactory blood flow is confirmed with ultrasound Doppler or angiography.

**Eversion Method**

With the eversion method, the internal carotid artery is transected at its origin at the bifurcation.  The vessel wall is everted circumferentially around the plaque, and the plaque is divided and removed. The artery is then repaired in an end to end anastomotic fashion.  The advantages of the eversion method include no need for patch closure and overall shorter carotid clamping time and total operative time.