Oxybutynin can be administered in several ways. The most common is pill or tablet form, which comes as immediate release or long-acting. The dosage starts at 5 mg for both the immediate and long-acting forms. It also can be administered as a syrup, transdermal patch, or gel. The syrup form is formulated as 1 mg/mL, and the same starting and maximum doses are used as the immediate-release tablet. It is distributed in 16-ounce bottles. The long-acting or extended-release tablets contain 5 mg, 10 mg, or 15 mg of oxybutynin chloride. It is intended to be taken as a once-a-day oral medication and uses an osmotic pressure delivery system to release the medication over 24 hours. The oral forms of oxybutynin are absorbed similarly whether the patient is in the fed or fasted state.

The oxybutynin transdermal system or patch delivers the medication continuously over three to four days after application. It contains 36 mg of oxybutynin, making the average daily absorbed dose 3.9 mg. Steady-state concentrations occur during the second application. The patch should be applied to the abdomen, buttock, or hip. Safety in pediatric patients has not been established.

Oxybutynin gel (10%) comes in sachets, and the contents of one sachet should be applied to clean, dry, intact skin on the abdomen, upper arms, or thighs. Steady-state concentrations occur within seven days of continuous dosing. Application sites should be rotated. Safety in pediatric patients has not been established.

**Over Active Bladder**

**Adult Dosing**

- In adults, the typical starting dose is one 5 mg tablet two to three times per day for immediate release. The patient should not exceed four 5 mg tablets a day.

- The recommended starting dose for long-acting or extended-release in adults is 5 mg, once daily, and it should be taken at the same time each day. The dose may be increased by 5 mg, up to 30 mg daily.

- Apply the content of one actuation of the pump or one sachet daily for topical gel formulation.

- Apply one 3.9 mg transdermal patch twice weekly, remove the old patch, and apply the new patch on the same two days of each week. As an OTC product, females are to apply one 3.9 mg patch every fourth day.

**Geriatric Patients**

- In frail or elderly patients, a starting dose of 2.5 mg two to three times per day is proper dosing for immediate release due to prolonging elimination half-life from 2 to 3 hours to 5 hours.

**Pediatric Patients**

- The typical starting dose in pediatric patients over five is one 5 mg tablet two to three times per day for immediate release. The maximum dose is 5 mg, three times per day.

- Pediatric patients aged six and older should start at 5 mg long-acting or extended-release, once daily, with a maximum of 20 mg daily.

- The extended-release form should not be given to patients under six or pediatric patients who cannot swallow the tablet whole, as it should not be chewed, crushed, or divided.

**Pregnancy/Breastfeeding considerations**

- Oxybutynin is category B for pregnant patients. Animal studies have not shown definitive evidence of harm to the fetus, but safety has not been established for women who are pregnant or may become pregnant. There is also no evidence regarding the use of oxybutynin in nursing mothers. When used chronically in breastfeeding women, monitor the infant for possible signs of decreased milk production (e.g., in-satiety, poor weight gain).

**Primary Focal Hyperhidrosis**

- Oxybutynin IR 2.5 mg is administered once daily and gradually titrated as tolerated between 5 to 10 mg daily in two divided doses.

- Extended-release oxybutynin dose is 5 to 10 mg once daily.