Stroke continues to carry high morbidity and mortality. In addition, the cost to the healthcare system is enormous. Even though treatments for strokes exist, the outcomes are not satisfactory and many people remain permanently disabled.

To improve outcomes, there is ample evidence indicating that the management of stroke is best done with an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department physician, nurse practitioner, neurologist, radiologist, and the stroke team. The key is to first identify if the stroke is embolic or hemorrhagic and then institute thrombolytic treatment accordingly. For those who recover, physical, speech and occupational therapy may be necessary.

However, today the focus is on stroke prevention as it is more cost-effective. All clinicians have the responsibility for educating the public on methods to prevent strokes. The pharmacist should encourage blood pressure medication compliance since uncontrolled blood pressure is one of the risk factors for stroke. The clinicians including nurses should educate patients on discontinuing smoking, eating a healthy diet, exercising regularly and maintaining healthy body weight. Patients should be provided with supporting literature and educated about stroke and its complications.

For those who have developed a stroke, one may need to involve a social worker to ensure that the home is a safe place and that the patient has the support systems. A dietary consult should be made to educate the patient on what to eat. In addition, some patients may need to enroll in rehabilitation to regain speech, muscle and joint function. Only via an interprofessional team approach and open communication can this lead to improved outcomes and a better quality of life.