UBC: Nonoperative management is the choice for mild symptoms.

Small asymptomatic lesions in upper extremities are usually followed up with serial plain radiographs. Larger lesions at risk for fracture, symptomatic lesions,  and lower extremity lesions typically receive treatment with curettage or aspiration and injection (corticosteroids, bone marrow aspirates, bone matrix, and other materials). Pathological fractures in the upper extremity generally have conservative treatment. The priority of therapy is to treat the fracture first, typically by immobilization for 4 to 6 weeks. However, unstable fracture or fracture in weight-bearing areas like in the lower extremity, treatment involves both fracture fixation and treatment of the bone cyst.

Treatment of all the other lesions is via non-aggressive options; techniques associated with preventive osteosynthesis. Injection of corticosteroid is one such option. The cyst is punctured with two needles and its contents aspirated with one needle, and radiological contrast is injected with the another, which is followed by injection with methylprednisone after emptying the contents. This also helps to differentiate from ABC. Cryptographic assessment showing the absence of venous drainage in the cyst rather than the presence of rapid venous outflow is a good prognostic indicator for treatment outcome with former showing better cyst healing.

Bone marrow aspirate and demineralized bone matrix injection avoids open bone curettage and grafting in 78% of cases with proximal humerus UBC, can be considered as an adjuvant to curettage.

Elastic stable intramedullary nailing in case of long bones of children has shown promising results for the treatment of UBC.

Current treatment concepts include a combination of decompressions, cyst wall disruption, injection with corticosteroid/demineralized bone matrix/bone marrow aspirate, and internal fixation in the weight-bearing region.

Diagnosis is either incidental or prompted by a fracture. In both scenarios, ABC and underlying malignancy must be ruled before further management.

ABC: Treatment goal for ABC is the eradication of disease, prevention of recurrence and reduction of pain/ functional impairment. Surgical curettage and bone grafting with or without adjuvant therapy was classically the primary mode of treatment. However need for wide resection, disability, cost of rehabilitation post surgery and the benign nature of cyst has prompted to look for less aggressive treatment options.

Several minimally invasive treatments have emerged as an alternative to curettage including sclerotherapy with polidocanol, selective embolization of feeding vessel to the cyst and medical therapy with denosumab. Radionuclide ablation is also an option.

Percutaneous injection of calcitonin and steroids under CT guidance has shown positive results. Repeated recurrences or development of any suspicious findings on imaging necessitate a more aggressive treatment.