Excisional biopsy of lymph node or an involved extranodal site is essential in the diagnosis of MCL. Laboratory exams including CBC with differential, LDH, and beta-2 microglobulin, bone marrow biopsy, and imaging (CT or FDG-PET/CT) are also recommended as the standard diagnostic workup. Further, the Ki-67 index and mutation status of p53, ATM, and CCND1 are also important in selecting the optimal treatment. A CSF study is also necessary to rule out CNS involvement and guide appropriate management in MCL patients with a high Ki-67 index (greater than 30%), blastoid variant, or neurologic symptoms.

Immunohistochemistry on pathology specimens plays an essential role in differentiating MCL from other NHL, including follicular lymphoma (FL), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), small lymphocytic lymphoma/chronic lymphocytic leukemia (SLL/CLL). MCL is positive for B-cell markers (CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a).  It is distinguished from other B-cell lymphomas by diffuse positivity for cyclin D1 and SOX11. SOX 11 is usually negative in indolent MCL. Rare cases are negative for cyclin D1 but can still be positive for SOX11. MCL is typically negative for BCL6, CD10, and CD23 (while CLL is CD23 positive). Rare cases of MCL are CD10 positive.

MIPI ( Mantle cell lymphoma international prognostic index) is a scoring system is used to stratify the risk of patients with MCL with pneumonic APLE to remember for readers.

- Age

- Performance status

- LDH

- Elevated white blood count

Using these parameters, scoring calculators are available for free (online) that can help educate patients about their prognosis and expected survival based on these calculations of their survival. However, the MIPI scoring system falls short in predicting prognosis in all MCL patients. Therefore the addition of KI 67, cytogenetics, and TP 53 mutations can help improve the risk stratification of MCL.

High-risk MIPI score patients have median Overall survival (OS ) of 2.8 yrs while low-risk MIPI had survival longer than 5 years.

Typically based on symptoms and presentation, patients can be divided into indolent MCL or aggressive MCL.