**General Management**

- Adjusting drug doses for the level of estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR)

- Preparation of renal replacement therapy by placing an arteriovenous fistula or graft

**Treat the Reversible Causes of Renal Failure**

The potentially reversible causes of acute kidney injury like infection, drugs which reduce the GFR, hypotension such as from shock, instances which cause hypovolemia such as vomiting, diarrhea should be identified and intervened.

Patients with CKD should be evaluated carefully for the use of intravenous contrast studies, and any alternatives for the contrast studies should be utilized first. Other nephrotoxic agents such as aminoglycoside antibiotics and NSAIDs should be avoided.

**Retarding the Progression of CKD**

The factors which result in progression of CKD should be addressed such as hypertension, proteinuria, metabolic acidosis, and hyperlipidemia. Hypertension should be managed in CKD by establishing blood pressure goals. Similarly, proteinuria goal should be met.

Multiple studies have shown that smoking is associated with risk of developing nephrosclerosis and smoking cessation retards the progression of CKD.

Protein restriction has also been shown to slow the CKD progression. However, the type and amount of protein intake are yet to be determined.

Bicarbonate supplementation for treatment of chronic metabolic acidosis has been shown to delay the CKD progression as well.

**Preparation and Initiation of Renal Replacement Therapy**

Once the CKD progression is noted, the patient should be offered various options of renal replacement therapy.

- Hemodialysis (home or in-center)

- Peritoneal dialysis (continuous or intermittent)

- Kidney transplantation (living or deceased donor): It is the treatment of choice for ESRD given better long-term outcomes.

- Patients who do not want renal replacement therapy should be provided information about conservative and palliative care management.

- The hemodialysis is performed after stable vascular access is placed in a nondominant arm. In this arm, intravenous cannulas are avoided to preserve the veins. The preferred vascular access is AV fistula. The other hemodialysis access options are AV graft and tunneled hemodialysis catheters. The patency rates of AV fistula is good, and infections are very infrequent. Higher flows can be achieved through AV fistula, and there is less chance of recirculation.

- Peritoneal dialysis is performed after placing a peritoneal catheter.

**Indications for Renal Replacement Therapy**

- Pericarditis or pleuritis (urgent indication)

- Progressive uremic encephalopathy or neuropathy, with signs such as confusion, asterixis, myoclonus, and seizures (urgent indication)

- A clinically significant bleeding diathesis is attributable to uremia (urgent indication)

- Hypertension is poorly responsive to antihypertensive medications

- Fluid overload is refractory to diuretics

- Metabolic disorders that are refractory to medical therapy such as hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, metabolic acidosis, hypercalcemia, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia

- Persistent nausea and vomiting

- Evidence of malnutrition

Renal transplantation is the best treatment option of ESRD due to its survival benefit compared to long-term dialysis therapy. The patients with CKD become eligible to be listed for Deceased donor renal transplant program when the eGFR is less than 20 ml/min/1.73m2

Conservative management of ESRD is also an option for all patients who decide not to pursue renal replacement therapy. Conservative care includes the management of symptoms, advance-care planning, and provision of appropriate palliative care. This strategy is often underutilized and needs to be considered for very frail patients with poor functional status with numerous comorbidities. For facilitating this discussion a 6-month mortality score calculator is being used which includes variables such as age, serum albumin, the presence of dementia, peripheral vascular disease, and (yes/no) answer to a question by a treating nephrologist "would I be surprised if this patient died in the next year?"

**When to Refer to a Nephrologist**

Patients with CKD should be referred to a nephrologist when the estimated GFR is less than 30 ml/min/1.73 mt2. This is the time to discuss the options of renal replacement therapy.