Indomethacin functions like most other NSAIDs. The effects of indomethacin occur because it inhibits the synthesis of prostaglandins. Prostaglandins are produced primarily by cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes, and prostaglandins are critical mediators of inflammation, fever, and pain. They also maintain renal function, GI mucosa, and platelet activity. Inhibition of COX enzymes by NSAIDs may explain some of these drugs' adverse effects.

COX-1 is involved in the production of thromboxane A2 (a critical mediator of platelet aggregation); thus, inhibition of this enzyme is likely responsible for the anti-platelet effects of NSAIDs. COX-1 is responsible for maintaining GI mucosa, while COX-2 is upregulated in inflamed tissues and produces prostaglandins accountable for inflammation, fever, and pain. Consequently, COX-2 selective NSAIDs may have fewer GI-associated side effects; indomethacin is a non-selective COX inhibitor.

Indomethacin has anti-viral activity; it down-regulates viral replication, and literature showed its anti-viral activity against rhabdovirus vesicular stomatitis virus, hepatitis B virus, and coronavirus.

Prostaglandin E2 relaxes smooth muscle and inhibits the closure of the ductus arteriosus. In preterm infants with respiratory distress syndrome, the ductus arteriosus fails to close, resulting in patent ductus arteriosus(PDA) as the concentration of prostaglandin E2 is relatively high. Uncorrected PDA can result in differential cyanosis. Indomethacin, by inhibiting PGE2 synthesis, is useful in the closure of PDA.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Indomethacin is well absorbed and attains peak plasma concentrations at 2 hours. Bioavailability is approximately 100%.

**Distribution:**The high lipid solubility allows indomethacin to cross the blood-brain barrier easily. Indomethacin also achieves high concentration in synovial fluid.

**Metabolism:**Indomethacin undergoes enterohepatic circulation. Indomethacin is metabolized via demethylation and deacylation. The major metabolites are O-desmethyl-indomethacin, O-deschlorobenzoyl-indomethacin, and their conjugates with glucuronides.****

**Excretion:**Approximately 60% of the administered indomethacin is excreted in urine by renal tubular secretion, while the remainder is excreted in feces after biliary secretion. The elimination half-life of indomethacin is approximately 7 hours but is highly irregular (1.5 to 16 hours) because of enterohepatic circulation.