Clinically suspected cases of Crigler-Najjar syndrome should undergo serum unconjugated bilirubin level testing. The level of unconjugated bilirubin is high in type I as compared to type II disease. In Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, the level of unconjugated bilirubin is between 20 to 25 mg/dL, but severe cases can be around 50 mg/dL. In type II, it is usually less than 20 mg/dL. Bile is collected from the duodenum using upper gastrointestinal endoscopy or an orally placed duodenal catheter and analyzed for bilirubin glucuronides by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).

Conjugated bilirubin is either absent or present in trace amount in Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I. In contrast, a significant amount of conjugated bilirubin is present in Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II disease. HPLC of bile obtained from duodenum is the definitive test. Tissue enzyme assay of a liver biopsy can help measure the UGT enzyme level. Urine analysis of bilirubin is absent in Crigler-Najjar type I. Liver function tests usually reveal a normal range of liver enzymes; however, these enzymes may become elevated due to cholestasis.

Phenobarbital administration for two weeks decreases the serum bilirubin concentration in most patients with type II Criggller-Najjar syndrome.

Genetic analysis can be performed in DNA extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes, and buccal scraping, as well as other tissues, and detects the types of mutation in the gene encoding UGT1A1 enzyme. Prenatal diagnosis is possible with genetic analysis of chorionic villus samples or amniotic cells aspirated in amniotic fluid. Diffusion tensor imaging of the brain may help to detect the microstructural gray and white matter changes in Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome.