Keloids remain a therapeutic dilemma. Not only are they difficult to treat but incomplete therapy can lead to a keloid worsening and growing. Therefore, primary prevention is key. Predisposed individuals should avoid elective procedures if possible, especially ear piercing and tattooing. If accidental trauma occurs or surgical interventions are required, there are ways to minimize and perhaps prevent the development of keloid scar. Minimizing wound tension is important to reduce the risk for keloid development. Rapid primary closure and adequate hemostasis are the cited key elements in tension-free wound closure. Prolonged wound stabilization using silicone sheeting also may help reduce tension on wounds. Compression therapy is noted in the literature to reduce keloid development with pressures of 15 to 45 mmHg recommended for more than 23 hours per day for at least 6 months.

Several modalities alleviate symptoms of existing keloids:

- **Corticosteroids**- Intralesional steroids are considered the first line in the treatment of keloid scars. Multiple injections at intervals of 4 to 6 weeks are required. Recommended doses range from 10 to 40 mg/cc of triamcinolone. This may be used alone or in combination with other modalities. Topical ointments and steroid impregnated tapes also have been shown to reduce symptoms of itching and burning.

- **Cryotherapy**- Delivery via spray, contact, or intralesional-needle cryoprobe all have been described. Multiple treatments are required. Freeze-thaw cycles of 10 to 20 seconds are recommended to achieve scar tissue necrosis. Post-treatment pigmentary alteration makes this method less desirable in darker skin types.

- **Surgical excision**- Due to high recurrence rate between 45% and 100%, this method should always be paired with an adjuvant therapy such as post-surgical radiation or intralesional steroid injections.

- **Radiotherapy**- Best utilized as adjuvant therapy 24 to 28 hours following excision. Caution should be used in patients less than 18 years of age and in vulnerable areas such as the head, neck, and breast as it carries an inherent risk of carcinogenesis.

- **Laser**- Successive sessions using 585 nanometers (nn) pulse-dye laser and 1065 nm neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (ndYAG) laser have been shown to induce flattening and regression of keloids.

- Other treatments including topical imiquimod following excision, intralesional botox, intralesional bleomycin, intralesional 5-fluorouracil, and silicone gel sheeting have also been reported to be successful in treating keloid scars either alone or in combination with the above modalities.

It is important to manage patient expectations as all treatments require multiple sessions and do not uniformly result in complete regression of keloid. The most successful treatment results from the use of multiple modalities and tailoring therapy to meet patient needs.