# Introduction

Muscle energy technique (MET) is a type of osteopathic manipulative medicine (OMM) developed by Fred Mitchell, Sr, D.O., in 1948, designed to improve musculoskeletal function through mobilizing joints and stretching tight muscles and fascia, to reduce pain, and to improve circulation and lymphatic flow.

- Isolation of the target joint and/or muscle barrier through joint positioning, generally to a pathologic barrier.

- This is followed by active muscle contraction by the patient in a specific direction, generally away from the restriction, for a specified period against provider-applied counterforce. Conventionally, the amount of force generated by the patient should be the maximum amount comfortably tolerated by both the patient and practitioner.

- Relaxation of the contracted muscle.

- Passive movement of the patient’s anatomy toward a new pathologic barrier

- Repeat steps 1 to 4 as tolerated until physiologic pain sufficiently relieved and/or the achievement of the desired range of motion.

Within this framework, different protocols have been developed with varied specifics for each step, including duration and strength of contraction, duration of rest, and the number of repetitions.

The goal of this therapy is to induce relaxation of a muscle or muscle group, the hypertonicity of which is proposed to be the source of pain and/or loss of mobility in a body part and/or joint. The primary theories behind this phenomenon entail post-isometric relaxation – the reduction in tone of an agonist muscle following isometric contraction, and reciprocal inhibition – the reduction in tone of an antagonist muscle after its agonist has undergone isometric contraction.

# Cellular Level

**Post-isometric Relaxation**

Golgi tendon organs (GTOs) are mechanoreceptors found in most skeletal muscles. They are sensitive to muscular contractile force, and in contrast to muscle spindles (see below), GTOs are rarely and inconsistently activated by muscle stretch. These encapsulated bundles of collagen are innervated by fast-conducting type Ib afferent fibers, and are present at muscle-tendon or muscle-aponeurosis junctions; they attach to an individual muscle fascicle tendon on one end, and the whole muscle-tendon or aponeurosis of the other. This positioning, often described as “in-series,” meaning the receptor is part of the functional unit, stands in contrast to the muscle spindle that operates adjacent to the functional unit, “in parallel.”

Physiologically, increased tension to the GTO prompts the activation of the type Ib afferent fibers that project to the spine, where they provide positive input on inhibitory interneurons that, in turn, add negative or “inhibitory” input on the efferent α-motor neurons that receive input from the cortex to the homonymous muscle.

**Reciprocal Inhibition**

Muscle spindles are stretch-sensitive mechanoreceptors found in skeletal muscle. A muscle spindle is a bundle of striated, “intrafusal” muscle fibers within the fascicles of force-producing, “extrafusal” muscle fibers. “Fusal,” comes from the term “fusiform,” meaning spindle-shaped. Any stretch, change in length, of the extrafusal fibers thus results in a stretch of the intrafusal fibers, which is then detected in the equatorial and polar regions of the muscle spindle. This physiology stands in contrast to GTOs that are relatively insensate to passive changes in length but respond to an increase in muscle force. The stretch sensation is measured by two types of afferents: primary (type Ia) and secondary (type II). There is a single Ia fiber and anywhere between zero-to-five II fibers per spindle.

Physiologically, stretch to a muscle fiber produces activation of Ia muscle spindle afferents that project to the spine and activate the efferent α-motor neurons, and subsequently, the γ-motor neurons of the homonymous muscle leading to contraction of the intra- and extrafusal fibers. Simultaneously, the Ia fibers activate inhibitory interneurons in the spine to inhibit the α-motor neurons of the antagonist muscle. This circuit is simply described as the “stretch reflex.”

# Development

Before birth, the first evidence of GTOs is observable in the aponeurosis where Ib axons terminate within islets of collagen bundles and myotubules.

Muscle spindle differentiation starts around 11 weeks of gestation when the intrafusal and extrafusal fibers differentiate. The arrival of the Ia afferent axon to the spindle prompts the formation of the nuclear bag, a term given to intrafusal fibers with multiple equatorial nuclei.

# Mechanism

As mentioned in the introduction, METs take advantage of the physiologic mechanisms of post-isometric relaxation and reciprocal inhibition, primarily, to improve musculoskeletal function and to reduce pain. For a given joint, MET is performable in a “direct” or “indirect” fashion based on the indication of treatment.

**Indirect (reciprocal inhibition)**

- The elbow is extended to the pathologic barrier - limited by the hypertonicity of the biceps.

- The patient is instructed to contract the triceps against the provider’s counterforce. This action stimulates muscle spindles of the triceps, which activate Ia efferents that project to the spine and activate the inhibitory interneuron that synapses onto the α-motor neurons that project to the biceps, thus producing relaxation of the intra- and extrafusal fibers.

- The patient is instructed to relax the triceps.

- The patient’s arm is passively extended as permitted by the biceps muscle. This action is facilitated by the reciprocal inhibition produced in step 2.

- Repeat steps 1 through 4 until achieving the full range of motion, or the procedure is intolerable.

**Direct (post-isometric relaxation)**

- The elbow is extended to the pathologic barrier - limited by the hypertonicity of the biceps.

- The patient is instructed to contract the biceps against the provider’s counterforce. This action activates the GTOs of the triceps, which activate Ib efferents that project to the spine and activate the inhibitory interneuron that synapses onto the α-motor neurons that project to the biceps, thus producing relaxation.

- The patient is instructed to relax the biceps.

- The patient’s arm is passively extended as permitted by the biceps muscle. This action is facilitated by the post-isometric relaxation produced in step 2.

- Repeat steps 1 through 4 until achieving the full range of motion, or the procedure is intolerable. This technique is limited by pain in the affected joint and/or muscle.

# Pathophysiology

The increased muscle tone purportedly treated by muscle energy technique is comparable to that of the hypertonicity and/or spasticity that presents in upper motor neuron disease.

# Clinical Significance

As mentioned in the introduction, MET primarily serves to improve range of motion and to reduce pain.

A handful of metanalyses have been performed to assess the effectiveness of MET in the treatment of various conditions, particularly of low back pain. While some yielded mixed results, there is an apparent consensus on the positive effects of MET on low back pain, with insufficient and inconsistent evidence to support its use in other circumstances.