**Overall**

The goal of surgical treatment is to allow stable reduction and early mobilization to prevent stiffness/contracture.

Indications for surgical treatment are:

- Articular congruity

- Rotational malalignment

- Significant angulation/displacement

- Multiple fractures

- Open fractures

**Proximal Phalanx Fractures**

**Non-operative**

- Extraarticular with less than 10 degrees angulation or under 2 mm shortening and no rotational deformity Stable, transverse fracture

- 
              
- Dorsal splinting in intrinsic plus position for 3 weeks
              
              
- Buddy taping

**Operative**

- Reducible but unstable isolated fractures

- 
              
- Closed reduction internal fixation (CRIF)

- Intra-articular fractures with displacement

- 
              
- Open reduction internal fixation (ORIF)

Closed reduction and internal fixation of proximal phalanx shaft fractures can be accomplished longitudinally through the metacarpal phalangeal joint but not the metacarpal head, or just through the metacarpal head known as Eaton-Belsky Pinning. The wires for either of these options are run in a parallel fashion, cross, or run transversely into the phalanx. Interfragmentary lag screw fixation would be indicated in long oblique fractures. Other ORIF options would be mini fragment plates and screws.

**Middle Phalanx Fractures**

Proximal intra-articular fractures may be comminuted with axial load and considered “pilon” fractures. If the volar portion of the proximal base fracture constitutes approximately 40% of the articular surface, then it carries the majority of the proper collateral ligament insertion. Also, the accessory ligament and volar plate insertions, which make the fracture unstable. Dorsal proximal base fractures may be considered central slip avulsions.

**Non-operative**

- Non-displaced

- 
              
- Dynamic splinting for 2to 3 weeks

**Operative**

- Transverse fractures with greater than 10 degrees angulation or 2 mm shortening or rotationally deformed

- 
              
- Closed reduction percutaneous pinning (CRPP) vs. ORIF

- Irreducible and unstable fractures

- 
              
- CRPP vs. ORIF

**Distal Phalanx Fractures**

- Non-operative

- 
              
- Closed fractures
              
              
- 
                  
- Immobilize the joint, be sure to allow motion of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint.
                  
                

              
              
- Minimally displaced tendon avulsion fractures 
              
              
- 
                  
- Extensor digitorum (mallet finger)

- splint immobilization in a neutral position

- Operative

- 
              
- Open fractures
              
              
- 
                  
- Tuft fracture is considered open in the presence of a nail bed injury. When the seal of the nail plate with the hyponychium has been broken, and the tuft fracture is displaced. This injury represents an open fracture that should receive treatment on the day of injury with debridement, followed by direct nail matrix repair. Stenting of the nail fold may be required to allow for the nail to grow 
                  
                

              
              
- Volar subluxed mallet finger fractures involving 30% of the articular surface
              
              
- Jersey finger injuries