Because there is no cure for ALS and the prognosis is grave, it is imperative for clinicians to diagnose the disease with confirmation by NCS and needle EMG as soon as possible so that the appropriate interventions can be taken. There are only a few approved FDA treatments for ALS. Riluzole blocks the release of glutamate from neurons and has been shown to prolong survival by a few months. Riluzole can cause an elevation in liver enzymes, therefore, liver function testing should be ordered prior to administering this medication as well as periodically

A combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine sulfate has been approved for pseudobulbar affect. It is contraindicated in patients using monoamine oxidase inhibitors and caution should be taken with patients on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors due to the risk of serotonin syndrome

The treatment plan should include a multidisciplinary approach in order to manage a patient’s symptoms and improve overall function and quality of life. Physical and occupational therapists can assist with maintaining mobility and improving functional ability, allowing patients to remain as independent as possible with their activities of daily living. Patients can benefit from exercise regimens that prevent joint contractures, manage spasticity, and increase mobilization. Therapists can also provide recommendations for bracing, wheelchairs, and home equipment.

Speech therapists are important for monitoring a patient’s swallowing as well as assisting those who have difficulty speaking. Speech therapists are able to recommend assistive devices to help patients communicate more efficiently. Respiratory therapists are needed to monitor respiratory function and the need for non-invasive ventilation. Patients who exhibit excess salivation may require anticholinergic medications. Patients and their families should undergo psychosocial counseling to help with the emotional toll of the disease

In order for patients to be treated in an appropriate and timely manner, it is important for clinicians to confirm the diagnosis of ALS with NCS and needle EMG studies, as well as rule out other possible etiologies.