Unicameral bone cyst: Typically, these lesions arise near the physis. As the years progress, it gradually grows away from the physis, and may remain as a static bone defect in diaphysis, or may resolve completely with time. Blockage of venous flow is the most favored hypothesis for cyst formation, which occurs in rapidly growing and remodeling bone. There are reports of a reduced partial pressure of oxygen in bone cyst as compared to arterial and venous blood which further supports the hypothesis of venous stasis.

Aneurysmal bone cyst: ABC can show three different forms of evolutivity; quiescent, active, and aggressive. In some cases, ABC may undergo spontaneous resolution while in others they may become more aggressive mimicking fears of malignancy.

Primary: Comprising 70% of cases, ABC arises de-novo.

Secondary: In the other 30% of cases, ABC occurs in underlying bone tumors like giant cell tumor, simple bone cyst, chondroblastomas, osteoblastomas, fibrous dysplasia, nonossifying fibroma, and chondromyxoid fibromas.

The classification and staging of ABC are according to morphological characteristics and behavior of lesions.

Enneking staging for benign bone tumors according to the behavior of lesion

- Inactive form: most benign, expansion is rare, minimal inflammation

- Active: Expansile lesion with cortical thinning, reactive bone formation, mild pain clinically

- Aggressive: Rapidly expansile, destructive, severely symptomatic

Capanna morphologic types of aneurysmal bone cyst

- Type 1: Central well contained a metaphyseal lesion

- Type 2: Lesion involving an entire segment of bone with cortical expansion and thinning

- Type 3: Eccentric metaphyseal lesion with no or minimal cortical expansion

- Type 4: Subperiosteal reaction with no or minimal cortical erosion

- Type 5: Periosteum displaced with the erosion of cortex and extension into cancellous bone