The exact etiology for anembryonic pregnancies is difficult to ascertain. The etiological factors for anembryonic pregnancies are generally understood and studied in the broader context of early pregnancy loss (EPL) which includes both embryonic and anembryonic pregnancies. Etiologies include:

- Morphological abnormalities of an embryo that prevents implantation or prevents long term survival of the embryo after implantation. These morphological abnormalities are thought to be related to chromosomal abnormalities.

- Chromosomal abnormalities that collectively include autosomal trisomy, polyploidy, sex chromosomal polysomy, and monosomy X likely represent the most common etiologies for EPL. Trisomies are the major fetal chromosomal abnormality in sporadic cases of miscarriage (30% of all miscarriages) and 60% of chromosomally abnormal miscarriages (recurrent miscarriage). Trisomies with monosomy X (15% to 25%) and triploidy (12% to 20%) account for over 90% of all chromosomal abnormalities found in sporadic cases of miscarriage. According to a study by Edmonds in 1992, trisomy 16 was found to give rise to rudimentary embryonic growth with an empty sac, while other trisomies often resulted in early embryonic demise.

- Other genetic and chromosomal abnormalities include translocations, inversions, single-gene perturbations, and placental mosaicism.

- Obesity and advanced maternal age are well-established factors associated with early pregnancy loss.

- Tuberculosis in the developing world as well as reproductive tract infections worldwide can predispose to EPL.

- Malformation of the uterus that includes didelphic, bicornuate, and septate uteri can impede in or prevent the longterm implantation of an embryo.

- Immunologic disorders in the mother such as NK Cell Dysfunction, autoantibodies, hereditary, and acquired thrombophilia, among others) can lead to the maternal immunological rejection of the implanting embryo in the uterus resulting in miscarriage.

- Hormonal factors (such as low levels of progesterone) and endocrinological disorders(thyroid autoimmunity and thyroid dysfunction) play a complex role in miscarriage. Polycystic ovarian syndrome is also associated with infertility and pregnancy loss.

- The role of alcohol consumption and it's associated increased risk in miscarriage has been well established.