# Definition/Introduction

The Moro reflex is a normal primitive, infantile reflex. The Moro reflex is an involuntary protective motor response against abrupt disruption of body balance or extremely sudden stimulation.

The reflex is elicited by pulling up on the infant's arms while in a supine position and letting go of the arms causing the sensation of falling.

# Issues of Concern

The Moro reflex is particularly weak in preterm newborns because of lower muscle tone, inadequate resistance to passive movements and slow arm recoil, compared with those of full-term newborns at the same post-conceptual age.

# Clinical Significance

The absence or premature disappearance of the Moro reflex can result from a birth injury, severe asphyxia during the birthing process, intracranial hemorrhage, infection, brain malformation, general muscular weakness of any cause, and cerebral palsy of the spastic type.

In one study, the presence or absence of the Moro reflex is more related to the development of the infant and less likely pertains to pathogenic conditions.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The Moro reflex is a normal reaction to stimuli of an infant, and it is essential for the entire healthcare team to understand what a normal reaction looks like and when to be concerned. Often families will have questions and concerns about their developing child. While a physician can comfort and address concerns, it is often the front line nursing staff in the hospital or a clinic environment that are first available to address parental concerns and recognize concerning finding. Identifying abnormalities early can then lead to the inclusion of physical therapy, occupational therapy, neurology, and developmental specialist into the care of a child.

It is crucial to the entire interprofessional team, including the nurses, recognize that an asymmetric Moro reflex at birth can be indicative of neuronal damage or a clavicular fracture.