The management of TRD can be divided into systemic management and ocular management. Systemic management includes control of the predisposing systemic factor, including diabetes mellitus (DM), systemic hypertension (HTN), nephropathies, and hemoglobinopathies. This should be done as per the advice of the treating physician or specialist.

Ocular management is to be done as per the discretion of the treating vitreoretinal surgeon. The decision to recommend surgery for TRD depends upon many factors, both systemic and ocular. The possible visual outcomes must be discussed with the patient before surgery. Diabetic vitrectomy is one of the most difficult vitreoretinal surgeries which demands the surgeon's expertise and a good understanding of the mechanism of the disease. Fortunately, with the advent of newer vitrectomy machines and with the advantages of small gauge vitrectomy surgeries, both the anatomical and functional outcomes of RTDs have been improved. The anatomical success rate of diabetic vitrectomy surgeries is reported to be in the range of 83% to 94%.

Surgery is usually indicated for RTD of duration less than 6 months and progressive RTD threatening macula. Recent studies also mention RTD of a duration of more than 6 months as one of the indications for surgery.

**Role of Preoperative Anti-vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) Agents**

All types of intravitreal anti-VEGF agents. e.g., bevacizumab, ranibizumab, aflibercept, conbercept, and pegaptanib have been injected preoperatively in diabetic RTDs.

**Role of Preoperative Pan-retinal Photocoagulation (PRP)**

Preoperative PRP may be considered in cases with RTD, especially if the eye never received any laser or the previous laser appears inadequate. Though it may help stabilizes the eye in a case of PDR with RTD, it has a potential risk of retinal tear creation (if very high power is used), attributed to laser energy and induced fibrovascular contraction. However, PRP with a safe distance from the base of the fibrous membranes done preoperatively helps in the induction of PVD and better ease of surgery. It may also reduce the time needed to complete endolaser pan-retinal photocoagulation.

**Surgical Equipment**

Microscope and lenses - Binocular surgical microscope with coaxial illumination equipped with motorized power zoom, power focussing, and X-Y positioning via foot pedals is necessary. A laser filter to permit endophotocoagulation is needed. For fundus visualization, both contact lenses and noncontact viewing systems e.g., Binocular Indirect Ophthalmomicroscope (BIOM), are common in use.

**Microinstruments and Illuminations**

Twenty gauge systems had become the standard and are still used in some vireo-retina setups. They have the advantage of offering many additional instruments with minimal flexibility.

**Vitrectomy Machine Set-Up**

The standard set up for vitrectomy consists of a vitrectomy cutter, combined with a suction unit, a fiber optic light pipe, an infusion of balanced salt solution, and an air pump. Additional combinations of diathermy, endophotocoagulation, cryo gas filling, or phacoemulsification modules are present in different vitrectomy setups.

**Vitrectomy Cutter**

The vitrectomy probe serves to cut and dissect vitreous gel and membranes. Newer probes with port closer to the tip of the probe are significantly safer.

**Illumination**

Illuminators range from single-function illumination probe to multipurpose illuminated scissors, forceps, or vitrectomy probes. The use of Chandelier illumination allows bimanual dissection. However, endoilluminator induced retinal phototoxicity is a potential side effect.

**Membrane Dissection Instruments**

A wide variety of tissue scissors, forceps, spatulas, and picks are available to remove vitreous and epiretinal membranes. The vitrectomy probe can also be used for membrane dissection.

**Retinopexy Instruments**

Endolaser probes are used for endophotocoagulation. Scleral depression with indentor can be used for peripheral treatment. Endodiathermy can be used for stopping hemorrhage during surgery or for making retinotomy sites.

**Dyes**

Various vital dyes are used for vitrectomy and identification of membranes for their removal. Triamcinolone acetonide is used for staining of the vitreous cortex and remnant vitreous membranes, the identification, and removal of which ensures complete membrane removal. Trypan blue is more specific for epiretinal membrane removal. Brilliant blue-green (BBG), indocyanine green (ICG), and infracyanine green are more specific for the internal limiting membrane (ILM). Dissection of the posterior vitreous face in cases with vitreomacular traction needs to be done with care to prevent iatrogenic macular hole formation.

**Tamponade**

Various tamponade agents are used for internal tamponade in vitrectomy surgery for retinal traction detachment. Perfluorocarbon liquid (PFCL) helps intraoperatively during membrane dissection since it gives counter traction and a temporary hemostatic agent due to its mechanical pressure effect. Tamponade agents with effect in the postoperative period include SF6, C3F8, and silicone oil.

**Pars Plana Vitrectomy for TRD**

**Preparation of Entry Sites**

Standard 3 port vitrectomy is the common practice. A 6 mm infusion cannula can be used instead of a regular 4 mm canola in cases with anterior displacement of the retina due to severe retinal traction. The infusion port is played in the inferotemporal quadrant. Superior quadrants are used for the vitrectomy probe and endoilluminator probe.

**Vitrectomy**

Vitreous removal is started behind the crystalline or intraocular lens. Then central vitreous is removed. In RTDs, the vitreous is usually detached in the mid periphery, but multiple attachments remain at the posterior pole, thus forming a vitreous cone. After the removal of central vitreous, its necessary to trim and release 360° of the peripheral vitreous cone. Induction of PVD or membrane dissection before removing peripheral vitreous cone may result in iatrogenic retinotomy. Once the peripheral vitreous has been released, membranes of the posterior pole should be addressed. There are two ways of handling the fibrous tractional membranes: an outside-in or an inside-out technique. In the outside-in technique, dissection of the membranes starts at or posterior to the vascular arcades and comes toward the optic nerve, whereas, in the inside-out technique, dissection starts from the optic nerve and goes toward the periphery.

**Membrane Peeling**

RTD is most commonly associated with incomplete posterior vitreous detachment (PVD), the presence of pre retinal membranes, and vitreoretinal adhesions.

The vitreoretinal adhesions (VRAs) can be

- focal (point-like localized vitreoretinal adhesion)- Focal vitreoretinal adhesions may be single or more commonly multiple. The dissection of such adhesions is easier, but there may be partial or no separation of vitreous from the retina between multiple focal VRAs. Focal VRAs may be associated with epiretinal membrane. or

- broad- Broad VRA can be of 2 types,

- those associated with and
- those not associated with folding of the underlying retina.

The latter type is less common in occurrence and probably formed by a large segment of neovascularization. The more common type of broad VRA is formed due to fibrotic posterior hyaloid and associated with underlying retinal folds. There may be an associated epiretinal membrane near the broad VRA. Broad adhesions are more common in the nasal retina.

The traditional methods described to remove the membranes are segmentation, delamination, en-bloc dissection, other methods, and the combination of all these methods.

- In segmentation, a sheet of fibrovascular membrane present over the retinal surface is divided into multiple pieces by dissecting in between the fibrovascular attachments to the retinal surface, which are to be removed later.

- In delamination, a large sheet of the fibrovascular membrane is severed from the underlying retina by cutting the multiple fibrovascular stalks attached to the underlying retina. This can be achieved with horizontal scissors, pick, or the vitrector. Delamination can be started in the posterior pole and progressed towards periphery or vice-versa, depending upon the availability of the correct plane of cleavage.

- En-bloc dissection is a method in which the whole fibrovascular proliferation and the posterior hyaloid is detached from the optic nerve head in one go as a single piece. Various methods for this are described. If the cutter is used to remove the attachment near the disc to induce PVD, it is frequently associated with severe bleeding and/or multiple breaks and is avoided by most retina surgeons. The original description of 'en-bloc excision technique' by Abrams and Williams and colleagues

- Viscodissection using sodium hyaluronate 1% in between the retina and the preretinal membrane by Stenkula and Tornquist.

- En bloc perfluorodissection (EBPD) by Arevalo.

Remnants of the posterior hyaloid should be diagnosed with the help of staining with dye, minimal stroking with diamond-dusted membrane scraper, intraoperative forceps, or intraoperative optical coherence tomography (OCT) and removed. These remnants are called second membranes, and failure to remove them completely may result in recurrent retinal detachment, vitreous hemorrhage, and subsequent failure of the surgery.

The taut posterior hyaloid membrane is a vitreoretinal interface disorder that causes tangential traction and results in diabetic macular edema (DME). Dye assisted removal of this membrane results in the resolution of DME. The peeling of the ILM (ILMP) in the posterior pole in these cases ensures the removal of all contractile elements. ILMP results in the prevention of astrocyte formation in these areas and hence prevention of recurrence.

Bimanual membrane dissection, with the help of 25 gauge self-retaining chandelier endoilluminator, is a useful method for difficult membranectomy. Forceps, scissors, and vitrectomy probe can be used as per the surgeon's comfort. Newer vitrectomy high-speed cutters (10,000 cuts per minute via a dual pneumatic technology) beveled probe has a beveled-tip design that allows the cutting port to come closer to the retina, which provides additional safety to use the cutter as an instrument for membrane removal.

Control of the intraoperative hemorrhage is very crucial in diabetic vitrectomy. The source of the bleeding points is usually elevated fibrovascular tissue over the attached or detached retina, surface retinal bleed, or over the optic nerve head. Intraoperative bleeders should be immediately managed well. A delay in the hemostasis will cause the blood clot to be thick and formed and thus will make the removal of the clot difficult, as the cleavage plane between the retina and the membrane becomes obliterated. Endodiathermy of the individual bleeding nails, increasing the intraocular pressure, and mechanical pressure with the help of the cutter tip are some of the methods to stop the bleeding. The mechanical effect of the PFCL as a temporary tamponade agent can be helpful in the management of bleeding in some cases. Raised intraocular pressure should be decreased to see any ooze or bleed and if present, should be managed before concluding the case. Adequate hemostasis is very important, as postoperative hypotony may cause early rebleed in the posterior segment.

Intraoperative use of perfluorocarbon liquid (PFCL) is very helpful in stabilizing the retina and removal of the membranes, especially in the presence of combined RTD and rhegmatogenous retinal detachment.

Some eyes with PDR with RTD are associated with lamellar or full-thickness macular hole. The mechanism of MH formation in these eyes is the deroofing of the retinal layers in the region of DME resulting from tangential and anteroposterior traction from the vitreous membranes. Complete removal of the membranes and peeling of ILM should be done in these eyes.

Iatrogenic retinotomies or breaks are unwanted complications of diabetic vitrectomy. If created, these retinotomies should be made free of membranes near them and lasered adequately.

**Photocoagulation**

Panretinal photocoagulation (PRP) in eyes with preoperative incomplete PRP and without PRP need to be completed with endophotocoagulation. Endophotocoagulation probe with curved tip is preferred, especially in phakic patients. Laser marks should be as light as possible and spaced one laser mark apart. Care should be taken to avoid the 3- and 9-o'clock hours to prevent damage to the ciliary nerves and avoid postoperative loss of accommodation.

**Tamponade**

Relatively uncomplicated cases and cases without retinotomy are managed with either filtered air or gasses like SF6 or C3F8. However, silicone oil is the tamponade of choice in complicated cases and cases needing longer tamponade. Different silicone oils are available from 1000 to 10000 centistokes. They also act as a protective shield to prevent neovascular growth factors and cytokines from affecting the ocular tissues. They are usually removed after 3-6 months or as soon as silicone oil-related complications appear.

In a case of pure TRD, the goal of the surgery is the safe removal of all reactions. After this is done, the surgery is concluded. Though the subretinal fluid (SRF) may remain during the end of the surgery, the SRF usually resolves with time due to the pump function of the RPE.

An intravitreal anti-VEGF agent may be injected after surgery to prevent recurrent hemorrhage.