Acute rhinosinusitis is among the most common primary care conditions.  To avoid high morbidity, an interprofessional team should manage the disorder. The critical thing of which clinicians need to be aware is that most cases result from viruses and are self-limiting.  As such, it is crucial to be able to identify the three cardinal symptoms for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis. Clinicians should only prescribe antibiotics for the patient who exhibits prolonged symptoms without improvement for 10 days, “double-worsening,” or those with severe symptoms. Amoxicillin with or without clavulanate should be first-line therapy. Local antibiotic resistance factors, risk factors for antibiotic resistance, and the overall risk level of the patient should be a consideration. An infectious disease certified pharmacist can be a valuable resource, as they will often have the latest antibiogram data, can suggest antimicrobial alternatives if necessary, and check for drug interactions.

Imaging is not helpful except in cases where there a complication or alternative diagnosis is suspected. If complications are suspected, then urgent imaging and referral to otolaryngology, ophthalmology, and/or neurosurgery should be done to avoid potentially catastrophic outcomes. The nurse and the pharmacist should educate the patient on avoidance of smoking and getting the flu vaccine annually, as this may lower the risk of viral rhinosinusitis. Finally, the patient should understand that routine use of antibiotics is not necessary, as most cases resolve spontaneously; this is another area where nursing staff can guide the patient and answer any questions. However, referral to otolaryngology for a culture of endoscopic aspirates merits consideration for refractory cases. Open communication between interprofessional team members will inevitably lead to improved outcomes. [Level V]

"The opinions and assertions contained herein are the private views of the authors and are not to be construed as official or as reflecting the views of the Department of the Army, Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense, or the U.S. government."