Heavy metal toxicity is in general underdiagnosed, and a high index of suspicion is needed.

A history of occupational exposure is vital.

When taking a medication history, attention to alternative medicine intake is easily overlooked. Many medications in Chinese, Ayurveda, homeopathy, and Siddha systems contain heavy metals in significant quantities that, when taken over time, may cause toxicity.

Living in older homes is a risk factor for lead toxicity by way of water pipes and flaking paint and dust.

Living in a neighborhood that has HM contamination(in industrial belts)is a definite risk factor. A parent who suffers exposure at work may contaminate his family when he gets home.

Heavy metal exposure during the antenatal period may yield clues to problems in newborn and infancy.

Young children are more vulnerable to HM toxicity. A previously active and healthy child may present with poor play, distractibility, falling grades at school, abdominal pain, anemia, and delay or retarded development.

Accidental consumption is more common, but in some cases, the cause is suicidal and will prompt urgent mental health consultation.

Exposure to more than one HM will cause profound symptoms than one HM alone.

Acute exposure is usually dramatic in presentation. Inhalation of HMs causes respiratory symptoms, topical contamination, skin lesions, and ingestion mimics acute gastroenteritis or dysentery.

Chronic exposure is more difficult to detect and needs a high index of suspicion. Depending on the organ system involved, the symptoms will vary. Typical findings may be present only in selected cases, while the majority may be non-specific.

Lead toxicity may cause a blue line in the gingiva, mercury toxicity may present with Mees lines in the nails, while chromium (Cr) toxicity may present as cutaneous ulcers that appear punched out with thickened raised edges involving the extensor surface of the forearms and web spaces of the hands.

**See Tables 2, 2A, and 2B for the clinical features of the common HMs.
**