No specific laboratory monitoring guidelines exist for finasteride use. However, the prostate-specific antigen is a routine assessment in men with benign prostate hyperplasia and surveillance for prostate cancer. Due to the decrease in prostatic volume at the 5-mg dose, there is an expected decrease in serum prostate-specific antigen levels. Therefore, the recommendation is to obtain baseline prostate-specific antigen levels before initiating therapy. Practitioners should be cognizant of serum prostate-specific antigen values in patients using finasteride. Serum lab values are often multiplied by 2 to estimate a more accurate approximation of levels.

There has been some controversy regarding the role of finasteride in the development of prostate cancer. The Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) was a landmark study that compared daily finasteride to placebo therapy in over 18,000 men aged 55 and older, who researchers followed for seven years. The study ultimately concluded that finasteride was associated with a 25% reduction in the prevalence of prostate cancer. However, it was also associated with an increased rate of high-grade prostate cancer. The FDA eventually placed a black box warning on the medication safety label, resulting in a negative impact on the prescribing patterns of the drug. There is a considerable consensus in the field that the increased rate of high-grade cancer in the PCPT may result from confounding factors and detection bias. However, it cannot be excluded with certainty.

The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and American Urological Association (AUA) released a joint statement in 2008. They developed a clinical practice guideline to assist physicians and patients with making informed decisions after reviewing the risks and benefits of the medication.

The AUA supports the use of finasteride as a treatment option for men with benign prostate hyperplasia and shared decision-making.