When there is a clinical suspicion of acute aortic syndromes, patients must be further investigated with imaging and non-imaging based exams.

**Non-Imaging Based Exams**

This consists of an ECG and blood tests. An ECG will allow for separating cardiac sources of chest pain such as myocardial infarction (MI). Both AAS and MI can present concomitantly, though further investigation and careful management will be required in situations such as this. Data from IRAD show in a group of 464 patients, 31% of patients with type A dissection had a normal ECG, with the rest showing an array of ECG changes from non-specific ST and T wave changes to features of acute MI.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

- Full blood count

- Urea and electrolytes

- CRP

- Liver function tests

- D-dimer

- Troponin

- Lactate

- Creatinine kinase

- Arterial blood gas (incl. lactate and glucose)

These tests will help rule in or out AAS while providing evidence for or against other differential diagnoses.

**Imaging**

Imaging is the mainstay of the diagnostic process with roles for chest radiography, computed tomography (CT), ultrasound (US), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Simple chest radiography has been shown to have sensitivity for picking up AAS of up to 64% and specificity of 86%. Features found on chest X-rays include widening of the mediastinum, widening of the aortic notch, kinking of the aorta, tracheal shift, and double density of the aortic shadow.

The current gold standard in AAS imaging is CT angiography (CTA). CTA is widely available in most emergency departments, non-invasive, less operator-dependent than Ultrasound, and less time-consuming. The average sensitivity for a CT scan in detecting AAS is upwards of 95%. Recorded specificities are anywhere between 87 to 100%.

There is a place for both Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) in the diagnosis of AAS; however, the effectiveness of each varies greatly. TTE is useful in an acute setting to diagnose proximal dissection and also complications of dissection. But in many other points along the whole length of the aorta, views can be limited. On the other hand, TEE allows the ultrasound probe to come in very close proximity to the aorta, allowing the sensitivity of this investigation to be 99% and a specificity of 89%.

MRI is seldom used as a primary mode of acute investigation due to the scarcity of MRI as an emergency provision and the life-threatening nature of the condition. It is the most sensitive and specific modality to identify all types of AAS, and it can be used when primary investigations are inconclusive.