An interprofessional approach is necessary for the appropriate care of patients with membranous nephropathy (MN). Consistent and ongoing patient education from presentation to diagnosis, from management to long-term follow-up, is necessary. Many patients with primary MN can be negative for the anti-PLA2R antibody. Assays for other antibodies might not be commercially available or are too expensive. A thorough workup for secondary causes is warranted, along with age-specific cancer screening. If negative, patients should be managed as primary MN. A "renal life plan" should be formulated each time the patient is seen in the clinic. This requires a collaboration of medical personnel, financial coordinator, and social worker. Usually, patients will need guidance and assistance during the follow-up from clinicians, social workers, dieticians, and nurses on a regular basis. Depending on the prognosis and patient's response to therapy, the patient will need counseling regarding any possible outcome, especially with incomplete remission or relapse. If a patient is refractory to treatment or relapses, switching to alternate immunotherapy based on evidence, should be attempted. Modality education and pre-emptive referral for a renal replacement would benefit the patients the most. Dialysis should be first-line renal replacement therapy. Home-based renal replacement therapy (peritoneal or home hemodialysis) should be the first choice. Transplantation is to be considered next. The patient should be informed about the risk of recurrence or de novo membranous nephropathy with the same.