Management of black piedra requires an interprofessional team that includes the primary caregiver, specialty-trained nurse practitioner, and dermatologist. Since the disease is asymptomatic, it may go undetected for several months. Poor personal hygiene and the sharing of hair-care products further spread this infection. Even though the disorder is benign, it reflects poor aesthetics.

The primary caregiver, nurse practitioner, and pharmacist should educate, especially those living in or planning to travel to hot and humid countries, about the risk of contracting this fungal infection. Coordinated health education by primary caregivers and nursing staff about good hygiene practices like the regular washing of hair, keeping the comb clean and avoidance of sharing combs, clips, and hairbands will prevent the development of this infection.

Treatment of this infection involves the complete shaving of the head; however, this option may not be acceptable to some females due to aesthetic reasons. In such cases washing the hairs with azole antifungals like 2% ketoconazole or 2% miconazole shampoos once a week can eliminate the infection. Oral terbinafine 250 mg once daily for 6 weeks can cure the infection in cases resistant to topical agents; such instances necessitate a medication reconciliation and dosage checking to avoid adverse effects, with concerns reported to the team. The pharmacist should verify dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and reinforce medication compliance to ensure cure. If there are concerns, the pharmacist should discuss them with the interprofessional team. Also, family members should avoid sharing personal care items with the infected individual. Nurses can monitor for treatment compliance and verify the inclusion of close contacts in the prevention regimen; it is crucial to screen the family members and close contacts of the patient for signs and symptoms of this disease and treat accordingly to avoid re-infection. All these activities among various members of the interprofessional healthcare team must be communicated to the entire team to ensure optimal treatment and results. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

With treatment, the outcomes are excellent, but recurrences are frequent if the lifestyle is not changed.