The clinical variability of CVID suggests that multiple immunoregulatory defects can result in the final common pathway of hypogammaglobulinemia.

Reports exist of numerous immune-system abnormalities, the most common of which is defective antibody formation. As a consequence, humoral and cell-mediated lymphocytic responses are affected, and some patients may have a defect in the T-cell ability to help B cells, and/or B-cell response to T-cell help

- **B Cells abnormalities:**The number of B cells is normal in the majority of patients, but many of them have reduced percentages of isotype-switched memory B cells capable of producing immunoglobin isotypes that are critical toward antibody response recall. The abnormalities that appear to occur in the bone marrow include aberrant gene rearrangement, decreased V gene replacements, reduced diversity of the naïve B cell repertoire, impaired somatic hypermutation, and abnormal expansion of unmutated B cell clones.
- **Toll-like receptor signaling:**B cell maturation is defective, and the action of toll-like receptors 7 and 9 (TLR7 and TLR9) becomes impaired because of a yet unknown mechanism. Defective signaling of TLR7 and TLR9 in B cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells, along with deficient IFN-a, impairs B cell functions and prevents TLR-mediated augmentation of humoral immunity in vivo.
- **Memory B cells:**determining the number of isotype-switched memory B cells is of utmost interest because it provides information about the immaturity of the B cell, relates to the numbers of plasma cells in the bone marrow, and gives information about the possible clinical outcomes.
- Patients that switched CD27+IgM-IgD- memory B cells had a higher prevalence of splenomegaly and autoimmune cytopenias. This proposed a fast and reliable new classification for CVID patients with flow cytometric quantification of class-switched memory and immature B cells.
- Certain disorders were more prevalent in patients with the lowest count of memory B cells (splenomegaly, lymphoid proliferation, granulomatous disease).
- Lower levels of IgM memory B cells were associated with chronic pulmonary disease (bronchiectasis).
- Research has determined that the percentages of switched memory B cells changed in some patients over time. Based on these findings, the suggestion is that immunologic characteristics have to be evaluated several times after diagnosis.


- Decreased T lymphocyte proliferation to mitogens and antigens,
- Decrease in CD4+ cell count or increase in CD8+ cell count, altering the CD4/CD8 ratio.
- The minor capacity of dendritic cells to secrete interleukin-12.
- A drop of plasma cells in the gastrointestinal tract and bone marrow.