Diagnostic workup usually starts with serological tests. The two antibodies measured are anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies (by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or ELISA measured numerically) and anti-endomysial antibodies that are usually reported as negative, weakly positive or positive. Traditionally, the next step and the gold standard for the diagnosis is duodenal mucosal biopsy; in celiac disease, this shows villous atrophy. It is important that these tests be performed while the patient is on a regular, gluten-containing diet.

Another useful test is for human leukocyte antigen (HLA). Specific HLA genotypes have been strongly associated with celiac disease. HLA testing can be used in the diagnostic process. For example, Joint BSPGHAN and Celiac UK guidelines published in 2013 indicates that positive serological tests with positive HLA typing in the presence of typical symptoms can be accepted as confirmative of diagnosis without a need for biopsy.

Laboratory studies:

- Both type 1 diabetics and down syndrome have a high incidence of celiac disease; so appropriate workup is required

- Electrolytes may reveal hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, metabolic acidosis

- Anemia due to deficiency of folate, iron or Vit B12

- Prothrombin time may be prolonged

- Stool are greasy and have a rancid odor

Radiology

Small bowel follow-through may reveal obliteration of intestinal mucosa, bowel dilatation and flocculation of the barium.

Upper endoscopy is often used to confirm the diagnosis