Administration of volatile anesthetics, including isoflurane, is based on each agent’s individual minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), which is used as a surrogate for the partial pressure of each agent in the brain. MAC is then defined as the alveolar concentration needed to prevent movement in 50% of patients in response to surgical incision. MAC is based on the agent’s partial pressure relative to the atmospheric pressure. At sea level, the MAC of isoflurane is 1.2%, which can otherwise be stated as 1 MAC of isoflurane.

MAC is affected by several factors. Factors that increase MAC include young age, chronic alcohol abuse, and hypernatremia. Factors that decrease MAC include old age, hypothermia and hyperthermia, acute intoxication, and most intravenous anesthetics, including opioids, benzodiazepines, dexmedetomidine, and ketamine. The most impressive of all these factors is the effect of age, which causes a 6% decrease in MAC per decade of age above the age of 40.

Isoflurane is administered via a specifically designed variable bypass vaporizer. This vaporizer has been calibrated to deliver a set percentage of gas based on the individual volatile’s vapor pressure over a broad range of flow rates and temperatures. Vapor pressure is defined as the pressure exerted by a vapor that is in thermodynamic equilibrium with its condensed phase, in the case of volatile anesthetics, the liquid phase, at a given temperature in a closed system. It can also be thought of the pressure at which a liquid will boil. In the case of isoflurane, which has a vapor pressure of 240 mm Hg, at a normal atmospheric pressure of 760 mm Hg, the resting state is in its liquid form. If the atmospheric pressure were decreased to 240 mm Hg, the resting state of isoflurane would be as a gas. This is important to recognize because each vaporizer is calibrated to a specific volatile anesthetic, and filling a vaporizer with a different volatile anesthetic will result in inappropriate delivery of the volatile anesthetic. It is worthy to note that isoflurane has a similar vapor pressure to halothane (243 mm Hg). This means that if halothane were placed in the isoflurane vaporizer or vice versa, the difference in the amount delivered would be minimal.