The anatomy of the cheek is vital in cosmetic procedures. Surgeons commonly alter the cheeks during the procedure termed "facelift". During facelifts, the skin of the cheeks is dissected and separated from the face. The underlying fat may be liposuction away. The nerve branches from the facial nerve may be injured if the surgeon is not careful. The most common nerve damaged during a facelift is the zygomatic branch of the facial nerve. Even though the zygomatic branch is most commonly injured, there is cross innervation from the buccal branch of the facial nerve. This cross innervation prevents visible nerve damage. The buccal branch is the nerve that most surgeons try to avoid damaging. If there is damage to the buccal nerve, there will be drooping of the cheeks. Unfortunately, the regions innervated by the buccal branch of the facial nerve do not have cross innervation from other nerves.

The excision of the parotid gland due to cancers can result in facial nerve damage if there is improper technique. The facial nerve penetrates through the parotid gland before branching inside the gland. When the parotid gland gets dissected, the facial nerve is commonly damaged if cancer affects the nerve itself or the surgeon accidentally damages the nerve during surgery.

During facial reconstruction surgery, the knowledge of the cheek and the face will allow for the taking of appropriate precautions. The precautions will prevent damage to the muscles, nerves, and vasculature that may result in an unsuccessful surgery.