The majority of patients with fungal keratitis present to the emergency department or their primary care provider; in order to expedite the referral process to an ophthalmologist, an interprofessional approach in diagnosis and care is vital. Any delay can lead to vision loss and permanent blindness. The majority of patients with fungal keratitis are managed as outpatients and treated with antifungal therapy for at least 12-16 weeks.

Patient education is vital in the prevention of fungal keratitis. Contact lens wearers need to be educated about hand washing, use of appropriate cleaning solution, and avoiding sleeping and swimming while wearing contact lenses. Contact lens wearers should also regularly follow up with the optician or ophthalmologist and get their eyes checked. All contact lens wearers should be informed of symptoms of eye infections and the need to immediately see an ophthalmologist if they experience pain, redness, or loss of vision. Ophthalmology nurses should educate patients, arrange for follow up, and ensure communication between the team members. Pharmacists should review medication dosages, check for drug interactions, and review methods of administration with patients.

Close follow up during treatment is required to ensure that the condition is not worsening. The eventual outcome depends on factors like overall patient health, the status of the immune system, and other comorbidities. Patients with a mild infection who are promptly treated have a good outcome, but in patients with an infection that has spread into the sclera, the prognosis is guarded. Data indicate that at least 30% of patients with fungal keratitis develop corneal perforation or fail to respond to drug therapy.