**Management After Birth**

Neonates with HLHS are critically ill and will need to be managed in the ICU and stabilized before surgical intervention during the first week of life. Initial management will include: (1) maintaining ductal patency, (2) avoid excess pulmonary blood flow, and (3) ensure adequate blood flow from the left atrium to the right atrium.

1. Any neonate with prenatal or postnatal suspicion of HLHS will have a transthoracic echocardiogram shortly after birth. Once the diagnosis of HLHS is confirmed, a low-dose intravenous prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) infusion must be started to ensure ductal patency and maintain systemic circulation. An initial PGE1 dose of 0.05 to 0.1 mcg/kg/minute is started. Once ductal patency is confirmed, the infusion is gradually titrated down to 0.02 mcg/kg/minute. The lowest effective dose of PGE1 should be used to avoid side effects of respiratory depression and hypotension.

2. Neonates with HLHS may experience significant systemic hypoperfusion as the PVR decreases after birth. The pulmonary and systemic circulations will need to remain balanced. Supplemental oxygen administration should be avoided as an oxygenation saturation in the 70s and 80s is acceptable. If the oxygen saturations are high, then the neonate can be intubated and ventilated to increase PVR by keeping the PCO2 around 45 to 50 mmHg.

3. The atrial septum will also be evaluated during the echocardiogram. If there is a restrictive foramen ovale or intact atrial septum, the newborn will be taken emergently to the cardiac catheterization lab shortly after birth to enlarge this interatrial communication and decompress the left atrium. If the atrial septum remains intact or restrictive, an irreversible increase in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) will occur. This elevation in PVR is associated with a higher mortality and morbidity rate in newborns with HLHS. There are several percutaneous catheter procedures commonly performed, including the Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy, static balloon septal dilation, and the Park's blade septostomy. Rarely, an interatrial stent may be needed to relieve a severe restriction.

**Palliative Surgical Management**

A series of three palliative repairs are necessary for survival. The ultimate goal is to separate the systemic and pulmonary circulations. The right ventricle will become the systemic ventricle and pump oxygenated blood to the body while all deoxygenated venous return from the body will flow passively into the pulmonary circulation. The first stage occurs during the first week of life. The second stage is performed around 4-6 months of age, and the third stage is performed around two years old.

**Stage 1 Palliative Repair HLHS (first week of life)**

The **Stage I****Norwood procedure**, first described by Norwood et al. in 1979, has become the standard of care for neonates with HLHS.

- The atrial septum is removed to allow free flow of oxygenated blood entering the left atrium from the pulmonary veins to reach the right ventricle

- A neoaorta is created by sewing the hypoplastic ascending aorta to the main pulmonary artery to provide a common outflow tract to the systemic circulation from the right ventricle.

- A systemic-to-pulmonary shunt (Blalock Taussig shunt) is created by connecting the right subclavian or innominate artery to the right pulmonary artery. This replaces the ductus arteriosus as the source of pulmonary blood. Consequently, prostaglandin E1 is no longer needed to maintain ductal patency.

The**Sano procedure**was introduced in the late 1990s as a modification of the Stage I Norwood procedure. The Sano procedure involves the creation of a neoaorta similar to the stage I Norwood procedure, but rather than a BT shunt uses a nonvalved right ventricle to pulmonary artery (RV-PA) conduit to provide a source of pulmonary blood. The advantage is higher diastolic pressures and improved coronary perfusion. The disadvantage is an increased risk of right ventricular arrhythmias or right ventricular impairment from the ventricular incision.

The **Hybrid procedure**was developed as an alternative for neonates who are not candidates for the Norwood procedure. The Hybrid procedure is associated with a decreased 30-day mortality rate in high-risk premature and low birth weight neonates as compared to the stage I Norwood procedure.

- Sternotomy with bilateral pulmonary band placement to restrict pulmonary blood flow and prevent pulmonary over circulation at the expense of systemic perfusion

- Cardiac catheterization with stent placement in the ductus arteriosus to maintain systemic perfusion without the need for prostaglandin E1.

- Cardiac catheterization with stent placement in the interatrial septum or balloon septostomy.

Following the Hybrid procedure, patients continue to have an in parallel circulation.  The pulmonary and systemic circulations must be carefully balanced to achieve a 1:1 ratio of pulmonary to systemic blood flow. The systemic oxygen saturation following stage I Norwood ranges from 75% to 85% due to the mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in the right or common atrium. Postoperative management is often very challenging, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support may be necessary. Following a Norwood, these neonates are critically ill and face an interstage mortality rate of 5% to 15%.

**Stage 2 Palliative Repair HLHS - Hemi-Fontan/Bidirectional Glenn (4-6 months old)**

The Hemi-Fontan and the Bidirectional Glenn are surgical procedures that direct systemic venous return from the upper body directly into the lungs via a superior cavopulmonary connection. Both of these procedures result in a decreased volume load on the right ventricle, thereby preventing right ventricular hypertrophy/increased wall thickness and potentially improving diastolic function.

**Hemi-Fontan**

- Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt removal (Blalock-Taussig shunt)

- Anastomosis between the SVC and right atrial (RA) confluence and the central and branch pulmonary arteries (PAs) to direct the SVC blood to the pulmonary circulation

- Homograft patch augmentation of the central and branch PAs

- Interruption of the SVC blood from reaching RA using the homograft stopper

**Bidirectional Glenn**

- Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt removal (Blalock-Taussig shunt)

- End-to-side anastomosis of the SVC to a branch pulmonary artery, typically right pulmonary artery

**Hybrid procedure 2nd stage repair**

- Superior cavopulmonary anastomosis (SVC to PA anastomosis) via Hemi-Fontan or Bidirectional Glenn

- Creation of a neoaorta, as described in the Stage I palliation, with aortic arch reconstruction

- Atrial septectomy

- Removal of the pulmonary artery bands and pulmonary arterioplasty if needed

- Removal or resection of the ductus/stent complex

**Stage 3 Palliative Repair HLHS - Completion Fontan/Lateral Caval Tunnel Fontan/Extracardiac Fontan (2-3 years old)**

This procedure directs the systemic venous return from the lower half of the body directly to the lungs via a connection between the inferior vena cava (IVC) to one of the branch pulmonary arteries, typically the right pulmonary artery. Once this is established, essentially, all of the systemic venous return will drain directly into the pulmonary arteries.  Because the blood flow into the pulmonary arteries is passive, cardiac catheterization is required before this procedure. The pulmonary artery pressures must be normal, or the Fontan procedure will fail. With this physiology, oxygenated blood from the pulmonary veins will enter the common atrium and be delivered to the systemic circulation via the single functional ventricle. The systemic oxygen saturations will be near normal or slightly lower if there is a fenestration between the Fontan pathway and the common atrium.

- Anastomosis of the underside of the right pulmonary artery and superior aspect of the right atrium

- An intra-atrial tunnel is created with synthetic material that connects the opening of the IVC to the opening of the cavopulmonary anastomosis (anastomosis of the right pulmonary artery to the superior aspect of the right atrium) for the lateral tunnel Fontan

- 18 to 20 mm synthetic tube graft anastomosis between the IVC and the underside of the right pulmonary artery for the extracardiac Fontan

- Creation of fenestration or a 3 to 5 mm communication created between the common atrium and the total cavopulmonary pathway. The fenestration allows right-left shunting, thereby preserving cardiac output in the face of high pulmonary arterial pressure or pulmonary vascular resistance.

**Heart Transplantation**

Due to the scarcity of donor hearts for newborns, multistage palliative surgical repair is currently the mainstay treatment for HLHS.