Inhaling the aerosolized droplets from an infected person is the principal mechanism through which tuberculosis spreads. Although tuberculosis most commonly causes a lung infection, it is a multisystemic disease and can present as variable pathologic findings. Subsequent deposition of the organism in the lungs can lead to a few possible outcomes, including:

- The immediate clearance of the organism from the body

- Primary disease: The immediate onset of active disease in the individual

- Latent infection

- Reactivation disease: The onset of an active disease many years after a period of latent infection

The body's ability to effectively restrict or eliminate the infective inoculum is dependent on the immune status of the individual, genetics, and whether exposure to the organism is primary or secondary. M. tuberculosis also possesses several virulence factors that make its elimination difficult for alveolar macrophages. These factors include the high mycolic acid content found in the bacterium's outer capsule, which makes phagocytosis difficult for alveolar macrophages. Other constituents of the bacterium's cell wall, such as the cord factor, could directly damage the alveolar macrophages. Several studies have demonstrated that M. tuberculosis also inhibits the formation of an effective phagolysosome, which limits and sometimes even prevents the elimination of the organisms. Other virulence factors include catalase-peroxidase, which helps resist the oxidative response of the host cell, and lipoarabinomannan, which helps induce cytokines and resist host oxidative stress.

Most exposed individuals clear the infection with the aid of innate immunity. About 30-40% of exposed individuals become infected. Adaptive (T-Cell) immunity contains the infection in 95% of infected individuals as latent tuberculosis. About 5 % of patients develop primary active tuberculosis secondary to inadequate T-cell immunity. About 5-10% of patients with latent infections progress to active disease in their lifetime, most commonly in the initial two years. If untreated, half of those with the active disease die.

The tubercle bacilli induce infection of the lungs after they are transported in droplets small enough to reach the alveolar space (around 5 to 10 microns). If the infection is not eliminated by the innate defense system of the host, the bacilli could proliferate inside alveolar macrophages, which could migrate away from the lungs and enter other tissues.

Macrophages in the lungs produce chemokines and cytokines that attract other phagocytic cells, including neutrophils, monocytes, and other alveolar macrophages, which produce a nodular granulomatous structure known as a tubercle. If the continuous bacterial replication is not inhibited, the enlarging tubercle and bacilli could enter local draining lymph nodes. This causes lymphadenopathy, which is a characteristic manifestation of primary tuberculosis. A Ghon complex can develop if the lesion produced by the extension of the tubercle spreads into the lung parenchyma and lymph node. Bacteremia could also be seen in the initial infection.

The tubercle bacilli will proliferate until an effective cell-mediated immune response develops. This usually takes about 2 to 10 weeks following initial infection in more than 90% of infected individuals. In the lungs, failure to mount an effective cell-mediated immune response and tissue repair could lead to extensive damage. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, nitrogen intermediates, reactive oxygen, and the constituents of cytotoxic cells (perforin, granzymes) whose function it is to eliminate M. tuberculosis could also contribute to the collateral damage of the host and the development of caseating necrosis. Therefore, much of the tuberculosis pathology results from the infected host's immune response to the tubercle bacilli.

Unchecked bacterial growth could lead to the hematogenous spread of bacilli and eventually disseminated tuberculosis. "Military tuberculosis" is the term for disseminated disease with lesions resembling millet seeds. The bacilli can also spread mechanically via erosion of the caseating lesions into the airways, at which time the host becomes infectious to other individuals. In the absence of treatment, the mortality rate is around 80%. The remaining patients could develop a chronic disease or recover. Chronic tuberculosis is characterized by recurrent episodes of healing by fibrotic changes surrounding the lesions and tissue breakdown. The complete spontaneous eradication of the tubercle bacilli is rare.

The primary tuberculosis infection is usually located in the middle portion of the lungs and is referred to as the Ghon focus. The Ghon focus usually enters a state of latency in most individuals as latent tuberculosis. In the event of immunosuppression in the host, latent tuberculosis reactivates to active tuberculosis.

Most individuals who develop tuberculosis do so after an extended latency period, often many years after the initial primary infection. This is known as reactivation disease or secondary tuberculosis. Individuals with latent infection but no underlying medical problems have a 5% to 10% risk of developing secondary tuberculosis in their lifetime. The location of the lesions of secondary tuberculosis is usually at the lung apices, and unlike primary disease, it tends to be localized. A small number of people could also develop secondary tuberculosis after getting reinfected with M. tuberculosis. Secondary tuberculosis can be differentiated from primary progressive tuberculosis by the presence of cavitation and the location of the lesion.