Physical growth is a process with its trajectory inching towards attaining a fully developed adult form. Stunted growth in children indicates either genetic dysfunctions or inadequate nutritional fulfillment. Early detection of such conditions through the regular monitoring of growth indicators such as height and body weight can diagnose these conditions at an early stage leading to early modifications and treatments. In some cases, this may result in “catch-up” growth in the child. Height measurement in adults fulfills a similar function by indicating the physical health status of individuals. In older adults, it can identify those at risk for osteoporosis and fractures.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) growth standards can be used to monitor the physical growth and development of children and infants. It estimates the percentile and z-scores for length/height for age, weight for age, weight for length, weight for height, and BMI for age. The standards depict normal early childhood growth under optimal conditions.

The Child Health and Disability Prevention (CHDP) Program Health Assessment Guidelines (guideline #4) recommend anthropometric measurements in all children and adolescents at each preventive visit to ensure adequate growth patterns and to assess the risk of obesity. The obtained measurement should be plotted on World Health Organization (WHO) charts or the CDC charts, which are gender and age-specific, to compare the child to the average population. Accurate serial measurements over time are the most important aspect of anthropometry. Solitary deviations from a growth pattern curve can be a normal variant or due to an acute illness. However, according to the CHDP guidelines, a steady change of the growth curve on serial measurements is a reliable indicator of an abnormal growth pattern and warrants further workup.

In adults, anthropometric measurements are recommended at each well-visit to determine nutritional status and the risk of future disease.