**CT Intravenous Contrast**

Intravenous contrast for CT is the most commonly used contrast agent overall. X-ray beams rely on energy passing through tissue, with some of the energy getting deflected or absorbed. The difference in the resulting rays or shadows creates an amplitude-dependent picture. The tissue modifies the energy beam or x-ray through scattering and absorption. Iodine is an element used in contrast media that utilizes both methods and subsequently changes the x-ray.

Early binding agents used for iodine were high osmolality agents, with their osmolality often exceeding 1500 mosm/kg H2O, approaching 5 to 8 times that of normal human serum, 290 mosm/kg H2O. Due to multiple side effects, by the mid-1990’s these agents declining in use in favor of low-osmolality (less than three times the osmolality of normal human serum) or even iso-osmolar agents.

The addition of IV contrast media increases the density and thus attenuation of the blood with which it mixes. The appearance of IV contrast will depend on the timing and contrast concentration. The iodinated blood results in signal loss or opacification. Early timing reveals undiluted or minimally diluted medium as it gets injected through the veins, and the attenuation of energy may be so great as to cause streak artifact. As it moves centrally, more blood mixes with the medium. As time passes, the contrast becomes progressively diluted as it passes into the arteries, tissues, and then distal peripheral veins. It obtains equilibration within several minutes before being filtered then secreted, predominantly through the urinary system. Modern contrast agents diffuse quickly, and the mixing of iodinated and non-iodinated blood is more related to blood flow than diffusion properties.

The appearance of tissues in a contrast-enhanced study depends on the timing of image acquisition relative to the contrast bolus. This timing depends on the pathology of interest or study indication.

**Contrast-Induced Nephropathy**

Early studies of contrast safety and efficacy quickly established links to contrast use and a decline in renal function. This association, once widespread, has come under scrutiny in the last few decades.

- Serum creatinine increase 0.3 mg/dl

- Increase in serum creatinine 50%

- Urine output of less than 0.5 ml/kg/hr for at least 6 hours.

Many of the early study design flaws that overrepresented CIN are just now being corrected. Inadequate risk factor identification and subsequent control groups have been the most cited cause of misleading associations. The early studies had their basis on high osmolality contrast, a contrast medium no longer used that has a higher side effect profile. Many of the early studies predominantly utilized patients undergoing heart catheterization, a procedure associated with significant embolic and nephrotoxic risk in addition to the contrast use.

The creation of a randomized controlled study to describe CIN has proven difficult, if not impossible, to employ.

Estimates are that it takes approximately 20 hours for normally functioning kidneys to clear contrast. The concern that increased contrast levels may have a nephrotoxic effect has led to the idea of waiting 24 hours between contrasted studies; however, no studies have adequately addressed this concept. In a patient with no renal function, no CIN is possible; however, for those in late-stage renal disease still producing urine, the patient may still be at increased risk. While the true risk of CIN or PC-AKI is yet fully delineated, contrast use will likely increase as contrast agents improve, and researchers continue to report low levels of CIN.

**Contrast Allergy**

Like CIN, the rates of contrast allergy have dynamically varied.

The American College of Radiology has classified reactions into two basic categories; physiologic and allergic-like reactions, and each category subdivide into mild, moderate, and severe. The physiologic reactions often occur as secondary to pain, vasovagal, ionotropic, infusion sensation, and neurologic. While often seen as benign and dependent on the dose, these physiologic reactions can be deadly with seizures or life-threatening hypotension and arrhythmia.

While a type 1 or IgE response mediates most allergies, only 50% of severe contrast have a corresponding skin test; this suggests an alternative or histamine-dependent pathway.

The treatment for acute contract reactions depends on the presenting symptom, and radiologists and emergency physicians are typically well-versed. Treatment paradigms should include but not be limited to bronchospasm, laryngeal edema, hypotension, anaphylactic reactions, pulmonary edema, hypertensive crisis, seizures, hypoglycemia, and anxiety. Example treatment paradigms are in the ACR Manual on Contrast Media.

The combination of allergic and physiologic reactions associated with low osmolality contrast mediums is low, with reports varying between 0.2 and 0.7%.

**Pretreatment Algorithms**

Pretreatment algorithms are focused on multiple doses of steroids with a small period to permit steroid efficacy and an additional dose of antihistamine before contrast injection. An estimated 4 to 6 hours are required before steroids can mitigate allergic-type reactions, and the most cited algorithm has a 13-hour protocol.

- Prednisone 50 mg PO, 13, 7, and 1 hour before the scan. Diphenhydramine 50 mg PO/IV/IM 1 hour before the scan.

- Methylprednisolone 32 mg PO 13 and 2 hours before the scan. Diphenhydramine 50 mg PO/IV/IM 1 hour before the scan.

- Methylprednisolone 40 mg IV or hydrocortisone 200mg IV every 4 hours for at least two doses of diphenhydramine 50 mg IV 1 hour before the scan.

- Dexamethasone 7.5 mg IV or betamethasone 6 mg IV every 4 hours for at least two doses. Diphenhydramine 50 mg IV 1 hour before the scan.

Even with pretreatment, estimates are that 12% of patients with prior reactions will have breakthrough reactions; however, the severity is typically similar or less than previous responses.

**Metformin Use**

Metformin is a medication commonly used to manage diabetes. Metformin use is associated with lactic acidosis, a potential side effect exacerbated by poor renal function. If patients are appropriately screened for contraindications to include renal function, no special precautions are warranted. Since there is a risk of CIN or PC-AKI with contrast use, the development of new or worsened renal dysfunction can merit altering a patient’s metformin use until such dysfunction is ruled out to prevent lactic acidosis.

**Other IV Contrast Complications and Considerations**

Contrast extravasation occurs in 0.1% to 1% of IV contrast administrations, with the most common correlating risk factor being peripheral wrist or distal leg IV injection site.

Myasthenia gravis exacerbations have correlated with contrast administrations.

Intravenous contrast does cross the placenta and is detectable within the fetus.

Similarly, contrast is found secreted in breast milk in low doses, with only a small amount of ingested contrast getting absorbed.