E. coli O157: H7 has become a major, worldwide food-borne pathogen known to result in life-threatening conditions, including HUS and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). The epidemiological investigation has identified cattle as the main reservoir for E. coli O157: H7 after tracing outbreaks of Shiga toxin enterohemorrhagic diarrhea to domesticated animals, particularly feedlot cattle. Ruminant animals on farms act as a natural reservoir of E. coli 0157: H7. Zoonotic transmission of E. coli 0157:H7 occurs after consumption of undercooked meat or deficiently pasteurized dairy products or contact with contaminated fomites laden with Shiga toxin enterohemorrhagic E. coli. Other causal etiologies of Shiga toxin enterohemorrhagic E. coli include exposure to contaminated water from potable drinking sources, swimming pools and lakes, contaminated food such as insufficiently cooked meats, inadequately washed leafy greens and fruits, unpasteurized drinks including apple juice, and direct contact with contaminated animals in petting farms. The contamination of fresh fruits and vegetables occurs secondary to fecal contamination in agricultural irrigation water or runoff. Although linked to other bacteria, HUS most commonly occurs after infection with Shiga toxin-producing E. coli, termed enterohemorrhagic E. coli, particularly E. coli 0157:H7. E. coli O157 has hardy survival characteristics exceeding those found in commensal E. coli strains, which enable this food-borne pathogen to survive a wide range of harsh conditions frequently encountered within the human food chain. This pathogen can persist for extended periods in the food matrix.