Verhoeff staining is effective on tissues preserved in any fixative, although formalin-based fixatives tend to be most successful. The Verhoeff staining process occurs in two steps. The initial stage is the Verhoeff stain component, using hematoxylin, iron (III) chloride and an iodine solution. Iron (III) chloride and iodine act as mordants and aid in the oxidation of hematoxylin to hematein, which is responsible for staining elastic elements. Elastin possesses a strong affinity for the hematoxylin-iron complex and thus, retains the stain longer than other tissue elements following decolorization. Excess iron (III) chloride is used to differentiate the tissue; then sodium thiosulfate is used to remove excess iodine. The subsequent van Gieson counterstain utilizes picric acid and acid fuchsin to stain collagen and muscle fibers, producing contrast against the hematoxylin stain. Under-differentiation is preferred in the Verhoeff stain, as picric acid used in the van Gieson counterstain serves to differentiate the elastic fibers further. Each slide must be differentiated individually as the appropriate duration of differentiation varies according to the amount of elastic tissue in each specimen, which may make preparation difficult.

Several modifications of the standard Verhoeff staining procedure have been developed to enhance specificity for elastic components or to improve staining of specific tissues. An adaptation of the Verhoeff procedure that advocates no decolorizing step and counterstaining with Bismarck Brown Y dye may improve staining of elastic fibers and lamellae. Another alteration of the standard Verhoeff staining procedure involving a unique tissue fixation process and counterstaining with a modified light green solution has been employed to visualize the elastic laminae of small-caliber blood vessels.