Histological examination is not routinely carried out for a high likelihood of diphtheria infection. Histology is useful mainly for diagnosing Corynebacterium diphtheria, primarily when there is a co-infection with other pseudo membrane forming bacteria such as Staphylococcus species and Streptococcus species.

The initial stage of the disease is characterized by edema and hyperemia of the affected epithelial surface, which is followed by necrosis and the formation of fibrinous suppurative exudates. These exudates then coagulate, creating a characteristic sturdy greyish whitish colored pseudo membrane appearance over the affected area. The pseudomembrane is composed of fibrin, necrotic epithelial cells, and C. diphtheria bacteria. The membrane is composed of mostly fibrin over the vocal cords, while on the bronchus, it is composed of both fibrin and neutrophils.

The myocardium, if affected, might show extensive hyaline degeneration along with the infiltration of mononuclear cells in the interstitium. There might be the presence of areas of necrosis and inflammation as well. Demonstration of diphtheria toxin (DT) with the myocardial fibers can also be seen on fluorescent staining of tissue sections with the anti-DT antibody. On an electron microscope, changes within the myofibres such as loss of matrix, mitochondrial enlargement with excess lipid, disorganization of cristae can be seen. Histological examination of the injured nerve demonstrates early changes seen in paranodal myelin, which includes both widenings of nodes of Ranvier and structural changes in its configuration. Segmental demyelination is rare at this stage but is a characteristic lesion in the latter part of the disease as the disease progresses.