Microvascular free tissue transfer is a reliable method for the reconstruction of complex surgical defects, with success rates ranging from 91 to 99 percent.

Although the DIEP flap achieves long-lasting satisfactory results in most patients, this long-lasting procedure is not devoid of serious complications. Obesity is a major predictor of the flap and donor-site complications, and these patients must be properly informed of the risks of the intervention and must be advised beforehand. Similarly, neoadjuvant preoperative chemotherapy and prior abdominal surgery increase the rates of minor complications.

Higher incidences of partial and fat necroses have been reported with the deep inferior epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flaps than with the transverse rectus abdominis musculocutaneous (TRAM) flaps (Wang, Liu, Song, & Wang, 2014). The technological advancements in magnification, suture material, and surgical instruments and increasing surgical experience with microsurgery may play a role in the occurrence of these complications.

Vascular occlusion with total or partial flap loss is an unavoidable potential complication of microvascular surgery.

Other Perforator flaps complications include infection, wound dehiscence, fat necrosis, hematoma, abdominal wall laxity/hernia, transient brachial plexus injury, deep venous thrombosis, mild congestive heart failure,  pulmonary embolus, blood loss,  pain, and weakness at the site from which the donor tissue was taken.

Obesity is considered the major risk factor of bulging and hernia after harvesting free abdominal flap.

A rise in intra-abdominal pressure or the presence of a weak abdominal wall (high body mass index, multiple scars on the abdomen), or a history of active smoking increases the risk of developing abdominal bulging or asymmetry.

Predictors of increased flap morbidity were smoking, chemotherapy, pre reconstruction radiotherapy, post-reconstruction radiotherapy, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, abdominal scarring, obesity, age, flap size, number of venous anastomoses, and number of perforators.

If choosing the mammary arteries, there is a small risk of pneumothorax.