Managing drug adverse effects requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and several physicians in different specialties. Without proper management, the adverse effects of prednisone overdose are high. Systemic corticosteroids have extensive use in the treatment of a variety of autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. Prolonged use, especially at high doses of 40 mg/day, can cause serious adverse effects. The most common systems involved include musculoskeletal, endocrine, cardiovascular, and central nervous system (CNS) and gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Prednisone's side effects can be minimized by monitoring the patient and putting preventative measures in place. Some of these preventative measures include using lower potency dosages and starting patients on the lowest effective dosage per guidelines. The patient needs to be informed of the adverse effects so they may understand and be aware of making the proper lifestyle modifications to help reduce the risk of adverse effects. Patients should receive counsel to seek medical attention if they experience any of these known adverse effects. A steroid treatment card can be recommended to show to all healthcare professionals involved in their care and management. Adults versus children monitoring and care should be noted, particularly regarding growth curve complications, adrenal suppression, and osteoporosis.

To accomplish the above, interprofessional collaboration is crucial. Clinicians prescribe the drug and need to inform the patients about the adverse event profile; this is often the task of the nursing staff. They can also assess patient compliance and let the prescribing clinician know about any possible issues. Pharmacists can counsel the patient on proper administration, as well as reinforce the adverse events. Pharmacists must also perform medication reconciliation and report to the prescribing office regarding any potential interactions. Only through this type of interprofessional communication can prednisone therapy achieve its optimal results. [Level 5]