**Nutritional Requirements and Energy Expenditure**

The needs of infants determine the amount of nutrition required to maintain and support adequate growth and optimal health while maintaining homeostasis with other nutrients. Nutritional requirements vary in infancy, and growth patterns are closely linked to optimized nutrition. The use of standardized definitions is essential when plotting growth in infancy. Energy expenditure for basal metabolic processes, regular physical activities, as well as unexpected increased energy utilization for pathological conditions, determine the infant's caloric intake. A healthy child from birth to 1 year should receive around 100 kcal/kg/day. Neonatal caloric requirements are higher at about 110–135 kcal/kg/day.

Of the total energy requirement, a healthy infant utilizes about 40-60 kcal/kg/day for basal metabolic rate. Thermoregulation plays a massive role in early infancy, requiring a significant amount of energy expenditure. This is even higher in smaller preterm infants with minimal subcutaneous fat stores. Feeding, digestion, absorption, storage, and elimination also require a vast amount of energy, often up to 30-50 kcal/kg/day. Preterm and sick infants often require higher amounts of energy to maintain adequate growth. As infants get older, their energy requirements decrease, with boys requiring more than girls usually on account of weight.

Nutritional needs are objectively defined collectively using the term 'dietary reference intakes.'

**Nutrient Profiles: Macronutrients**

Macronutrients include large nutrient molecules that provide the primary nutritional source of energy and substrate, playing a vital anabolic role in building tissues and in growth. These are broadly grouped into proteins, carbohydrates, and fats.

**Proteins**

Proteins are building blocks that play a significant anabolic role in building muscle and tissues. Protein accounts for about 15% of total energy intake. Structurally, proteins are large molecules comprised of chains of amino acids joined by peptide bonds. They can be classified based on the number of amino acids in the protein chain into dipeptides, oligopeptides, or polypeptides. Complex folding of the longer protein chains into three-dimensional structures further results in a tertiary modification, adding complexity to the protein structure.

Enteral protein intake in neonates is primarily consumed as whey or casein proteins. Whey protein has less methionine content, while casein has less cysteine content. Mucins are another minor group of human milk proteins, seen in milk fat globule membranes.

Parenteral intake of protein, on the other hand, is achieved using various amino acid formulations. Amino acids have historically been classified as essential and non-essential based on the maintenance of nitrogen balance or based on a varying degree of 'essentiality' considering supply and demand.

**Lipids (Fats)**

Lipids are a primary source of caloric intake, primarily in the form of triglycerides, free fatty acids, and cholesterol. Lipids account for about 40-50% of total energy intake. The caloric density of lipids is 9 kcal/g. During the fetal period, lipids are transferred transplacentally as fatty acids, gradually increasing in the third trimester. Body fat stores are accumulated towards the end of the third trimester, provide a significant source of energy to the newborn infant. Stores are decreased in low birth weight and preterm infants. Excess glucose is also converted to lipids by lipogenesis.

Triglycerides account for the bulk of lipids accounting for up to >90% of all lipid intake, with phospholipids and cholesterol acting as minor sources usually packaged into milk-fat globules. Enterocytes utilize the ingested lipids to produce lipoproteins rich in triglycerides, known as chylomicrons, that are used for transporting lipids via lymphatics to the target cells.

Essential fatty acids (EFA) include linoleic (LA) and alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), which provide an essential source of fats. Besides, given the current use of intravenous lipid emulsions, arachidonic acid (ARA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), derivatives of LA, and ALA, respectively, are also considered EFAs. Essential fatty acid deficiency (EFAD) can appear as soon as 7-10 days if not receiving adequate lipid intake. EFAD can be diagnosed biochemically using the triene:tetrene ratio (Holman index) with a value greater than 0.2 suggestive of biochemical EFAD, although symptoms appear >0.4.

Parenteral lipids are most commonly given as intravenous lipid emulsions. Multiple such emulsions have been used in infants over the past fifty years. Intralipids are currently the most widely used fat emulsions made from soybean oil, commonly used at 20% concentration.

A newer generation lipid emulsion is SMOF (a mixture of soybean, MCT, olive oil, fish oil), which is approved for adults but being utilized in the neonatal ICU more commonly for infants with or at risk for parenteral nutrition-induced cholestasis (PNAC). Infants and children with PNAC may be candidates to receive Omegaven; a fish-oil derived intravenous lipid emulsion, rich in omega-3 fatty acids, therefore with a less inflammatory omega-3:omega-6 ratio. This has been associated with less hepatotoxicity and less inflammation. Despite theoretical concerns of increased risk of bleeding due to metal toxicity from fish oil, this has not been clinically validated. Omegaven is FDA approved for use in pediatric patients with PNAC. The recommended dose of Omegaven is 1 g/kg/day.

Clinolipid is a soybean-olive oil mix with a favorable lipid profile that is used in Canada and was recently approved the US food and drug administration (FDA). Medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) are not used as an emulsion since it is coconut oil-based, has no EFA and is cleared quickly from circulation. Infants receiving intravenous lipid emulsions require close monitoring using liver functions, and triglyceride levels (to maintain a goal TG level <250 mg/dL).

**Carbohydrates (Energy)**

The primary source of carbohydrates to the brain is glucose. Carbohydrates provide the bulk of calories with 40-55% of daily needs. While carbohydrates are utilized as disaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides, lactose forms the primary enteral source of glucose in human milk and standard infant formula. The amount of carbohydrate requirement is calculated based on the total anticipated energy requirement taking into account the energy from non-carbohydrate sources. Besides, glucose provides the carbon molecules required for synthesizing fatty acids and amino acids. In parental nutrition, it is often started as D10W and increased over days accounting for the glucose infusion rate (GIR). Dextrose provides 3.4 kcal/g of glucose.

**Micronutrients and Other Trace Elements**

Nutrient elements that are required in minute quantities are considered micronutrients or trace elements- with RDA often in micrograms. The most common micronutrients are zinc, copper, chromium, manganese, and selenium. Trace elements require age, size, and disease-specific adjustments in the pediatric population; therefore, adult recommendations cannot be used. While the absorption of trace elements is tightly regulated in the gastrointestinal tract, supplying trace elements parenterally bypasses this homeostatic barrier leading to a risk of overload if excessive quantities are provided.

**Iron:**Iron is a basic component of hemoglobin and myoglobin and is hence an essential nutrient. The deficiency of iron results in microcytic anemia and FTT. Growing preterm infants require a higher dose of iron to meet the demands of catch up growth and to support increased red blood cell production from bone marrow proliferation. Breastfed infants may require iron supplementation after 4-6 months of life where formula-fed infants do not as infant formula is fortified with iron.

**Zinc:**Zinc is a vital cofactor of human enzymes and is considered essential for growth. Zinc requirements vary with age and clinical condition. Infants with short bowel syndrome often have increased fluid losses; therefore are at higher risk of zinc deficiency. Premature infants need higher doses of zinc secondary to their rapid growth. Zinc deficiency can result from congenital or nutritional causes. Congenital abnormality of zinc absorption or transport results in acrodermatitis enteropathica affecting skin, hair, and nails, and patients present with FTT, hair loss, diarrhea, dermatitis, facial rash, and nail hypoplasia. Acquired/ nutritional deficiency of zinc is commonly seen in preterm infants on PN, resulting in growth failure, poor wound healing, skin rashes, and iron deficiency anemia as zinc is a cofactor in iron metabolism.

**Copper:**Copper plays an important role as a cofactor to over twenty enzymes involved in multiple basic cellular processes involving cellular respiration, iron metabolism, and production of red blood cells, to name a few.

**Chromium:**Chromium plays a crucial role in insulin metabolism, thus regulating glucose levels. While deficiency of chromium has not been well reported in humans, chromium toxicity is well known, especially in infants and children on long-term PN. Chromium is believed to have renal tubular toxicity with a reduced glomerular filtration rate. Given the wide variability in the contamination of chromium with different PN formulations, the actual intake is often unclear. It is thus recommended to decrease the dose of chromium in children with renal failure, but not eliminate it.

**Manganese:**Manganese is an important trace element with a role in enzyme activation and function of multiple enzymes, including metalloenzymes with manganese incorporated into the enzymatic molecular structure, most notably, superoxide dismutase enzyme. However, due to wide availability in nature, deficiency of manganese is rare. However, the neurotoxicity and hepatic toxicity of manganese are well described. In preterm infants on long-term PN, and especially those with PNAC, the risk of accumulation and, thus, toxicity is significantly higher since manganese is primarily excreted via the liver. Thus manganese is no longer added as a trace element as it can be neurotoxic in large amounts, and there is enough in the PN additives.

**Selenium:**Selenium is an antioxidant associated with reductions in a wide range of pathological conditions in infants, especially preterm infants on PN, including bronchopulmonary dysplasia/chronic lung disease, necrotizing enterocolitis, retinopathy of prematurity, periventricular leukomalacia and sepsis. As a cofactor for glutathione peroxidase enzyme, selenium plays a role in reducing free radicals, thus decreasing cellular level injury across various organ systems. Due to predominantly renal excretion, caution is recommended in infants with renal dysfunction.

**Vitamins:**

Preterm infants are prone to vitamin deficiencies due to lower stores, increase requirements, and immature metabolic processes. The opposite is also true that these preterm infants are at higher risk for toxicity due to immature and compromised renal function. Fat-soluble vitamins include vitamins A, D, E, and K. Vitamin A (Retinol) is known to play an essential role in the growth and development of skin, eyes, bones, and pulmonary epithelium. It is thus implicated in chronic lung disease, photophobia, abnormal epiphyseal bone growth, and FTT. Vitamin E (tocopherol) has an antioxidant role in iron-induced hemolysis. Vitamin K plays a vital role in coagulation through carboxylation of prothrombin into its active form, thus essential in preventing hemorrhagic disease of the newborn. Vitamin D plays a crucial role in calcium and phosphorus metabolism in conjunction with parathyroid hormone. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with rickets, osteopenia of prematurity, and failure to thrive. Water-soluble vitamins B and C, on the other hand, require daily intake to meet their requirements.

**Preterm Infants**

Preterm infants are a unique population with specialized needs. The nutritional requirements of preterm infants are diverse and vary significantly with gestational age and stage of growth. The extrauterine growth velocities of preterm infants in the NICU frequently fall short of in-utero growth velocities at corresponding gestational ages. Neurodevelopmental outcomes are strongly linked to growth velocities in preterm infants.

**Parenteral Nutrition in Preterm Infants**

Parenteral nutrition is essential to those unable to tolerate sufficient enteral feedings for various reasons. Intravenous nutrition starts at birth and is gradually reduced as enteral feeds are introduced. The type of IV access dictates the concentrations of the components of intravenous nutrition. Parenteral nutrition is roughly divided out to 55% carbohydrates (dextrose), 15% protein (amino acids), and 30% fat (lipid formulations such as intralipids, SMOF, or Omegavan). Intravenous dextrose is the most common source of carbohydrates. Dextrose (10%) is used as the starting fluid in most situations, except the extreme preterm infants, who may require a lower dextrose concentration. Dextrose concentrations are titrated based on infant's needs, serum glucose levels, and glucose infusion rate. While up to 12.5% dextrose can be given safely via a peripheral venous catheter, higher concentrations require central venous access. Parental amino acids can be supplemented from the first day of life, even in preterm infants.

**Enteral Nutrition in Preterm Infants**

Enteral feeds are introduced as soon as possible and advanced gradually until full feeds are attained. Colostrum care is practiced in many neonatal intensive care units (NICUs) across the world wherein colostrum is applied orally, acting as oral immune therapy.

No other significant benefits or adverse events were identified. However, the quality of the evidence from the studies available for the review was considered low. Once ready to feed enterally, small volume starter feedings are given, starting at 10-15 ml/kg/day. These are considered 'trophic' and used for gut priming. Trophic feeds are introduced in the first 24 hours in most NICUs across the USA. The feeds are gradually advanced by 10-30 ml/kg/day to full feeds, ideally attained by 7 to 14 days. While there are no standard 'one-size-fits-all' recommendations for feeding preterm infants, the optimal suggested timeframe for achieving full enteral feeds is inversely proportional to the size of the infants- taking about 7-14 days in infants with birth weight 750-1500g. The use of donor breastmilk is currently subject to unit-specific practices. Once the infant is receiving about 75-80 ml/kg/day, breastmilk (either mother's or donor milk) may be fortified with human milk fortifiers to 24 calorie/ounce (cal/oz), with some units practicing a gradual increase in fortification to 22 cal/oz then 24 cal/oz. Standard infant formulas are between 19 and 20 kcal/oz, which is modeled after breastmilk.