Overall, a tracheobronchial injury is relatively uncommon in blunt trauma (less than 1% of hospitalized blunt trauma patients have this type of injury). However, the majority of tracheal injuries are due to blunt trauma including direct blows, compression or strangulation, and shearing injuries (e.g., clothesline injuries) from sudden flexion, extension or deceleration. Blunt trauma accounts for 60% of external laryngeal injuries. Approximately two-thirds of upper airway injuries involve the cervical trachea, while the remaining one-third are laryngeal injuries. While penetrating trauma to the trachea is also relatively uncommon, it is the most common airway structure injured by stab wounds to the neck. When found, it is more frequently seen in patients with concomitant cervical trauma and vascular or digestive tract injuries. In fact, when death results from this type of penetrating trauma, it is most commonly associated with concomitant vascular injury rather than the airway injury itself. Failed or flawed intubation attempts are another potential cause of death in this population. It should also be noted that most injuries requiring tracheal reconstruction are iatrogenic and related to tracheostomies and endotracheal intubation. The most common among these are tube cuff injuries.

The thyroid cartilage is the tracheal structure most commonly fractured in both blunt and penetrating trauma. In blunt trauma, tracheal transection most commonly occurs distal to the cricoid cartilage and within 3 cm of the carina.

Up to 25% of patients with acute laryngotracheal trauma requiring surgery have no physical evidence of the injury at initial presentation, and signs may be delayed for 24 to 48 hours. A high index of suspicion is necessary to avoid missing an occult injury as delays in diagnosis and definitive treatment are associated with poorer outcomes. Mortality is relatively high in patients with acute trauma to the trachea with a reported 15% to 40% range depending on mechanism and classification.