Blood products should be transfused based on guidelines, and clinical assessment and unnecessary transfusions should be avoided. Transfusions have become a lot safer over few decades with the advancement of component preparation practices. For example, Leukoreduction of RBC or platelets significantly reduces complications of FNHTR and HLA alloimmunization. These product modifications are implemented predominantly in developed nations but still universally lacking in the developing world. Irradiation, washed RBC/platelets and plasma depletion of platelets are the specific modification that should be put in place for patients with special blood product need.

A thorough discussion about such procedures between the physician and blood transfusion specialist always helps benefit the patient. Close communication between blood banks and clinical services is crucial to establish safe transfusion practices. Hemovigilance keeps track of adverse events and helps develop better policies to reduce the chance of any transfusion-related complication.

With ever-changing medicine, we are bound to keep ourselves updated with the latest guidelines in transfusion. Participation in CMEs, conferences, and symposium help transfer techniques and the latest technology to improve patient care. Regular academic interaction between physicians in the blood bank and at the patient end is crucial and technical and nursing staff. Every physician undergoing residency should have a mandatory rotation in transfusion medicine to implement better transfusion practice overall.