The initial evaluation should include carboxyhemoglobin levels, ideally obtained via blood gases. Studies have determined that venous COHb levels are equivalent to arterial levels; thus, an arterial sample is not required. The FDA has approved the use of a pulse CO-oximeter device; however, clinical studies demonstrate a poor correlation with blood gases. Thus, a CO-oximeter should not be used unless blood gases are unavailable.

ECG and cardiac monitoring are needed to assess for cardiac ischemia and dysrhythmias. Those with an abnormal ECG, complaints of angina, known CAD, and arguably anyone over 65 years of age should also have cardiac biomarkers (troponin, CK-MB). In females, a pregnancy test is imperative, as this may change management. Elevated lactate is seen but does not correlate with severity. Blood gases are helpful for both a carboxyhemoglobin level as well as assessing the degree of metabolic acidosis. Additional toxicology screens are indicated in cases of intentional CO poisoning (acetaminophen and salicylate levels, urine drug screen). Of note is that CO poisoning can have overlapping features with cyanide poisoning, which would be of concern in the setting of a house fire; however, administration of hydroxocobalamin can affect carboxyhemoglobin levels, and blood gases would ideally be obtained before administration.

Imaging of the brain is frequently obtained to rule out other disorders that may be causing mental status changes. CT of the head is typically normal, though hemorrhage of the globus pallidus and deep white matter have been reported. MRI can show increased T2-weighted hyperdensities, basal-ganglia lesions, and atrophy of the hippocampus, though these findings are largely non-specific.

There are 2 biological markers showing substantial promise in identifying patients at high risk for neurologic damage: neuron-specific enolase (NSE), a glycolytic enzyme in the neuronal cytoplasm, and S100B, a calcium-binding protein in astroglial cells. Both are released from the cell following hypoxia and subsequent cell death. One study demonstrated 15-fold higher S100B levels in patients who developed delayed neurologic sequelae (DNS) and found this to be an independent risk factor with levels greater than 0.165 mcg/L predicting DNS with high sensitivity and specificity.