Lung compliance refers to the change in volume that accompanies a change in pressure in the lung. Compliance is calculated according to the formula dV/dP, where V refers to the volume of the lung and P refers to the transpulmonary pressure (TPP), which can be otherwise expressed as alveolar pressure (Palv) – intrapleural pressure (Ppl). TPP can be thought of as the pressure that prevents the inward recoil of the lung, or rather the pressure that keeps the lung from collapsing on itself.

At rest, TPP is slightly positive, and during inspiration, as the diaphragm contracts, Ppl will decrease, causing TPP to increase and subsequently the lung to expand. Normal lung tissue is based on a compliance curve in which a change in TPP will generate a maximum increase in lung volume.

Lung diseases can either cause an increase or decrease in the lung's compliance and distortion of the curve, resulting in an increased TPP to generate the appropriate change in lung volume. For example, emphysema will cause the compliance curve to be displaced upwards, resulting in the TPP being in a region where increased TPP will result in a minimal increase in lung volume.

NPPV reduces the work of breathing through three different methods. By applying positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) through expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP), NPPV allows the body to overcome the dynamic intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure threshold required to initiate a breath, as well as increasing lung compliance.