Contact dermatitis is a relatively common disorder encountered in clinical practice. However, the condition is best managed by an intradisciplinary team that includes a dermatologist, allergist, primary care provider, nurse practitioner, and a pharmacist. The key is compliance with avoidance is important. The key to avoidance is proper evaluation and detection of causative allergen. Wear appropriate clothing to protect against irritants at home and in a work environment.

The pharmacist should educate the patient on over the counter products that can be used to ease symptoms. Topical corticosteroids may be used to reduce the inflammation. Antihistamines such as hydroxyzine and cetirizine are recommended to control pruritus. Systemic steroids are advised in severe cases but should be tapered gradually to prevent recurrences. Friction should be avoided as well as the use of soaps, perfumes, and dyes. Emollients are used for hydrating the skin. Tacrolimus ointment and pimecrolimus cream are immunomodulating drugs that inhibit calcineurin and are helpful in allergic contact dermatitis.

The nurse and primary care physician should educate the patient on avoidance of the offending agents and maintain some type of barrier protection. Patients should be educated that contact dermatitis can recur if repeated exposure occurs. When going hiking, long-sleeved garments are recommended for individuals with an allergy to plants.

Unfortunately, recurrence is common and people with no identifiable cause have a poor quality of life.