The typical clinical features include tender, largely nonpruritic, and erythematous psoriasiform eruptions that favor acral sites such as the fingers (61%), toes (39%), ears (79%), and nose (63%). Nail involvement is almost always present, is indistinguishable from nail changes associated with psoriasis, and is often the first sign of the condition. Unlike in psoriasis, the helical rim of the ear and nasal tip are affected. Intensive violaceous erythema, erosions, and yellowish crusts may be present. Rarely, bullous lesions may be present as well.

In 63% of cases, skin lesions precede the diagnosis of the tumor by approximately one year.

According to Bazex et al., the disease develops in three stages. The first stage is typically asymptomatic and typically affects the earlobes, the ear helix, the tip of the nose, distal fingertips, or nails. Vesicles, subungual hyperkeratosis, or nail dystrophy can be noted. Nail involvement is almost always present, is often the first sign of the condition, and nail changes are indistinguishable from those due to psoriasis. Nail changes can include horizontal and vertical ridging, yellow discoloration, onycholysis, subungual hyperkeratosis, and in more severe cases, nail plate atrophy. Later, in stage two, the palms and soles may become involved. The skin lesions spread to involve the cheeks, forehead, elbows, and knees. In stage three, if the underlying tumor is progressing, erythema can spread to the trunk.

During the physical exam, one must be aware of signs of malignancy and paraneoplastic syndromes. Features that may be indicative of malignancy include the following:

- Pruritus

- Ichthyosis

- Sister Mary Joseph nodule

- Clubbing

- Sign of Leser-Trelat

- Blummer shelf

- Virchow's nodes