As discussed above, anemia of chronic renal disease is mainly secondary to EPO deficiency; however, numerous studies indicate that the following also contribute to the development of anemia in patients with chronic renal disease:

- Circulating uremia-induced erythropoiesis inhibitors lead to anemia, although this has been challenged in some studies as no specific inhibitors have been identified.

- The shortened lifespan of red blood cells also contributes, as observed in radioisotope labeling studies.

- Although the underlying mechanism is not entirely understood, mechanical and metabolic factors have been proposed.

- Nutritional deficiencies, such as vitamin B12 and folate, due to dialysate losses or anorexia are currently not very common due to the routine supplementation of nutrients in hemodialysis patients.

- Recent studies have uncovered an excessively recognized role of disordered iron homeostasis in anemia of chronic renal disease. Systemic iron content is maintained by regulating gastrointestinal iron absorption and its release from storage sites, such as reticuloendothelial macrophages and the liver.

- CKD patients have exaggerated iron losses, accounting for around 1 to 3 g annually in hemodialysis patients, secondary to chronic bleeding due to uremia-associated platelet dysfunction, blood being trapped in the dialysis apparatus, and frequent phlebotomy. CKD patients are at significant risk of true iron deficiency; therefore, iron supplementation is part of the mainstay of treatment. Hemodialysis patients have impaired dietary iron absorption, which is why intravenous iron is a preferred treatment option.

- In addition to true iron deficiency, CKD patients also have a functional iron deficiency, known as reticuloendothelial cell iron blockade. It is characterized by reduced iron release from body stores unable to meet the requirement for erythropoiesis.

- Hepcidin excess is the main factor behind impaired iron regulation and anemia of chronic renal disease as it affects dietary iron absorption and mobilization of iron from body stores.

In summary, anemia of chronic renal disease is a multifactorial process attributable to relative EPO deficiency, uremia-induced erythropoiesis inhibitors, the shortened lifespan of erythrocytes, and disordered iron homeostasis.