# Continuing Education Activity

Butterbur (derived from the leaves of Petasites hybridus) is an herbal supplement that has been found to be effective in the prophylaxis of adult migraines in multiple studies. Based on these trials, the American Headache Society gave the herb a level A recommendation and declared it effective in preventing migraine headaches. This activity reviews the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, toxicity, dosing, and pharmacodynamics of butterbur and the recommended monitoring of patients taking the drug to avoid adverse effects.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the proposed mechanism of action of butterbur in relieving migraine headaches. 
- Review the indications for initiating butterbur.
- Summarize the contraindications of butterbur.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication when considering or using butterbur in migraine management.

# Indications

**FDA Approved Indications**

- None

**Non-FDA Approved Indications**

**Adult Migraine**

The American Headache Society and the American Academy of Neurology: 2012 evidence-based guideline update indicated that Petasites (butterbur) demonstrates effectiveness for migraine prevention and is a valid option for patients with migraine to reduce both the severity and frequency of migraine attacks (Level A). The recommendation was questioned and then retracted in 2016.

Butterbur (leaves of Petasites hybridus) has been found to be effective in the prophylaxis of adult migraines in multiple studies.

**Pediatric Migraine**

Similar to adult migraines, there is evidence for Petasites in the prevention of pediatric migraines.

**Allergic Rhinitis and Asthma**

Butterbur has been used in countries in Asia as a herbal treatment of asthma and allergic diseases.

**Alzheimer's Disease**

Studies have found that butterbur may potentially be effective in treating Alzheimer's disease due to its neuroprotective effect. However, only studies involving in vitro and in vivo models have been performed.

# Mechanism of Action

**Mechanism of Action for the Treatment of Migraines**

- Petasites inhibit the opening of L-type voltage-gated calcium channels, decreasing vasoconstriction of vessels and excitation of neurons.

**Mechanism of Action for the Treatment of Asthma and Allergic Rhinitis**

- Petatewalide B, a derivative of Petasites, has also been found to exhibit anti-allergic activities.

**Mechanism of Action for the Treatment of Alzheimer Disease**

- Derivatives of Petasites have been found to have antioxidant activity; the DPPH free radical-scavenging value and ferric ion reducing potential were both increased.

# Administration

Butterbur is given almost exclusively via oral administration.

# Adverse Effects

Previous randomized controlled trials have found no serious adverse effects and good overall tolerance of the drug.

One major area of concern regarding safety is with pyrrolizidine alkaloids which are commonly found in the butterbur plant.

Severe hepatotoxicity may be associated with butterbur use, but the evidence is unclear. From the World Health Organization's Vigibase, one study reported 40 cases of hepatotoxicity, including two liver transplants associated with the use of Petasites formulations.

# Contraindications

Butterbur use is contraindicated in patients using anticholinergic medications. Also, there have not been studies establishing safety criteria in children under six or pregnant or lactating women. Therefore, butterbur use is not recommended in these groups.

# Monitoring

Multiple studies recommend a daily dose of 50-150 mg.

# Toxicity

The list of side effects of butterbur is in the adverse effects section. Long-term use of butterbur may rarely lead to reversible cholestatic hepatitis (estimated incidence of 1:175,000).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There have been no formal studies examining interprofessional care and its relationship to butterbur. Nevertheless, close coordination among all interprofessional healthcare team members, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs), nurses, pharmacists, and other healthcare providers, is recommended to monitor for side effects and interactions with other medications, especially anticholinergics. As a herbal remedy, butterbur may often not appear on a patient's official prescribed medication list. Therefore, every healthcare provider needs to inquire about alternative or natural remedies when interviewing patients and record it in the patient's chart. By employing interprofessional care coordination and open communication, the healthcare team can optimize patient care and prevent adverse events for patients using butterbur. [Level 5]