hThe basic understanding of radiation physics is important when dealing with radiation and explaining its associated health effects. Atoms are the fundamental building blocks of matter and are composed of protons, neutrons, and electrons. A chemical element holds the same number of protons, which corresponds to its atomic number. However, depending on the number of neutrons in the nucleus, the atomic mass of the element can change. This difference is what creates an isotope of an element. Electrons orbit the nucleus and are arranged in layers called shells. Removing one of the outer electrons from an atom emits energy, usually in the form of gamma rays. This phenomenon can is called ionizing radiation.

Radioactive isotopes have unique characteristics determined by the type of particle, how much energy it emits, and the rate of decay. The different types of particles include alpha, beta, and photons. It is important to appreciate the different properties of each particle to understand the effect it has on the atoms with which it interacts. Depending on the mass, velocity, charge, and electron density of the target material, the extent of kinetic energy lost and the subsequent transfer of energy to certain mediums vary.

Alpha particles consist of two protons and two neutrons. The emission of this particle results in a reduction of its atomic mass by four and a reduction of its atomic number by two. The emission of alpha particles usually results from the radioactive decay of heavy elements such as plutonium, uranium, and radium. Alpha particles have a positive charge of +2 and have a large ionizing power. However, due to their charge and large density, they typically lose energy rapidly over a short period and distance. The average distance that an alpha particle travels is about 3 to 5 cm, and it usually cannot penetrate clothes or skin. As a result of these characteristics, to cause any effect or damage, alpha particles must be emitted close to their target.

Beta particles subdivide into negative and positive emissions. A negative beta emission has a single negative charge, and it increases the number of protons by one and decreases the number of neutrons by one. A positive beta emission contains a single positive charge, and it decreases the number of protons by one and increases the number of neutrons by one. In both cases, the atomic mass stays the same, but it forms a different element. Unlike alpha particles, beta particles can travel far and penetrate through water and tissue with high energy.

When radioactive decay occurs in an element, residual energy produced from the transformation is typically stored within its nucleus and, therefore, ultimately excites the nucleus. Because high energy states cause instability, the nuclei release this energy to return to their baseline energy level. The energy that is released is typically in the form of gamma rays.

Radiation can be toxic when exposed in large amounts, and it is thus important to measure. The process of radioactive decay is random, and it is, therefore, difficult to predict when a particular atom will start to decay. However, it is possible to quantify the number of isotopes in a group that decays over a period of time. This rate of decay is called radioactivity, and it is proportional to the number of atoms of a certain radioactive material over its half-life. The half-life of an isotope is the time it takes for 50% of the nuclide in a group to decay. This rate is measured in Becquerels (Bq) in international units or Curies (Ci), which is used in the United States. By emitting particles, the radioactivity of an element can generate radiation. Radiation is clinically measured by the absorbed dose, which is equal to the amount of energy deposited in a specific region. It is calculated as the mean energy absorbed divided by the mass of the target material. In the practice of radiation oncology, the absorbed dose is measured as "gray" (Gy), with doses expressed in fractions over a time period.