The diagnosis and management of separation anxiety disorder require the efforts of a coordinated interprofessional healthcare team. Pediatric providers are the most likely clinicians to encounter children with SAD. Multiple studies show that patients with anxiety disorders tend to have more frequent medical visits and increased healthcare utilization rates, especially for comorbid medical conditions or somatic complaints. Children with suspected SAD should be promptly referred for a behavioral health evaluation by a child and adolescent psychiatrist.

Barriers to appropriate diagnosis and treatment of patients with SAD include time constraints, unfamiliarity with diagnosing and managing anxiety disorders, concerns of stigmatizing patients, and reluctance to speak with parents or adult patients about mental illness. To overcome these barriers, there have been increased efforts in developing collaborative care models for training pediatricians to identify and refer children with anxiety disorders to psychiatric professionals in-clinic or by telehealth.

Once the diagnosis is made, patients and family members may require intensive psychotherapy and psychoeducation to benefit from the treatment plan and understand expected outcomes. Parents need education regarding maladaptive parenting styles so they may be avoided at home. The clinical nurse plays a crucial role in educating parents and caregivers, reinforcing the techniques learned in therapy so they may be practiced at home. When pharmacotherapy is initiated, the clinical pharmacist assists in monitoring for adverse effects of the medications prescribed, performing medication reconciliation, and offering patient medication counseling. A collaborative interprofessional team of clinicians, behavioral therapists, nurses, and pharmacists can optimize clinical outcomes for separation anxiety disorder and help decrease the global burden of this disease. [Level 4]