Evaluation of a patient with esotropia usually does not require specific laboratory tests. A detailed history and clinical examination are generally sufficient to reach a provisional diagnosis and help in planning further management courses. Imaging might be needed if any neurological signs or associations are expected on evaluation or cases with acute onset of esotropias.

The clinical features specific to the most common types of esotropia seen in the pediatric age group are described briefly here.

**Infantile Esotropia**

Deviation of eyes manifests within six months from birth. These children typically have a large angle of deviation, usually more than 30 degrees, which is present for distance and near. An alternate fixation is present in the primary gaze, and cross-fixation in lateral end gazes. Dolls' head maneuver might help elicit abduction movements, which helps in distinguishing from bilateral sixth nerve palsy. Visual acuity or retinoscopy values are usually within normal limits in these children because of cross fixation, and no significant underlying refractive errors are expected.

**Refractive Accommodative Esotropia**

These cases usually manifest around 2 to 3 years. The deviation in these cases is typically intermittent, to begin with, noticed by parents, particularly for near. This may progress from stages of esophoria to intermittent esotropia to constant esotropia. The deviation for distance and near is usually within ten prism diopters. AC/A ratio is generally normal in these cases. Atropine refraction usually reveals a high underlying hypermetropia in the range of 2 to 6 diopters.

**Non-Refractive Accommodative Esotropia**

The esotropia in these cases is related to an underlying high AC/A ratio, with no significant underlying hypermetropia revealed on atropine refraction. This progresses from esophoria for near, to esotropia for near with esophoria for distance, to an esotropia both for distance and near. This type of esotropia also begins around 2 to 3 years. The near deviation in these cases is typically much more significant than the distance deviation.

**Partially Accommodative Esotropia**

These cases present with a large angle esotropia, high hypermetropia, and a normal AC/A ratio. The esotropia might be more for near distance and gets partially corrected with the refractive correction alone.

**Sensory Esotropia**

This is often characterized by monocular vision loss, amblyopia, and concomitant sensory esotropia with the dominance of the contralateral eye.