# Continuing Education Activity

Anticholinergic medications are used to manage and treat a wide range of diseases. This activity illustrates the indications, action, and contraindications for anticholinergic drugs as valuable agents in managing cholinergic toxicity, urinary incontinence, Parkinson disease, respiratory disorders, cardiovascular disease, and numerous other diseases. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with the disorders mentioned above and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of anticholinergic drugs.
- Describe the potential adverse effects f anticholinergic drugs.
- Review the need for monitoring patients when using anticholinergic drugs.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance anticholinergic drugs and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Anticholinergic medications (shorthand: "anticholinergics") are drugs that block and inhibit the activity of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) at both central and peripheral nervous system synapses.

Generally speaking, anticholinergic agents can be subdivided into two categories based on their specific central and peripheral nervous system targets, as well as at the neuromuscular junction. These two categories are antimuscarinic blockers and antinicotinic blockers.

Anticholinergic medications have a wide range of physiologic effects, including effects on circulation, respiration, alertness, and vision.

Ipratropium and tiotropium: Function to dilate the bronchi and relieve shortness of breath and FDA approved for the use in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

- Benztropine and trihexyphenidyl: Used to counter reduced dopamine levels and relieve symptoms of Parkinson disease

- Oxybutynin and tolterodine: FDA approved for the treatment of urge incontinence and detrusor hyperactivity

- Oxybutynin has an off-label use for the treatment of hyperhidrosis.

- Diphenhydramine and other anti-histamines: FDA approved as a sleeping aid

- Scopolamine: Used as a prophylactic anti-emetic

- Atropine: Used to dilate pupil during retina visualization and in the treatment of cholinergic toxicity

- Vecuronium and Succinylcholine: Antinicotinic medications used as a neuromuscular blockade in surgeries

- Mecamylamine: Used strictly in research settings as a ganglionic blocker

- Glycopyrrolate: A type of quaternary amine used in anesthesia to decrease salivary and tracheal secretions

Medications like antipsychotics, tricyclic antidepressants, and diphenhydramine (when used to treat allergies) possess anticholinergic properties despite not being responsible for their therapeutic qualities.

# Mechanism of Action

Anticholinergic medications are competitive antagonists of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at receptor sites within the cholinergic system. The cholinergic system utilizes two types of receptors, the plasma membrane-bound G protein-coupled muscarinic receptors, and the ligand-gated ion channel nicotinic receptors.

Muscarinic receptors are present on the target organ cells of the parasympathetic nervous system and sweat glands in the sympathetic nervous system. Antagonism of the cholinergic system reduces or, in some cases, prevents the effects of cholinergic neurotransmission in the central nervous system and peripheral tissue.

# Administration

Administration of anticholinergic medications varies across the large group of drugs with anticholinergic properties; many are available in oral and intravenous forms. For example, ipratropium, used in treating COPD, can be administered orally or intranasally.

# Adverse Effects

The adverse effects of anticholinergic medications divide into central and peripheral effects. Central effects result from the excess blockade of cholinergic receptors within the central nervous system, and peripheral adverse effects result from the blockade of exocrine glandular secretion, muscle contraction, and end-organ targets of the peripheral parasympathetic nervous system. Common central anticholinergic adverse effects include headache, impaired memory, reduced cognitive function, behavioral disturbances, anxiety, and insomnia at low dosages.

At high dosages and approaching the range of anticholinergic toxicity, central adverse effects include signs of agitation, confusion, delirium, and seizures.

- General: Hyperthermia and anhidrosis

- Cardiovascular: Tachycardia, flushing, and arrhythmias

- Gastrointestinal: Reduced gut motility, constipation, vomiting, reduced saliva, and tear production

- Genitourinary: Urinary retention

- HEENT: Blurred vision, mydriasis, narrow-angle glaucoma, and potentially vision loss

- Skin: Inhibition of sweating

- Musculoskeletal: Diminished muscle contraction

Overall, the potential to cause anticholinergic side effects is based on the drug's affinity for cholinergic receptors.

# Contraindications

The use of anticholinergics requires caution, particularly with the elderly, those with a high anticholinergic burden, and those with conditions susceptible to increased anticholinergic activity such as dementia.

Patients with high anticholinergic burdens are at higher risk for adverse effects and anticholinergic toxicity; providers need to consider the total anticholinergic burden when prescribing new medications. Patients with dementia also have a relative contraindication to the use of anticholinergics. Dementia correlates with reduced acetylcholine in the brain and thus can become worse with the use of anticholinergics.

# Monitoring

Serum anticholinergic assay is one technique used to measure the total anticholinergic burden of all substances within an individual.

It is worth mentioning that the assay cannot detect CNS anticholinergic levels directly and that it lacks specificity for muscarinic receptor subtypes. Another tool used to monitor the risk of anticholinergic medications is the Anticholinergic Drug Scale. The anticholinergic drug scale ranks anticholinergic activity per medication on a scale of 0 to 3, with 0 being no reported anticholinergic activity and 3 signifying high levels of anticholinergic activity.

# Toxicity

Toxicity from anticholinergic medications is essentially an extreme version of the previously mentioned central and peripheral adverse effects. Clinical characteristics of anticholinergic toxicity include anhidrosis, anhidrotic hyperthermia, vasodilation-induced flushing, mydriasis, urinary retention, and neurological symptoms, including delirium, agitation, and hallucinations. The memory aid “red as a beet, dry as a bone, blind as a bat, mad as a hatter, hot as a hare, full as a flask’ often serves as means of remembering the common symptoms of anticholinergic toxicity.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Anticholinergic medications are quite prevalent throughout the healthcare system, and many drugs that are not used explicitly for their anticholinergic properties still have anticholinergic side effects. The entire interprofessional healthcare team, including all clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurses, and pharmacists, need to be well-versed in both the therapeutic and adverse properties of anticholinergic drugs. This is most important regarding the contribution of anticholinergics to adverse events. The team should monitor the overall anticholinergic burden, attempt to limit unnecessary use of anticholinergic medications, and pay special attention to high-risk groups such as the elderly and those receiving treatment for depression and schizophrenia.

When prescribing agents with anticholinergic properties, clinicians need to be aware of other such agents the patient may already be taking; this is where a pharmaceutical consult can prove helpful, with the pharmacist performing complete medication reconciliation and reporting back to the prescriber. Nurses can instruct the patient on proper administration and also counsel them regarding the onset of potential adverse events so that if they occur, the patient will recognize their onset early and be able to reach out to members of the interprofessional team for appropriate intervention; this can be contact with the nursing staff or even the pharmacist where the pick up their medication. Once any team member has been alerted or perceives an issue, it must be communicated to all members of the healthcare team and noted in the patient's chart or electronic health record (EHR). With interprofessional communication and collaborative efforts, these medications can exert their therapeutic effects with a reduced chance of causing adverse events, leading to improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]