**Pre-Surgery**

All equipment should be checked for safety, and to ensure patient topographical data is imported into the excimer laser. The patient should be given education on the routine of the procedure, as well as signing an informed consent document.

**Surgical Technique**

In general, LASIK surgery is performed in the following manner: the patient is brought to the table and placed in a comfortable supine position. The fellow eye is taped closed, and the operative eye is positioned open with a speculum.

After the flap is created, the surgeon carefully reflects the flap to reveal the underlying stroma. The surgeon positions and signals the excimer laser to provide sculpting to the stromal surface through photoablation.

**Post-Surgery**

The patient instills preservative-free artificial tears because dry eyes are a common side-effect of surgery. Patients are advised to use artificial tears frequently, but if symptoms persist, the use of punctal plugs may be prescribed. The patient is also given antibiotics, and steroidal eye drops to use for 5 to 14 days after the surgery.

**Alternate Procedures**

There are other laser-assisted procedures that may be options for the patient with refractive errors. In addition, with advances in technology, variations to LASIK have been implemented successfully in practice.

**PRK**

One study shows that while LASIK has better results for visual acuity sooner after the surgery, patients with PRK tended to maintain better refraction years after the initial surgery.

**Femtosecond Lenticule Extraction (FLEx) or Small Incision Lenticule Extraction (SMILE)**

The femtosecond laser removes the squamous epithelium without leaving a flap. It is indicated in patients with higher myopia (-6.00 D to -12.00 D) compared to LASIK.

**Laser Epithelial Keratomileusis (LASEK)**

Lasek is a procedure where an alcohol solution is used to assist in the removal of the superficial corneal layer. Epi-LASEK uses an epi-microkeratome to remove the layer. Both techniques are variants of PRK and can be considered as viable alternative procedures.