**Step 1**

The Cath lab charge nurse or scheduler will contact the patient regarding preoperative instructions.

- Nothing by mouth for 6-8 hours.

- Not to take anticoagulants.

- Discuss patient transportation options before and after the procedure.

- Review of home medications with a patient.

- Review of patient allergies.

- Review of the patient's labs, chest x-ray, urinalysis, and other preoperative testing.

- Review of the indication for a coronary angiogram with the patient.

- Expected time of the procedure.

- Expected time to check in at the Cath lab.

**Step 2**

- The Cath lab nurse will accompany the patient from the check-in counter to the Cath lab.

- Safely lock the patient's items.   The patient wears a surgical gown.

- The nurse records the patient's vital signs (heart rate, blood pressure, temperature, and respiratory rate).

- Insertion of IV access, preferably one on both arms.

- Connect the patient to telemetry and blood pressure monitor.

- Obtain Baseline EKG.

- Review of all the blood work and preoperative testing with the patient.

- Brief physical examination.

- IV hydration will be started based on the patient's clinical condition ( Normal saline is preferable to N acetylcysteine and bicarbonate solution).

**Step 3**

- Interventional/Invasive cardiologist explains the procedure limitations and benefits in detail to the patient and obtains written consent.

**Step 4**

- Brief physical examination by the physician.  Modified Barbeau test for radial access.  Routine groin check for femoral access.   The physician finalizes the access route and the preferred catheters.

**Step 5**

- Cath lab technician connects pressure transducers and flushes all the diagnostic catheters.  They will prepare the inventory based on the physician's preference.

**Step 6**

- The patient will be supine on the Cath lab table and covered under a sterile drape.  The patient's groin or wrist will be prepped and sterilized for the procedure.  The Cath lab technician organizes the inventory table and also helps with rotating C-arm.

**Step 7**

- The Cath lab nurse will organize medications like lidocaine and moderate sedation and help prep vascular ultrasound.

**Step 8**

- Cath lab technician or nurse will do a Pre-procedure time-out.

**Step 9**

- The second technician or nurse will be ready to enter all the hemodynamic data in the Cath lab reading room.