Frostbite is a very common problem during winter and is associated with high morbidity. Because any part of the body can be affected, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department physician, internist, wound care nurse, and a surgeon.

A multimodal approach to the treatment of patients with frostbite may provide the best chance for functional recovery.

The key is patient education; frostbite in many instances can be prevented. Patients should be advised to dress well during winter, carry extra clothing supplies if they are into winter sports and avoid tight restrictive clothing. The nurse should advise against the use of alcohol, illicit drugs, and tobacco. For those with medical problems. it is important to ensure that their health is stable before venturing on an outdoors trip during winter.

Early consultation with the surgical services specializing in frostbite is crucial. During recovery from frostbite, as with other traumatic injuries with an expected loss of, function, consultation with rehabilitation services is vital, including wound care, physical therapy, occupational therapy, physical medicine & rehabilitation specialists, among others.

Finally, one should not immediately recommend amputation. The aim is to salvage all viable tissue. Thus, a wound care nurse should follow the patient and only debride infected superficial dead skin and let the damaged skin slough off on its own. Open communication with the interprofessional team is the key so that all patients receive the optimal standard of care.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes after frostbite injury are guarded and depend on the extent of the injury. Most people tend to have some residual deficits; either sensory or functional.