Diazepam is available in multiple formulations, including oral tablets, intramuscular injections (IM), intravenous injections (IV), or rectal gel. Oral tablets have a more reliable absorption and controlled release when compared to IM. When administered intravenously, diazepam has an onset of action within 1 to 3 minutes, while oral dosing onset ranges between 15 to 60 minutes. In addition, diazepam is long-lasting, with a duration of action of more than 12 hours.

- Treatment of acute ethanol withdrawal: Initial dosing should be 10 mg IM or IV. If needed, a follow-up dose of 5 to 10 mg is permissible 3 to 4 hours later. If using the oral tablet, dosing is 10 mg every 6 to 8 hours within the first 24 hours, then 5mg every 6 to 8 hours after that as needed.

- Treatment of anxiety: 2 to 10 mg can be given orally 2 to 4 times daily. If given parentally, dosing can be 2 to 10 mg and repeated in 3 to 4 hours, if needed.

- Treatment of muscle spasms: 2 to 10 mg can be given orally 3 to 4 times daily. If given parentally, an initial dose of 5 to 10 mg can be followed by another 5-10mg dose in 3 to 4 hours, if necessary.

- Treatment of preoperative anxiety: Dosing is 10 mg IM before surgery.

- For sedation in the ICU: Loading dose of 5 to 10 mg for initial administration, followed by a maintenance dose of 0.03 to 0.10 mg/kg every 0.5 to 6 hours. (Barr 2013)

- Treatment of seizures: 2 to 10 mg orally dosed 2 to 4 times daily as adjunctive maintenance therapy. Rectal gel 0.2mg/kg is an option for intermittent management of seizures. It may be repeated in 4 to 12 hours if needed. Do not exceed five uses per month or more than one dose every five days.

- Skeletal muscle relaxant: 2 to 10 mg, dosed 3 to 4 times daily as an adjunct therapy.

- Treatment of status epilepticus: 0.15 to 0.20 mg/kg IV per dose and may be repeated once needed. Do not exceed 10 mg per single dose. Rectal administration of 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg administered one time. Do not exceed 20 mg per dose.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Renal impairment**: Clinicians should exercise caution when prescribing diazepam to the older population as they tend to have decreased renal function and clearance; therefore, this population is at an increased risk of diazepam accumulation and its major metabolites. The recommendation is to limit the dosage to the smallest effective amount. Paradoxical reactions of CNS hyperactivity have also been reported when using benzodiazepines in the elderly, manifesting as hyperactivity, aggressive behavior, irritability, anxiety, and hallucinations. Discontinuation of diazepam is recommended if there is a presence of paradoxical agitation.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**In mild and moderate cirrhosis, the mean half-life of diazepam is increased. In addition, the volume of distribution also increases, and average clearance decreases by almost half. Mean half-life is also increased with hepatic fibrosis by approximately 90 hours, chronic active hepatitis by 60 hours, and acute viral hepatitis to about 74 hours.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Diazepam is classified as a former FDA pregnancy category D, indicating positive evidence of human fetal risk. Still, the benefits from use in pregnant women may be acceptable despite the risk. The use of diazepam and other benzodiazepines in pregnancy correlates with an increased risk of congenital malformations, premature birth, low birth weight, and other neurodevelopmental abnormalities. However, additional studies are needed to confirm. Diazepam readily crosses the placental barrier, and use during pregnancy may result in neonatal withdrawal soon after birth. Symptoms of neonatal withdrawal include high-pitched cry, hypertonia, tremor, irritability, feeding difficulties, sleep/wake disturbances, gastrointestinal and autonomic disturbances, respiratory problems, and failure to thrive. The onset of withdrawal in a neonate whose mother has taken diazepam during the pregnancy could be anywhere from the first days of life to the first few weeks. During the last trimester of pregnancy, diazepam use can result in "floppy infant syndrome," characterized by hypotonia, hypothermia, lethargy, respiratory distress, and suckling difficulties.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Diazepam and its metabolites are excreted in breast milk and may affect the nursing infant. Some studies have shown diazepam's relative infant dose (RID) to be approximately 9%. The relative infant dose (RID) is the dose received via breast milk relative to the mothers. A relative dose below 10% is within an acceptable range regarded as reasonably safe in the short term. However, due to diazepam's long half-life, metabolites may accumulate in a breastfed infant. Therefore, the clinician should monitor an infant breastfed by a mother receiving diazepam for drowsiness, decreased feeding, lethargy, and failure to thrive. Discontinue breastfeeding in cases with high doses of diazepam or when repeated administration will be necessary. However, when a single dose of diazepam is required for a procedure or seizure, the clinician should advise the mother to wait six to eight hours before resuming nursing, particularly with a preterm infant.