**Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus**

Due to minimal to no pancreatic beta-cell function, type 1 diabetics should have a basal supply of insulin at all times (even if nothing by mouth), either subcutaneously or intravenously. Failure to do so can cause them to decompensate into diabetic ketoacidosis easily.

**Subcutaneous Insulin Pumps**

In recent years, the use of an insulin pump has increased exponentially, especially in type 1 diabetes. The use of insulin pumps in the hospital setting during the pre-/postoperative period must be guided by clear institutional policies and the patient’s ability to manage the pump.

**Enteral Nutrition**

Diabetic patients on enteral nutrition should preferably receive formulas containing low carbohydrates, high mono-saturated fatty acids, and subcutaneous insulin regimen should include basal, nutritional, and correctional components. Usually, 30 to 50% of TDD is administered as basal insulin, once or twice daily. The remaining 50 to 70% of TDD is added as nutritional insulin.  An alternative method for calculating the dose of nutritional insulin is to administer 1 unit of rapid-acting or regular insulin for every 10 to 15 grams of carbohydrates that will be provided with each bolus feed or in 24 hours with a continuous feed.

**Parenteral Nutrition**

In patients receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN), insulin can be provided either as a separate intravenous infusion or added to the TPN solution. When added to the solution, a starting point is to add 1 unit of regular insulin for every 10 grams of dextrose, and the regimen adjusted every 1 to 2 days based on glycemic trends. Another method is to start a separate intravenous infusion initially. Once BG is within the glycemic goal, 80 to 100% of the total insulin dose provided via infusion is added to the TPN solution. Additionally, BG monitoring with subcutaneous correctional insulin every 4 to 6 hours is used to treat any hyperglycemia above the target range

**Hypoglycemia**

Based on the classification by the International Hypoglycemia Study Group – BG less than 70 mg/dl is the hypoglycemia alert value (level 1), BG level less than 54 mg/dl indicates clinically significant hypoglycemia (level 2) and cognitive impairment with no specific BG threshold qualifies as severe hypoglycemia (level 3).

Iatrogenic hypoglycemia is a common occurrence in the perioperative setting and correlates to poor patient outcomes and mortality.