**Popliteal pulse**– the popliteal pulse is palpable in the popliteal fossa with the knee in moderate flexion.  It is important for the evaluation of perfusion to the lower leg in the event the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries are non-palpable, such as in a person with advanced peripheral artery disease.

**Popliteal aneurysms**– May occur in isolation, bilaterally (50% of cases), or in conjunction with other large vessel aneurysms (abdominal aortic aneurysm seen in 30-50% of cases). Popliteal aneurysms are almost always true aneurysms involving all three layers of the vessel (intima, media, and adventitia) and are fusiform.  Risk factors for developing aneurysms of the popliteal artery include smoking, hypertension, male sex, age, and arteriomegaly. Patients will often present with leg pain or a palpable pulsatile mass at the level of or above the knee posteriorly.  Thrombus formation can result in reduced blood flow.

- Chronic ischemia with varying degrees of lower extremity claudication.

- Acute ischemia secondary to the formation of a thrombus occluding blood flow to the distal lower extremity, this is a vascular emergency.

- Local compression of nerves resulting in motor and sensory deficits. Compression of the popliteal vein leading to swelling of the distal lower extremity secondary to compromised blood return.

- Rupture of a popliteal artery aneurysm is rare and typically confines itself to the popliteal fossa resulting in severe pain behind the knee.  Rupture into the popliteal vein has been described resulting in an arteriovenous fistula.  This is a vascular emergency.

Diagnostic confirmation is with noninvasive radiographic imaging using duplex ultrasound, CT angiography, or MR angiography.  CT and MR angiography are the most accurate tools in the diagnosis and confirm an aneurysm with a measured lumen = 1.5 cm.  Conservative management may be a consideration for aneurysms that are asymptomatic and less than 2 cm.  Intervention is typically the recommendation when an aneurysm is greater than 2 cm or when symptoms indicating thrombus formation or ischemia are present.

**Hemorrhage/trauma**– As the popliteal artery descends below the knee it is held tightly against the bone by the arch of the soleus muscle.  The tight hold distally does not allow for much movement in the event of trauma involving the knee.  Reports are that between 4% and 20% of knee dislocations result in a rupture of the popliteal artery; the vascular compromise is a surgical emergency.  When addressing a knee dislocation ischemia should always be suspected.  Distal pulses should be evaluated before and immediately after the reduction of the knee.  The absence of a pulse should warrant angiography.  A ruptured vessel requires a bypass of the disrupted segment using an inverted portion of the saphenous vein.

**Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES)**- A rare vascular disease that compromises blood flow to the distal lower extremity of young athletes, particularly women.  Hypertrophy of the gastrocnemius muscle or popliteus muscle results in compressive forces that reduce blood flow through the artery. Patients will present with pain, numbness, and cramping of the calf and lower extremity with exercise. Pain typically resolves with a few minutes of rest.

**Cystic adventitial disease**– A rare vascular condition that typically presents with claudication in healthy individuals that do not have significant risk factors of peripheral artery disease. Cystic adventitial disease is a result of cyst formation within the artery that narrows the lumen and restricts blood flow.  Cyst formation is not limited to the popliteal artery but is the most common site to form and produce symptoms. Early treatment reduces the risk of thrombosis. Treatment is the removal of the cyst and replacing the affected segment with venous graft.

**Popliteal cyst -**Also known as Baker's cyst. This is a fluid-filled swelling that forms on the posterior aspect of the knee. It is common in patients with osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. It presents with a bulge behind the knee joint that causes stiffness and resistance to flexion of the knee. It can occasionally lead to compression of the popliteal artery.