It is essential to recognize the differential diagnoses of PSS since this can affect the therapy and prognosis. The most familiar differential diagnoses include commoner glaucomas. These include acute and chronic angle-closure glaucoma, ocular hypertension, primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), the uveitic glaucomas, Fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis, herpetic iridocyclitis, and other viral uveitis.

Efforts must be made to differentiate PSS from other commoner causes of raised IOP.

Acute angle-closure (ACG) ranks high on the list because of the acuteness of symptoms, unilateral nature, presence of marked rise in IOP, and the presence of ocular inflammation. A case report of missed diagnosis of PSS as ACG exists, and in this case, peripheral iridectomy was performed due to an error in diagnosis.

In POAG, the patient may be older; there may be a known family history, and intraocular inflammation is absent.

In uveitic glaucoma, the intraocular inflammation is often more fulminant. Fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis can be differentiated from PSS by the presence of iris heterochromia (occurs late in the course of the disease), fine abnormal anterior chamber angle vessels, fine diffuse keratic precipitates, and posterior subcapsular cataract. The uveitic glaucomas are an essential group of conditions that are similar to PSS. This uveitic glaucoma could be viral in etiology, such as the herpetic iridocyclitis due to HSV and VZV. In order to differentiate this uveitic glaucoma from PSS, the following features may be observed, sectorial or diffuse iris atrophy, more severe anterior chamber reaction, and IOP may not be markedly elevated as seen in PSS.

Sectorial iris atrophy is suggestive of HSV or VZV. Also, vesicular rash and dendritic ulcers may be suggestive of HSV. Generally, in the clinical setting of high IOP and uveitis, one should consider other possible causes of ocular inflammation such as HLA B27 uveitis, sarcoidosis, HSV, Vogt Koyanagi Harada (VKH) disease, and human T lymphotropic virus type 1. The finding of a severely elevated IOP not in keeping with mild iridocyclitis, absence of PAS, and posterior synechiae, should raise the suspicion of PSS.

If the diagnosis is in doubt, performing aqueous humor sampling and qualitative PCR analysis may become necessary. More than one virus can co-exist in a patient.

Other differentiating signs of HSV include keratitis with corneal stromal opacities and edema, resulting in scarring, neovascularization, and hypoaesthesia. VZV manifests with maculopapular rash and vesicles, which may occur at the nose's tip, side, or root and sometimes on the forehead. This presence of rashes at the tip of the nose is known as the "Hutchinson's sign" and is a strong predictor of intraocular involvement by the VZV. It is also seen in immunodeficiency states.