Psoriasis presents as well-defined erythematous plaques covered with silvery scales commonly over the scalp, and extensors of extremity, particularly over knees, elbows, and lumbosacral region. Psoriasis is classified into two types. Type 1 psoriasis, which has a positive family history, starts before age 40 and is associated with HLA-Cw6; while type 2 psoriasis does not show a family history, presents after age 40, and is not associated with HLA-Cw6. Psoriasis can present with different morphology in the form of plaque, guttate, rupioid, erythrodermic, pustular, inverse, elephantine, and psoriatic arthritis. Variation in a site is seen with the involvement of the scalp, palmoplantar region, genitals, and nails. Any injury to the skin in patients with psoriasis in the form of either mechanical, chemical, or radiational trauma induces lesions of psoriasis at that site which is called the Koebner phenomenon. It indicates the activeness of the disease.

Plaque psoriasis typically presents as erythematous plaques with silvery scales most commonly over extensors of extremities, i.e., on the elbows, knees, scalp, and back.  It is the most common type of psoriasis which affects 85% to 90% of patients. On successive removal of psoriatic scales pinpoint bleeding points are seen. This is called the Auspitz sign which is used to confirm the diagnosis clinically.

Guttate psoriasis also called eruptive psoriasis is commonly seen in children after an upper respiratory tract infection with the streptococcal organism. It presents with erythematous and scaly raindrop-shaped lesions mainly over the trunk and back. It is the type of psoriasis having the best prognosis.

Pustular psoriasis presents with small non-infectious pus-filled lesions with erythema surrounding it. It is of two types localized and generalized. Generalized pustular psoriasis is associated with hypocalcemia and presents with sterile pustules on an erythematous plaque involving the whole body.

Erythrodermic psoriasis presents with widespread inflammation in the form of erythema and exfoliation of the skin covering more than 90% of the body area. It is associated with severe itching, swelling, and pain. It is the result of an exacerbation of unstable plaque psoriasis, following the abrupt withdrawal of systemic steroids. Complications of erythroderma include impairment in barrier functions of the skin, disturbance in basal metabolic rate, and increased cutaneous circulation in turn affecting the heart with cardiac failure.

Nail changes in psoriasis are seen as pitting, oil spots, subungual hyperkeratosis, nail dystrophy, and anchylosis.

Fissured tongue is the most common finding of oral psoriasis and has been reported to occur in 6.5% to 20% of people with psoriasis affecting the skin.

Inverse psoriasis is also called flexural psoriasis or intertriginous psoriasis. It appears as smooth, erythematous, and sharply demarcated patches affecting intertriginous areas like groins, armpits, intergluteal region, and inframammary region. The skin may be moist, macerated, and may contain fissures that may be malodorous, pruritic, or both.   It needs to be differentiated from dermatophyte infection affecting these sites, which presents with central clearing and the active border with scales, vesicles, and pustules at the margin.

Sebopsoriasis is a form of psoriasis which typically manifests as red plaques with greasy scales. It commonly affects areas with increased sebum production such as the scalp, forehead, nasolabial folds, sternum, and retro-auricular folds.

Psoriatic arthritis is a form of chronic inflammatory arthritis which affects 30% of patients with psoriasis. It commonly occurs in association with skin and nail psoriasis. It typically involves painful inflammation of the joints and connective tissue commonly affecting the joints of the fingers and toes. It leads to sausage-shaped swelling of the fingers and toes known as dactylitis. Psoriatic arthritis can also affect the hips, knees, and spine presenting as spondylitis and sacroiliac joints with sacroiliitis.

Ocular features: psoriasis also affects the eyelid, conjunctiva, and cornea giving rise to trichiasis, ectropion, conjunctivitis, and corneal dryness. The most common eye feature is blepharitis which can lead to cicatricial ectropion, madarosis, and trichiasis. In some cases, anterior uveitis may be seen.