**General Management**

Generally, cervical spondylotic myelopathy is managed conservatively in early, mild stages with various treatment measures, including physical therapy, limiting high-risk physical activities, and pain control with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, muscle relaxants, and other agents. Epidural steroid injections are also a mainstay of conservative treatment.

Urgent glucocorticoid administration for MSCC with neurologic involvement is recommended. Administration of dexamethasone results in the downregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor and prostaglandin E2, with a corresponding decrease in spinal cord edema. Glucocorticoid therapy has been shown to improve analgesia and neurologic function.

Both surgical intervention and radiation treatment play a central role in the management of MSCC. Factors that may weigh into the decision for surgical management include spinal stability, neurologic deficits, and overall prognosis. The Spine Instability Neoplastic Score has demonstrated 95.7% sensitivity and 79.5% specificity in the determination of spinal stability and can be used to guide clinicians in deciding whether surgical intervention should be pursued.

Once the diagnosis of SEA is made, intravenous antibiotics are routinely given. The decision to withhold antibiotics before tissue diagnosis/culture can be made on a case-by-case basis in conjunction with neurosurgery and should only be considered in a stable patient without clinical evidence of bacteremia/sepsis. The standard regimen includes ceftriaxone, 2 g IV daily, and vancomycin, 15 to 20 mg/kg IV every 8 to 12 hours for adequate S. aureus coverage. Management of SEA usually involves surgical management with decompression. Increasing numbers of case reports and small studies have also shown a role for a trial of non-operative management with IV antibiotics and close monitoring among appropriately selected patients.

In a 2014 retrospective study of this practice, 73 out of 142 patients with SEA were successfully treated with an antibiotic-alone approach. Statistically significant factors associated with failure of non-operative management included age more than 65 years, diabetes, MRSA infection, neurologic compromise, and circumferential SEA.

Prompt surgical decompression with laminectomy and evacuation is indicated for SEH with severe or progressive neurologic deficits. Although an exact time interval for the prevention of irreversible neurologic deficits has not been defined, most experts advise evacuation within 48 hours of symptom onset. A role for anticoagulation reversal with non-operative management has been explored in case reports but is not currently considered standard care for patients with SEH, particularly when neurologic deficits, bowel or bladder dysfunction are present.

**Surgical Approaches**

For the above conditions, a variety of surgical approaches exist depending on the location of the pathology. For cervical spine pathology, approaches are generally either anterior or posterior in nature. For stenosis caused by soft cervical disc herniations, anterior cervical discectomy, and fusion (ACDF) is a mainstay. Here, the anterior neck is opened through most commonly a transverse incision, and the anterior cervical spine is approached. The herniated disc is incised and removed, and either a cadaveric graft or structural allograft is inserted to promote fusion. A plate is usually placed over the construct for added stability. An additional anterior approach for pathology partly or wholly behind the vertebral body is the cervical corpectomy, whereby a similar exposure is done as in an ACDF, but the vertebral body and discs above and below are completely resected and a cage is inserted with a plate overlying the construct.

For pathology posterior to the cord, such as canal stenosis from ligament hypertrophy, often posterior cervical decompression (laminectomy vs. laminoplasty) with or without fusion is preferred. Posterior cervical fusion is most often accomplished via lateral mass fusion, but pedicle screw fixation and interfacet fusion are also options at hand for the surgeon.

In the thoracic and lumbar regions, posterior approaches for decompression (laminectomy, discectomy, etc.) with or without fusion remain the most common technique. However, anterior and lateral approaches are also possible. In the thoracic region, an anterior approach is possible but carries high morbidity, especially in the upper thoracic spine, and requires an access surgeon. Anterior approaches in the upper thoracic spine will also be limited by the heart and mediastinal structures. Lateral approaches to the thoracic spine may be less morbid but often will still require an access surgeon. Lateral access options include extracavitary or intracavitary and will vary depending on the pathology.

Similar indications for anterior or lateral approaches to the lumbar spine exist, but in general, they are less morbid when compared to the thoracic spine. Anterior approaches to the lumbar spine may be selected for pathologies anterior to the dura, including vertebral body tumors, infection, or burst fractures. A relatively common approach for lumbar disc disease is the anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF). ALIF is best indicated in patients with the collapse of disc space, causing foraminal stenosis without significant canal stenosis. In this technique, an indirect decompression of the neural foramina is accomplished through a wide discectomy and placement of a large graft anteriorly into the disc space. An access surgeon is almost always required by the neurosurgeon for ALIF procedures. In addition, the ALIF is best done in the lower lumbar spine (L4-S1) to avoid the major vessels anteriorly. Lateral or oblique approaches to the lumbar spine may be done for similar indications as an ALIF and frequently do not require an access surgeon by the neurosurgeon. A more common indication for a lateral approach to the lumbar spine is also disc disease without significant central canal compromise. Similar to the ALIF, indirect decompression is done in lateral or oblique approaches. Here, a coronal deformity of the spine may also be corrected. Aside from disc surgery in a lateral or anterior approach, vertebral body resections (corpectomies) with the placement of large grafts may be done for tumor, fracture, or infection. For lateral approaches to the lumbar spine, L2-L4 are, in general, most easily accessed. Levels superior to L2 are often limited by the ribs, and rib resection may be required. Levels inferior to L4 are, in general, limited by the iliac crest. In addition, anterior and lateral fusions of the thoracic or lumbar spine are also often supplemented by posterior pedicle screw fixation for additional stability when needed.

Despite the above approaches, posterior approaches, especially in the lumbar spine, remain the most common. This is due to the following general reasons: ease of access, decreased morbidity, often shorter patient recovery, and versatility for the surgeon. For most degenerative lumbar pathology, a posterior approach is a good option. For lumbar claudication secondary to congenital stenosis, a simple laminectomy may be adequate. If significant disc pathology is also present, a laminectomy may be supplemented with a partial or complete discectomy. Complete discectomies may be accomplished through a posterior corridor (posterior lumbar interbody fusion [PLIF]) or a more lateral corridor (transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion [TLIF]) and need to be supplemented with disc grafts as well as pedicle screw fixation.

As shown above, a wide variety of approaches to the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine are available in the armamentarium of the spine surgeon. Approaches should be selected based on the location of the pathology in the spine and its relation to the spinal canal. In addition, the surgeon should always keep in mind his or her skill level and what is safest in the surgeon's hands. Preexisting medical conditions of the patient also play a large part in selecting an approach. The best approach is often the safest approach.