A thorough history and physical examination are essential for patients suspected of having Heyde syndrome. A comprehensive review of systems should be obtained, in addition to a careful review of the patient’s past medical history to search for a history of recurrent gastrointestinal hemorrhage, particularly if the bleeding is from an undiscovered source. The healthcare professional should also review the past medical records for a diagnosis of AS or evidence of the disease based on symptoms and prior procedural studies, such as imaging or echocardiographic findings. Moderate-to-severe AS increases the likelihood that AVWS is also present.

**History of Present Illness**

Notable symptoms that may suggest a diagnosis of Heyde syndrome fall into categories according to their respective body systems:

- Evidence of aortic stenosis – chest pain, syncope, exertional dyspnea, fatigue.

- Evidence of gastrointestinal bleeding – hematochezia, melena, hematemesis, fatigue

- Evidence of impaired hemostasis (AVWS) – fatigue, easy bruisability

**Physical Examination Findings**

Notable exam findings that may suggest a diagnosis of Heyde syndrome appear in the following outline:

- Evidence of aortic stenosis – early systolic ejection murmur, pulsus parvus et tardus, laterally displaced point of maximal impulse.

- Evidence of gastrointestinal bleeding – abdominal pain with palpation, blood on digital rectal examination, hemodynamic instability, or hypotension

- Evidence of impaired hemostasis (AVWS) – bruising, hemarthrosis, gastrointestinal bleeding

Of note, occult or intermittent gastrointestinal bleeding can be difficult for both the physician and the patient to appreciate if bleeding is not severe or obvious. Physical examination may be entirely unremarkable in such cases; therefore, the physician should pay careful attention to the patient's history and ask additional questions for clarification when necessary. A patient history that includes fatigue or worsening exhaustion, paleness of the skin, cravings for non-nutritive substances (as seen in pica syndrome), or darkening of the stool could suggest the presence of occult bleeding and subsequent anemia.