# Introduction

Protein catabolism is the breakdown of proteins into absorbable monomers for further degradation or reassembly. Protein catabolism in the intestinal lumen is important for several reasons, one of which is mobilizing essential amino acids for absorption. Essential amino acids can’t be synthesized in the human body but are needed for the biosynthesis of vital proteins, so their only source is polypeptide breakdown through digestive enzymes. This process begins in the stomach and continues in the small intestine. Large protein chains are disassembled to eventually leave free amino acids that can be taken up into the blood and transported to various cells around the body for further breakdown.

Endopeptidases in zymogen form are released by the stomach mucosa and the exocrine pancreas to cleave the polypeptide chain between particular amino acid residues. Once in a smaller form, exopeptidases remove the last amino acids from the C or N terminus of a di-peptide or tri-peptide one by one, aiding absorption at the microvilli. Cells can use those amino acids to construct vital proteins or as substrates for energy creation. Proteins created intracellularly can also be catabolized for the same reasons. Intracellular proteins that were either misfolded or are no longer functioning in the cell also undergo intracellular protein catabolism in the lysosome, with the help of ubiquitin and proteasome formation. If a cell is in a low energy state, the free amino acids in the cytosol are further degraded to produce citric acid cycle intermediates and are funneled there to produce ATP. While the carbon backbone enters energy-generating pathways, the nitrogen backbone is modified and excreted mostly through the kidneys.

# Fundamentals

rThe catabolic process begins when proteolytic enzymes are released in zymogen form from the gastrointestinal mucosa. Once secreted, zymogens are cleaved into active proteases. Pepsin from the gastric mucosa hydrolyzes the larger polypeptide into smaller polypeptides that can later be broken down further by the pancreatic proteases released in the duodenum. Trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidases synthesized by the exocrine pancreas can cleave the polypeptide at specific cleavage points into amino acids and oligopeptides. Aminopeptidases located on the brush border of intestinal epithelial cells hydrolyze the remaining oligopeptides into amino acids that then absorb into circulation through transmembrane transport systems. Both facilitated and active transport mechanisms exist to transport amino acids into the cells.

Protein catabolism is a vital part of cellular turnover. When cytosolic proteins such as signaling or structural peptides are no longer needed, they must be broken down in lysosomes to create new proteins that can carry out necessary metabolic functions. If the resulting amino acids are not used to synthesize new proteins for vital intracellular functions, they can enter the citric acid cycle for energy generation. When programmed death is the cell's fate, cathepsins and other catabolic enzymes work together in the apoptotic process.

Gastric Peptidases: Chief cells in the gastric mucosa secrete pepsinogen.

Pancreatic and Intestinal Peptidases: The exocrine pancreas secretes a variety of digestive enzymes, including amylase, lipase, colipase, bicarbonate, and inactive proteases. The bicarbonate released into the intestinal lumen raises the pH and allows the pancreatic proteases to become activated from their zymogen form. One particular protease, trypsin, is the most important to the digestive process because it cleaves proteins on its own and also activates other proteases from their inactive forms. Trypsin is cleaved from its proenzyme form trypsinogen by enteropeptidase. Trypsin then continues on to activate chymotrypsinogen, proelastase, and procarboxypeptidases into chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidases, respectively.

Elastase, also a serine protease, breaks down elastin and also proteins with small hydrophobic side chains such as glycine or alanine. Pancreatic acinar cells release two forms of elastase, with elastase II having a broader specificity than elastase I.

Intracellular protein turnover: proteins within the cell also undergo catabolism to replenish the intracellular amino acid pool. While all proteins have a half-life, some degrade within minutes and some within hours or days. Some examples of heavily synthesized and degraded proteins are muscle cell proteins, hemoglobin, gastrointestinal epithelial cells, and proteolytic enzymes themselves. Many of these proteins are broken down by lysosomal proteases so that their amino acid constituents are usable for rebuilding proteins whose needs depend on the current physiological status of the cell. For example, in starvation periods, the amino acids released from muscle protein catabolism can funnel into gluconeogenesis and act as an energy source. In a fed state or during metabolic acidosis, Glutamine can be a fuel for the renal system. Skeletal muscle can absorb alanine, aspartate, and glutamate, and through transamination, form useful Krebs cycle intermediates.

# Cellular Level

Transmembrane Transport: The work of endopeptidases, chymotrypsin, elastase and carboxypeptidase and exopeptidases, carboxypeptidase and aminopeptidase, ultimately yields free amino acids. Facilitated diffusion and active transport mechanisms exist to absorb these compounds from the intestinal lumen through secondary active transport

The transporters on the apical surface of the muscle, liver, and other tissues absorb amino acids from the blood and concentrate them. Although similar to the luminal sodium-dependent amino acid transporters on the intestinal epithelium, these transporters differ in their genetic bases, protein composition, and specificities.

Lysosomal Degradation: Whether proteins are no longer needed or synthesized incorrectly, intracellular proteins are broken down using lysosomes and the proteasome complex. Proteins enter the lysosome through autophagy, a highly regulated process in which vesicles fuse with the lysosome membrane.

Ubiquitination is the process in which a ubiquitin molecule becomes covalently attached to the proteins to be degraded and interacts with a proteasome within the lysosome to break down said protein using an ATP-dependent process.

Once inside a lysosome, lysosomal proteases called cathepsins can also degrade cytosolic proteins labeled for catabolism. Cathepsins are another type of cysteine protease present within pericellular environments, cytosol nuclei, and mitochondria.

# Molecular Level

The fate of the intracellular amino acid pool strongly depends on the metabolic state of the individual tissue and body in general. In a fed physiologic state, the amino acids can be degraded further to their carbon and nitrogen skeletons. While the carbon backbone can undergo oxidation for energy, the nitrogen component is eliminated from the body through nitrogenous waste products. Initially, the nitrogen is present in the form of ammonia, a toxic substance to the human body. The liver converts toxic ammonia into urea, through the urea cycle, into a non-toxic, water-soluble form of nitrogen that can be eliminated easily through the kidneys.

As the nitrogen backbone becomes discarded, the carbon skeleton of amino acids can be used for energy production by oxidation into pyruvate (tryptophan, glycine, alanine, serine, cysteine) and acetyl-CoA. Pyruvate and acetyl Coenzyme A are substrates for the citric acid cycle to ultimately produce ATP and carbon dioxide. Acetyl CoA can also form ketone bodies released into the bloodstream for use as an energy source by specific tissues. Amino acids that become acetyl CoA or acetoacetate are named ketogenic because of their propensity to become ketone bodies.

Another possible fate is for the carbon skeleton to convert into citric acid cycle intermediates alpha-ketoglutarate (arginine, histidine, glutamine, proline, glutamate), succinyl CoA (valine, threonine, isoleucine, methionine), fumarate (aspartate, tyrosine, phenylalanine), and oxaloacetate (aspartate, asparagine).

# Testing

Ubiquitination is the beginning of intracellular protein catabolism. Testing the function of this process to understand specific pathologies involves combining cultured cells with plasmids containing a protein with epitope-tagged ubiquitin. The next steps include the addition of stabilizing buffers, lysing, and sonicating the cells, followed by rounds of incubation. Because the ultimate form of analysis involves immunoblotting with SDS-PAGE gel, conjugated antibodies against the protein must be formed

There are ways to test for the enzymes released by the exocrine pancreas, trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase. One test is the fecal elastase test, in which the stool is analyzed for the concentration of elastase, thus confirming patency of the pancreatic duct, the secretive function of the exocrine pancreas, and the presence of activating trypsin.

# Pathophysiology

Cystic Fibrosis is an autosomal recessive mutation in the CFTR gene, which codes the proteins that compose the chloride channel pore.

Kwashiorkor is another severe protein deficiency; however, it is due to a lack of protein intake rather than a genetic disorder. The digestive enzymes are present in kwashiorkor; however, because there is little protein ingested, symptoms of protein deficiency are present. In malnourished individuals with kwashiorkor, the vital reactions in the body are sustained through intracellular protein catabolism. The need for available essential amino acids leads to an extensive reduction in peripheral muscle mass from muscle breakdown.

A defect in facilitated and active transport mechanisms can lead to pathological malabsorptive states. Cystinuria and Hartnup disease are both genetic disorders involving the membrane amino acid transporters but differ in the groups of amino acids transported and so present different clinically.

# Clinical Significance

Proper functioning of protein catabolism is of utmost importance to sustain the metabolic needs of the human body. The breakdown of large polypeptide chains to unleash free essential and non-essential amino acids provides cells with the needed substrates for protein synthesis or energy creation. Intracellular protein breakdown is important for normal turnover as well as in malnutrition and malnourished physiological states to mobilize amino acids for export to support the energetic demands of vital organs. Protein catabolism defects can lead to a variety of clinical presentations affecting almost every organ system.