Following a localization procedure, the surgeon performs the lumpectomy with the patient in the supine position with the ipsilateral arm at 90 degrees. The incision location can be planned either near or distant from the location of the lesion. Incisions may be placed within the Langer lines over the mass when possible and made large enough to avoid excess manipulation when delivering the specimen from the field. A short, curvilinear incision may suffice for small tumors versus a radial incision for large tumors, which may result in less distortion of the nipple-areolar complex. With more emphasis on cosmesis, the use of more conspicuous regions of the breast has become popular, which include periareolar, inframammary, or axillary incisions.

The incision is opened, and dissection is carried down into the breast tissue. Skin flaps are raised in all directions over the mass or area of concern. Sufficient subcutaneous fat should be left in place to provide adequate blood supply to the flaps as they are elevated. Occasionally, the skin may require resection to obtain sufficient margins for superficial lesions or prevent ischemia. Dissection is carried down just above the identified tumor and then completed circumferentially. The tumor is excised with enough surrounding tissue to ensure that inked specimen margins are free of tumor. If needle localization is performed, identification of the thickened portion of the wire allows a better estimation of the lesion location and margins needed. Pectoral fascia and muscle are only removed if required to obtain tumor-free margins. The specimen is then oriented before removal from the surgical field with suture and/or ink. When performed, the specimen is inked on six sides, either by the operating surgeon or a pathologist.

Intraoperative specimen imaging is then typically performed to confirm the location of the biopsy clip, possible marker (wire or wireless), and to ensure adequate margins if the lesion is visible. Mammogram of the specimen is common, although other modalities are also options. The cavity margins are inspected for remaining suspicious tissue. Re-excision of a suspected close margin may be performed by removing another 0.5 to 1 cm of tissue, appropriately oriented for the pathologist. Some surgeons also take "shave margins," where at least an additional 1 mm of tissue gets taken from the cavity. This practice may lower both margin positivity and re-excision rates.

Oncoplastic techniques may be utilized to achieve adequate tissue resection and an acceptable cosmetic outcome without the need for breast reconstruction. Oncoplastic surgery is a form of breast conservation that uses volume replacement or tissue displacement techniques to optimize aesthetic results following partial mastectomy.

These procedures categorize as Level 1 and Level 2 procedure types. SUrgeons consider Level 1 procedures when excising less than 20% of breast tissue in small to moderate-sized breasts. These procedures involve aesthetically placed incisions either at the inframammary crease, periareolar margin, or axilla.

Level 2 procedures are those that require removal of 20 to 50% of breast tissue in moderate to large-sized breasts with moderate to severe ptosis.

Regional lymph node staging is performed in conjunction with breast-conserving therapy. The sentinel lymph node, the lymph node most likely to contain metastatic disease, is identified and removed via an axillary incision. Identification of the sentinel axillary lymph node uses either a radiolabeled colloid, injection of isosulfane or methylene blue dye, or both. The use of dual tracer has shown to have higher rates of node identification and lower false-negative rates.