Chronic anemia is a very common condition seen in day-to-day clinical practice and managed in outpatient settings. Because of numerous causes, the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team. Anemia management can range from simple to complex based on the underlying condition causing it.

The patient's primary care physician and nurse practitioner may need the help of a specialist based on the underlying condition, either a gastroenterologist, hematologist, nephrologist, or gynecologist.

Any pharmaceutical interventions should have consult from a pharmacist, perhaps even a board-certified pharmacotherapy specialist, who can better guide drug interventions and assist the clinician staff. The social worker should be involved, as some patients may neglect treatment due to a lack of finances. Once the anemia is treated, the primary clinicians need to observe the patient for signs and symptoms of recurrent anemia. The dietitian should educate the patient on eating a healthy diet that consists of fruits and vegetables. The pharmacist should encourage abstinence from alcohol. At every discharge, the nurse should educate the patients on the importance of follow up with the relevant specialists.

It is very important to have good interprofessional communication and care coordination for the management of anemia appropriately and promptly. This will prove invaluable in correcting anemia and treating the underlying conditions.

The outcomes of chronic anemia depend on the cause, chronicity, other comorbidities, and the presence of malignancy. [Level 5]