# Continuing Education Activity

Lipid emulsion therapy is a medication used in the management and treatment of Local anesthetic toxicity. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for lipid emulsion therapy as a valuable agent in the management of local anesthetic toxicity. In addition, this activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the healthcare team in the management of patients with Local anesthetic toxicity and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Review the indications of lipid emulsion therapy.
- Describe the proposed mechanism of action of lipid emulsion therapy.
- Summarize the potential complications and contraindications of lipid emulsion therapy.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance patient care when administering and monitoring lipid emulsion therapy to improve patient outcomes for patients receiving treatment for local anesthetic toxicity with lipid emulsion therapy.

# Indications

Intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) therapy (also known as lipid resuscitation therapy, LRT) is the current recommended treatment for local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) by professional societies such as the American Society of Regional Anesthesia (ASRA).

ILE therapy also extrapolates to other lipophilic agents. It has been emerging in emergency rooms and critical care units as potential rescue therapy for many other acute toxicities and poisonings. Researchers have investigated drug classes, including tricyclic antidepressants, calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, antipsychotics, insecticides, and organophosphates. Specific drugs also studied include bupropion, lamotrigine, cocaine, and diphenhydramine.

# Mechanism of Action

The precise mechanism of action of ILE is unknown, though there have been several proposed theories. The early “lipid sink” theory by Weinberg et al. suggested that a lipid compartment gets created in the blood into which the lipophilic bupivacaine may dissolve, thereby removing bupivacaine from the aqueous plasma circulation.

The “lipid sink” hypothesis had garnered widespread acceptance and was the basis for extrapolating ILE therapy with other lipophilic drug toxicities.

A static lipid phase reservoir would become rapidly filled before removing enough drug from the plasma circulation to recover toxicity. Instead, ongoing research better supports ILE as a dynamic “lipid shuttle” or “lipid subway.”., heart and brain), then 2) redistributes to muscles for storage and the liver for detoxification.

Besides scavenging, animal and human models have indicated cardiotonic and postconditioning effects from lipid infusion. Lipid directly increases cardiac contractility, which improves cardiac output and increases preload through simple volume expansion. Studies have also found a lipid-induced effect on vascular resistance separate from cardiac mechanisms. Contractility and vascular tone improve only when the local anesthetic concentration in the heart falls below sodium channel blocking thresholds.

LAST experiments suggest a similarity with cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury at the cellular level, which seems to be mitigated by the cardioprotective effects of lipid through multiple biochemical pathways.

# Administration

**Dosage Formulations**

There are many commercially available 20% intravenous lipid emulsion preparations. The most prevalent formulations have 100% long-chain fatty acids derived from soybean oil. Others in the market contain 50% medium-chain fatty acids from coconut oil and 50% long-chain fatty acids from soybean oil. Nevertheless, newer formulations such as that introduce other fatty acid sources from olive and fish oils.

- The formulations with 100% long-chain fatty acids contain linoleic acid (53%), oleic acid (24%), palmitic acid (11%), alpha-linolenic acid (8%), and stearic acid (4%).

- The formulations with 50% medium-chain triglycerides contain caprylic acid (28.5%), capric acid (20%), lauric acid (1%), and caproic acid (0.5%), and the long-chain fatty acids in the formulations contain linoleic acid (29.1%), oleic acid (11% ), palmitic acid (7.4%), alpha-linolenic acid (4.5%), and stearic acid (2%).

- Other formulations with 50% MCT / 50% LTC contain 30% coconut oil, 30% soybean oil, 25% olive oil, and 15% fish oil.

- ILE is also available in 20% soybean oil and 80% olive oil combination.

ILE formulated from 100% long-chain fatty acids and derived from soybean oil appears to be the predominant ILE in research studies and clinical use for LAST. It is the recommended lipid emulsion by ASRA for LAST treatment.

**Dose**

ASRA has published guidelines for LAST, including recommendations for ILE therapy.

- For patients over 70 kilograms, a rapid 100 mL bolus of 20% lipid emulsion followed by another 200 to 250 mL infusion over 15 to 20 minutes is the recommended course.

- For patients below 70 kilograms, a rapid 1.5 mL/kg (of lean body weight) bolus of 20% lipid emulsion followed by a 0.25 mL/kg/minute infusion should start.

- The same bolus dose is repeatable, along with doubling the infusion rate if cardiovascular instability continues. The recommended dosing limit is approximately 12 mL/kg.

- Propofol, which is reconstituted in 10% lipid emulsion, is not an acceptable ILE therapy alternative for LAST as a much larger volume of 10% lipid emulsion would be needed to match the effects of the more concentrated 20% emulsion. Also, the cardio depressant effects of propofol would worsen hemodynamic instability.

# Adverse Effects

The early and less frequent adverse effects of ILE include allergic reaction, dyspnea, hyperlipidemia, hypercoagulability, and irritation. The delayed and less frequent adverse effects of ILE include transient elevation of liver function test values, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and thrombocytopenia.

As parenteral nutrition, adverse reactions of lipid emulsion treatment are infection, hyperlipidemia, acute pancreatitis, decreased immune response, interference with laboratory examinations using serum, and parenteral nutrition-associated hepatic diseases. In addition, hyperlipidemia and infection can be associated with impaired reticuloendothelial function, leading to impaired pulmonary gas exchange. However, the adverse effects induced by lipid emulsion infusion are mild and transient for a short-term infusion compared with the fatal complications, such as cardiovascular depression and cardiac arrest, induced by toxic doses of local anesthetic, which require immediate lipid emulsion treatment.

The complications are minor and few within the recommended doses of 12 mL/kg, and early administration of ILE therapy for LAST is encouraged.

# Contraindications

Lipid emulsion formulations in the United States are derived from egg phospholipids and thus contraindicated in patients with documented severe egg allergy.

# Monitoring

Due to the potential for allergic reactions, monitoring for signs and symptoms, such as dyspnea, cyanosis, or fever, is essential. As lipemia may occur with ILE, patients require assessment for hypertriglyceridemia and symptoms of pancreatitis. Regular triglyceride levels require monitoring, especially when doses are adjusted. Lipase levels, liver enzyme tests, and bilirubin levels are necessary if there is a suspicion of acute pancreatitis or acute cholecystitis.

# Toxicity

Higher ILE doses have correlated with hypertriglyceridemia, acute pancreatitis, lipid embolus, extracorporeal circulation machine circuit obstruction, acute kidney injury, cardiac arrest, acute lung injury, and increased susceptibility to infections. Both higher infusion rates and higher total dose administered to increase the likelihood of these events.

Fat overload syndrome is another well-known complication of ILE; initial reports of this condition appeared in the setting of parenteral nutrition. Characteristic symptoms include sudden elevation of triglyceride levels, fever, liver dysfunction, splenomegaly, pancreatitis, coagulopathy, and hemolysis. These symptoms improve as lipemia resolves.

In a severe case of ILE toxicity, clinicians observed somnolence and metabolic acidosis with elevated lactic acid levels after administration of 66 mL/kg, which is well above the recommended threshold.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Since its initial proposal for bupivacaine toxicity, ILE therapy has become recognized as the standard treatment for LAST and is recommended for local anesthetic-mediated cardiac arrest. Furthermore, ILE therapy has been used for experimental rescue treatment of other lipophilic drug overdoses, toxicities, and toxin antidotes, though with variable success. As such, ILE therapy is relevant to physicians, advanced care providers, nursing teams, pharmacists, and ancillary staff across the interprofessional healthcare team, especially in anesthesiology, emergency medicine, and critical care.

The decision to use ILE requires strong clinical judgment on the part of the ordering clinician. Nursing staff will typically administer the therapy and must be familiar with administration protocol and potential adverse effects. The pharmacist must have involvement from the standpoint of dosing, medication reconciliation, and working with the nursing staff regarding administration and adverse events. These are but a few examples of the need for interprofessional teamwork when using ILE therapy in patients experiencing anesthetic toxicity. [Level 5] Despite the increasing awareness of ILE therapy, more clinical studies and research are needed to explain better its mechanism of action, other appropriate indications, optimal dosing, and associated complications.