Laminectomy can be performed through a traditional open approach or with a minimally invasive technique.

The traditional open approach requires a posterior midline incision (3 to 4 cm in length for a single level) and subperiosteal dissection along spinous processes to detach and retract paraspinous muscles from the spinous processes medially to the lateral laminar border avoiding damage to the facet joint. Spinous processes may be resected along with dorsal laminae to expose ligamentum flavum with bone cutting rongeur or a burr, resection of ligamentum flavum is possible with Woodson elevator and spatula, and medial facetectomies can be performed to decompress the lateral recess. The foraminal region can is reachable with Kerrison rongeurs. Use of a ball tip or angled probe help to assess foraminal size. Great care is necessary to avoid damage to pars interarticularis and more than 50% of the facet joint to decrease the risk of instability. The decompression procedure is usually complete upon confirmation of the dural sac, exiting, and descending nerve roots.

Minimally Invasive Surgical (MIS) techniques include laminotomy and microendoscopic laminotomy with tubular retractors. Contemporary literature supports these procedures resulting in better preservation of posterior musculature, decreased intraoperative bleeding, and postoperative pain.

Even though MIS approaches may have some early outcome advantages over open procedures, the economic value and cost-effectiveness of MIS require further investigation.

A recent systematic review compared conventional laminectomy with three different techniques that avoid removing the spinous process (unilateral laminotomy, bilateral laminotomy, and split spinous process laminotomy). A decreased postoperative back pain for bilateral laminotomy and split spinous laminotomy was found; however, there were no observable clinically significant differences. Further, there was no difference in terms of hospital length of stay, operative time, and complications of these techniques compared to conventional laminectomy.

The salient surgical steps in classical decompressive laminectomy can be summarized as follows:

- Prone positioning

- The abdomen should be made free of any undue pressure

- Anatomical localization aided with fluoroscopy

- Superficial tissue and muscle dissection to reach the spinous process

- Subperiosteal dissection of lamina-not exceeding axis of facet joints in classical laminectomy and not exceeding tip of the transverse process in others

- Spinous process removal via large rongeur or Horsley bone cutter

- Removal of the lamina via Leksell rongeur starting from the inter-laminar space

- Removal of thickened ligament flavum via Kerrison rongeur

- A high-speed drill to thin the lamina followed by its removal via Kerrison can also be undertaken

- Undercutting of medial facet and decompression of respective foramina

- Layered wound closure after ensuring hemostasis and placement of a drain