Once the history and physical examination findings are determined to be concerning for a brain tumor, additional workup using radiographic diagnostic studies should be performed to understand the condition in more detail. The findings of the imaging studies vary according to the type and grade of the tumor.

**Radiological Evaluation**

**Computed Tomography (CT) Scan:**CT scan is typically the initial study obtained due to the acute presentation of patients to the emergency department. On CT scans, the low-grade tumors are usually low-density in appearance. Over 95% of these tumors are located in the supratentorial compartment, mainly either the frontal or the temporal lobes. Calcification can be seen in about 20% of these tumors, particularly in oligodendrogliomas. Contrast enhancement is usually not seen, but when present is patchy in contrast to ring-enhancing typically seen in high-grade gliomas.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Brain:**MRI is a more sensitive imaging study to delineate low-grade tumors and soft tissue in general compared to a CT scan. Low-grade gliomas appear hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2-fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences. Calcification can be evident on susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) sequence.

**Advanced Imaging Techniques:**Functional MRI, diffusion MRI, perfusion MRI, MR spectroscopy, and positron emission tomography (PET) scan are more advanced diagnostic studies and add a modest value in diagnosing low-grade tumors. These tests are not routinely performed.

**Neuro-pathological Diagnosis**

After a decision to move forward with surgery or biopsy is made by the treating physician or tumor board/multidisciplinary team discussion, the tissue is obtained. The tissue is then subjected to histopathological examination to determine the diagnosis. This is considered the gold standard test to confirm the type of tumor. In addition, molecular markers are also tested to classify the tumor per the 2016 WHO CNS classification.

**Histopathology:**The main histopathological features that classify brain tumors include atypia, anaplasia, microscopic proliferation, and necrosis. Histologically, low-grade tumors are well-differentiated and demonstrate hypercellular glia with nuclear atypia and rare mitotic activity. An indicator of mitotic activity, the Ki-67 labeling index, is usually below 10% for low-grade gliomas. The appearance of the cells depends upon the type of tumor. Oligodendrogliomas tend to have a classic 'fried egg appearance' with clear, scant cytoplasm, isomorphic round nuclei, and fine delicate branching vessels, sometimes described as 'chicken wire vasculature.' Astrocytomas have pleomorphic giant cells with prominent cytoplasmic processes creating a fibrillary stroma. And these stains intensely with vimentin and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).

**Molecular Neuropathology:**A major restructuring in the WHO classification in 2016 resulted from the findings and understanding of molecular neuropathology of low-grade gliomas.TP53 has been known to be present in most low-grade astrocytomas and rare to absent in oligodendrogliomas. It has also been well known that most of the oligodendrogliomas have co-deletion of the short arm of chromosome 1 (1p) and the long arm of chromosome 19 (19q). Both these mutations (TP53 and 1p/19q co-deletion) are mutually exclusive in almost all low-grade gliomas.IDH, the gene coding for an enzyme in the Krebs cycle, and isocitrate dehydrogenase being present in over 75% of low-grade glioma has been a breakthrough.

Most are IDH1 mutations (R132H) and, less commonly, IDH2 mutations. These mutations lead to altered enzyme function, ultimately leading to the production of 2-hydroxyglutarate, which is an oncometabolite and has a broad range of effects on gene expression.may be classified into three categories: a) group with IDH mutation and 1p/19q co-deletion, which comprises oligodendrogliomas, b) group with IDH mutation and without 1p/19q co-deletion where most of these have TP53 mutations and ATRX mutations and comprise of astrocytomas, and c) group with neither IDH mutation nor 1p/19q co-deletion.

Thus, when a glioma is suspected on clinical presentation, imaging, and tissue obtained, it is strongly recommended to test for IDH mutation and 1p/19q co-deletion to have definitive tumor classification. In the 2016 WHO CNS classification, the diagnosis of oligoastrocytoma has been strongly discouraged since molecular studies can almost always aid in the classification of either oligodendroglioma or astrocytoma. Oligoastrocytomas can be diagnosed with a NOS (Not Otherwise Specified) designation and are indicated only when molecular studies are unavailable or not feasible.