The steps of glycolysis are as follows:

- Glucose gets phosphorylated by hexokinase, forming glucose-6-phosphate. This step requires one molecule of ATP.

- Glucose-6-phosphate is isomerized by phosphoglucose isomerase to form fructose-6-phosphate.

- Fructose-6-phosphate is phosphorylated by phosphofructokinase to form fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. This step requires one molecule of ATP.

- Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate is split into two separate sugar molecules, dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, by aldolase.

- The molecule of dihydroxyacetone phosphate is isomerized by triosephosphate isomerase to form a second glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.

- Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is phosphorylated by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase to form 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. This step requires NAD+ as a cofactor.

- 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is converted to 3-phosphoglycerate by phosphoglycerate kinase. This step involves the transfer of a phosphate molecule to ADP to form 1 molecule of ATP.

- 3-phosphoglycerate rearranges to form 2-phosphoglycerate by the enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase.

- 2-phosphoglycerate is dehydrated to produce phosphoenolpyruvate by the enzyme enolase.

- Phosphoenolpyruvate is converted to pyruvate by pyruvate kinase. This step involves the transfer of a phosphate molecule to ADP to form 1 molecule of ATP.

The microenvironment of the cell determines the fate of pyruvate following the initial ten steps of glycolysis. If a cell lacks mitochondria, is poorly oxygenated, or energy demand has rapidly increased to exceed the rate at which oxidative phosphorylation can provide sufficient ATP, pyruvate can be converted to lactate by the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase.glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase reaction (step #6, see above).