The abdominal and pelvic vasculature contains a multitude of arteries and veins that are of particular note during surgical procedures. Some examples comprise but are not limited to injuries during incisions of the abdomen and pelvis, damage to the ureters during pelvic surgeries, or metastatic routes.

The inferior epigastric artery can become injured during lower abdominal wall incisions. Placement of trocars during laparoscopic procedures can also lead to injury. When these happen, abdominal wall hematomas arise and can expand to a considerable size since there is very minimal tissue resistance in that area.

During Caesarean sections and hysterectomies, injury to the uterine arteries or transection can occur when there is an extension of the incision into the broad ligament. In this situation, they are also at risk of inclusion within a suture during attempts at hemostasis because of the proximity of the ureters to the uterine arteries.

Another surgical consideration is during hernia repairs, surgeons should note for a common variant of an accessory or aberrant obturator artery. This variation typically runs the same route as the pubic branch of the obturator artery and can be damaged during procedures.

The lateral sacral veins anastomose with the internal vertebral venous plexus and act as an alternate route to reach the vena cava; this becomes important as a pathway for metastatic spread form prostatic or ovarian cancers to the vertebral or cranial sites.

Esophageal variceal bleeding is a common complication in liver cirrhosis leading to portal hypertension. This condition results in severe hemorrhage at the portocaval anastomosis at the lower end of the esophagus.