An interprofessional team approach is essential for providing excellence in healthcare to individuals with SSADH deficiency. The composition of the team may target a unique holistic, and integrated approach with the aim of delivering excellent management to patients with SSADH deficiency. The role of the primary clinician and pediatric neurologist is crucial. The involvement of geneticist and genetic counselor is important for appropriate genetic counseling and testing the at-risk individuals in the family.

Management of neuropsychiatric symptoms requires the involvement of a pediatric psychiatrist and psychological medicine team. An allied health professional team should be involved in the management from the beginning to provide physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy. Appropriate social support to the family should be provided, and support from the social worker and community nurses are pivotal for ongoing monitoring and to make appropriate and timely referrals as needed. The collaboration and shared decision making, as well as communication, are key elements for a good outcome.

The interprofessional care must use an integrated care pathway using preferably an electronic medical recording linked to an evidence-based medical avenue to planning and peruse of all arthro-skeletal activities. Of note is that the earlier the manifestations of SSADH deficiency are discovered, the better the outcome is with the potential avoidance of most SUDEP occurrences. [Level III]