In necrotizing viral retinitis, including herpetic retinopathy and CMV retinitis, the virus infects retinal cells and causes necrosis from virally induced cytolysis and vascular occlusion.

Behcet disease is an auto-immune inflammatory vasculitis involving both arteries and veins of all sizes. Histopathologically, non-granulomatous inflammation is seen. Increased local expression of proinflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-1-beta (IL-1beta), changes in polymorphonuclear cells, and endothelial dysfunction play a role in the pathogenesis of Behcet disease-associated vasculitis.

Post-fever retinitis may be the result of direct invasion of the pathogen or by indirect invasion mediated through immune mechanisms.

Toxoplasma gondii has been proposed to reach ocular tissues via blood and yield a focus of inflammation. The primary lesion is retinitis, and choroid may be involved secondarily. Host immune responses induce the conversion of tachyzoites to bradyzoites and their encystment, which may remain inactive in the scar for a long time. However, there may be reactivation of cyst at the border of these old scars when the cyst ruptures with the release of organisms into the surrounding retina. However, new lesions are sometimes found at distant locations from old scars.

Metastatic endophthalmitis occurs due to the spread of blood-borne organisms. The microbes enter the internal ocular spaces through the blood-ocular barrier in patients with risk factors.

The defective measles virus in SSPE directly affects the optic nerve, retina, and choroid resulting in optic neuritis, retinitis, and chorioretinitis, respectively.