The exact etiology of asthma remains unclear and appears to be multifactorial. Both genetic and environmental factors seem to contribute. Positive family history is a risk factor for asthma but is neither necessary nor sufficient for the development of the disease. Multiple environmental exposures, both prenatal and during childhood, are associated with the development of asthma.

One of the most well-studied risk factors during the prenatal period is maternal smoking, which does appear to increase the risk of wheezing in childhood and likely increases risk for the development of asthma. Other proposed prenatal risk factors include maternal diet and nutrition, stress, use of antibiotics, and delivery via Cesarean section, though studies regarding these have been less conclusive.

Many childhood exposures have also been the target of research. Tobacco smoke exposure appears to increase the risk of development of asthma and is also a known trigger for exacerbations in those already diagnosed with the disease. Other risk factors include animal, mite, mold, or other allergens, as well as air pollutants.

The role of many other proposed risk factors remains unclear, and studies are often inconclusive or contradictory. The influence of breastfeeding and avoidance of nutritional allergens during breastfeeding is controversial. Family size and structure have been proposed as a risk factor; an increase in family size may be protective, though birth order seems less likely to be contributory. Low socioeconomic status has correlations with increased morbidity, though the increased prevalence is a topic of debate. Viral lower respiratory infections and the use of antibiotics have been associated with early childhood wheezing, but their role in causing persistent asthma is less clear. There has been a particular association with Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and asthma, but not causation. Viral respiratory tract infections are known to trigger existent asthma.