Opioid analgesics can be administered through a variety of drug dosage forms. Most opioids are available in oral formulations, including both immediate-release or extended-release tablets. Buprenorphine is also commonly used in a sublingual film medication which can be useful for the mitigation of symptoms related to opioid withdrawal in addicts attempting to detoxify. Codeine is also widely given in oral suspensions, such as in codeine cough syrup with or without antihistamines such as promethazine. Intravenous formulations of opioids such as morphine, hydromorphone, and fentanyl very frequently are used to provide analgesia and supplement sedation in an inpatient setting, particularly in the perioperative setting. Fentanyl also exists formulated for transdermal patches for extended absorption.

Rectal formulations of morphine and hydromorphone are also commonly given to patients who cannot tolerate medications by mouth. Methadone is also commonly given orally, subcutaneously, or intramuscularly if there is a concern for patient non-adherence and the possibility of illicit sale or distribution of controlled substances. Morphine can also be given epidurally for the management of acute pain and intrathecally in the form of implantable spinal pumps for the management of chronic pain and palliative care.

For specifics regarding the administration (including appropriate dosing) of individual agents in the opioid pain reliever class, the reader is directed to seek articles on the individual agents themselves.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD.  Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.