Radiographic imaging should be obtained in all patients with acute or chronic shoulder pain.

**Radiographs**

Recommended imaging includes a true anteroposterior (AP) image of the glenohumeral joint (i.e., the “Grashey” view). The true AP image is taken with the patient rotated between 30 and 45 degrees offset the cassette in the coronal plane. Alternatively, the beam can be rotated while the patient remains neutral in the coronal plane. The distance between the acromion and the humeral head (i.e., the acromiohumeral interval) can be calculated. A normal interval is between 7 and 14 mm, and this interval is decreased in cases of advanced degenerative arthritis and RCA. Other standard views include the lateral (or “scapular Y”) view and an axillary view.

Routine radiographs are recommended, but in the majority of cases of LHB tendinitis without coexisting pathologies, these will be normal.

**Ultrasound (US)**

Ultrasound (US) is highly operator-dependent but is often touted as a fast, cost-effective tool for diagnosing LHB tendon pathology.  Characteristic findings include tendon thickening, tenosynovitis/hypertrophy of the synovial sheath, and fluid surrounding the tendon in the groove. The ability to perform a dynamic examination increases the sensitivity and specificity for detecting subtle instability. The diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in detecting LHB pathology ranges from 50% to 96% (sensitivity) and 98% to 100% (specificity) when compared to magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA).

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)/M****agnetic Resonance Arthrography (MRA)**

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is useful in evaluating the LHB tendon, bicipital groove, and any fluid or edema that may be indicative of pathology. MRI is most beneficial in delineating other associated shoulder pathologies; however, there is poor concordance with MRI-suspected pathology, intra-operative findings, and/or histologic grades of biceps tendinopathy.

MRI is useful in evaluating the LHB tendon’s position in the bicipital groove. Absence of the tendon within the groove would suggest subluxation and/or dislocation. In these cases, careful attention should be paid to evaluating for concomitant subscapularis pathology. Other associated shoulder pathologies and rotator cuff integrity can also be evaluated with MRI. Other common sources of acute or chronic shoulder pain can be evaluated on MRI, including subdeltoid and/or subacromial bursitis, acromioclavicular (AC) joint pathology, and morphology.  A systematic approach to reviewing shoulder MRIs is important, especially when correlating the MRI findings with the patient-reported symptoms and clinical examination.

The addition of IV-contrast dye (MR arthrography) is sensitive but only moderately specific for LHB tendon pathology.  While a standard MRI series can be valuable in detecting fluid surrounding the LHB tendon as it courses in the bicipital groove, the administration of the dye serves as a confounding variable that inherently limits the specificity of this pathologic finding.