# Continuing Education Activity

Infantile spasms (IS) is a seizure disorder that was first described by William West in 1841 and has been referred to as West syndrome. It is a disorder that affects mostly those in the first year of life and is described as spasms with characteristic EEG changes known as hypsarrhythmia and a strong association with developmental delay or regression. Infantile spasms have been evaluated for over 170 years in regards to etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis. This activity reviews the cause, presentation, and diagnosis of infantile spasms and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of infantile spasms.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with infantile spasms.
- Summarize the treatment of infantile spasms.
- Identify the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by infantile spasms.

# Introduction

Infantile spasms (IS) is a seizure disorder that was first described by William West in 1841 and has been referred to as West syndrome. It is a disorder that affects mostly those in the first year of life and is described as spasms with characteristic EEG changes known as hypsarrhythmia and a strong association with developmental delay or regression.

# Etiology

Infantile spasms can be classified into two, well-known groupings of symptomatic and cryptogenic. An additional subgroup of cryptogenic proposed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) is known as idiopathic infantile spasm.

Symptomatic IS is described in patients with an “identified etiology and/or significant developmental delay at the time of spasm onset.”

**Prenatal**

- CNS Malformations: The most common central nervous system (CNS) malformation to occur in the prenatal period, accounting for 30% of cases, is cortical dysplasia. Cerebral dysgenesis, lissencephaly, holoprosencephaly, and hemimegalencephaly account for the additional CNS malformations that can be associated with IS.

- Neurocutaneous Disorders: Neurocutaneous disorders need to be considered as an etiology for IS. The most common neurocutaneous disorder to be associated with infantile spasms and accounting for 10% to 30% of prenatal causes is tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) in which 68% of patients will have IS.

- Chromosome Abnormalities: Down syndrome is the most common chromosomal abnormality to be associated with IS. Up to 15% of prenatal causes of IS are attributed to chromosome abnormalities including 18q duplication, 7q duplication, deletion of MAGI2 gene on chromosome 7q11.23-q21.11, and partial 2p trisomy.

- Genetic Mutations: In addition to chromosomal abnormalities genetic mutations such as those encoding the forkhead protein G1, syntaxin-binding protein 1, calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase, ALG13, pyridoxamine-5’-phosphate oxidase, and adenylosuccinate lyase have been identified to be associated with IS.

- Inborn Errors of Metabolism: Twenty-five metabolic disorders have associations with IS. Phenylketonuria is the most common inborn error of metabolism with etiological associations with IS in countries where PKU is not identified at birth; this accounts for 12% of patients with PKU.

- Congenital Infections: The last prenatal insult that must be considered with associations to IS is congenital infections. These congenital infections include toxoplasmosis, syphilis, cytomegalovirus, and Zika virus.

**Perinatal**

Though prenatal factors account for the greatest proportion of cases of symptomatic IS, perinatal causes of IS to include hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and neonatal hypoglycemia also have etiologic associations with IS. Low birth weight is another factor that is 3 to 4 times more prominent in children with IS than that of the general population. At this time there has been no association found between IS and prematurity.

**Postnatal**

The last etiological associations with symptomatic IS are postnatal insults; these include traumatic injury, near drowning, tumors, and CNS infections with attribution of 15% to 67% of cases of symptomatic IS.

As noted above, IS is classified as symptomatic when there is an identifiable cause in addition to developmental delay present prior to the onset of spasms. Cryptogenic IS has no identifiable cause and the following criteria: no other kind of seizures, a normal examination, a normal CT and MRI, recurrence of hypsarrhythmia between consecutive spasms of a cluster, and lack of any focal interictal or ictal EEG abnormalities.

# Epidemiology

Infantile spasm (IS) is a unique and rare disorder with an incidence of 1.6 to 4.5 per 10,000 live births; this is roughly 2000 to 2500 new cases in the United States per year.

# Pathophysiology

Current research using animal models is being performed to contribute to the understanding of the pathophysiology of IS. One theory in the pathophysiology of IS is that IS “results from a nonspecific insult at a critical point in the ontogenetic development of the brain.”

# History and Physical

Patients are grouped into symptomatic versus cryptogenic versus idiopathic IS, but clinicians must be able first to identify the clinical features that prompt further investigation of IS as a diagnosis. As stated above infantile spasms "are characterized by epileptic spasms with onset in infancy or early childhood that are usually associated with the EEG pattern of hypsarrhythmia, and also developmental regression."

Spasms range from a few to more than a hundred, occurring in clusters that range from less than one minute up to ten minutes.

All the above typically occurs through several stages:

- The first stage is noted to be relatively mild with infrequent and isolated spasms. This is associated with developmental regression.

- The mild stage then progresses to a more severe stage with an increase in frequency and clustering of spasms. The developmental regression noted in stage one becomes more pronounced.

- The last stage is characterized by a progressive decrease in spasm frequency and severity. Spasms may completely resolve and be replaced by other types of seizures.

Clinicians must be able to identify and begin early diagnostic testing for IS because time is important to prognosis.

# Evaluation

The initial step, after a clinician has identified the clinical features of infantile spasms as above, is to perform electroencephalography (EEG). The EEG should get a full sleep-wake cycle and a full ictal event, best obtained with an overnight inpatient 24-hour video EEG. If the diagnosis is not clear on the initial EEG, repeat or prolonged monitoring can be performed 1 to 2 weeks after the initial study.

After an EEG shows findings suggestive of IS, neuroimaging is the next diagnostic test that should be pursued. The etiology of IS is established in 70% of cases with neuroimaging. The imaging of choice, with the highest sensitivity, is MRI and should be the initial scanning method.

After clinical evaluation, EEG and MRI are obtained, and if there is no obvious cause of IS, then further metabolic and genetic testing should be obtained.

To further evaluate the metabolic etiologies of IS one should obtain studies such as pyridoxine challenge, urine for organic acids, serum lactate and amino acids, biotinidase determination, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis of neurotransmitters, lactic acid, amino acids, folate metabolites, glucose and glycine, and lastly, chromosomal studies.

The initial genetic testing of choice would include an epilepsy gene panel. If after thorough metabolic evaluation as well as the epilepsy gene panel no apparent cause of IS is identified then whole-exome sequencing should be considered.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of infantile spasms should be initiated immediately once IS is suspected with hormonal therapy, antiseizure medications or dietary changes. The first line treatment for IS is hormonal therapy with corticotropin, ACTH.

Once ACTH therapy is begun the time to effectiveness with a cessation of spasms was 7 to 12 days.

ACTH treatment does have side effects to include “hypertension, immune suppression, infection, electrolyte imbalances, GI disturbances, ocular opacities, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, cerebral atrophy and growth impairment.”

The other hormonal therapy that has potential effectiveness in IS treatment are corticosteroids. At this time as there is only probable effectiveness of corticosteroids the optimal preparation, dosing and duration has not been established.

An alternative initial treatment for IS after consideration of ACTH is vigabatrin. Vigabatrin is a GABA-transaminase inhibitor, this allows for increased GABA in the CNS.

In regards to comparison to ACTH, vigabatrin is inferior to ACTH when assessing short-term outcomes.

In cases that are refractory to initial treatment with ACTH or vigabatrin, clinicians may consider initiation of a ketogenic diet. The ketogenic diet is a high-fat, adequate-protein, low-carbohydrate diet.

Surgical treatment is another consideration for refractory IS if a focal-cortical structural, metabolic abnormality or neurodevelopmental arrest/regression is noted.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for infantile spasm is broad including mild diagnoses such as colic, gastroesophageal reflux, spasticity, benign neonatal sleep myoclonus, or excessive startles or Moro reflexes up to more severe diagnosis. Differentials should also include tonic reflex seizures of early infancy, brain injury, and severe myoclonic epilepsies.

# Prognosis

With continued research regarding infantile spasm and its etiologies, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment the overall prognosis of IS is poor. Mortality rates of IS range from 3% to 33%.

# Complications

Babies with infantile spasms commonly have mental and developmental problems. These include:

- Eyesight

- Speech

- Hearing

- Writing skills

- Fine and gross motor development

- Autistic traits

# Deterrence and Patient Education

After the diagnosis of infantile spasms has been established, thorough patient and parent education are imperative. Discussions regarding the possibility of neurodevelopmental delay, seizures, and mortality must occur. Clinicians and family members should also establish medical and psychosocial treatment plans. Providing the family with resources including fact sheets, forums, and treatment options can help family members with self-education to supplement the education provided by a physician.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because of the complex nature of infantile spasms and the need for prompt diagnosis and initiation of treatment, strict interprofessional communication must occur. Care coordination includes coordination between general pediatricians, pediatric neurologists, nurses, pharmacists, and therapists. Emergency medical physicians may also be part of care coordination as they will likely evaluate the patient initially when the parents note spasms. Once the emergency department physician has suspicion for IS, a pediatric neurologist and the patient's general pediatrician should be contacted to evaluate the patient and begin diagnostic measures. They should involve nursing in parent education and coordination of appointments and diagnostic imaging. Once a diagnosis is made, a pharmacist can assist in medicine distribution and dosing, as well as parent education, on medication side effects. The patients should also start the occupational, speech, and physical therapy due to the likelihood of developmental delays and regression. Caring for patients with infantile spasms is complex and requires extensive interprofessional communication to improve patient outcomes.