The survival of most patients with lung cancer is poor. Thus, a streamlined approach to diagnosis and treatment is recommended. The earlier the cancer is diagnosed, the higher the cure rate with surgery. Since most patients with lung cancer initially present to the primary caregiver, a high index of suspicion should be held. Any patient with risk factors for lung cancer should have a chest X-ray and possibly a CT scan of the chest. The radiologist is essential for biopsy of any lung lesion, and the pathologist is necessary to determine the type of cancer. A thoracic surgeon should be involved in the care of the patient since early surgery is curative. Even after surgery, an interprofessional team of healthcare workers needs to follow the patient to ensure no recurrence or metastatic disease.

For those patients deemed non-surgical candidates, the treatment is chemotherapy. When metastases occur, a pain management specialist and a radiation oncologist must be consulted to determine pain management options. With the availability of the newer targeted agents, the oncology specialist pharmacist plays a key role in selecting agents and monitoring the patient for adverse reactions, and reporting concerns to the team. Many guidelines exist to assess patients for lung cancer, but the key is an index of suspicion.

An interprofessional team should manage BAC. Besides the pulmonologist and thoracic surgeon, other team members may include a pathologist, oncologist, radiation oncologist, pharmacist, and specialty trained nurses in surgery and oncology. The surgical nurse should help coordinate care, patient and family education regarding surgery, and monitor the patient for surgical complications with reporting untoward events to the team. Pharmacists should evaluate medications prescribed, drug-drug interactions, and patient compliance and communicate with the team. Specialty-trained oncology nurses should assist with aftercare by helping with the education of the patient and their family, coordination of follow-ups, and evaluating for recurrence and report issues to the team. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

Tumors classified as MIA and AIS have been shown to have nearly 100% disease-free survival once completely resected. (100% 10-year disease-free survival for AIS and 97.3% to 100% for MIA.) [Level 2]

Tumors identified as bronchioloalveolar carcinoma or adenocarcinoma with lepidic growth rarely follow the traditional progression through nodal or vascular involvement. Multifocal disease within lung parenchyma has been seen and attributed to synchronous disease or aerogenous spread. Given their intrathoracic spread, even lung transplantation has been performed in cases of multifocal BACs but has often exhibited recurrence in the donor's lung as late as 48 months post-transplantation.