The development of T1D occurs in 3 stages. Stage 1 is asymptomatic and characterized by normal fasting glucose, normal glucose tolerance, and the presence of  ≥2 pancreatic autoantibodies. Stage 2 diagnostic criteria include the presence of pancreatic autoantibodies (usually multiple) and dysglycemia: impaired fasting glucose (fasting glucose 100 to 125 mg/dL) or impaired glucose tolerance (2-hour post-75 gm glucose load glucose 140 to 199 mg/dL) or an HbA1c  5.7% to 6.4%. Individuals remain asymptomatic. In stage 3, there is diabetes, defined by hyperglycemia (random glucose ≥200 mg/dL) with clinical symptoms, fasting glucose ≥126 mg/dL, glucose ≥200 mg/dL two hours after ingesting 75 g of glucose during an oral glucose tolerance test and/or HbA1c ≥6.5%. If the individual lacks classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis, it is recommended that two tests be performed (simultaneously or at different times) to confirm the diagnosis. If there is an acute onset of symptoms with hyperglycemia, as more often occurs in youth-onset T1D, HbA1c may be misleading at the time of diagnosis, and glucose criteria should be used.

T1D, especially in children, classically presents with hyperglycemic symptoms, which can be sudden, and include polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, nocturnal enuresis, blurred vision, unintentional weight loss, fatigue, and weakness. If not evaluated and treated promptly, it can become a medical emergency. In addition to hyperglycemia, electrolyte abnormalities may be present. If these individuals are not treated,  DKA can develop, requiring hospitalization and treatment with intravenous fluids, insulin, potassium, and careful monitoring. Almost one-third of youth present with DKA.

In adult-onset diabetes, the onset of symptoms is more variable than in youth, and DKA is less common. It can be difficult to distinguish T1D and type 2 diabetes. GAD65 should be the initial antibody tested when diagnosing T1D in adults is suspected. If negative and/or if available, IA2 and/or ZNT8 should be measured as well. C-peptide levels can be used when there is a question about which type of diabetes is present. A random C-peptide should be drawn with concurrent serum glucose. If the duration of diabetes exceeds three years, c-peptide >600 pmol/L strongly suggests type 2 diabetes. A low (<200 pmol/L) or undetectable c-peptide confirms the diagnosis of T1D.