Treatment of PCS is individualized to each patient and the patient's particular complaints. Simple reassurance is often the major treatment. It is important to note that most patients will improve within three months. In the absence of specific treatments to be provided for each patient, clinicians can adopt a symptomatic approach.

In 85% to 90% of cases, mild TBI is self-limited and does not progress to PCS. In the minority of cases that do not recover to baseline at 4 weeks post-injury, management, and physiological treatment is important in patients returning to baseline mental and physical activity. Physical and cognitive rest is recommended for at least the first 24 to 48 hours post-injury as outlined by Zurich guidelines. In terms of advanced recovery or long-term clinical outcomes, cognitive and physical rest after a concussion has not been able to demonstrate convincing evidence of its benefits.

Some of the following medications and treatment algorithms have been utilized for the management of headache syndromes, specifically in the post-traumatic setting: Amitriptyline, intravenous dihydroergotamine and metoclopramide, greater occipital nerve block, propranolol, and indomethacin.

For patients continuing to endorse visual and balance symptoms, the vestibular-ocular motor screening tool may be completed in the outpatient setting. By using the screening tool to identify the root cause of a patient’s residual post-concussive symptoms, the provider can prescribe active forms of therapy, which include cervical physical therapy, vision therapy, or vestibular rehabilitation.

Lastly, Zurich guidelines acknowledge that patients with PCS who engage in low-level exercise recover faster. The Buffalo concussion treadmill test assesses when patients may resume full activity by measuring the patient’s ability to achieve target heart rate without experiencing symptoms or early exhaustion. Once patients can achieve age-related maximal heart rate and exercise without symptoms for at least 20 minutes for 2 to 3 consecutive days, the patient is deemed physiologically recovered. For athletes, this may not correlate to return to play but allows the athlete to train aerobically until other post-concussive symptoms resolve.