Electrodiagnostic (EDX) testing can be performed to understand the etiology, severity, prognosis, and possible treatment options for peripheral neuropathy. It can identify the primary characteristics of the neuropathy as axonal, demyelinating, sensory, motor, multifocal, or diffuse; however, there is often overlap.

Classic nerve conduction study (NCS) findings for demyelinating injury include prolonged distal latency, slowed conduction velocity, and a prolonged F-wave latency. Demyelination generally occurs at many sites along a nerve, causing variation in nerve action potential propagation such as a slowed conduction velocity or a conduction block. Slowed conduction velocity in a non-uniform pattern causes abnormal dispersion of arrival times of nerve action potentials at the recording site, referred to as abnormal temporal dispersion. Conduction block refers to a blockage of many axons over a short segment of nerve and is most frequently encountered at sites of entrapment in mononeuropathies such as in carpal tunnel syndrome or peroneal neuropathy at the knee. In peripheral neuropathies, focal conduction block can be evident in a site unaffected by entrapment and may represent focal demyelination. It is also important to note that slowed conduction may occur from reversible metabolic causes with no myelin damage.

The presence of conduction block and abnormal temporal dispersion may be consistent with demyelinating injury; however, it is more likely present in acquired versus hereditary demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. In Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1, the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude does not markedly decrease between distal and proximal stimulation sites because it is a slowly occurring neuropathy with uniform changes to myelin along nerve fibers. Thus, there is a diffuse slowing of conduction velocity without abnormal temporal dispersion.

In acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP), with one common variant known as Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), weakness may occur within one month of an upper respiratory or gastrointestinal illness or vaccination, likely due to a viral attack on the myelin and Schwann cells. If performed early, the electrodiagnostic testing may be relatively normal, though the F-wave may be abnormal. Later on, electrodiagnostic testing may show a motor more than sensory demyelinating neuropathy with evidence of temporal dispersion and conduction block.

NCS findings in axonal injury show reduced sensory nerve action potential/compound muscle action potential (SNAP/CMAP) amplitude with near-normal distal latency and near-normal conduction velocity. It is also important to note that, as a primarily demyelinating peripheral neuropathy progresses, mild axonal damage may occur. Primarily axonal polyneuropathies can be motor or sensory predominant, although a mixed pattern is also possible. In Acute Intermittent Porphyria, electrodiagnostic testing often reveals axonal degeneration with secondary demyelination in motor nerves more than sensory nerves. Friedreich’s Ataxia is classically associated with a sensory predominant axonal neuropathy.

Needle electromyography (EMG) is used in defining the chronicity of an axon loss lesion. EMG testing should assess for spontaneous activity at rest and the motor unit action potential (MUAP) activity during voluntary activity. The presence of positive sharp waves and fibrillations indicates denervation from axonal loss, which would not be present in a demyelinating-type polyneuropathy.

Abnormal spontaneous activity with very low amplitude (less than 50µV) indicates a chronic, slowly progressive denervation. Assessment of recruitment and MUAP amplitude and complexity can also help determine the time course. At low levels of activation, the needle electrode records from around 3 to 5 MUAPs, which can help better assess the recruitment pattern of MUAPs. Observation of several MUAPs discharging at frequency rates greater than 20 Hz support motor unit loss. MUAP waveforms can be inspected for increased amplitude as well. In slowly progressive neuropathies, usually of the hereditary type, there will be markedly reduced recruitment, very high amplitude (around 5 to 10 times normal), and minimal complexity. In axonal peripheral neuropathies with ongoing denervation, one would find moderately reduced recruitment and moderately increased MUAP amplitude and complexity. Increased MUAP complexity can be found in up to 10% of normal individuals’ motor units; therefore, the clinician should not use its presence solely for diagnosis.

Another important classification system is based on whether there is electrodiagnostic evidence of diffuse (uniform) versus a multifocal (segmental) disease pattern. A patient with diffuse polyneuropathy presents with peripheral neuropathy that involves most nerves in a length-dependent fashion, while a multifocal-type peripheral neuropathy involves one or more nerves in an asymmetric patchy distribution. Heavy metal toxins or drugs like alcohol typically present as a diffuse axonal mixed sensorimotor polyneuropathy, while vasculitis and porphyria are more typically multifocal axonal neuropathies. Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type I (HMSN-I) presents as a diffuse demyelinating mixed sensorimotor polyneuropathy, while Guillain-Barre syndrome presents as a multifocal demyelinating motor greater than sensory neuropathy. Diabetic neuropathy is a prevalent and widespread cause of polyneuropathy. Typically patients present with disabling dysesthesias and numbness in the lower extremities with physical findings demonstrating reduced two-point discrimination and vibratory sensation symmetrically in the lower extremities. It starts distally, gradually moving proximally as it progresses. The electrodiagnostic findings typically involve a uniform mixed axonal and demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy. In patients with chronic renal failure and in all patients requiring dialysis, similar electrodiagnostic findings are observed.