Varicella-zoster virus (HHV-3) is a highly contagious virus that can cause either chickenpox or herpes zoster. It is transmitted mainly through inhalation of the virus-infected aerosolized droplets. It initially presents as an upper airway infection, which enters the circulation after 2 to 3 days. It subsequently causes another bout of viremia (after 10 to 12 days) when it presents with a characteristic, pruritic, vesicular rash over the skin and mucous membranes. Additional features include fever and a loss of appetite. This rash typically begins on the face and the trunk and then spreads to the extremities, usually resolving in 4 to 7 days. Individul=als produce immunoglobulins like IgA, IgM, IgG as a response to the infection, and IgG antibodies provide lifelong immunity against the virus. Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV) can remain dormant in the sensory nerves after a primary varicella infection. Its reactivation can cause herpes zoster, a painful vesicular rash along a dermatome that does not cross the midline.

VZV vaccinations, approved by the FDA, have significantly decreased the number of patients admitted with varicella each year in the United States. The vaccines are available for ages 12 months and older, making chickenpox a preventable disease. However, immunocompromised and pregnant patients are ineligible for these vaccinations.

Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG) was first researched in the 1960s and prepared from patients recovering from varicella-zoster. It reduces the severity and attack rates of primary varicella. Following modification in the late 70s, the varicella immune globulin came onto the market for high-risk individuals with varicella exposure. It underwent further revision to the current immune globulin sold in the United States.

Varicella-zoster immune globulin should be a consideration for post-exposure prophylaxis in individuals who have a high risk of developing severe disease, lack evidence of immunity, or are ineligible for the vaccination.

- Immunocompromised patients with no evidence of immunity (including those who have primary or secondary immunodeficiencies), patients with an underlying neoplastic disease, and persons receiving immunosuppressive therapies are also indicated for patients undergoing hematopoietic cell transplantation who have not yet been re-immunized against varicella infection.

- Mothers of newborn infants who have signs and symptoms of varicella around the time of delivery (i.e., five days before delivery and up to two days after); VZV transmission can be transplacental (in utero) or can happen during a contact perinatally or postnatally.

- Premature infants hospitalized or born at ≥28 weeks of gestation whose mothers lack evidence of immunity to varicella.

- Premature infants hospitalized or born at <28 weeks of gestation or weighing <1000g at birth, even if their mothers have evidence of immunity to varicella.

- Pregnant women lacking evidence of immunity

Immunocompromised patients who were receiving a monthly high dose of intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) and received the dose <3 weeks before exposure, were likely to be protected from varicella.