Janus kinases are phosphotransferases, and receptor engagement by cytokines activates their enzymatic function. Janus kinase inhibitors represent a new strategy for the treatment of immune and inflammatory diseases. Tofacitinib is a targeted synthetic small molecule that is an oral inhibitor of Janus kinases (JAKs). It is (JAK) inhibitor FDA-approved in April 2012 and indicated for its use in the management of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis (PA), ulcerative colitis (UC), polyarticular course juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pcJIA).

Tofacitinib's indications in rheumatoid arthritis are for adult patients unresponsive or developed intolerance to one or more disease-modifying rheumatoid drugs (DMARDs) with active moderate to severe disease course.

Tofacitinib's indication for active psoriatic arthritis received FDA approval following two phase III clinical trials, OPAL Broaden and OPAL Beyond.

Tofacitinib's indication as a treatment for ulcerative colitis (UC) was approved by the FDA following three randomized phase III placebo-controlled clinical trials (OCTAVE Sustain trial, OCTAVE Induction 1, OCTAVE Induction 2), which were conducted following a promising phase 2 trial.

Tofacitinib's indication as a treatment for polyarticular course juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pcJIA) is approved for subjects age two and older and available as an oral solution. The FDA approval was granted in September 2020 following a phase 3 clinical trial assessing its efficacy and safety in subjects aged 2 to 17 years.

**FDA Approved Use**

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Psoriatic arthritis

- Ulcerative colitis

- Polyarticular course juvenile idiopathic arthritis