There are some pitfalls in establishing a diagnosis of accessory nerve injury. For instance, the trapezius muscle has a dual nerve supply resulting in some residual motor function following SAN injury. This can make spinal accessory nerve injury challenging to diagnose. Trapezial dysfunction results in subjective symptoms secondary to contralateral paresthesias, myofascial pain syndromes, and radiculitis. These variable presentations also make it difficult for providers to promptly diagnose spinal accessory nerve injury. Different presentations are also attributable to the anatomic extent of SAN injury, collateral tissue damage, and variable pain thresholds.

Ultrasound, such as high-resolution ultrasonography (HRUS), has been used to confirm the target nerve and visualize the structures surrounding the nerve. Ultrasound helps detect some changes to the muscles, such as atrophy. Ultrasound guidance to correct target areas may also help reduce possible damage during injections and medication administration. Ultrasonography does not help detect the actual transaction of the nerve.

Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies are not necessary for the diagnosis; however, it would be useful to distinguish and quantify the degree of damage by doing serial EMGs. Electrodiagnostic tests are considered most sensitive for the assessment of nerve conduction impairment.

EMG has shown that the trapezius is the primary muscle responsible for shoulder elevation, and, by means of its upper bundle, it takes part in arm elevation. Nonetheless, this movement also involves the participation of the deltoid, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus muscles. For these reasons, certain spinal nerve mononeuropathy may be missed by healthcare providers because the movement may be compensated by the action of the other muscles responsible for arm elevation.

Electrodiagnostic tests help plan a physical therapy regimen to minimize postoperative morbidity.

Kim et al. observed that in nerve conduction studies of the spinal accessory nerve, the most appropriate site for recording in the upper trapezius is the middle point between the acromion and C7 spinous process. In the middle trapezius, this site is the meeting point between the middle and lateral one-third of the line joining the root of the scapular spine to the vertebral spine.”

Shoulder function is clinically evaluated in the following ways:

- Goniometry - for a range of motion assessment to evaluate movements, such as flexion and abduction around the shoulder joint

- Manual measurement of muscle strength in elevation, flexion, and abduction

The disease-specific questionnaires to assess the quality of life (QOL) are sensitive tools for evaluating shoulder movements and strength. Some more commonly validated questionnaires for shoulder specific evaluations are:

- The University of Washington quality-of-life scale

- The neck dissection impairment index

- The shoulder disability questionnaire (SDQ)

Intraoperative diagnosis is heavily reliant on intuition. A provoked motion of the shoulder as a result of cautery or dissection should be carefully assessed. Clinical examination of the motor function postoperatively is optima. Additionally, the area must be widely explored during surgery to rule out the possibility of any inadvertent injury.