Serum prostate-specific antigen has been demonstrated to be far superior to digital rectal examination (DRE) and transrectal prostatic ultrasonography (TRUS) for detecting early prostate cancer.

Initially, the urologic and medical community heartily embraced the potential of PSA screenings to detect early prostate cancer, with the intent to avoid any disease progression and decrease mortality. But with increased utilization of PSA testing, many individuals experienced side effects and "unnecessary" procedures because their PSA values were elevated secondary to benign conditions.

Overall, PSA sensitivity varies between 9% to 33% depending on age and the PSA cut-off values used. This suggests that up to 91% of individuals with elevated serum PSA levels do not have prostate cancer.

Most malignancies found due to elevated PSA levels are low-risk prostate cancers that are often managed by monitoring with active surveillance. Only about 25% of men managed by active surveillance will experience a progression of their cancer that requires definitive therapy.

**Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**can also be used to detect prostate cancer. However, it is costly and time-consuming, and other non-invasive options should be exhausted before its use, as even T-1 and T-2 weighted imaging lack sufficient specificity or sensitivity to justify utilization as a screening tool. It will also miss about 25% of clinically significant malignancies. MRI prostate scans have been useful in identifying suspicious nodules when a decision has already been made to consider a biopsy.

**Prostate-specific risk stratification bioassays**are designed to determine which patients with elevated PSA levels can safely avoid biopsies. These tests use either genomics or specific biochemical markers in the serum or urine to identify those individuals with elevated PSA levels with a low likelihood of clinically significant (Gleason grade 4) cancer. All of the currently available commercial products in the US (like the Prostate Health Index (PHI), 4K Score, PCA3, SelectMDx, and EPI Exosome testing) have at least a 90% negative predictive value indicating that there is less than a 10% chance of finding significant cancer if the test is negative. Between 25% and 30% of all patients having one of these prostatic bioassays will ultimately test negative and can safely avoid a biopsy.

MRI and prostatic bioassay risk stratification testing are used in selected, borderline, or questionable cases to avoid unnecessary, low-yield biopsies. Because of their cost and complexity, these tests are not appropriate for general screening.

**Overdiagnosis, Overtreatment, and "Unnecessary" Biopsies**

Overdiagnosis and overtreatment have been touted as reasons to discontinue PSA testing for prostate cancer.

**Overdiagnosis**is defined by the "Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Healthcare" as the diagnosis of a medical condition, disease, or disorder that would never have caused the patient an earlier death or any symptoms or clinical problems. Overdiagnosis is considered harmful if it leads to unnecessary treatments or causes the patient undue psychological stress or anxiety. It is not a misdiagnosis or a "false alarm," and it is an inevitable part of all screening tests to some degree.

The only way to eliminate overdiagnosis is to avoid all screening tests, as it is not possible to accurately predict the course or outcome of every disease discovered through screening nor foresee all other related and unrelated medical events that might occur to the patient in the future. The harmful effects of overdiagnosis can be minimized by carefully explaining, before PSA screening, that most men with an elevated PSA don't have cancer and that the vast majority of prostate cancers discovered by PSA testing never need treatment or cause the patient any harm. Screening tests like PSA are never urgent, so there is plenty of time for patients to review the available information on screening and carefully consider their options.

For many patients, the choice boils down to one of the following:

- Conduct regular screening tests even if that risks possible overdiagnosis of indolent cancers that might result in procedures or treatments that can cause psychological or physical harm.

- Avoiding screening tests will eliminate overdiagnosis and potentially uncomfortable treatments. However, it also means that a potentially serious cancer would only be discovered at a later stage when curative treatment is no longer effective or available.

**Overtreatment**of indolent prostatic cancers can cause significant physical harm, dramatically decrease quality of life, and may ultimately not provide any survival benefit to the patient.

**"Unnecessary" biopsies**can be minimized by the optimal use of pre-biopsy tools and procedures. Prostate biopsies can be uncomfortable and lead to prolonged bleeding and infections, but they are also the only way to definitively diagnose prostate cancer which is a potentially lethal but curable disease if caught early. Using age-adjusted PSA normal ranges and limiting PSA screenings only to those likely to benefit from treatment will help. The increasing use of MRI scans and risk stratification bioassays can eliminate 25% to 30% or more of low-yield biopsies by better identifying patients unlikely to have clinically significant (Gleason grade 4) disease.

It has been suggested that there is no such thing as an "unnecessary" biopsy, as all biopsies are done to establish a definitive diagnosis which is what a prostate biopsy accomplishes. It is disingenuous to suggest that any biopsy is "unnecessary" just because the result is negative; otherwise, all biopsies with negative results could also be considered "unnecessary." The negative effects of overdiagnosis can be substantially mitigated by carefully avoiding the treatment of indolent cancers. This can be accomplished by following the established guidelines and recommendations related to low-grade, low-stage prostate cancers, optimally utilizing MRI scans and risk stratification bioassays, fully implementing active surveillance protocols where appropriate, and avoiding screenings in patients who would not benefit from them, such as those who would refuse biopsies and treatment, individuals with a life expectancy of fewer than ten years, and asymptomatic patients over the age of 75.