Due to the frequency of utilization of survival analysis in medical literature, healthcare providers must understand common concepts and analyses associated with these techniques, including Kaplan-Meier, log-rank tests, and Cox proportional hazards models.

Survival analysis is used with a binary or dichotomous outcome of interest.

**Censoring**

Censoring is an important topic in survival analysis. Censored subjects never experienced the outcome of interest during the study specified timeframe. Whether or not an individual is censored should not be associated with whether or not the event occurred.

**Life Tables**

Life tables (also known as actuarial life tables) differ from other methods of survival analysis in that the observation outputs categorize into distinct time events.

******Kaplan-Meier Method**

One of the most frequently used methods of survival analysis is the Kaplan-Meier (KM) approach. The KM method estimates the likelihood of survival.

**Log-rank**

The log-rank test is a non-parametric test that compares two or more groups’ survival distributions.Wilcoxon rank-sum test can compare survival times.

**Cox Proportional Hazard Model**

The Cox proportional hazards model is a semiparametric regression model that allows researchers to examine the effects of multiple variables on survival curves.

Hazard, or the hazard function, refers to the chances of an event/outcome to occur within a unit of time, assuming that the subject has survived up to that time.

An important assumption made by the Cox model is that the proportional hazards between the variables remain steady over time. Cox hazard models allow researchers to adjust for confounders and to form relative risk (RR) for individuals to experience an event based on risk factors.