There are roughly 5,000 work-related deaths in the United States each year and millions of injuries, which is significantly reduced relative to OSHA intervention, but still a significant cause of concern which OSHA attempts to negate.

The physical hazards include oxidizing solids, liquids, and gases; flammable solids, liquids, gases, and aerosols; explosives; gases under pressure; self-reactive substances; self-heating substances; pyrophoric solids and liquids; substances that emit a flammable gas when in contact with water; organic peroxides; and corrosive to metals.

The health hazard warnings include acute toxicity; single and repeated exposure target organ toxicity; skin corrosion or irritation; eye damage or irritation; respiratory and skin sensitization; aspiration hazard germ cell mutagenicity; reproductive toxicology; and carcinogenicity. Finally, the single environmental hazard is if the chemical is hazardous to the environment acutely or chronically. Each chemical should be stored in a labeled container with the designated symbol that signifies the specific physical and health hazards associated with exposure.

Additionally, OSHA requires a detailed safety data sheet also be provided with specifics on the chemical that include: identification; hazard identification; composition, first-aid, firefighting and accidental release measures; handling and storage; physical and chemical properties; stability and reactivity; ingredient information; exposure controls/personal protection; disposal considerations; and information on toxicology, ecology, transport, and regulations.

The OSHA HCS was developed to provide employees with information on the chemical they are handling. OSHA requires employers to adhere to HCS by implementing the following standards:

- Inform the employees of the specific hazardous chemicals they can expect to be exposed to in the workplace. Importantly, this includes any possible exposures, whether as part of the normal role or by accident. The health and physical hazards associated with the chemical should also be shared.

- In addition to informing employees, employers must also provide appropriate training to employees who will handle a hazardous chemical. This must occur when the employee begins a new position, or a new hazardous chemical will be used as part of their role.

- Employees must be trained on specific protective measures determined by the employer to minimize exposures.

- Develop and maintain a written plan for communicating chemical hazards.

- Maintain safety data sheets for each hazardous chemical.

- Maintain an inventory of chemicals on-site and ensure that a warning label is written in English and is included on the container where the chemical is being stored. The required contents of the hazard label are described next.

The OSHA HCS has recently changed from the performance-based standards set in the 1990s to a more structured labeling system designed to provide brief visual warnings for the user so they quickly know the hazards of the chemical. Requirements for the label include:

- The name, address, and phone number of the chemical’s manufacturer.

- The identifying name, code, or batch number of the chemical.

- Signal words indicating the severity of the hazard.

- “Danger” is used when the severity of the hazard is high.
- “Warning” is used when the severity of the hazard is low.

- Hazard statements regarding the nature of the hazard, including the type of contact necessary to inflict the hazardous reaction and the physical, health, and environmental hazards of the chemical.

- Precautionary statements describe specific steps to minimize exposures and hazardous effects, steps to take depending on the nature and bodily location of the exposure, how to store the chemical, signs, and symptoms that indicate the need to seek medical attention how to dispose of the chemical.

- Pictograms include a red diamond-shaped frame with an image specific to the chemical hazard within the frame. These pictograms are meant to quickly notify the user of the most pertinent hazards. These pictograms are displayed as:

- Health hazards include carcinogenic, mutagenic, respiratory sensitizers, or induce reproductive, organ, or aspiration toxicity.
- Flame, which warns of chemicals that are flammable, pyrophoric, self-heating, emitters of flammable gas, self-reactive, or organic peroxides.
- Exclamation mark, which warns of chemicals being skin, eye, or respiratory tract irritants, skin sensitizers, inducers of nonfatal acute toxicity, narcotic-like, or a non-mandatory label of a hazard to the ozone layer.
- Gas cylinder, which indicates the gas is under pressure.
- Corrosion, warns that the chemical can cause skin corrosion or burns, eye tissue damage, or corrosion to metals.
- Exploding bomb, which warns that the chemical is explosive, self-reactive, or an organic peroxide.
- Flame over a circle, which indicates the chemical is an oxidizer.
- Skull and crossbones, which indicate the chemical can induce acute toxicity that can be fatal.
- Environment, which indicates the chemical causes aquatic toxicity. This pictogram is required by the GHS but by OSHA.

A concern that has arisen in recent years is the misclassification of chemicals and misinterpretation of chemical hazard communication signage. In fact, improvements could be made to harmonize the classification system internationally and the criteria for selecting an expert who determines the classification of a chemical.

Further standardization of the classification process is likely warranted. Interpretation of the chemical hazard information associated with a specific chemical label is also of concern, as prior reports have shown that level of education, prior training, and the inclusion of the GHS pictogram associated with a chemical hazard as factors influencing the interpretation of a chemical hazard.

Based on these results, additional steps to provide improved initial and longitudinal training for employees on the hazards of certain chemicals and the label warnings associated with them may be beneficial for identifying hazards.

Specific to the healthcare field, the clinical pathology laboratory is the area of the hospital that works most intimately with hazardous chemicals.

Proper labeling, handling, and personal protective equipment for the risks associated with the chemicals being used should be considered a top priority for the short- and long-term health and safety of all clinical laboratory staff members.