# Continuing Education Activity

Elbow dislocations are a common large joint dislocation experienced in children and adults. They can occur with associated fractures or damage to surrounding supporting structures. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of elbow dislocations and reviews the role of the interprofessional healthcare team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the typical patterns and common patient presentations with elbow dislocations. 
- Summarize the treatment considerations for patients with elbow dislocations. 
- Describe and review common complications of patients with elbow dislocations. 
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients affected by elbow dislocations.

# Introduction

The elbow is among the most common large joints to dislocate. Dislocations may be isolated, involve damage to static supportive structures of the elbow, and may even cause fractures about the elbow. Because of this, it is important to recognize elbow dislocations and know the appropriate management to avoid any complications.

Simply put, the elbow is the articulation between the distal humerus with the proximal ulna and radius.

The anatomy of the ulna allows two articulations and serves as an area of attachment for many structures. The greater sigmoid notch of the ulna creates the ulnotrochlear joint, and the lesser sigmoid notch creates the proximal radioulnar joint. The proximal anterior surface of the ulna also contains the coronoid process. The anteromedial facet (called the sublime tubercle) creates the insertion point for the medial collateral ligament, specifically, the anterior bundle.

The elbow is generally stable due to the congruity articular surfaces. It is further supported by static supporting structures, including the collateral ligaments on the medial and lateral side of the elbow and the joint capsule.  Dynamic stabilizers of the joints are composed of the surrounding musculature.

The vascular anatomy of the elbow is composed of a few structures. The brachial artery is a central component of the anterior elbow and eventually divides into the radial and ulnar artery in the proximal forearm. The radial and ulnar artery, along with the brachial and the deep brachial artery, comprise an intricate anastomosis of vessels around the elbow, including the radial and ulnar collateral arteries and the radial and ulnar recurrent arteries.

There are many nerves that exist around the elbow, and whose function can be compromised by an elbow dislocation. The radial nerve runs in the posterior compartment of the arm in the radial groove of the humerus and wraps laterally to its position near the elbow, where it is anterior to the lateral epicondyle.

# Etiology

Falling onto an outstretched hand is the most common mechanism leading to elbow dislocations.

Importantly, soft-tissue structures can also undergo compromise during an elbow dislocation. Disruption of supportive structures occurs, from lateral to medial, called the “Horii circle.”

Elbow dislocations differentiate by the direction of the olecranon relative to the humerus. Posterolateral, posteromedial, posterior, anterior, medial, and lateral are different possibilities. Posterolateral is the most common pattern of dislocation.

Dislocations can also be complete or subluxated (also referred to as perched). A perched dislocation shows the coronoid resting on the trochlea instead of complete dissociation, as seen in a complete dislocation.

Finally, dislocations can be termed simple or complex. A simple dislocation involves injury to only capsular or ligamentous structures. A complex dislocation involves fractures of the surrounding bony structure.

# Epidemiology

Elbow dislocations represent the second most common large joint dislocation.

The second decade age group also accounts for nearly half (43.5%) of the elbow dislocations. Age is inversely proportional to elbow dislocation rates: as age increases, elbow dislocation rates decrease. Over half of dislocation events occur at home, followed by at work and at school. The most popular sports with elbow dislocations from highest to lowest rates are football, roller-blading or skateboarding, and wrestling.

# History and Physical

Objective evaluation should begin with a visual inspection of the elbow, looking for any obvious deformity or malpositioning of the extremity.  The elbow should have an assessment for any palpable effusion, and skin also inspected for ecchymosis. Next, the patient's elbow should be palpated to evaluate for any tenderness.

Subsequently, the neurovascular status of the extremity requires documentation. It is rare for arterial or neurologic injury to occur with elbow dislocations. However, it is crucial to document due to potential changes in neurovascular status after a reduction attempt.

Therefore, the function of the motor nerves is an essential part of the physical exam and requires testing in patients who have sustained an elbow dislocation. The median nerve is evaluated by checking the function of the flexor digitorum superficialis, or by asking the patient to make a fist.

# Evaluation

The examiner must understand the direction of the dislocation before attempting reduction.

Post-reduction films are ordered to evaluate concentric reduction of the joint and to evaluate for any associated fractures.

# Treatment / Management

Attempting closed reduction of the elbow is the initial management of choice.

Generally, reduction requires appropriate intravenous sedation and relaxation of the patient, often administered by a team in the emergency department. If there is displacement of the elbow in a medial or lateral direction, the displacement first gets translated before the application of longitudinal traction of the forearm. As posterolateral dislocations are most common, the elbow is often extended.

After reduction, elbow stability requires assessment by performing a gentle range of motion in flexion/extension, valgus/varus, as well as pronation/supination.

A repeat neurovascular assessment is then performed to assure no arterial or nerve injuries due to reduction. A brachial artery injury or median nerve entrapment may occur, which can lead to operative management with exploration.

After adequate reduction with a stable joint, patients can proceed with non-operative management with posterior long-arm splinting, usually in 90 degrees of flexion. Follow-up in the outpatient clinic allows for further radiographs to evaluate the maintenance of the reduction and that it remains stable. After two weeks, if the joint is stable, the splint can be removed, and physical therapy is initiated utilizing range of motion exercises to help avoid loss of terminal extension. In a less stable joint, the splint will remain, and the use of extension blocking splints can allow early flexion.

Surgical management is required only in a few situations. If the dislocation is unable to be reduced, closed reduction under anesthesia in the operating room is a possible option, as muscular relaxation is difficult to reproduce with sedation in the emergency department.

Another indication for surgery is if the elbow is unstable with extension during range of motion, exhibited by dislocation once the elbow reaches 50 to 60 degrees of extension.

Surgery is also necessary if there are any associated unstable fractures with a complex elbow dislocation.

# Differential Diagnosis

Elbow dislocations are often a clinical presentation confirmed by radiographs. The patient's elbow, as well as surrounding bony structures, should be palpated to evaluate for any tenderness.

Chronic elbow dislocation is another differential. Chronic elbow dislocations are elbows that have remained dislocated for more than two weeks. It is essential to determine if there is a history of instability, previous attempts at reduction, or multiple episodes of dislocation. Ulnar neuropraxia in chronic dislocations occurs in 15% of patients. Due to this, fibrosis of the surrounding structures is common, and reduction is often difficult. Surgical intervention with open reduction is generally necessary due to extensive fibrosis and granulation tissue that can be present within the joint. Surgery often involves anterior and posterior capsule release and release of any surrounding fibrotic areas. Patients may also require triceps lengthening procedures or transposition of the ulnar nerve.

# Prognosis

It is not uncommon for patients to lose 10 to 15 degrees of terminal extension. Limiting the time of immobilization to less than three weeks can help to avoid contracture. Dynamic elbow splinting along with therapy can be used if the patient is not improving at an expected rate. It may take up to 5 months for patients to regain extension. If these fail, surgical intervention for contracture release may be required.

In children, the prognosis after elbow dislocation is usually more optimistic. Children generally have lower rates of contracture and loss of motion and have a higher tendency to regain normal elbow function.

# Complications

One of the most common complications with elbow injuries is loss of range of motion. In particular, extension loss is the most common and is usually related to the time of immobilization in a static splint. Greater than 25 days of immobilization can lead to a loss of 30 degrees in extension and nearly 20 degrees in flexion. Extrinsic causes may be due to flexion contracture of the anterior capsule, or contracture of the collateral ligaments and the surrounding musculature.

Ectopic bone formation is common, but is usually periarticular and does not block motion.

Elbow instability is another common complication. Due to the mechanism of injury, the laterality and involvement of ligaments can change and requires appropriate management. Lateral collateral ligament insufficiency is common, leading to valgus instability, and is treatable with the patient in a pronated position during splinting to allow soft tissue to heal.

Neurovascular injury from acute elbow dislocations is uncommon; however, ulnar nerve neuropraxia is the most commonly reported. Patients typically undergo observation, as these injuries generally resolve following closed reduction. Other neuropraxia such as median nerve and anterior interosseous nerve occur less frequently. Median nerve entrapment can occur, especially in the pediatric population, and is commonly associated with entrapment in the fracture site or posterior to a displaced medial epicondyle, which may be visible on radiographs as a widening of a medial condyle due to the median nerve displacing it, or neuropraxia may be apparent after closed reduction. Median nerve involvement after closed reduction requires open exploration. In patients that have an observed neuropraxia, electromyography is ordered only after three months of persistent symptoms. Lastly, brachial artery injury can occur. Initial assessment of pulse and perfusion is important, and if absent requires emergent reduction. Pulses often return following closed reduction. In patients without return of pulses or perfusion, the clinician should have a high suspicion of vascular injury.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Certain activities are more prone to elbow dislocations due to the nature of the forces encountered. The most common sports being football, roller-blading or skateboarding, and wrestling.

Patients quite commonly lose 10-15 degrees of terminal extension after elbow dislocations.

Lastly, elbow dislocations are the most common large joint dislocation in children.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Pediatric elbow dislocations have many similarities to adult elbow dislocations. However, in children, medial epicondyle fractures may occur. Up to 60% of medial epicondyle fractures are associated with elbow dislocations in children. Importantly, the medial epicondyle is the last ossification center in the distal humerus to fuse, anywhere from 15 to 20 years old. The medial epicondyle serves as the common flexor origin and the origin of the inferior aspect of the medial collateral ligament, leaving it vulnerable to avulsion injuries. It also lays anterior to the ulnar nerve.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional care is fundamental to the treatment of patients with elbow dislocation. If an elbow dislocation occurs on the field of a sporting event, a member of the healthcare team may be able to reduce it immediately.

Plain radiographs of the elbow are needed to understand the direction of the dislocation, including anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique views.

Closed reduction is often the initial management, and likely to occur in the emergency department (ED).

A quality improvement study from Boston Children's Hospital looked at ways to reduce this, including meetings involving clinical assistants, emergency department physicians, orthopedic physicians, and nurses. They initiated new strategies, roles, and checklists to attempt to improve efficiency. They found a 5.8% decrease in length of stay in patients requiring sedation for long bone fracture reduction; this also allowed the engagement of interprofessional personnel to help increase efficiency together.