Before initiating this drug, laboratory tests are necessary to assess and document coagulation status, including platelet count, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), and bleeding time. Also, as a baseline and for potential dose adjustment in the event of renal or hepatic insufficiency, liver function tests and serum creatinine should be measured. Routine coagulation testing is not necessary for rivaroxaban. Assessment of renal function and CBC before initiation, when clinically indicated, and at least annually is essential in all patients.

There are several clinical settings in which obtaining a drug level is desired. These include:

- Emergent bleeding or surgery

- Checking adherence to appropriate therapy

- Continued thrombosis despite therapy

- Patients in the extremes of weight and age

Although this drug does not require frequent monitoring, drug levels influence decisions about the timing of surgery among preoperative patients.

The drug levels are relatively predictable for a given dose, and there is no established therapeutic range. Currently, there are no FDA-approved calibration reagents or assays available to measure the drug level. The sensitivity of PT/aPTT is dependent on the laboratory performing the testing and the reagents utilized, although ultimately, the PT/aPTT is not reliably sensitive enough to detect the presence of rivaroxaban. Prolonged PT/aPTT should be assumed to be due to drug effect until proven otherwise. PT (measured with a reagent sensitive to rivaroxaban) may be useful for confirming the absence or presence of an anticoagulant effect (if the blood sampling time is known) when anti-factor Xa assays are not available.

If available, the preferred test for ruling out clinically significant serum concentrations and quantifying the anticoagulant effect is anti-factor Xa activity calibrated specifically for rivaroxaban (undetectable anti-Xa activity likely excludes clinically relevant drug concentrations). The International Council for Standardization in Haematology provides examples of rivaroxaban drug levels for the 20 mg once-daily dose, with an expected mean peak of approximately 249 to 270 ng/mL and an expected mean trough of approximately 26 to 44 ng/mL (Gosselin 2018). An anti-factor Xa assay calibrated for low molecular weight heparin can help rule out clinically relevant drug concentrations, but this is not useful for quantification (ACC