The patient should be placed in the dorsal lithotomy position. Then, a bimanual examination should be performed to assess the uterine size and position.

A bivalve or weighted speculum is placed in the vagina. If local anesthesia is used, then the cervix and lower uterine segment should be injected. Most commonly, 1% lidocaine is adequate. A tenaculum is used to grasp the anterior lip of the cervix and pull towards the introitus with the non-dominant hand. The traction will stabilize the uterus and reduce the cervicouterine angle to decrease the risk of uterine perforation. Routine use of uterine sound for cavity length does not benefit the procedure unless the uterus was not palpable on the initial bimanual examination.

The procedure is initiated by dilating the cervix with the smallest accommodating dilator; the dilator size is then sequentially increased. The dilator must pass through the external and internal os. Providers learn to identify this landmark with the loss of mild resistance under gentle pressure. The dilator should be held using only two fingers of the dominant hand, and force should not be excessive; excessive force may increase the risk of uterine perforation. The extent of dilation will be determined by the amount of tissue to be removed and the size of the chosen curette. After adequate dilation, the metal or plastic curette is inserted through the endocervical canal into the endometrial cavity and gently advanced to the uterine fundus.

Once the curette is appropriately placed at the uterine fundus, manual or electric suction may be applied. The curette is applied to the walls of the uterus and pulled from the fundus to the cervix while staying inside the uterine cavity during suction to limit any cervical damage. Rotate the curette 360 degrees while proceeding with a repetitive vertical pass motion from the fundus to the level of the internal os covering the entire uterine cavity.

A gritty texture indicates complete removal of the pregnancy or, in nonpregnant procedures, adequate sampling of the endometrium. In the pregnant D&C, there should be limited to no bleeding from the os with total removal of the pregnancy; this indicates the procedure is complete. If a gritty texture is present, but bleeding is seen, consider bimanual massage to treat possible uterine atony, retention of products, or uterine or cervical injury. Ultrasound can directly visualize the uterus while performing the procedure; this is not required. However, the ultrasound may provide a safety measure to prevent injury in patients with an abnormal endometrial cavity or when cervical dilation is difficult.