The initiation of treatment for patients who are symptomatic with concerns for BF is paramount. Early detection and prompt treatment may shorten the disease course and reduce potential complications. Treatment is not to be delayed waiting for confirmatory lab testing. The current treatment of choice for all rickettsial infections is doxycycline. This includes pediatric and pregnant patients. Standard adult dosing is 100 mg twice daily for 7 to 10 days. This is routinely done on an outpatient basis if given within five days of symptom onset, and the disease is mild. Pediatric dosing is 2.2 mg/kg twice daily for children under 45 kg. Doxycycline was previously avoided in the pediatric and pregnant population due to possible side effects of dental staining in children and the risk of teratogenicity on the developing fetus. Recent studies have shown relative safety using doxycycline in these populations, especially with a short treatment duration being used for BF and other rickettsial infections.

Contraindications to using doxycycline include severe allergic reaction and history of hepatotoxicity with prior use. In these cases, azithromycin is recommended for use in mild cases for pregnant and pediatric patients as a second-line agent. For more severe cases or pregnant females, chloramphenicol use is indicated. Dosing of azithromycin is 500 mg daily for 7 to 10 days, and 10 mg/kg in pediatrics, with a maximum dose of 500 mg. Chloramphenicol dosing is 50 mg/kg daily, divided into four doses. Azithromycin can be used if a pregnant woman is unable to take doxycycline or chloramphenicol. Fluoroquinolones have been used in the past, but are associated with worse overall outcomes, and their use is no longer recommended.