**Dosage Formulations**

There are many commercially available 20% intravenous lipid emulsion preparations. The most prevalent formulations have 100% long-chain fatty acids derived from soybean oil. Others in the market contain 50% medium-chain fatty acids from coconut oil and 50% long-chain fatty acids from soybean oil. Nevertheless, newer formulations such as that introduce other fatty acid sources from olive and fish oils.

- The formulations with 100% long-chain fatty acids contain linoleic acid (53%), oleic acid (24%), palmitic acid (11%), alpha-linolenic acid (8%), and stearic acid (4%).

- The formulations with 50% medium-chain triglycerides contain caprylic acid (28.5%), capric acid (20%), lauric acid (1%), and caproic acid (0.5%), and the long-chain fatty acids in the formulations contain linoleic acid (29.1%), oleic acid (11% ), palmitic acid (7.4%), alpha-linolenic acid (4.5%), and stearic acid (2%).

- Other formulations with 50% MCT / 50% LTC contain 30% coconut oil, 30% soybean oil, 25% olive oil, and 15% fish oil.

- ILE is also available in 20% soybean oil and 80% olive oil combination.

ILE formulated from 100% long-chain fatty acids and derived from soybean oil appears to be the predominant ILE in research studies and clinical use for LAST. It is the recommended lipid emulsion by ASRA for LAST treatment.

**Dose**

ASRA has published guidelines for LAST, including recommendations for ILE therapy.

- For patients over 70 kilograms, a rapid 100 mL bolus of 20% lipid emulsion followed by another 200 to 250 mL infusion over 15 to 20 minutes is the recommended course.

- For patients below 70 kilograms, a rapid 1.5 mL/kg (of lean body weight) bolus of 20% lipid emulsion followed by a 0.25 mL/kg/minute infusion should start.

- The same bolus dose is repeatable, along with doubling the infusion rate if cardiovascular instability continues. The recommended dosing limit is approximately 12 mL/kg.

- Propofol, which is reconstituted in 10% lipid emulsion, is not an acceptable ILE therapy alternative for LAST as a much larger volume of 10% lipid emulsion would be needed to match the effects of the more concentrated 20% emulsion. Also, the cardio depressant effects of propofol would worsen hemodynamic instability.