The stylopharyngeus muscle forms a part of a significant anatomical structure known as stylopharyngeal septum (styloid diaphragm). While entering the pharyngeal spaces, this septum is considered to be an important surgical landmark.

Also, the stylopharyngeus septum divides the parapharyngeal space into two compartments (retrostyloid and prestyloid). The presence of any deep-lobe parotid tumors or any ectopic salivary gland tumors specifically occupies the prestyloid space. Their growth may displace other significant anatomic structures posteriorly. In such cases, stylopharyngeus muscle and the styloglossus muscle can be considered as the safe posterior boundary during dissection as they protect the significant anatomic structures of the retrostyloid space.

During the surgery for neurogenic tumor of the cranial nerves, the superior control of the internal carotid artery can be achieved by dissecting the area present between the stylopharyngeus muscle and the styloglossus muscle.

Glossopharyngeal nerve anesthesia bilaterally produces a dysfunction of the stylopharyngeus muscle resulting in the collapse of the dorsal wall of the nasopharynx.

Occasionally, the stylopharyngeus muscle may compress the cervical part of the internal carotid artery. The patient may mimic symptoms of Eagle syndrome, which is usually due to an elongated styloid process. In such cases, routine radiographs would not be useful in symptomatic patients as the styloid process would appear to be normal. The compression may only be visible on CT angiography or conventional angiography. The level of compression is usually medial and distal to the styloid process. It may occur only with head rotation.