A range of factors needs to be considered before referring a patient for hearing aid fitting.

**Audiology**

Pure tone audiometry (PTA) indicates the type, extent, and laterality of loss. PTA data informs the number of hearing aids (unilateral or bilateral) and the type of hearing aid needed (some hearing aids cannot amplify sufficiently for severe-profound hearing loss or perform better across certain frequencies). Bilateral hearing aids may improve speech recognition and localization but can increase interference, are cosmetically less pleasing, and are more expensive.

Conductive deficits resultant of acute infection or wax should not be treated with a hearing aid. Audiologists' further tests to inform hearing aid programming include speech audiometry results and uncomfortable loudness levels (ULLs) to establish the patient’s dynamic range; the range in sound pressure level (dB SPL) between the patient’s hearing thresholds and the point at which sounds become uncomfortably loud. Hearing aids generally work better in patients with a large dynamic range.

**Anatomy**

A further factor to consider is the patient's ear anatomy, which can vary significantly. The pinna has to be able to support the processor and battery, and the custom made earmould. The ear canal needs to be wide enough to accommodate hearing aid components. Cases of pinna atresia or canal stenosis/atresia may require invasive hearing aids, not covered in this chapter.

**Patient Factors**

Importantly, the lifestyle, concerns, and expectations of the hearing aid user should be explored. The communication needs of each user will vary, including the setting (occupational or social) and frequency of communication. There may also be concerns regarding cost, cosmesis, sound quality, and the level of dexterity required to operate the hearing aid.