**Irritant contact dermatitis**

It is due to sufficient inflammation arising from the release of proinflammatory cytokines from keratinocytes, usually in response to chemical stimuli. It mainly causes skin barrier disruption, epidermal cellular changes, and cytokine release.

Irritants can be classified as cumulatively toxic (e.g., hand soap causing irritant dermatitis in a hospital employee), subtoxic, degenerative, or toxic (e.g., hydrofluoric acid exposure at a chemical plant).

**Allergic contact dermatitis**

It is T-cell mediated inflammation of the skin caused by repeated skin exposure to haptens in a sensitized individual.

Allergic contact dermatitis has two phases. The sensitization phase in which antigen-specific effector T cells are induced in the draining lymph nodes by antigen captured cutaneous dendritic cells that migrate from the skin. The elicitation phase includes effector T cells that are activated in the skin by antigen captured cutaneous dendritic cells and produce various chemical mediators, which create antigen-specific inflammation.

Photo contact dermatitis occurs when an allergen becomes an irritant in the presence of light.

Contact urticaria usually presents with a 'wheal and flare' reaction after exposure to the offending topical agent. While most cases are mild, anaphylactic reactions can occur. Some common types of contact urticaria include exposure to cold, dermatographism, pressure, exercise, solar, heat and cholinergic.

Contact dermatitis can also occur after exposure to plants of the Urticaceae family.