**Timing of Palliative Sedation**

Determining the most appropriate time to initiate palliative sedation is often a challenging process.

**Understanding Proportional Treatment and the Doctrine of “Double Effect”**

The goal of palliative sedation is to relieve intractable symptoms and not to keep the patient unresponsive. Thus the concept of proportional treatment must be understood while using palliative sedation. Medications such as benzodiazepines, opiates, and antipsychotics are often used to alleviate patients' respiratory distress, agitation, and anxiety and cause sedation. However, it should be noted that the dose and frequency with which these medications should be used should be titrated and always be proportional to the desired clinical benefit. There are certain extreme cases when a patient has to be given a high dose of sedatives; keeping them obtunded is the only way to alleviate their symptoms, e.g., extreme agitation or seizures. However, in most instances, continuous sedation aims to manage intractable symptoms and observe for an adequate response, not merely to keep the patient sedated.

An additional ethical concept that needs to be understood regarding the use of palliative sedation is the doctrine of “double effect.” This doctrine originated from Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century, and it parallels the principles of beneficence and non-maleficence.

This doctrine asserts the follows:

“An action in the pursuit of a good outcome is acceptable, even if it is achieved through means with an unintended but foreseeable negative outcome if that negative outcome is outweighed by the good outcome.”

Some recent studies have shown that palliative sedation is safe in terminally ill patients is not associated with an increased risk of death. However, it is important to highlight the use of potential risks of excess sedation. Palliative sedation can be associated with an increased risk of aspiration, respiratory depression, and worsening agitation due to delirium. These adverse outcomes are unintended effects of therapy and not the primary intended outcome in palliative sedation. Thus, as per the doctrine of “double effect,” as long as the patient, family, and physicians are aware of the potential adverse effects coupled with palliative sedation, it can be administered without any hesitation.

**Initiating Goals of Care Discussion with Patients, Family Members, or Surrogates**

Clinicians and health care workers must identify terminally ill patients with poor prognosis and refractory symptoms who are likely to benefit from palliative sedation. Prior studies have demonstrated several communication barriers and misconceptions in both physicians and patients/family members regarding end-of-life issues.

**Discussing Ongoing Care and Obtaining Consent**

After a thorough goals-of-care discussion, written or verbal consent must be documented from the patient regarding their willingness to initiate palliative sedation. For patients who cannot communicate their wishes due to a decreased level of consciousness or nonverbal state, we must follow the patient's advance directives, or if there is no advance directive, consent must be obtained from a legally recognized proxy. Patients and families should be assured that being started on palliative sedation does not imply that any ongoing medical or nursing care that has been beneficial to the patient will be withdrawn by default. In fact, detailed goals of care discussion should address what therapies would be added or continued for the patient's care and which can be discontinued. For example, there should be a detailed discussion regarding issues such as feeding and artificial nutrition in terminally ill patients. Clinicians should clearly explain the prognosis and life expectancy and discuss with patients/family members whether it is prudent to continue feeding tubes and nutrition (e.g., the life expectancy of weeks to months where feeding tubes might help in providing hydration and nutrition) or to discontinue it entirely to limit patient distress (life expectancy of hours to days).