**Pineocytoma:**

- Relatively good prognosis.

- If treated surgically, they have an excellent prognosis when complete resection is achieved (which is most of the time as they are well-circumscribed lesions).

- Five-year survival of 86% to 91%.

**Pineal parenchymal tumor with intermediate differentiation:**

- Prognosis is between that of pineocytoma and pineoblastoma.

- They are more likely to present with localized disease.

- Median overall survival of 165 months (vs. 77 months for pineoblastoma) with a median progression-free survival of 93 months (vs. 46 months for pineoblastoma).

**Pineoblastoma:**

- It is the most aggressive of the pineal parenchymal tumors.

- Median overall survival time, reaching 4 to 8 years.

- The 5-year overall survival rates vary from 10% to 81%.

- Prognosis is negatively affected based on:

- 
              
- Dissemination of disease at the time of diagnosis
              
              
- Young patient age.
              
              
- Partial surgical resection.

- Chemotherapy treatment and the possible addition of stem cells can provide a better outcome.

**Papillary tumor of the pineal region:**

- Local recurrences often affect prognosis.

- The 5-year overall and progression-free survival rate were 73% and 27%, respectively.

- Gross total resection and younger patient age are associated with improved overall survival; radiotherapy and chemotherapy had no significant impact.

- Screening of the entire neural axis is required as CSF dissemination occurs in up to 7% of cases.

**Germinoma:**

- Remarkably radiosensitive, with long-term survival rates of > 90% after craniospinal irradiation.

- The addition of chemotherapy to treatment regimens may provide comparable tumor control at lower radiation doses and field volumes.

- The leptomeningeal or intraventricular spread is not uncommon at the time of diagnosis, occurring in 13%.

**Mature teratoma:**

- Curable by complete surgical excision.

**Immature teratoma:**

- Along with germinoma, occupy an intermediate position in terms of biological behavior.

- The size and location determine prognosis.

**Embryonal carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, and yolk sac tumor (endodermal sinus):**

- These are the most aggressive germ cell tumors.

- Survival rates as high as 60-70% can be achieved with combined chemotherapy and irradiation. Local recurrence and CSF dissemination are the usual patterns of progression.