In 1970, the United States established the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), which ultimately led to the development of recommended acceptable levels of volatile anesthetics not confined to the breathing circuit.  In test samples measuring levels of pollutants over a defined period, halogenated agents are deemed occupationally acceptable at concentrations of 2 ppm and nitrous oxide at 25 ppm. However, if using a mixed combination of agents, then the recommended limit is 0.5 ppm.  It is worth noting that this recommendation has its basis on techniques available in 1977 and that these levels represent the lowest detectable levels using those techniques.  More recent recommendations suggest levels of nitrous oxide and sevoflurane can reach 50 ppm without significant detriment.

The WAGD system has four parts: the relief valve, which allows gas to leave the breathing circuit, conducting tubing, and the receiving and disposal elements.  Two main classes of WAGD systems exist: active and passive.  Active systems utilize fans, vacuums, or a venturi design to generate a pressure gradient that drives gases toward the collection unit.  Because of the potential for barotrauma, these systems must possess a pressure-relief device such as the adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve.  Passive systems rely on the gas to diffuse independently along a large diameter tube to the collection unit or the hospital’s ventilation system.  Open systems refer to receiving elements that have ports permitting passage of gas from the environment into the scavenging circuit, whereas closed systems are an arrangement of valves, pipes, or tubes, and a reservoir that receives gas flows from the ventilator portion of the machine.