There are many ways to perform a splenectomy. The splenectomy can be performed open or laparoscopically.

**Key Steps in the Open Approach**

- Place the patient in the supine position

- Time-out to verify correct patient, procedure, site, and any additional information

- Endotracheal intubation

- Ensure adequate lines/tubes (arterial lines, foley catheter, nasogastric tube or orogastric, sequential compression devices) placement

- Prep and drape the abdomen in a sterile fashion

- Make a vertical midline incision extending from the xiphoid process to the pubic symphysis or a left subcostal incision approximately two fingerbreadths below the costal margin extending from midline to anterior axillary line deepened through the skin, subcutaneous tissue, fascia layers, into the peritoneal cavity

- Inspect all four quadrants of the abdomen

- Placement of Omni/Bookwalter retractor to aid in visualization

- Lysis of adhesions

- Incise the gastrocolic ligament to enter into the lesser sac

- Divide and ligate the gastrosplenic and splenocolic ligaments

- Mobilize the spleen medially to expose the retroperitoneal attachments

- Divide and ligate the splenorenal and splenophrenic ligament

- Ligate the splenic artery and vein near the hilum using suture ligation or vascular load stapler. Avoid injuries to the pancreatic tail when dividing the vessels.

- Carefully pass the spleen off the field. Careful to prevent any spillage which can lead to splenosis (breakage and implantation of splenic tissue in other places)

- Obtain hemostasis

- If pancreatic injuries are noted, consider placing a closed-suction drain.

- Examine for the accessory spleen. The most common location to be found is in the hilum. Resect any accessory spleens

- Close the fascia and reapproximate the skin edges with staples or running subcuticular

**Key Steps in the Laparoscopic Approach:**

- Place the patient in the supine position.

- Time-out to verify correct patient, procedure, site, and additional information

- General anesthesia induction

- The patient can be placed in a supine position or in the right lateral decubitus position. Ensure that all pressure points are padded properly

- Ensure lines/tubes (arterial lines, foley catheter, nasogastric tube or orogastric, sequential compression devices) placed properly

- Prep and drape the abdomen in a sterile fashion

- Entry into the abdomen using Veress needle, Hassan cannula, or Optical view trocar

- Establish pneumoperitoneum

- Place the laparoscopic and inspect the abdomen to ensure no injuries from initial trocar placement.

- Place additional ports along the left costal margin.

- Inspect the abdomen

- Divide the splenocolic ligament

- Dissect the peritoneal attachments

- Entry into the lesser sac, and divide the short gastric arteries.

- Dissect the splenic hilum and ligate the splenic vessels using a vascular stapler. Avoid injuries to the pancreatic tail when dividing the vessels.

- Divide the remaining attachments

- Place the spleen in an endoscopic retrieval bag and remove it through the trocar.If the spleen is too large, morcellation with ring forceps may be required. Careful to prevent any spillage which can lead to splenosis

- Inspect the abdomen and obtain good hemostasis

- Evacuate the pneumoperitoneum and remove all the trocars

- Fascia closure of port sites to prevent incisional hernias and reapproximate the skin incisions