The differential diagnosis for myasthenia gravis include the following:

- **Lambert-Eaton syndrome**is a fluctuating weakness that improves with exercise, differentiating it from MG. This is usually due to underlying malignancy, most commonly small-cell lung cancer. It affects voltage-gated calcium channels in the presynaptic membrane.

- **Cavernous sinus thrombosis**can present with persistent ocular findings, photophobia, chemosis, and headaches. It is usually abrupt in onset but can be fulminant, and causes can be septic or aseptic.

- **Brainstem gliomas**are malignant tumors that present with bulbar symptoms, weakness, numbness, balance problems, and seizures depending on its location and structures affected. The symptoms are persistent and usually present with headaches and signs of increased intracranial pressure.

- **Multiple sclerosis**can present with any neurological sign that may fluctuate or persist over hours to days to weeks secondary to demyelination in the central nervous system. This may present with weakness, sensory deficits, cognitive and behavioral issues. Weakness may be unilateral or bilateral and is usually accompanied by upper motor neuron signs like hyperreflexia, spasticity, and a positive Babinski.

- **Botulism**presents with ptosis, double vision, progressive weakness, and pupillary abnormalities accompanied by systemic symptoms. Ingestion of honey or contaminated foods may be elicited in the patient's history.

- **Tick-borne disease**presents with ascending paralysis and respiratory distress and decreased reflexes from a neurotoxin from the saliva of ticks. Minimal constitutional symptoms are seen. It can sometimes present with ophthalmoplegia and bulbar symptoms.

- **Polymyositis and dermatomyositis**cause proximal muscle weakness and is usually associated with pain. The pathology is the inflammation of the muscle itself.

- **Graves ophthalmopathy**presents with eyelid retraction and widened palpebral fissure. These are caused by autoantibodies targeted toward the structures of the eye.