The superior gluteal nerve, with its close relation to the superior aspect of the piriformis, accompanies the superior gluteal artery and vein. The superior gluteal artery is the largest of the branches of the internal iliac artery and exits the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen above the piriformis muscle. The superior gluteal veins run along with the superior gluteal artery and drain into the hypogastric or internal iliac vein.

Once past the notch, the superior gluteal artery divides into a superficial branch which supplies the gluteus maximus, and a deep branch which is found deep to the gluteus medius and subdivides into the superior and inferior divisions. The superior division travels along the superior border of the gluteus minimus towards the anterior superior iliac spine, eventually anastomosing with the deep iliac circumflex artery as well as the ascending branch of the lateral femoral circumflex artery. Moreover, the inferior division travels in an oblique fashion across the gluteus minimus towards the greater trochanter, subsequently giving off branches to the gluteal muscles and anastomosing with the lateral femoral circumflex artery. Hence, the superior gluteal artery is involved in the trochanteric anastomoses, providing a connection between the internal iliac and femoral arteries.

The superior gluteal artery passes out of the pelvis at a rather acute angle, which increases its vulnerability to a shearing force. The artery may also be compromised by the sharp fascia of the piriformis muscle during displaced fractures. Surgical procedures involving the greater sciatic foramen places the superior gluteal artery at risk for injury as well.