Treatments for familial hypertriglyceridemia focus on reducing triglyceride levels. Furthermore, if the patient has pathologic triglyceride levels, treating or removing secondary causes would be vital to maintain relatively normal lipid levels.

Current recommendations suggest evaluating mild and moderate hypertriglyceridemia for the evaluation of cardiovascular disease risk. Additionally, severe hypertriglyceridemia should be evaluated for possible pancreatitis development. Lastly, initial treatment of isolated severe hypertriglyceridemia should be initiated with fibrate therapy.

Specific treatments used for the management of hypertriglyceridemia include fibrates as first-line pharmacotherapy. Drugs like fenofibrate and gemfibrozil help activate LPL through PPAR-alpha leading to further breakdown of triglycerides. Fibrates have been shown to markedly reduce triglyceride levels by 50% and beyond, attributing to their efficacy and placement in the treatment protocol. However, caution must be noted during polypharmacy. A combination of fibrates with statins can exacerbate statin-induced side effects.

Nicotinic acid (niacin) can commonly be used as an adjunct to therapy. Adjunctive niacin is most useful in patients that are refractory to fibrate monotherapy and those at high risk for pancreatitis.

Another helpful supplement to better augment treatment is fish oil. Fish oil has shown a significant reduction of both VLDL and triglyceride levels.

New developments in the genetics of hypertriglyceridemia are showing promise in the ability to predict cardiovascular risk further.