During the procedure when the mediastinoscope is inserted, it can cause compression of the innominate artery. This can lead to a decrease in pulse oximeter signal and blood pressure when these are placed in the right upper extremity, as a result of the decreased blood flow to the extremity when the artery is compressed. Compression of the innominate artery can lead to intracerebral hypoperfusion which can in turn lead to cerebral ischemia and stroke.

Mediastinoscopy is not a benign procedure; the morbidity associated with the procedure is reported to be between 1.5% to 3%, with an overall mortality rate of 0.09%. Intraoperative complications can occur with mediastinoscopy and include bleeding, which is the most common complication of this procedure. Injury to the great vessels causes hemorrhage that can be life-threatening; an emergent thoracotomy or median sternotomy may be necessary to gain control of the hemorrhage while using the mediastinoscope to tamponade the site of bleeding. The procedure has a risk of air embolism given that the patient is in a head-up position/reverse Trendelenburg and the mediastinoscope can lead to vascular injury which could lead to air being entrained into the vascular system; this can be monitored via end-tidal CO2 and end-tidal nitrogen. Some recommend the use of precordial Doppler to monitor for any venous air embolism. Instrumentation can lead to airway rupture; however; this complication requires an immediate thoracotomy. During the procedure, the recurrent laryngeal nerve can be injured. The left is at more risk because of its more caudal path under the aorta. Bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve injury can lead to complete respiratory failure and the need to re-intubate and then perform a surgical airway on the patient. Damage to the thoracic duct can lead to chylothorax.

There are times when mediastinoscopy is indicated in the presence of an anterior mediastinal mass. It is important that surgeon, anesthesiologist, and operating room staff appreciate potential complications of the mass. The patient may not be able to lie flat, making endotracheal intubation more difficult. Even in the presence of successful intubation with proper airway placement, the airway may be compromised by the mass distal to the airway after muscle paralysis is induced. Therefore, it is recommended that muscle relaxants be avoided in high-risk patients and that the patient be intubated while spontaneously breathing either via a fiberoptic bronchoscope or direct/indirect laryngoscopy following mask induction. An otorhinolaryngology (ENT) surgeon competent with rigid bronchoscopy should be present if necessary to bypass the obstruction. Changing patient position from to supine or either lateral or prone may be a temporizing measure that relieves the obstruction of the mass on the airway. In cases where there is a large anterior mediastinal mass that may result in cardiovascular collapse with induction of anesthesia, cardiopulmonary bypass should be available.

Patients who have suspected airway obstruction due to a mediastinal mass on physical examination should undergo pulmonary function tests (PFTs) with flow-volume loops. The tests should be performed in both the upright and supine positions. If the PFTs show obstruction while supine during inhalation, the patient’s mass is extra-thoracic, if the obstruction occurs during expiration, the patient’s mass is intrathoracic. A review of CT imaging can be extremely helpful in evaluating any compression or deviation of the great vessels.

In patients with a large mediastinal mass, SVC syndrome may be present. Obstruction of the superior vena cava will cause facial swelling, distension of neck, development of collateral venous drainage along the thoracic wall. It associated with dyspnea and dysphagia commonly. Diagnostically, it can be seen on imaging. A positive Pemberton’s sign also characterizes it. A positive Pemberton’s sign occurs when a patient lifts both of their arms over their head in the upright position causing marked facial plethora to occur, indication profound compression of the jugular veins. It is important to have intravenous access in these patients in the lower extremities because of the resistance of upper extremity drainage being recirculated.