Heart failure is the major cause of death and a rapidly growing cardiovascular diagnosis in the era of advanced management of coronary artery disease.

The majority of patients with cardiomyopathy have conduction delays such as a left bundle branch block (LBBB), which results in electromechanical dyssynchrony. The resulting contractile dyssynchrony generates marked regional heterogeneity of myocardial work with the early stimulated region having reduced load and territories of late activation higher lead.

The CRT implantation is a complex procedure that requires operative skills and expertise, proper selection, and preparation of the patients. Therefore it is necessary to have a system to ensure the completion of all aspects of patient care. In pre-procedure care, in addition to discussing the risks and benefits of the procedure with the patient and family, the assessment must be done to ensure that patient meets the recommended criteria for the procedure. Proper sterile technique is fundamental to better outcomes in terms of device-related infection.

The placement of LV epicardial lead is the mainstay of CRT implantation. Successful resynchronization is achieved by placement of the LV lead in an appropriate tributary of CS, preferably at the site in the proximal third to the middle third of the LV.  Left ventricular lead positioned in the apical region is associated with unfavorable outcomes.

Patients need regular monitoring by trained nursing staff for complications. It is now recommended to have a multidisciplinary team approach that may include a primary care provider,  cardiac electrophysiologist, heart failure, cardiac transplant specialist, cardiac surgeon, and a cardiac nurse to enhance patient care, optimize procedural success and minimize peri-procedural complications.