Certain pulmonary diseases can influence changes in lung compliance. The following are pathologies that can increase or decrease lung compliance:

- Emphysema or COPD: In both of these conditions, the elastic recoil property of the lung suffers damage due to a genetic cause (alfa-1 antitrypsin deficiency) or an extrinsic factor (e.g., smoking). Because of poor elastic recoil, such patients have high lung compliance. Their alveolar sacs have a high residual volume, which in turn causes difficulty in exhaling the excess air out of the lung, and patients develop shortness of breath.

- Pulmonary Fibrosis: Certain environmental pollutants, chemicals, or infectious agents could cause fibrosis of the lung tissue. Genetic diseases can also do so. In fibrosis, lung elastin fibers are replaced by collagens, which are less elastic and decrease the compliance of lung. Such patients need higher work of breathing to inflate more rigid lung alveoli.

-  Newborn Respiratory Distress Syndrome: Usually, surfactant secretion begins between the sixth and seventh months of gestation. Premature newborns have little or no surfactant in the alveoli when they are born, and their lungs have a significant tendency to collapse. As described earlier, surfactant helps in reducing surface tension and thereby increases compliance of the lung. An absence of the surfactant leads to a decrease in pulmonary compliance, and this condition is called newborn respiratory distress syndrome. It is fatal and requires aggressive measures by continuous positive pressure breathing.

- Atelectasis /ARDS: Atelectasis is the collapse of lung alveoli and usually occurs in the dependent parts of the lungs. Following operative anesthesia, this could be one of the potential complications. In the case of atelectasis, pulmonary compliance decreases due to a decrease in the volume of the lung and requires higher pressure to inflate the alveoli. Obtaining a compliance curve along with oximetry and arterial gas analysis is one useful method in ICU monitoring.