The differential diagnosis of soft tissue radionecrosis should take into account of other causes of tissue necrosis. Necrotizing infections, especially Staphylococcus and Streptococcus infections can cause tissue necrosis and should be ruled out by infectious disease evaluation of the wound and deep tissue culture. Superficial wound cultures are often inadequate and result in falls negatives and isolation of organisms that may be just colonizing the wound. Arterial insufficiency ulcers and tissue necrosis from macrovascular insufficiency must be considered especially in a patient with risk factors such as smoking, hypertension and Diabetes mellitus.  Sometimes soft tissue radionecrosis presents as tissue that is at risk for hemorrhage from proliferative arteritis and telangiectasis that are more fragile and tend to bleed. Hemorrhagic cystitis is a complication of pelvic radiation, and the delayed effects may be very difficult to treat and often lead to further damage to the bladder which occurs after flugration treatments or cauterization. Proctitis is also a delayed soft tissue radionecrosis that can result in significant rectal bleeding.  Such bleeding problems can severe enough to require repeated blood transfusion and significant morbidity. It is always important when dealing with such situation to make sure that there is not a recurrence of cancer or a secondary carcinoma or precancerous adenomatous polyp causing the bleeding. Cystoscopy or colonoscopy with biopsy is often required to rule out cancer and to confirm the diagnosis of soft tissue radionecrosis as the cause of the patient's symptoms.