Gastrin secretion increases in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, infection with Helicobacter pylori, and chronic use of H2 blockers and/or proton pump inhibitors (PPIs).

Patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome have a gastrin-secreting tumor (gastrinoma) in the duodenum or pancreas that results in excess gastrin secretion. Predictably, these patients will have increased H+ secretion and hypertrophic gastric mucosa because of gastrin’s trophic effects. Furthermore, the excess acid lowers the luminal pH so significantly that pancreatic lipase will become inactivated, causing patients to experience steatorrhea due to fat malabsorption. In addition to measuring serum gastrin levels, the best diagnostic confirmation of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is with the secretin stimulation test using 0.4 micrograms/kg via intravenous infusion. Since secretin inhibits gastrin release in normal mucosa and stimulates gastrin release by gastrinoma cells, an increase in circulating gastrin levels of greater than 120 pg/mL over basal fasting levels suggests Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a common cause of elevated gastrin secretion (hypergastrinemia) with normal or increased gastric acid production. However, it is possible to have hypergastrinemia with decreased acid production.

Helicobacter pylori is a gram-negative organism that directly damages gastric glands and parietal cells by infiltrating the gastric mucosa. This destruction results in decreased acid production and secondary hypergastrinemia due to lack of negative feedback of G cells.

Since H2 blockers and PPIs inhibit secretion of hydrogen ions by parietal cells in the stomach, patients who chronically take these medications will experience secondary hypergastrinemia in response to lack of negative feedback from gastric acid production. Due to the trophic effects of gastrin, this also raises concern for the development of cancer arising from ECL cells, called carcinoid tumors.