Treatment of DVT aims to prevent pulmonary embolism, reduce morbidity, and prevent or minimize the risk of developing post-thrombotic syndrome.

The cornerstone of treatment is anticoagulation. NICE guidelines only recommend treating proximal DVT (not distal) and those with pulmonary emboli. In each patient, the risks of anticoagulation need to be weighed against the benefits.

Treatment for DVT should be addressed mainly according to the underlying causality of DVT as follows:

- The preferred anticoagulant to address DVT in cancer-associated thromboembolism is low molecular weight heparin and factor Xa inhibitors, including rivaroxaban.

- In circumstances where once-daily oral therapy is the preferred management, the following options are viable; 1. rivaroxaban, 2. edoxaban, and 3. vitamin-K antagonist (VKA)

- In the context of liver disease, DVT should be managed with low-molecular-weight heparin.

- In patients with renal disease suppressed creatinine clearance to less than 30 ml/min, VKAs are recommended. DOACs and LMWH should be avoided in patients with end-stage renal disease.

- In patients with a remarkable past medical history of coronary artery disease, the following alternatives are recommended; 1. VKA, 2.rivaroxaban, 3.apixaban, and 4. edoxaban

- In patients with remarkable dyspepsia or any past medical history suggestive of GI bleeding, VKA and apixaban are the preferred treatments. It should be noted that DOCAs, e.g., dabigatran, factor Xa inhibitors, e.g., rivaroxaban, and selective factor Xa inhibitors, e.g., edoxaban, might be associated with higher rates of GI bleeding.

- In the group of patients with a history compatible with poor compliance, VKA is preferred. However, it should be noted that still some patients might be highly compliant with other alternatives, including DOACs.

- If thrombolytic therapy is indicated, unfractionated heparin is indicated.

- In patients who might later be subjected to reversal of thrombolytic therapy, it should be noted that reversal agents for DOACs are not universally available.

- Since most anticoagulants have the potential to cross the placenta, the preferred anticoagulation therapy during pregnancy is LMWH.

Moreover, the following guidelines address the required duration of treatment.

- Low-molecular-weight heparin or fondaparinux for five days or until INR is greater than 2 for 24 hours (unfractionated heparin for patients with renal failure and increased risk of bleeding)

- Vitamin K antagonists for three months

- In patients with cancer, consider anticoagulation for six months with low-molecular-weight heparin.

- In patients with unprovoked DVT, consider vitamin K antagonists beyond three months.

- Rivaroxaban is an oral factor Xa inhibitor which has recently been approved by the FDA and NICE and is attractive because there is no need for regular INR monitoring.

- If the platelet count drops to less than 75,000, switch from heparin to fondaparinux, which is not associated with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.

Thrombolysis: The indications for the use of thrombolytics include:

- Symptomatic iliofemoral DVT

- Symptoms of less than 14 days duration

- Good functional status

- A life expectancy of 1 year or more

- Low risk of bleeding

The use of thrombolytic therapy can result in an intracranial bleed, and hence, careful patient selection is vital. Recently endovascular interventions like catheter-directed extraction, stenting, or mechanical thrombectomy have been tried with moderate success.

- Compression hosiery: Below-knee graduated compression stockings with an ankle pressure greater than 23 mm Hg for two years if there are no contraindications

- Inferior vena cava filters: If anticoagulation is contraindicated or if emboli are occurring despite adequate anticoagulation

**Newer Drugs**

Rivaroxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, and betrixaban are relatively newer factor Xa inhibitors approved for prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis.

The duration of DVT treatment is 3 to 6 months, but recurrent episodes may require at least 12 months of treatment. Patients with cancer need long-term treatment.

Inferior vena cava filters are not recommended in acute DVT. There are both permanent and temporary inferior vena cava filters available. These devices may decrease the rate of recurrent DVT but do not affect survival. Today, only patients with contraindications to anticoagulation with an increased risk of bleeding should have these filters inserted.