As previously said, hyperkeratosis can be the result of different pharmaceutical compounds mainly used for oncologic treatments. Hyperkeratotic drug reaction occurs commonly with tyrosine kinase inhibitors, cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents, and immunomodulators or immune checkpoint inhibitors.

BCR-ABL inhibitors (mainly nilotinib and dasatinib) are commonly used for ontological target therapy, and the cutaneous side effects are only second to the hematologic sequelae. They are usually transitory and not severe. The most common dermatological side effect is a pruritic skin rash, while chronic dermatological side effects include psoriasis, lichenoid hyperkeratosis, pityriasis, and others.

Multikinase-inhibitors (VEGF, PDGFR, EGFR, KIT, RET, Flt3, and RAF) affect the skin homeostasis and give rise to many different cutaneous manifestations, mainly with hyperkeratosis in the form of hyperkeratotic hand-foot skin reaction.

Inhibition of the RAF pathway can lead to paradoxical MAPK activation and induce dimerization of RAF isomers. Keratinocyte proliferation is characteristic of B-RAF inhibitors, causing a broad spectrum of epidermal toxicities ranging from a verrucal reaction to squamous cell carcinoma. The use of the RAF-pathway inhibitor induces the rapid appearance of keratinocyte malignancies, mainly squamous cell carcinomas of the skin, even within the first week after the starting them.

The dermo-epidermal changes related to tattoo procedures can elicit skin reactions with hyperkeratosis patterns.