Therapeutic exercise mainly falls into three categories

- Endurance training: Defined as the use of large muscle groups in the area of 50 to 60% VO2Max to achieve greater cardiovascular endurance.

- Resistance training: This modality increases overall strength and comes in three forms: isotonic, isometric, and isokinetic. Isotonic consists of dynamic movements with a constant load. Isokinetic involves a constant velocity with variable load. Isometric involves muscle contraction that is static with no change in muscle length. All forms of resistance training have favorable effects on diabetes, osteoporosis, and cancer with increases in bone mineral density, increased bowel transit time, increased glucose uptake in muscle, and improvements in back pain.

- Flexibility training: slowed, controlled exercises performed in a gradual manner (usually in the increment of fifteen to thirty seconds) that aid in the range of motion at joints or series of joints. Three main types exist: static, dynamic, and PNF (proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation).

Static involves held positions that are effective with little required in terms of assistance and time.

Dynamic involves repetitive bouncing movements that produce muscle stretch over time.

PNF involves alternating contraction and relaxation of agonist/antagonist muscles at specific joints that generally produce the largest increase in flexibility.

All of these are combinable into exercise programs that work for many different types of patients. Different subtypes of modalities can help to increase effectiveness or allow participation of individuals with special needs based on comorbidities. One such example would be aquatic therapy for stroke patients with balance difficulties.

Basic exercise prescriptions should follow the FITT mnemonic.

- F- frequency: number of days per week

- I- Intensity: low, moderate or vigorous

- T- Time: minutes per session for endurance exercise

- T- Type: endurance, strength, flexibility or some combination

Exercise programs require individualization according to the age of the patient, severity of OA, and/or comorbid disease. The analytic exercises for improvement of muscle strength in hip OA aim to influence the hip abductors, adductors, flexors, and extensors. In knee osteoarthritis and pathology, the target muscle groups are thigh muscles such as the quadriceps muscle and posterior group of thigh muscles), calf muscles (triceps surae muscle), as well as muscles, are the hip joint such as gluteus and sartorius. Beyond this, there are no documented or established specific programs for therapeutic exercises regarding the intensity, frequency, and interval of joint load.

For selected populations:

Diabetes mellitus

Exercise is essential in diabetes prevention and management. Exercise has positive effects on glucose metabolism and decreasing insulin resistance, a hallmark for diabetes mellitus type 2. Exercise improves insulin sensitivity by acting on muscle physiology. Increasing glucose transporter 4 (GLUT-4) content and increasing glucose transport. Exercise decreases free fatty acid in the bloodstream by reducing levels of obesity. It also increases insulin-stimulated limb blood flow. Increased resistance training increases muscle mass, which in turn affects glucose uptake.

Exercise slows peripheral neuropathy development by an unknown mechanism. One theory is that exercise promotes endoneurial blood flow and greater oxygen delivery to nerves.

Osteoarthritis

Therapeutic exercise has great potential to reduce pain and improve muscular strength, balance, and range of motion in individuals with osteoarthritis. Resistance training and endurance training are especially beneficial for pain and balance with osteoarthritis in large joints such as the knee. The most validated is isokinetic exercise for the knee.