The patient who presents with conductive hearing loss should undergo a complete history and physical with a focused head and neck exam, including an otomicroscopic exam and tuning fork evaluation. Visual inspection of the sound conduction pathways must be performed to determine the cause and contributory factors to conductive hearing loss. This includes ear canal patency, tympanic membrane integrity and position, middle ear aeration, and retrotympanic abnormalities.  Tuning fork tests include Weber and Rinne tests.

In the setting of conductive hearing loss, the Weber test will lateralize to the side of the conductive hearing loss and the Rinne test will suggest improved audibility better via bone conduction than air conduction. Both 512 Hz and 1024 Hz forks are recommended to help estimate the degree of conductive hearing loss. Preoperative pure tone audiogram will assess the nature and degree of hearing loss, as well as to confirm the findings on the tuning fork exams. Impedance audiometry offers information regarding tympanic membrane compliance and acoustic reflex integrity. CT scan of the temporal bones is obtained to provide information on ossicular integrity and continuity and co-existing tympanomastoid disease that will affect surgical planning.

Prior to surgery, informed consent is obtained. Risks include bleeding, infection, ossicular prosthesis displacement (immediate or delayed) or extrusion, hearing loss, dizziness, altered taste, facial nerve injury leading to facial paralysis, stapes subluxation leading to deafness, perilymphatic fistula, and need for additional future surgery.

The alternative options for surgery to improve hearing includes conventional hearing aids or bone conduction device.