Aliskiren is FDA-approved to treat hypertension in adults and children six years and older. It may be used as monotherapy or in combination with other antihypertensive agents.

Aliskiren first received approval in 2007 after demonstrating its antihypertensive effects in six randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. All patients included had mild to moderate hypertension. Most patients demonstrated a blood pressure-lowering effect within two weeks of treatment. These studies showed a mean reduction in systolic blood pressure of 2.9 to 10 mmHg and a mean decrease in diastolic blood pressure of 3.3 to 8.6 mmHg.

In November of 2017, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA) released updated treatment guidelines for patients with high blood pressure. According to the 2017 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults, most patients will have a blood pressure goal of less than 130/80 mmHg. This guideline is a significant change from the 2014 JNC 8 Guidelines (Evidence-based guideline for managing high blood pressure in adults: a report from panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National Committee JNC8). The JNC 8 guidelines recommended a blood pressure goal of 140/90 mmHg for most patients and an even higher blood pressure goal for elderly patients. For patients over the age of 60, the JNC 8 guideline recommended a blood pressure goal of less than 150/90 mmHg.

In addition to the new lower blood pressure goals, the ACC/AHA guidelines strongly focus on decreasing the risk of cardiovascular disease. Their current recommendation is that patients with elevated blood pressure should receive treatment with medication to reduce cardiovascular risk by lowering blood pressure. However, aliskiren does not currently have outcome data available demonstrating cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk reduction with its use. The ACC/AHA guidelines emphasize the importance of blood pressure-lowering over drug selection, but initial recommendations for most patients currently include calcium channel blockers, thiazide diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI), and angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARB) because of their evidence of CVD risk reduction.

There is also no outcome data for using aliskiren in patients with diabetes mellitus and nephropathy, patients with coronary artery disease, or post-MI patients. The ATMOSPHERE study found aliskiren not to be inferior to enalapril in congestive heart failure patients in the primary composite endpoint of cardiovascular death or heart failure hospitalization.

At this time, aliskiren remains a medication that would be most appropriate for use as an add-on therapy for patients already managed with one or more medications that have demonstrated the ability to decrease cardiovascular risk.

Savoia C. et al. conducted a clinical trial on sixteen patients with mild essential hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Bokuda K. et al. conducted a study on thirty-nine patients with hypertension and chronic kidney disease.