Ulcerated plaques just distal to the bifurcation of the common carotid artery into its external and internal branches may be a source of retinal emboli that can be asymptomatic or produce transient monocular blindness.

A Hollenhorst plaque is a clinical sign. It is commonly a contributing factor in the diagnosis of retinal artery occlusion (RAO). In order for a Hollenhorst plaque to cause an RAO, the plaque must completely obstruct the vessel. RAOs can occur in the central retinal artery (CRAO) or one of its branches (BRAO). Hollenhorst plaques are only one possible cause of a CRAO/BRAO and should not be thought of as synonymous. As discussed in the differential diagnoses, other types of emboli exist with the ability to occlude. There are also non-embolic causes of retinal artery occlusion including nocturnal arterial hypotension and transient vasospasm. Hollenhorst plaques, like other types of retinal emboli, may not stay in one place. The plaque may dislodge and move to a smaller diameter vessel before it gets lodged again, or the plaque may dissolve completely. The presence of a Hollenhorst plaque is a confirming diagnosis; however, the absence of a plaque does not rule out the possibility of embolic occlusion.

If an RAO takes place, the most common symptom is sudden, painless vision loss. The fundus will display typical ischemic signs such as retinal whitening around the occluded vessel. The macular area will remain “cherry-red” due to its secondary outer retinal blood supply.If the plaque is only partially occluding the vessel, blood can still flow through the lumen, and no damage is currently occurring. This partial occlusion is what was taking place with our patient. This does not mean an RAO cannot occur in the future. A single eye can undergo more than one transient RAO as documented by Hayreh et al. in their clinical study of over 250 patients. Unfortunately, what the literature shows is that asymptomatic Hollenhorst plaques are a poor predictor of future embolic events.