Status epilepticus is a neurological emergency that requires the immediate cessation of seizure activity to prevent permanent neurological injury. Initial management should be following the currently available guidelines.

- Patients should be stabilized first with regards to their cardiocirculatory function.

- Airway patency and safety should be ensured. Supplemental O2 through a nasal cannula or other non-invasive methods should be considered to ensure oxygenation before advancing to intubation and mechanical ventilation.

- Rapid sequence intubation should be performed in patients with impaired oxygenation or ventilation despite conservative measures.

- Intravenous (IV) benzodiazepines are the agents of choice for aborting seizures emergently. The use of benzodiazepines in the prehospital setting has been shown to terminate seizures in 43% to 59% cases with SE, en-route to the hospital, with less need for respiratory support on arrival to the emergency department and need for ICU subsequently. Intramuscular (IM) midazolam has been observed to be superior and more efficacious than IV lorazepam in patients without IV access.

- IV acyclovir should be started early during the course of illness in patients with suspicion for HSV encephalitis (acute febrile encephalopathy, new-onset seizures, asymmetric medial temporal lobe involvement, and lymphocytic pleocytosis with RBCs on CSF analysis), pending HSV-PCR results in CSF. It has been shown to reduce mortality and morbidity when started early in the course of illness.

- In patients with benzodiazepine refractory SE, a second-line antiepileptic agent should be attempted immediately at appropriate doses. In a randomized control trial, IV levetiracetam, IV fosphenytoin, and IV sodium valproate were shown to have similar safety and efficacy in established SE patients.

- If seizures continue despite treatment with a second-line agent, another anti-epileptic agent should be used before progressing to IV anesthetic agents. IV phenytoin/fosphenytoin, phenobarbital, valproate, levetiracetam, and lacosamide; have been noted to be effective in the treatment of established SE with no preference over each other.

By definition, patients who fail to respond to first and second-line therapies progress to refractory SE and require treatment with continuous IV anesthetic agents to achieve seizure control.

- Current guidelines recommend using continuous IV infusion of anesthetic agents for seizure suppression or burst suppression coma for 24-48 hours before attempting to wean.

- Midazolam: Load with 0.2 mg/kg IV followed by continuous infusion at 0.05 to 2 mg/kg/hr.

- Propofol: 2 mg/kg IV bolus followed by maintenance infusion at 20 to 250 mcg/kg/min.

- Pentobarbital: 5 mg/kg IV bolus, continuous infusion at 1 to 10 mg/kg/hr.

- Ketamine: Load with 0.5-4 mg/kg followed by maintenance infusion at 0.3 to 5 mg/kg/hr.

- IV midazolam and propofol are preferred over longer-acting agents like pentobarbital as long-acting agents are associated with a prolonged need for mechanical ventilation and cardiovascular complications.

Patients with NORSE (or FIRES) often have a poor response to antiepileptic medications, and continuous IV anesthetic agents should be started without further delay, given the disease process's refractory nature. Multiple anesthetic agents are required in approximately 1/3 of patients with NORSE to achieve seizure suppression, and often for prolonged periods.

- Once the initial workup fails to elucidate a cause for RSE, and there is a high suspicion for NORSE, IV methylprednisolone should be started ideally within the first week at a dose of 1 gm/day for 3 to 5 days.

- Alternatively, other first-line treatment options (IV immunoglobulin 0.4 gm/day for 3 to 5 days or plasmapheresis for 3 to 5 sessions on alternate days) can be used depending on patient characteristics and clinical context.

- If there is no response to first-line therapies, i.e., failure to wean anesthetic agents due to high risk of seizure recurrence or prolonged RSE, the following second-line immunotherapies can then be considered: IV rituximab 375 mg/m^2 weekly for four doses, or IV cyclophosphamide 500-1000 mg/m^2 monthly for 3 to 6 months.

- Anakinra, a recombinant version of the human Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, has been observed to reduce the seizure frequency and achieve remission in two case reports.

- Other therapeutic options (hypothermia, cannabidiol, ketogenic diet), although less studied, have also been attempted in NORSE patients with mixed results and need to be validated.