Where mild cases of dental fluorosis are concerned, involving subtle enamel changes, patients may be unaware or unconcerned with the appearance of their teeth. As such, no treatment may be necessary. Thus, treatment is patient-led where dental fluorosis is concerned, and patient concerns are cosmetic in most cases.

Vital dental bleaching can be a highly effective treatment modality in mild cases of dental fluorosis. The concentration of hydrogen peroxide utilized varies between countries depending on legislation pertaining to the maximum permitted concentrations of hydrogen peroxide permissible for dental whitening.

Generally, dental bleaching completed in a dental clinic will use a higher concentration than that provided to patients for at-home bleaching using bleaching trays. Lightening the healthy, unaffected tooth structure allows it to camouflage with lighter fluorosed hypomineralized enamel, providing a more aesthetic appearance.

Other minimally invasive techniques suitable for treating mild to moderate cases of dental fluorosis include enamel microabrasion and resin infiltration. Microabrasion involves mechanically removing the superficial layers of flurosed enamel, thus reducing the visibility of enamel discoloration.

The use of dental whitening and microabrasion together has been shown to provide a more aesthetic result and help overcome this limitation. Resin infiltration involves applying hydrochloric acid to etch the enamel, followed by low-viscosity resin, which infiltrates the enamel.

In cases where these methods are ineffective in improving the appearance of fluorosed teeth, the next minimally invasive step includes using resin-based dental composite bonding to mask the discoloration. This can be in the form of localized fillings or composite veneers. Composite veneers require less, if any, mechanical preparation of the natural tooth and are, therefore, more conservative of tooth structure than traditional veneers.

In cases with severe discoloration, veneers or conventional crowns may become necessary to achieve a cosmetically acceptable result for the patient. Crowns may be the only viable long-term restorative option in cases with insufficient or poor-quality enamel, as composite and veneer restorations rely on effective enamel-resin bonding for retention.

More invasive indirect restorative options such as veneers and crowns start patients on the restorative cycle leading to the need for lifelong maintenance, patients must be fully informed, and a judgment must be made based on the risks and benefits. Occasionally a combination of the techniques available is required to achieve an optimal aesthetic result.