The increase in the volume occupied by gas at higher altitudes can have adverse effects on various body sites sensitive to changes in air volume and pressure. Such areas include the inner ear, lungs (specifically relative to pneumothoraces), and potentially any air-filled instruments like a balloon cuff on an endotracheal tube (ET).

The middle and inner ear are air-filled spaces that are essential for both hearing and spatial orientation.  The middle ear begins behind the tympanic membrane (TM) and communicates via the eustachian tube with the nasopharynx

The Eustachian tube helps equilibrate the pressure in the middle ear with the external atmosphere via the levator and tensor veli palati muscles. These open during yawning or swallowing, or during Valsalva maneuvers (forcing positive pressure to open the eustachian tube by blowing against a closed nasopharynx).  When gas expansion builds up in the middle ear via decreased atmospheric pressure (as seen with altitude increases), or by direct compression from increased pressure externally compressing the TM (as in landing), barotrauma to the TM may result. This risk increases in patients with underlying eustachian tube dysfunction, either via structural disease or inflammatory process.

Flying is the most cited cause of ear barotrauma. In commercial flying, ways to prevent barotrauma include the Valsalva maneuver, chewing mints or gum, or swallowing to equalize the inner ear pressure with the outer ear. Flyers should also avoid air travel when they have signs or symptoms or an upper respiratory tract infection.

Another issue of concern regarding flight barotrauma can present in the pulmonary system. In patients with a pneumothorax, the air volume trapped in any pulmonary space that does not communicate with the outside atmosphere will increase as atmospheric pressure decreases, consistent with Boyle’s law.

In patients who do not have a pneumothorax at the beginning of air travel, the risk of spontaneously developing a pneumothorax secondary to changes in atmospheric pressure is low yet does occur.

Another area of concern regarding flight barotrauma comes in the form of endotracheal cuffs and changes in cuff pressures.  On flight ascent, due to the decreased barometric pressure, there is a concern for expanded gas volume within the cuff that may lead to tracheal injury and necrosis secondary to decreased perfusion if the balloon overcomes the critical perfusion pressure to the corresponding tracheal tissue, often cited at 30 cm H20.