Management of sialolithiasis should begin with conservative measures, including massaging the salivary gland, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and sialogogues. Signs of infection, including cervical adenopathy, purulent discharge from the salivary ducts, or erythema surrounding the salivary ducts, indicate the need for antibiotic therapy.

Further treatment is dictated based on the sialolith's size, number, and location if conservative management is unsuccessful.

Mobile submandibular stones measuring less than 5 mm located within the distal duct should initially undergo management with endoscopy. Impacted submandibular stones within the distal duct and stones larger than 5 mm should have treatment with transoral duct slitting. Stones of 5 to 7 mm within the proximal duct or hilar region should receive initial treatment endoscopically. If this is unsuccessful or the stone becomes impacted, the next step is a transoral surgical approach.

External shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) is an option for not palpable stones or visualized under endoscopy. Intraparenchymal stones can be extracted endoscopically if they are 5 to 7 mm and visualized. Larger stones require treatment with transoral slitting. ESWL is indicated for smaller stones that are not palpable and not visualized endoscopically. ESWL is generally unsuccessful for stones larger than 7 to 10 mm. Surgical excision of the submandibular gland should be a last resort.

Salivary stones within the parotid duct that measure less than 7 mm and are mobile require endoscopic removal. If endoscopic management is unsuccessful or the stones have become impacted, external shockwave lithotripsy is considered the most appropriate second-line therapy with subsequent endoscopic removal of fragmented stones. Treatment of salivary stones that do not respond to external shockwave lithotripsy is with a combined transcutaneous and endoscopic approach (assuming the stone is visible under endoscopy). Surgical excision of the parotid gland should be a last resort.