The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) estimates that 1,414,259 new cases of prostate cancer are diagnosed worldwide yearly, resulting in a mortality of 375,304. In the US, the SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) database estimated about 268,490 new cases and 34,500 deaths due to prostate malignancy in 2022. It accounts for 14% of all new cancer diagnoses and 5.7% of cancer mortalities annually. However, 5-year relative survival is estimated to be 98.6%.

The incidence of prostate malignancy has a geographical variation, with the highest in Australia/New Zealand, North America, and parts of Europe, primarily due to the employment of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing and an aging population. Even though prostate cancer mortality has relatively less variation worldwide, the rates are exceptionally high among the Black population in the Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa, intermediate in the US, and lowest in South Central Asia.

Sixty-six percent of cases diagnosed are older than 65 years, and the average age of initial diagnosis is 66 years. Though the exact etiology is unknown, genetic predisposition and family history are clearly associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer.

Genomic evaluation has identified more than 100 genes contributing to the risk of prostate malignancy.

The Identification of Men with a Genetic Predisposition to Prostate Cancer (IMPACT) study evaluated men aged 40-69 years with BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline mutations by screening with PSA annually and targeted biopsy if PSA>3.0 ng/mL.

Many exogenous factors are associated with the likelihood of developing prostate cancer, such as metabolic syndrome, diabetes, obesity, dyslipidemia, Agent Orange exposure, and various dietary factors. Japanese men have comparatively less risk compared to Western men. However, the risk increases substantially for the person migrating to the US, implying an interplay of environmental, dietary, or lifestyle factors.