The various complications associated with viscoelastics are

**Secondary Glaucoma**

If the viscoelastic is not thoroughly washed intraoperatively from the anterior chamber and capsular bag, it will result in a post-operative IOP spike, usually within 6 to 24 hours. The IOP increases because the trabecular meshwork is clogged, and there is mechanical resistance with large particles of the OVD. In most cases, it resolves spontaneously after 72 hours, but if the IOP rise is persistent, it should be managed with antiglaucoma medications.

**Capsular Block Syndrome**

Capsular block syndrome (CBS) or capsular block distention syndrome has been reported after viscoelastic use. It refers to the collection of fluid or viscoelastic in the capsular bag behind the nucleus or IOL. The nucleus or IOL is pushed forward, blocking the anterior capsular opening. CBS has been classified as

**Intraoperative**- Due to collection of balanced salt solution in the capsular bag during hydrodissection.

**Early post-operative**-  Due to the viscoelastic accumulation in the capsular bag at the end of surgery.

**Late post-operative**- High-density viscoelastic accumulation in the capsular bag like hyaluronic acid in the capsular bag.

**Pseudo-Anterior Uveitis**

Due to high viscous property and negative electrostatic charge, the red blood and inflammatory cells may clump and remain suspended in the anterior chamber. This resolves spontaneously within three days. Sometimes the hyphema or the blood clot may get trapped within the vitreous phase and OVD in the anterior chamber mimicking vitreous hemorrhage.

**Postoperative Uveitis and Hypopyon**

This complication has also been reported after OVD instillation.

**Corneal Edema and Decompensation**

This is also have been reported after OVD use.

**IOL Surface Crystallization**

It occurs due to residues of viscoelastic solution over the IOL surface. The deposits take the pattern of a fern or an amorphous deposit. The IOL calcification mandates an explantation or an exchange.

**Calcific Band Keratopathy**

This has been reported with chondroitin sulfate-containing OVD.

**Hypersensitivity**

A small risk of hypersensitivity exists with OVD as sodium hyaluronate is extracted from rooster coombs or streptococcal bacterial culture containing proteins.