HIT should be suspected when there is an unexplained drop in platelet counts in a patient currently on heparin or recently exposed to heparin products. HIT typically presents as a steady drop in platelet counts (no fluctuations), while hemoglobin and hematocrit counts remain relatively stable.

The first step in the diagnosis of HIT is the calculation of the 4T score. This is a scoring system used to determine the likelihood of a patient having HIT based on the presence or absence of certain parameters. The score may be calculated using the following table.

A 4T score of 0 to 3 points means HIT is unlikely, and heparin therapy may continue while the clinician looks for other causes of thrombocytopenia. A score of 4 to 5 corresponds to intermediate probability, and a score of 6 to 8 means high probability. All forms of heparin, including line flushes, should be immediately discontinued, and treatment with an alternative anticoagulant should be pursued in any patient who scores 4 or more. Also, the clinical diagnosis with the 4T score should be confirmed with the PF4 ELISA and the Serotonin Release Assay (SRA).

The PF4 ELISA is an immunoassay that detects the presence of antibodies. This test is highly sensitive and has a high negative predictive value; HIT can be ruled out if this test is negative. The PF4 ELISA has low specificity, leading to false positives. This is because the test detects not only IgG antibodies but also IgA and/or IgM, neither of which is involved in the pathogenesis of HIT. The lab will report a positive ELISA when the optical density (OD) is greater than 0.4. The higher the optical density, the more likely the patient is to have true HIT and the higher their chance of thrombosis. Evidence from retrospective studies suggests that less than 3% of patients with an OD of 0.4-1 will have a true positive result. The ASH guideline recommends getting a confirmatory SRA for any patient with a positive ELISA; however, if the patient is in a region where the SRA is not available, the diagnosis of HIT may be confirmed with positive ELISA when the OD is greater than 2 (which correlates with ~ 90% chance of having HIT).

Thus, if the PF4 ELISA is positive, the result should be confirmed with the SRA, the gold standard test for confirming HIT with high sensitivity and specificity. Unlike ELISA, which detects the presence of antibodies, the SRA is a functional test, which detects the activation of platelets in the presence of antibodies. A donor platelet that becomes activated in the presence of heparin and a sample of the patient's blood (containing IgG) will release serotonin. A positive SRA confirms the diagnosis of HIT, and negative SRA rules out HIT, even in the setting of a positive ELISA.