Clinically, the presentation of AAD is subject to the extent of the dissection, with complaints corresponding to those affected cardiovascular structures. Three fundamental questions that must be addressed when taking a history of a patient with suspected AAD are the quality, radiation, and intensity of pain at the onset. Various studies identified the intensity of onset of pain as the most reliable historical factor.  While increasing the probability of AAD when present, classically cited physical findings, such as a discrepancy of blood pressures in the upper extremities, a pulse deficit, or presence of a diastolic murmur, are present in less than 50% of confirmed cases of AAD.  Additionally, the presence of chest pain with any neurological finding, the combination of chest and abdominal pain, or chest pain accompanied by limb weakness or paresthesia should alert the clinician to the possibility of AAD.

The pain of AAD is often sudden in onset, reaches maximal severity quickly, and can be tearing in nature. In about 10% of patients, the AAD is painless, which is more common in Marfan syndrome. The pain can be located in the anterior chest in case of ascending aorta and in the back if the dissection is descending. It may have a migrating character as dissection propagates caudally.

At the time of presentation, neurological deficits are present in 1/5th of patients. Syncope is also common and may be due to hypovolemia, arrhythmias, MI, or an increased vagal tone. If the dissection is antegrade, it may involve the extremity vessels leading to loss of pulses, paresthesias, and pain.

Hoarseness and Horner syndrome have also been described in patients with AAD.

If the AAD is leaking or ruptured in the mediastinum, then the patient may have dyspnea and hemoptysis.

Physical findings

Hypertension is very common in AAD; if the patient presents with hypotension then this is a grave sign most likely indicating a rupture. A difference of more than 20mmHg in blood pressure between the arms should raise suspicion of AAD. Other features include:

- Wide pulse pressure

- Aortic insufficiency

- Diastolic murmur

- Muffled heart sounds (suggesting cardiac tamponade)

- Syncope

- Altered mental status

- Loss of peripheral pulses

- Horner syndrome