Skin appendages are derived from the downgrowth of the epidermis during human development. Every hair follicle present reflects an invagination of the epidermis during hair development. The hair follicle can be differentiated from the surrounding dermal connective tissue by the glassy basement membrane, a hair-specific basal lamina, also known as the dermal sheath.

There are three segments of hair follicles:

- Infundibulum

- Isthmus

- Inferior segment

The infundibulum is the portion from the invagination of the epidermis to the level of opening of the sebaceous gland. The infundibulum is part of the pilosebaceous unit where sebum is expressed. The isthmus extends deeper to the level of insertion of the arrector pili muscle. The arrector pili muscle has attachments to the hair follicle and adjacent dermis. The muscle will contract in cold temperatures, which causes the hair to orient vertically. Finally, the inferior segment forms the remainder of the deep hair follicle and expands to form the hair bulb. At the base of the bulb is the dermal papilla that provides vital blood supply to the growing hair follicle. The dermal papilla appears as an invagination of dermal connective tissue upward into the epidermis-derived hair follicle. The dermal sheath surrounding the dermal papilla contains progenitor cells that rejuvenate the dermal papilla and possess wound healing properties.

The internal root sheath surrounds the deep part of hair within the hair follicle. The internal root sheath also contains three layers not to be confused with the aforementioned layers of the hair follicle. The layers of the internal root sheath are as follows:

- Cuticle

- Huxley’s layer

- Henle’s layer

The cuticle, the innermost portion of the internal root sheath facing the hair shaft, contains a layer of squamous cells that overlap one another like shingles on a roof. The overlapping cells of the cuticle fill with keratin after losing their nuclei. The Huxley layer forms the middle plate. The Henle layer forms the outermost portion of the internal root sheath and contacts the outermost layer of the hair follicle, the external root sheath. Cells of the internal root sheath contribute keratin and trichohyalin granules to the growing hair shaft.

Histologically, the external root sheath can be described as the attachment site for the arrector pili muscle to the hair follicle. The external root sheath facilitates the pilosebaceous unit. Near the arrector pili, muscle attachment, and the origin of the sebaceous duct is an area known as the follicular bulge. The follicular bulge contains a conglomerate of undifferentiated epithelial cells that contribute to hair follicle growth. These same stem cells can migrate to areas of epidermal injury and take part in wound healing.

Keratinized cells from the hair follicle produce elongated filamentous structures known as hairs. As stated previously, melanocytes in the hair bulb produce melanin pigment that extends into the hair shaft. This melanin pigment is responsible for hair color. Histologically, hairs contain two or three layers:

- Medulla*

- Cortex

- Cuticle

The medulla is the innermost portion of the hair shaft but is found only in thicker hairs. The cortex contains cuboidal cells that differentiate into keratin-producing cells. The cuticle of the hair shaft juxtaposes the cuticle of the internal root sheath. Similar to the cortical layer, the cuticle layer contains squamous cells that derive from matrix progenitor cells in the growing hair follicle.