Obtain baseline ECG in at-risk patient populations, along with monitoring sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium.

**Arrhythmia**

5-HT3 receptor antagonist use correlates with many dose-dependent increases in ECG intervals (PR, QRS, QTc, JT), usually occurring 1 to 2 hours after intravenous (IV) administration. When used in conjunction with other interval prolonging agents, there is the risk of arrhythmia development. Healthcare providers should observe caution with patients with a history of congenital long QT syndrome, ventricular arrhythmias, cardiac disease, electrolyte abnormalities, or with those who are receiving concomitant cardiotoxic chemotherapy.

**Serotonin Syndrome**

There are cases of fatal serotonin syndrome reported with 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, most often in the post-anesthesia setting or an infusion center. This condition appears to be from the concomitant use of serotonergic medications, such as SSRIs, e.g., fluoxetine, selective norepinephrine serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), lithium, fentanyl, and mirtazapine. Patients require monitoring for signs of serotonin syndrome, including mental status changes, autonomic instability, tachycardia, labile blood pressure, diaphoresis, flushing, neuromuscular changes, GI symptoms, and/or seizures. If serotonin syndrome occurs, discontinue 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, and initiate supportive management.

**Constipation**

Constipation is a commonly reported adverse effect with all formulations of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, especially the use of tablets or extended-release subcutaneous injection; this can be compounded during pregnancy or for patient populations at risk for constipation. There is concern regarding the masking of symptoms of bowel obstruction with 5-HT3 receptor antagonist use and should not be a substitute for nasogastric suctioning—exercise caution in patients with recent abdominal surgery.

**Other**

Some dosage forms of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists may contain sodium benzoate/benzoic acid, which is a metabolite of benzyl alcohol. Large amounts of benzyl alcohol (greater than 99 mg/kg per day) have correlated with fatal neonatal “gasping syndrome,” which consists of metabolic acidosis, respiratory distress, gasping respirations, central nervous system (CNS) depression, renal failure, and hypotension. Caution is necessary when using these agents for patients with phenylketonuria, as orally disintegrating tablets contain phenylalanine. Clinicians should decrease the dosing of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists in patients with hepatic impairment due to the altered hepatic clearance and prolonged drug half-life.