Tobramycin binds to the 16s ribosomal RNA component of the bacterial 30s ribosomal unit, inhibiting the initiation step of translation.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Tobramycin is absorbed rapidly following intramuscular injection. Peak serum concentrations of tobramycin are achieved in 30 to 90 minutes following intramuscular administration. Tobramycin dose of 1 mg/kg of body weight results in 4 mcg/mL peak serum concentrations. Therapeutic levels of tobramycin are generally considered to be between 4 to 6 mcg/mL.

When tobramycin is administered via intravenous infusion over one hour, it achieves similar serum concentrations compared to intramuscular administration. Tobramycin is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Tobramycin is excreted via the kidneys through glomerular filtration. The serum half-life of tobramycin is about 2 hours in an adult and prolonged in neonates to about 4.5 to 8.7 hours.

**Distribution:**Concentrations in bile and stools are low, indicating minimum biliary excretion. Tobramycin is present in CSF, and concentrations depend on the dose and extent of meningeal inflammation. Tobramycin is distributed in sputum, synovial, and peritoneal fluids. It also crosses the placental membranes. Concentrations in the kidney are higher than in the serum. Inhaled tobramycin produces bactericidal concentrations in the lower respiratory tract in children with cystic fibrosis.

**Metabolism:**The uptake of tobramycin into hepatocytes is limited, and the drug is minimally metabolized in the liver.

**Excretion:**Tobramycin is excreted primarily by glomerular filtration. The elimination half-life of tobramycin following parenteral administration is 2 to 3 hours and varies from 50 to 70 hours in patients with impaired renal function.