Medical professionals are trained to communicate with patients, partners, and families to understand their chief complaints and formulate an effective and useful differential diagnosis. At the same time, taking a detailed history is mandatory, whether it occurs in a primary clinic or the Emergency Department. The clinician's role is to effectively communicate with the patient who presents with signs and symptoms suggestive of a previously undiagnosed sexually transmitted infection. Physicians should be aware that all adolescents under 18 have the right to an STI screening and treatment without parental consent in the US.

Physicians should recognize that STIs closely correlate with patient behavior which should be addressed kindly, diplomatically, and non-judgmentally during the clinical evaluation.

Further details should be investigated with individual state health care systems or reference the "Sexually transmitted disease treatment guidelines 2021" published by the CDC.

While performing the sexual history collection, an easy mnemonic that can help guide clinical questions can be remembered as the "other 5 Ps".

- History of sexually transmitted infections

- Partners

- Practices

- Prevention against pregnancy

- Protection against sexually transmitted infections

The physical exam should be guided by the presenting chief complaint and symptoms collected in the review of systems.

The physical exam will be broken down by the most common signs and symptoms, physical exam findings, and diagnosis.

**Chancroid**

- Females and males:

- Signs and symptoms: Often occurs in the 20 to 30-year-old age group, frequently among sex workers and their clients. The areas most often affected include the distal portion of the penis in men, while in women, the vagina, labia, and perianal regions are involved. The most significant symptom is the extremely high pain level noted when the lesion reaches the ulcerative stage.
- Physical Exam: The lesion starts as a reddish papule which rapidly progresses to a pustule followed by an extremely painful ulcer. The ulcer sometimes called a "soft chancre," will have soft and irregular margins with a friable base and a grayish-yellowish exudate. It tends to bleed easily. The ulcers are typically 1 cm to 2 cm in diameter and usually resolve spontaneously within three months, even if left untreated. Close to half of the affected individuals will develop regional lymphadenopathy, which may be tender. A minority (about 25%) of these patients will progress to infected bulla or abscesses, which can rupture and become superinfected leading to significant tissue destruction and damage to the genitalia. It is estimated that 10% of affected individuals will also have syphilis or genital herpes as well.

**Chlamydia**

- Females:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Most infections can be asymptomatic but may present with vaginal discharge, abnormal vaginal bleeding, lower pelvic pain, urinary frequency, or dysuria.
              
              
- Physical exam:  inflammation of the cervix with mucopurulent discharge, ectropion, vaginal discharge, increased sensitivity of the cervix, tenderness of the adnexal regions and abdomen.

- Males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: The most common presenting symptoms are dysuria, testicular pain, and pain with defecation secondary to inflammation of the rectal area and/or prostate.
              
              
- Physical Exam: Tenderness to the testicles (specifically over the epididymis) and/or discomfort with palpation to the prostate or rectum.

**Genital Herpes**

- Females and males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Primary infections tend to induce systemic symptoms, including painful vesicular lesions over affected areas, pruritus, dysuria, fever, headaches, malaise, and lymphadenopathy. Initial infections typically resolve spontaneously, starting at about two weeks. Reactivation usually presents with a prodromal phase, including tingling, itching, and rash consistent with vesicular lesions.
              
              
- Physical Exam: The affected area may be localized or systemic. A primary herpes infection tends to be worse with diffuse symptomatically involving various systems, possibly resulting in pneumonitis, hepatitis, meningitis, and encephalitis. Females may have diffuse vesicular lesions in the internal and external vaginal areas.

**Gonorrhea**

- Females:

- Genitourinary exam: This may include inflammation of the external vagina, causing excoriations from pruritus, mucopurulent discharge, and friable inflamed mucosal tissue of the cervix.

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Patients may present with dysuria, urgency, urinary frequency, lower pelvic pain, and abnormal vaginal bleeding.
              
              
- Physical Exam: If suspecting systemic infection, a thorough physical exam should be performed.

- Males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Patients may present with testicular pain, dysuria, purulent discharge from the meatus, and pain with defecation secondary to inflammation of the rectum and/or prostate.
              
              
- Physical Exam: There may be palpable tenderness over the epididymis, purulent discharge from the meatus, or palpable tenderness to the prostate or rectum.

**Granuloma Inguinale**

- Females and males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Patients will present with highly vascularized lesions over the genitals and perineum that tend to be painless.
              
              
- Physical Exam: Typical findings include ulcer-like lesions that are beefy red, consistent with high vascularization that bleeds easily with manipulation. Subcutaneous granulomas may be present, but lymphadenopathy is uncommon. The lesions tend to be relatively large and irregular. It is often found to be associated with secondary infections.

- Four main lesions can be seen on examination:

- 1. Ulcerovegetative: large painless ulcer on the patient's physical exam. 
- 2. Nodular: soft and erythematous that tend to ulcerate throughout the infectious process.
- 3. Cicatricial: dry ulcerations that tend to transition into plaques.  
- 4. Hypertrophic: lesions are thick and painless.

**HIV**

- Females and males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Patients may be asymptomatic or present with an acute viral syndrome, including systemic symptoms: malaise, fatigue, anorexia, fever, chills, arthralgias, myalgias, or cutaneous presentations.
              
              
- Physical Exam: The chief complaint will guide the physical exam. The patient should have a thorough history and physical exam to rule out a broad differential diagnosis.

**HPV and Genital Warts**

- Females and males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Most complaints are cosmetic or incidental findings due to the asymptomatic nature of common HPV types 6 and 11. These are usually asymptomatic but are responsible for most (90%) venereal and anogenital warts. Patients may also present with ulcerative lesions secondary to oncogenic HPV types 16 and 18, which can progress to malignancies when triggered or stimulated by folate deficiency, UV light exposure, pregnancy, immunosuppression, or smoking. Lack of HPV vaccination is a risk factor.

- 
              
- Physical Exam: On exam, there may be an exophytic lesion described as a cauliflower-like growth known as condylomata acuminata.

**Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV)**

- Females and males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Patients will present with painful lymphadenopathy localized to the inguinal area. Patients may note the initial presentation of a pustule that gradually progresses to large painful ulceration.
              
              
- Physical Exam: Lymphogranuloma venereum presents with two stages: Primary phase is a small painless papule/pustule that will ulcerate and can be visualized throughout the affected genital area. During the secondary phase, patients present with unilateral lymphadenopathy that is fluctuant with palpation or may be suppurative in a presentation known as buboes.

**Mycoplasma genitalium
**

- Females

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Patients may present with pelvic pain, dysuria, and similar type symptoms to gonorrhea or chlamydia infection, including vaginal irritation, discharge, foul odor, or even pelvic inflammatory disease.
              
              
- Physical Exam: Common findings would be irritation of the external and internal vagina, vaginal discharge, cervical tenderness, cervicitis, adnexal tenderness, or abnormal vaginal spotting.

- Males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Patients may present with suprapubic pain, dysuria, urinary frequency, urgency, or testicular pain. A common cause (40%) of persistent or recurrent urethritis.
              
              
- Physical exam: The examination may be painless and benign, or there may be tenderness to the epididymis with palpation or discomfort from the prostate on the rectal exam.

**Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (Females)**

- Pelvic inflammatory disease is a sexually transmitted infection that involves the upper female genital tract. It can affect future fertility, and the infections can be serious.

- Risk factors include multiple sexual partners, prior episodes of pelvic inflammatory disease, IUD implants, history of tubal ligation, and younger age.

- The most common causative organisms are chlamydia and gonorrhea, but Mycoplasma genitalium can also cause PID. There is no specific test for pelvic inflammatory disease, as the diagnosis is primarily clinical.

- The typical physical finding is tenderness on cervical motion and/or pain on palpation of the pelvic area.

- Other findings include cervical friability or discharge and increased WBCs on wet prep.

- Typical symptoms include the following:

- Abdominal tenderness
- Adnexal tenderness
- Cervical motion tenderness
- Fever (>38 C or >100.4 F)
- Increased vaginal discharge
- Irregular menstrual bleeding
- Lower abdominal pain
- Mild pelvic pain
- Pain with intercourse
- Painful and frequent urination
- Pelvic organ tenderness
- Uterine tenderness

**Syphilis**

- Females and males:

- Primary: Presents with a painless well-demarcated lesion/ulcer known as a chancre at the site of inoculation.
- Secondary: Presents with systemic symptoms involving a cutaneous lesion and characteristic maculopapular rash. Cutaneous wart-like lesions known as condylomata lata may present and resolve during this phase. The rash does not itch and specifically includes mucus membranes as well as the palmar regions of the hands and soles of the feet, which are generally spared in other disorders.
- Latent: No clinical signs or symptoms are present, but serological tests are positive.
- Tertiary: Presentation can be within months or years from the original inoculation. Systemic symptoms can range from cardiovascular and neurologic to cutaneous gummatous lesions. Neurosyphilis can present with stroke-like symptoms, cranial nerve deficits, a change in mental status, general paresis, or tabes dorsalis.

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Presenting symptoms of a syphilis infection depends on the phase of the infection at the time of evaluation. Symptoms can be broken down into primary, secondary, latent, and tertiary phases, which are best detailed and discussed in our reference companion StatPearls article on "Syphilis."
              
              
- Physical Exam: The physical exam is dependent on the presenting phase of the syphilis infection.

**Trichomoniasis**

- Females:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Females can remain asymptomatic with trichomonas vaginalis infections but, at times, may present with a complaint of foul-smelling discharge, pruritus, dyspareunia, dysuria, and vaginal spotting.
              
              
- Physical Exam: The exam will show irritation of the external and internal vagina, including classic physical findings of "strawberry cervix," known as colpitis macularis. A foul frothy vaginal discharge may be present on exam.

- Males:

- 
              
- Signs and symptoms: Males can remain asymptomatic with a trichomonas vaginalis infection but can also present with testicular pain, dysuria, or rectal pain. 
              
              
- Physical Exam: Tenderness will be present with palpation to the epididymis and prostate on rectal exam. No overlying skin lesions or inflammatory processes will be seen.

This is a brief overview of the most common signs and symptoms, physical exam findings, and diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections that can be evaluated in an acute setting such as the emergency department or a routine visit with the patient's primary care physician. The information and references cited should be used for a more in-depth approach to the signs and symptoms of a sexually transmitted infection.