Many models have been studied to explain the development of the definitive erythroid lineage. HSC lack lineage-specific cell markers and instead express markers called lineage negative (lin-), Sca1+, and c-Kit+ (LSK).

The earliest erythroid progenitors arise from MEPs and can form a burst-forming unit (BFU-E), which are large red colonies. BFU-E is a large colony that has thousands of hemoglobinized cells. They have the same immunohistochemistry as MEP, which makes it difficult to distinguish between the two. These cells respond to erythropoietin, stem cell factor, interleukin 3 and 6, corticosteroids, and insulin growth factor 1 and divide to form colony forming units erythroid (CFU-E). It is here that CFU-E is committed to erythroid differentiation and require EPO for survival (4). These cells display the phenotype of CD45+, GPA -, IL-3R-, CD34-, CD36+, and CD71 high in humans, and IL-3R-, c-Kit+ and CD71 high in mice.

The transition from CFU-E to proerythroblast involves the loss of c-Kit to gain Ter119 expression. EPO engages cell division, the expression of erythroid-specific genes, and prevents apoptosis. Proerythroblast undergoes three mitoses, resulting in 2 basophilic, four polychromatic, eight orthochromatic erythroblasts and ending in 16 reticulocytes. After each division, the maturing erythroblast gets smaller, its nucleus will condense, and hemoglobin gathers in the cytoplasm. By the orthochromatophilic stage of growth, the erythroid cell will exit the cell cycle resulting in a condensed nucleus polarized to one side of the cytoplasm. The nucleus gets extruded and forms the reticulocyte. Reticulocytes express high amounts of CD71, and as they progress to become fully mature red blood cells, they lose most CD71 but gain CD235a+ expression.