Diarrhea can be acute or chronic: acute is defined as lasting less than two weeks, chronic lasts more than a month, between 2 to 4 weeks is dubbed persistent.

Chronic diarrhea may reflect a functional issue as in cases of irritable bowel syndrome. Still, chronic diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), malabsorption, and medication side effects, can be other etiologies. Chronic diarrhea is more often non-infectious, although chronic infections produce it as well. Bacterial infection with Clostridiodes difficile can result in chronic diarrhea, as can protozoa such as Giardia, Entamoeba, Cryptosporidium, or Isospora. Patients at increased risk of chronic diarrhea from these organisms include young children, the elderly, immune-compromised, or international travelers.

Acute diarrhea usually has an infectious etiology. Most of the episodes of acute diarrhea are viral, with common pathogens including norovirus, rotavirus, or adenovirus. Rehydration is the mainstay of treatment, especially in children who have increased morbidity and mortality. In developing countries, diarrhea is a major cause of mortality in young children, and prompt treatment with oral rehydration solutions (ORS) replaces water and electrolytes lost during diarrheal episodes, significantly reducing morbidity and mortality.

Bacterial diarrhea can produce more severe forms of acute diarrhea. Dysentery is diarrhea associated with blood (plus or minus mucus) and represents more invasive infection. The most frequently identified organisms causing bacterial diarrhea are Escherichia coli (most common worldwide), Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter (most common in children), Yersinia, and Clostridium spp.

Traveler's diarrhea can be most commonly the result of Shiga-toxin producing E. coli (STEC), as well as Shigella, Salmonella, Entamoeba histolytic, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, and enteric viruses.