The management of hypopigmented macules depends on the underlying pathophysiology. Successful repigmentation is often possible with timely diagnosis, removal of offending agents (chemicals, infectious agents), avoiding exposure to sunlight, using sunscreen, and appropriate therapeutic treatment. Repigmentation might not be possible in the congenital/ inherited conditions (associated with chromosomal defects). Therapeutic treatment helps to fasten the process of repigmentation. Repigmentation is achieved by medications, phototherapy, and surgical procedures.

**Medications**- There are topical and systemic medications.

- Topical corticosteroids - Low dose corticosteroids are used as first-line drugs in many hypopigmented conditions. They are known to accelerate the repigmentation process. Their use, along with phototherapy, also has great outcomes. Systemic corticosteroids are rarely used to treat hyperpigmentation, for e.g., in vitiligo, to halt the rapid progression of skin lesions.

- Topical calcineurin inhibitors - These are topical immunomodulatory agents (tacrolimus, pimecrolimus), also used as first-line medication. Tacrolimus inhibits the synthesis and release of proinflammatory cytokines, thereby protecting melanocytes from the effects of T-cell and mast-cells. In contrast to topical steroids, tacrolimus does not cause skin atrophy and striae, preferred for treating facial hypomelanosis conditions.

- Vitamin D - The current literature reviews that vitamin D has an association with skin pigmentation. Vitamin D increases melanogenesis by increasing the tyrosinase content in melanocytes by the anti-apoptotic effect.

- Antifungals - These are used in treating Tinea versicolor infection, available in both topical and systemic forms. Topical agents are often used for weeks to months; include selenium sulfide shampoo, 1% or 2% ketoconazole ointment, zinc pyrithione. Oral medications like fluconazole, itraconazole are used for a short duration of therapy.

- Oral isotretinoin- This is used to treat conditions like PMH in which propionibacterium acne is the underlying cause.

- Emollients - Used to provide a soothing effect in pruritic and scaly skin lesions.

**Phototherapy**- This includes narrow-band ultraviolet B (NBUVB) and psoralen ultraviolet A (PUVA). NBUVB is superior and preferred over PUVA in treating vitiligo. PUVA has comparatively more adverse effects because of the systemic use of psoralen. PUVA is contraindicated in children and pregnant women.

**Surgical Procedures -**skin grafting, split skin grafting are practiced in treating some localized depigmented and inherited hypopigmented conditions.