Pyramidal Lobe of the Thyroid (PL) - Pyramidal lobes occur when the distal portion of the thyroglossal duct differentiates into thyroid tissue. Estimates of pyramidal lobe incidence vary. For example, a 2015 study of 166 thyroidectomy patients found a pyramidal lobe in 65.7% of patients, with equal gender distribution, while a 2010 study of 90 male cadavers found a pyramidal lobe in 37.8% of patients.

Double Pyramidal Lobe (DPL) - An extremely rare variant with only a handful of cases reported. These present with two pyramidal lobes arising from the thyroid, often located at the junction of the isthmus and the right and left lobes, respectively. All case reports involve female patients aged 45 to 58 years old.

Sub-Isthmic Accessory Gland - Another rare variant of thyroid development. Unlike pyramidal lobes which present superiorly to the thyroid gland, relating to the thyroid descent along the thyroglossal duct, these present inferiorly to the thyroid.

Absent Isthmus - A normal thyroid isthmus is commonly located at the second and third tracheal rings, but can vary from the cricoid cartilage down to the fourth tracheal ring.

Ectopic Thyroid Tissue - Thyroid tissue located outside the normal anatomic position in the anterior neck. It most commonly occurs secondary to failure of embryologic descent. The most common location for ectopic thyroid tissue is the base of the tongue (at the foramen cecum, secondary to failure or migration), but is also commonly found along the thyroglossal duct, resulting in a high cervical thyroid (due to incomplete migration). Excessive migration leads to superior mediastinal or pericardiac thyroid tissue. Less commonly, ectopic thyroid tissue can be found in the adrenal/pituitary glands along with the GI system, within the female reproductive system and even within the iris of the eye. One or more foci of ectopic tissue may be present. Ectopic thyroid tissue can be distinguished from thyroglossal duct cysts via thyroid scintigraphy, as ectopic tissue is functional, and cysts contain insufficient thyroid tissue for an examiner to identify.

Lingual Thyroid - Rarely, the thyroid fails to descend properly down the thyroglossal duct to the final anatomic position, which leads to retention of thyroid tissue at the foramen cecum, at the base of the tongue, and is more common in female patients. Lingual thyroid can span a wide range of clinical presentations, from an incidental finding to partial airway obstruction. If symptomatic, lingual thyroid tissue can be surgically removed - with a risk of hypothyroidism if insufficient thyroid tissue remains.

Thyroglossal Duct Cyst - Relatively rare, present in approximately 7% of the population worldwide. Arises when a portion of the thyroglossal duct fails to involute. Secretions from the epithelial lining result in inflammation and cyst formation. Thyroglossal cysts are found in the midline and closely associated with the hyoid bone, with 20 to 25% found suprahyoid and 25-65% infrahyoid. Cysts are frequently asymptomatic but can become infected and present as an abscess. Classically, thyroglossal duct cysts will elevate with swallowing or protrusion of the tongue.

Lingual Cyst - This is a thyroglossal duct cyst occurring at the base of the tongue. These can present with difficulty in swallowing or breathing.