Patients with pudendal neuralgia are typically diagnosed after several years of symptoms, have seen multiple physicians, and have often undergone extensive, repetitive testing. They may have had several surgeries and are often told: "it is in your head." Patients often suffer anxiety or depression and may initially be resistant to new treatments or evaluations. Patients may become angry, frustrated, or feel threatened if their standard therapy, such as opioids, is questioned or modified.

As pudendal neuropathy is often a tunnel entrapment syndrome, it is treated in a manner somewhat analogous to carpal tunnel syndrome, namely:

- Conservative nerve protection measures initially, along with physical therapy and medications

- Pudendal nerve block perineural injections are given monthly as needed or as a series of three at four-week intervals

- If conservative treatments fail, sacral neuromodulation and/or surgical decompression of the pudendal nerve(s) should be considered

The monitoring of responses can be objective when using symptom scores. Experience has shown that the National Institutes of Health - Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index or NIH-CPSI is an excellent metric useful in both genders with simple changes of anatomical terms.

**Initial Conservative Measures**

Initial conservative measures are designed to help protect the nerve and avoid any aggravation of the neuropathy. When pain occurs while seated, a simple "sit-pad" or "doughnut" that can be self-constructed or purchased commercially. With the center section of the seating pad removed, the perineum has no pressure, and the patient is sitting on his/her ischial tuberosities. These pads are useful and may even be curative in some cases. Avoidance of sitting should be recommended, such as the use of a standing workstation., Cessation of hip flexion exercises, cycling, jogging, rowing, and similar sports activities are essential to prevent repeated pudendal nerve injury. About 20% to 30% of patients report improvement with conservative measures and lifestyle modifications.

**Medications**

Polypharmacy is often necessary to control the multiple symptoms of neuropathic pain and common central sensitization in pudendal neuralgia patients.

Several medications are commonly used for pudendal neuralgia.

- Amitriptyline is often started at 10 mg HS, titrating every five days to a maximum of 50 mg HS as tolerated.

- Duloxetine is started at 30 mg daily for one week; then, the dose is increased to 60 mg daily. No additional benefit is noted from increasing the dose further.

- Gabapentin is often started at 300 mg TID (titrated up to 900 mg TID) and/or pregabalin starting at 75 mg BID up to a maximum of 300 mg BID.

- Clonidine 0.1 mg HS can be beneficial in controlling sympathetically moderated pain. Patients often find this is also a very useful sedative for sleep.

- Antihistamines may have a beneficial adjuvant effect.

- Compounded topical creams containing gabapentin, ketamine, and clonidine may be useful.

- Ketamine oral troches and nasal spray may be necessary when pain is unrelenting.

Combining medication types is often necessary to control symptoms.

**Cognitive behavioral therapy**has not been specifically tested for pudendal neuralgia but has been helpful for other types of neuropathic pelvic pain, such as dyspareunia and vulvar vestibulitis (a type of vulvodynia).

**Physical therapy**may be a useful adjunct for tender, spastic pelvic floor musculature. Most patients should use it for at least 6 to 12 weeks. Physical therapy appears to be most helpful for levator ani syndrome or similar myofascial syndromes involving the lateral rotator group (obturator internus and piriformis muscles).

**Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation****(TENS)**has been used with reasonable success for pelvic pain syndrome, perineal discomfort, and prostatodynia, although there is very limited data on its use specifically for pudendal neuralgia.

Several patterns of TENS electrode placements have been recommended. These include along the tibial or sacral S2-4 nerve roots as well as direct perineal stimulation with circular penile or vulvar electrodes.

**Pudendal nerve block injections**are a mainstay for diagnosing pudendal neuralgia, but their role in therapy is less clear. Like most of the available treatments for pudendal neuralgia, there is a lack of high-quality prospective, randomized trials demonstrating efficacy and no consensus on the optimal medications, preferred protocols, or the long-term value of repeated injections.

Short-acting local anesthetics are used for diagnostic pudendal nerve block testing but for therapeutic injections; there is no definitive recommended agent. Both local anesthetics and corticosteroids have been used separately or together with roughly similar results. A combination of short and long-acting local anesthetics together with steroids has the theoretical advantage of both immediate and long-lasting efficacy. Only about 25% of patients have noted pain relief lasting one month or more.

One recommended therapeutic technique involves a series of three pudendal nerve blocks using a mixture of lidocaine 1%, bupivacaine 0.25%, and a corticosteroid. This regimen allows time for the beneficial effect of the steroids to complement the early pain control from the local anesthetics. Relief from steroids usually occurs starting three to five days post-injection and lasts for three to five weeks or longer. As the steroid benefit wanes, the next nerve block injection cocktail can be performed, so the treatments are typically given at four-week intervals. Two consecutive blocks are given into the interligamentary space between the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments immediately adjacent to the ischial spine. The third block in the series is generally given by an interventional radiologist using computed tomography (CT) guidance.****Injections may be performed unilaterally or bilaterally as appropriate. Nerve blocks performed without sedation allow for improved communication between the patient and the treating specialist.

Patients are examined two hours after their block to determine the quality of the block, usually via pinprick sensory testing. Pain relief within minutes or a few hours from the injection confirms the diagnosis of pudendal neuropathy and the adequacy of the nerve block. The lack of any pain relief indicates that the block probably missed the pudendal nerve pathway. Image guidance is recommended to minimize technically inadequate blocks. Ultrasound guidance is suggested for repeated or sequential blocks to minimize costs and patient ionizing radiation exposure.

Transgluteal injections are sometimes preferred over a vaginal approach to ensure higher precision in placement and to decrease the possibility of infection. Some providers perform therapeutic pudendal nerve blocks using ultrasound guidance and nerve stimulator guidance. The use of MRI has also been reported.

Pudendal nerve block injections can be given monthly or as needed, but there is evidence that repeated injections may lose efficacy after two years.

**Sacral neuromodulation**is often considered a treatment of last resort when all other treatments, including nerve decompression, have failed to provide adequate pain control. Sacral neuromodulation utilizes implanted leads and a battery pack to deliver low amplitude electrical stimulation to specific sacral nerves. This acts as a neural regulator which modifies the functional characteristics of the affected nerves to block abnormal sacral nerve reflex activity and normalize effector organ function. It has been shown to be effective in both intractable functional disorders of the rectum and lower urinary tract, as well as chronic pelvic pain. Its use in pudendal neuralgia has not been well studied, but the available data suggests that it appears safe and effective even in some otherwise intractable cases.

First reported in 2014, sacral neuromodulation has been reported to be effective in some otherwise intractable cases of pudendal neuralgia, including decompression surgery failures.

**Decompressive surgery**is generally the mainstay and most definitive treatment for persistent pudendal neuralgia. As the condition is often considered a "tunnel" syndrome, decompressive surgery is a reasonable and frequently curative option for patients. A randomized control study published by Robert demonstrated the benefit of surgery over conservative care and made surgical decompression the preferred treatment for pudendal neuralgia.

The most common site for pudendal nerve compression is in the interligamentary space between the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments. The next most common site is within Alcock's canal (also called the pudendal canal). The falciform process may compress the nerve. Congenital compression may be due to aberrant fascias, or the nerve may be squeezed between leaves or layers of the sacrotuberous ligament. Multiple anatomic variations of the pudendal nerve have been described.

Indications for decompressive surgery are severe pain/symptoms that do not respond to conservative measures, medications, and a series of good-quality image-guided pudendal nerve blocks. A positive response to an anesthetic injection of Alcock's canal is highly suggestive of a good outcome from decompressive surgery.

There are several surgical approaches for decompression of the pudendal nerve. Shafik described the first transperineal approach in 2007.

The most commonly used surgical approaches include transperineal, transgluteal, transischiorectal, and laparoscopic.

During nerve healing after nerve decompression surgery, medications are often needed for several months to control pudendal pain and treat central sensitization. Treatment of other associated abdominal wall neuropathies should be continued. Neurectomies of iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves may be necessary for complete pain control.

Decompressive surgery fails in about 30% of patients.

**Pulsed radiofrequency****ablation**has been used as an alternative to therapeutic pudendal nerve blocks and standard radiofrequency ablation.****(Pulse technology appears to improve therapeutic efficacy while minimizing heat-related complications compared to standard radiofrequency ablation.) Two recent studies totaling 90 pudendal neuralgia patients treated with pulsed radiofrequency reported significant pain relief in 89% of those treated and followed for up to 6 months.

**Lipofilling**is a new therapeutic technique where perineal injections of stem cells and autologous adipose tissue into Alcock's canal are performed to relieve neuropathic pain from pudendal neuralgia. This therapy was initially evaluated in a 2015 prospective study involving 15 pudendal neuralgia patients who had failed medical treatment; 87% of the patients treated indicated an improvement in symptoms with no complications, but long-term follow-up was not reported beyond six months.

**Cryotherapy**appears promising based on results from similar treatments of other neuropathies, but there have not yet been sufficient studies to demonstrate efficacy or safety in treating pudendal neuralgia.

**Other treatment modalities**are found on the internet and directed to desperate patients. Of the many additional interventions found in the media, many will be specious or suggest higher success than can be supported by the peer-reviewed medical literature. Physicians should be cautious in recommending or suggesting unproven therapies outside of a clinical trial. Acceptable treatments typically include conservative measures, medications, physical therapy with or without TENS, cognitive behavioral therapy, pudendal nerve blocks, sacral neuromodulation, and decompressive surgery. All other therapies (such as cryotherapy, pulsed radiofrequency ablation, and lipofilling) should be considered investigational.

There is a critical lack of properly performed, large, randomized clinical trials with adequate follow-up for any treatment of pudendal neuralgia. The therapeutic recommendations listed above are based on the best available evidence, which is often very limited, and expert opinion.

**Treatment Summary**

- Conservative measures such as the use of seating pads and avoidance of prolonged sitting

- Medications such as amitriptyline, duloxetine, and gabapentin alone or in combination

- Physical therapy, preferably with transcutaneous electrostimulation (TENS)

- Cognitive behavioral therapy for patients with psychological effects from or contributing to their chronic pain

- Diagnostic and therapeutic pudendal nerve blocks, preferably performed with image guidance

- Sacral neuromodulation can be quite effective and is probably underutilized

- Surgical decompressive surgery for appropriately selected patients (such as those who respond well to Alcock's canal injections)

- Consider sacral neuromodulation for the 30% of patients who fail surgical decompression

- There is currently insufficient data to recommend pulsed radiofrequency ablation, cryotherapy, or lipofilling outside of a clinical trial, but there are some promising early studies and anecdotal case reports