A complete ophthalmic examination including pupillary examination, visual acuity, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, applanation tonometry, fundus biomicroscopy, should be performed in all cases suspected to have syphilis. Case-specific investigations include fundus photo, autofluorescence, fluorescein angiography, optical coherence tomography, and indocyanine green angiography. Laboratory tests for syphilis include darkfield microscopy and the serological tests for syphilis.

Darkfield microscopy is used to identify spirochetes from tissue fluids. However, the examination requires expertise as it is difficult to distinguish from T. pallidum from other spirochetes.

The serological tests are classified as treponemal and non-treponemal. Venereal disease research laboratories (VDRL) test and the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test are two most commonly used non-treponemal tests for syphilis. Infection with spirochete stimulates the production of nonspecific antibodies against cardiolipin. Both VDRL and RPR tests are assays for detecting anticardiolipin antibody. The sensitivity and the specificity of the non-treponemal tests vary depending on the stage of the disease. The VDRL test becomes positive approximately 1 to 2 weeks after the surfacing of the primary chancre and is positive in up to 99% of patients presenting with secondary syphilis. However, in later stages of the disease, the VDRL test sensitivity decreases, and only about 70% of patients with tertiary syphilis have a positive test result. The serological tests become nonreactive after treatment, and the VDRL test is commonly used to monitor treatment response.

The treponemal tests are highly specific for T. pallidum and include enzyme immunoassay (EIA), T. pallidum hemagglutination tests (TPHA), and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test (FTA-ABS). The treponemal tests stay positive throughout life. Any weakly reactive or reactive VDRL/RPR test needs to be confirmed with these tests. The FTA-ABS test is highly specific for syphilis, but false-positive results can be seen in patients with various diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, biliary cirrhosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, infectious disease like hepatitis, HIV infection, infectious mononucleosis, rickettsial disease, scarlet fever, and also in pregnant females.

The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be used in the near future to detect T. pallidum in ocular specimens.

To increase the sensitivity and specificity of the serological diagnosis of syphilis, both non-treponemal and treponemal tests must be performed, and the results should be interpreted taking into account the history of prior syphilis exposure and any previous treatment for syphilis. The CDC recommends the following serologic testing algorithms:

- Traditional syphilis screening algorithm: A nontreponemal test (VDRL/RPR) is used as the initial screening test with reactive samples undergoing a second confirmatory treponemal test, such as the FTA-ABS, TPPA, or EIA.

- Reverse-sequence syphilis screening algorithm: A treponema-specific immunoassay, such as the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (EIA) or chemiluminescent immunoassay (CIA) is used for initial screening of the disease. Samples that are reactive then undergo a non-treponemal titer like VDRL/RPR. A second treponemal test (like FTA-ABS) is performed if the non-treponemal test is nonreactive for confirmation of the disease.

Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) analysis for VDRL and FTA-ABS is indicated in all patients diagnosed with ocular syphilis to rule out neurosyphilis as the treatment strategy in such patients with central nervous system (CNS) involvement is different from that for patients without CNS involvement.

All patients diagnosed with syphilis should also be screened for HIV infection, as both are sexually transmitted diseases with similar risk factors. Recognition of HIV coinfection is important because the clinical presentation may be atypical, and the therapeutic approach to syphilis may differ in such patients.