While there currently are no routine laboratory tests or imaging that can be performed to confirm a diagnosis of xeroderma pigmentosum, the diagnosis can be confirmed by either unscheduled DNA synthesis techniques (UDS) or by gene sequencing.

Unscheduled DNA synthesis involves exposing the patient’s cultured fibroblasts to UV radiation and then assessing their ability to repair DNA. DNA repair after UV exposure is different than DNA synthesis during normal cell replication and is therefore called unscheduled DNA synthesis. The amount of UDS after irradiation is quantifiable by determining the number of nucleotides incorporated into DNA. Nucleotide incorporation into DNA is determined using one of the following methods: fluorescence assay, autoradiography, or liquid scintillation counting. If the patient’s level of UDS is low following UV exposure, the diagnosis of xeroderma pigmentosum is confirmed.

For the variant subtype of XP, cultured fibroblasts do not show severe sun sensitivity, as seen in subtypes XP A-G. The cultured fibroblasts from XPV patients require incubation with caffeine for sensitization to UV exposure. The fibroblasts are incubated with caffeine for several days following UV radiation and are then compared to normal fibroblasts to determine any deficiency in UDS. UV sensitivity, when cultured with caffeine, confirms the diagnosis of the variant subtype of xeroderma pigmentosum.

Prenatal diagnoses of xeroderma pigmentosum can also be confirmed by either performing UDS on cultured amniotic fluid cells or by performing gene sequencing on chorionic villus cells or amniotic fluid cells.

Following confirmation of xeroderma pigmentosum, further tests can be performed to confirm the gene mutation for that given patient. One method to determine the gene complementation group is by performing a complementation analysis. Cultured fibroblasts from the patient get fused with each of the different XP subtypes. If the fused cells do not regain UDS and remain at a low level of UDS, the gene complementation group is confirmed, and the specific subtype of xeroderma pigmentosum can be diagnosed. Additionally, the patient can undergo gene sequencing to determine the mutated gene and subtype of XP.

Patients with XP will need multiple skin biopsies throughout their lifetime to diagnose or rule out various skin cancers. Histologic examination of the skin biopsies will be necessary for diagnosis. If the patient presents with neurologic symptoms, a neurologist may perform electroencephalography.