The popliteal vein is one of the most common locations for the development of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). These can be life-threatening when a portion of a thrombus to breaks off and forms a pulmonary embolus as it travels to the lungs. Also, whenever there is cryptogenic stroke always perform the duplex ultrasound of the legs to rule out deep vein thrombosis. If present, one should perform the transesophageal echocardiography to rule out patent foramen ovale. Patients who have deep vein thrombosis need to start on coumadin or newer anticoagulation agents. The duration of the treatment depends on the provocating factor involved. Common risk factors of DVT include smoking, reduced mobility, recent surgery, and combined oral contraceptive pills.

Superficial venous thrombosis (SVT) is also reported with gaining incidence due to increased recognition and diagnosis. The common predisposing factors are similar to DVT and include varicose veins, immobilization, trauma, obesity, and the use of oral contraceptives. An SVT can occur in tributaries of the popliteal vein including the small saphenous vein.

Popliteal vein entrapment is an uncommon development that typically occurs secondary to a muscular or tendinous anomaly causing compression of the vein. The most common cause is an anatomic variation in the location of the heads of the gastrocnemius muscle. Other causes of entrapment may include popliteal artery aneurysms, hypertrophied gastrocnemius muscles in athletes, and ruptured popliteal cysts. Popliteal vein entrapment can cause similar symptoms to that one might see in chronic venous insufficiency. Some of these sequelae include lower leg edema distal to the entrapment, venous claudication, venous varicosities in the lower extremities, skin stasis changes, and DVT development secondary to venous stasis.