The foot is innervated by branches from the medial plantar nerve, lateral plantar nerve, medial calcaneal, inferior calcaneal, superficial peroneal, deep peroneal, saphenous, and sural nerves.

Common peroneal nerve wind around the neck of the fibula and divides into superficial and deep peroneal nerves.Superficial peroneal nerve supplies evertors of the foot (peroneus longus and peroneus brevis) and, in the lower part of the leg, becomes cutaneous, carries sensory information from the anterolateral aspect of the leg, and divides into lateral and medial branches to supply most of the dorsum of the foot except first web space, medial and lateral borders.

The deep peroneal nerve passes in front of the interosseous membrane. It lies lateral to the anterior tibial artery in the upper and lower part of the leg while it lies anteriorly in the middle part giving rise to its name, nervi hesitant. It supplies muscles of the anterior aspects of the leg responsible for dorsiflexion of the ankle and toes and invertors of the foot (tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus, and peroneus tertius).

The posterior division of the femoral nerve gives rise to the cutaneous branch, the saphenous nerve, which pierces the roof of the adductor canal and runs along with great saphenous vein in the leg and supplies skin of the medial side of the ankle and foot up to the ball of the great toe.

The tibial nerve gives rise to the sural nerve, which joins with the sural communicating nerve that arises from the common peroneal nerve. It passes between the medial and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius muscle and then runs subcutaneously along with a small saphenous vein. It provides sensory branches to the lower part of the lateral side of the back of the leg and the lateral border of the foot up to the tip of the little toe.

The heel region of the foot is supplied by medial and inferior calcaneal nerves. Proximal to the tarsal tunnel, the tibial nerve gives rise to the medial calcaneal nerve, which pierces the flexor retinaculum and then provides sensory supply to the posteromedial aspect of the heel. The lateral plantar nerve gives its first branch inferior calcaneal nerve, which provides motor fibers to the abductor digiti minimi muscle and sensory supply to the anterior part of the calcaneus.

The tibial nerve divides into two terminal branches, lateral and medial plantar nerves deep to the flexor retinaculum. The medial plantar nerve passes beneath the abductor hallucis and flexor hallucis longus muscles to enter the sole. It will provide motor branches to the abductor hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, first lumbrical, and flexor hallucis brevis muscle.

The lateral plantar nerve runs obliquely beneath the flexor digitorum brevis muscle. The main trunk of the lateral plantar nerve provides motor supplies to abductor digiti minimi and flexor digitorum accessorius and sensory to the lateral part of the sole. It further divides into superficial and deep branches.

The deep branch of the lateral plantar nerve innervates all lumbricals except first, all plantar and dorsal interossei except the fourth web space, adductor hallucis muscles. In the third web space, there is communication occurs between lateral and medial plantar nerves, which is the most common site for Morton neuroma.