HDL cholesterol levels have been believed to be cardioprotective for many years. Recent studies examining pharmacologic elevation of HDL through various methods have not demonstrated a reduction in coronary vascular disease progression. This resulted in further study of the relationship of HDL particle number with HDL level as well as the many functions of HDL and the role they play in antiatherogenic properties. This has been identified as a potential secondary target for those with cardiovascular disease who have reached maximum LDL lowering benefit on lipid-lowering medications. We will also look at the various hereditary disorders and genetic mutations that result in low HDL states and the various effects these have on cardiovascular risk. This activity will examine the drugs that affect HDL cholesterol level, particle number, and function while also examining the clinical benefit. Lastly, it will highlight the importance of the interprofessional team in supporting the nutrition and exercise changes that improve HDL levels as well as cardiovascular health.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiologies of low high-density lipoprotein medical conditions and the effect they have on cardiovascular disease risk.
- Review the evaluation of low high-density lipoprotein states including very low levels due to inherited causes and the syndromes associated with them.
- Summarize the management options available for low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication in the treatment of low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and improve outcomes.