Hepatic Encephalopathy may be classified according to the West Haven Criteria (a semi-quantitative grading of mental state - based on the level of dependence on therapy and the impairment in autonomy, behavior, consciousness, intellectual function) or the World Health Congress of Gastroenterology Criteria (based on the underlying cause of HE and associated conditions).

**West Haven Criteria******

Grade 1

- Trivial lack of awareness

- Euphoria or anxiety

- Shortened attention span; impaired performance of addition or subtraction

Grade 2

- Lethargy or apathy

- Minimal disorientation for time or place

- Subtle personality change

- Inappropriate behavior

Grade 3

- Somnolence to semi-stupor, but responsive to verbal stimuli

- Confusion

- Gross disorientation

Grade 4

- Coma

**World Health Congress of Gastroenterology Criteria**

Type A (acute)

- HE associated with acute liver failure, typically with cerebral edema

Type B (bypass)

- HE caused by portal-systemic shunting (without associated intrinsic liver disease)

Type C (cirrhosis)

- HE in patients with cirrhosis - subdivided into episodic, persistent, and minimal encephalopathy

**Minimal Hepatic Encephalopathy**

Minimal encephalopathy (MHE) is a form of HE that is not associated with any grossly evident signs of cognitive dysfunction but with cognitive deficits that can be demonstrated with neuropsychological testing. MHE has been shown to impair overall quality of life and ability to work and has been associated with a higher risk of motor vehicle accidents. Patients with MHE are also more prone to falls and have an increased risk of their condition progressing to overt HE. Psychometric testing remains the standard for diagnosis of MHE - these include the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) and PSE-Syndrome-Test - which incorporate a number of neuropsychological tests aimed at measuring multiple domains of cognitive function (which tend to be more reliable than older tests focused on assessing single domains of cognitive function). Treatment with rifaximin or lactulose has also been shown to improve the quality of life in patients with MHE. Rifaximin has furthermore been shown to improve driving performance in simulated experiments. The combination of both Rifaximin and lactulose has been shown to prevent the recurrence of episodic HE over a period of 6 months follow-up.