The gluteal muscles are a group of muscles that make up the buttock area; the muscle group consists of the gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and gluteus minimus. The gluteus maximus is the most superficial and largest of the three muscles and makes up the bulk of the shape and form of the buttock and hip area. The gluteus maximus is a thick fleshy muscle with a quadrangular shape, sloping across the buttock at approximately 45 degrees to its distal insertion.

The gluteus maximus arises from the posterior part of the ilium behind the posterior gluteal line and the lateral mass of the sacrum as well as having soft tissue origins from the sacrotuberous ligament and the lumbar fascia.

The gluteus maximus has two insertion points. The superficial fibers insert into the iliotibial tract, and the deep fibers insert into the gluteal tuberosity of the femur between the adductor magus and vastus lateralis.

The gluteus maximus also has associations with three bursae: the trochanteric, ischial, and gluteofemoral bursae.

The principal function of the gluteus maximus is as the chief antigravity muscle during sitting by counteracting and controlling the flexion of the hip. Its main actions are to extend and externally rotate the thigh. Although a powerful extensor, it only acts in this capacity when force is necessary; it works in conjunction with semitendinosus and semimembranosus to achieve this. Examples of activities requiring the gluteus maximus to act as an extensor include rising from a seated position, straightening from a bending position, walking upstairs or on a hill, and running.

To externally rotate the hip, the gluteus maximus works synergistically with the iliopsoas, piriformis, and obturator muscles. It also acts on the bony pelvis, supporting it and the trunk, which is vital when standing on one leg. By attaching to the tensor fascia lata, the gluteus maximus also steadies the femur.