Contraindications to loratadine include patients with documented hypersensitivity to the drug or components of the formulation, with strong contraindications in children under the age of 2 due to its antihistamine properties, which may cause CNS stimulation or seizures in young patients.

This medication requires cautious use in asthmatic or COPD patients due to its anticholinergic effects, which may cause a flare-up.

Though the medication is generally non-sedating, patients who perform activities requiring concentration, such as driving a motor vehicle, should be advised to use caution as it may cause some drowsiness.

Patients diagnosed with phenylketonuria (PKU) should speak with their primary care physician before taking loratadine. Some of its formulations (e.g., orally disintegrating tablets) may contain phenylalanine which may exacerbate the symptoms of PKU.

While loratadine has no dangerously significant drug-drug interactions, as with any drug, thorough medication reconciliation is necessary. Drugs that affect the CYP450 enzyme system may have interactions that require therapy modification.

Patients with liver disease or hepatic impairment are advised to exercise caution as the liver extensively metabolizes loratadine, and dose adjustments are necessary per healthcare guidelines. Similarly, individuals with kidney failure or renal impairment should be cautious as such patients will have elevated loratadine concentrations, requiring dose adjustments.

According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, loratadine should be safe for use during pregnancy; the risk of harm to the fetus is not expected based on limited human data; the drug is pregnancy category B. Caution is advised in breastfeeding; nursing mothers may use the medication short-term while breastfeeding; both loratadine and its active metabolite pass readily into breast milk. There is no known risk of infant harm based on the drug's properties and currently limited data in humans.