**Reperfusion**

The definitive management of acute posterior STEMI is reperfusion therapy. Optimally this is done via percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), though the next option would be fibrinolytic therapy. PCI is the preferred option if it can be initiated within 120 minutes, though within 90 minutes is the goal. If PCI is not available within 120 minutes, then fibrinolytic therapy should be given within 30 minutes.

**Adjunctive Therapies**

- Aspirin 162 to 325 mg chewable or 600 mg per rectum

- Aspirin should be given as soon as STEMI is suspected. Aspirin reduced mortality.

- Nitroglycerin (NTG)

- Should be given sublingually for rapid absorption and onset of action. It aides coronary vasodilatation and helps with symptomatic relief of angina. It does not reduce mortality. The most common side effect is a throbbing headache. NTG should not be given in inferior myocardial infarction due to the risk of hypotension. The right ventricle is preload dependent, and the vasodilation decreased blood return. 
- It is imperative to ask male patients if they have used phosphodiesterase inhibitors such as sildenafil, vardenafil, or tadalafil, within 24 hours as the combination can cause life-threatening hypotension.

- Oxygen

- To only be used if SpO2 less than 90%. The AVOID trial SHOWED that in patients with STEMI who are not hypoxic, supplemental oxygen therapy might increase early myocardial injury and was associated with larger infarct size at six months.

- Antiplatelet agents

- Clopidogrel: 600 mg loading dose for STEMI or 300 mg for NSTEMI followed by 75 mg daily
- Ticagrelor: 180 mg loading dose followed by 90 mg twice daily

- GPIIB/IIIa inhibitors - not routinely used

- Abciximab, eptifibatide
- These are now much less commonly used since the advent of other agents and stents due to increased risk of bleeding.

- Beta-blockers

- Oral beta-blockers should be initiated within 24 hours.

- ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB)

- Therapy should start within 24 hours in stable patients.

- Statin 

- High-intensity statin therapy should begin as soon as possible.

- Anticoagulation

- Heparin is required after thrombolysis to prevent re-thrombosis. Patients undergoing PCI should undergo heparinization to prevent thrombosis during the procedure
- Other agents like low molecular weight heparin, fondaparinux, and bivalirudin may be alternatives.