Despite improvements in the resuscitative care of IHCA over the past decade, survival outcome is still poor, with only about 22-25% surviving to hospital discharge.

Hospitals with dedicated cardiac arrest response teams have been shown to have better survival cardiac arrest outcomes.

The AHA Guidelines for CPR and ECC have consistently recommended the formation of cardiac arrest teams at hospitals to prevent and respond to IHCA based on evidence from systematic reviews and cohort studies.

Though no clinical trials have evaluated cardiac arrest response teams, there are published assessments of IHCA response teams at top-performing hospitals.

- Teams should include diverse disciplines across all levels of expertise

- Team members should have clearly defined roles and responsibilities focusing on the components of CPR, including intravenous access, administration of drugs, chest compressions, and airway management.

- Team members should undergo periodic training on prone CPR and practice mock codes in actual patient rooms and high-risk wards.

- Teams should conduct post-resuscitation debriefings to identify any problems with the response and areas for improvement.

- Emphasize and reinforce best practices

**Future Research and Considerations**

- Though clinical trials to assess the efficacy of prone CPR are limited by ethical concerns, adequately designed cohort and feasibility studies are needed to provide evidence-based guidance, particularly on controversial aspects such as the decisional algorithm for supination and the best sternal counterpressure.

- Randomized trials are needed to provide robust evidence on the long-term outcome of patients that underwent prone CPR. Unfortunately, most current evidence is from case reports/series and nonrandomized studies.

- There is a need for scientific societies to standardize their guidelines and recommendations on the protocol for performing CPR in the prone position.

- Without a standard national guideline, hospitals could develop institution-specific protocols for prone CPR based on the available evidence to support clinical practice.

- Multidisciplinary healthcare personnel caring for prone patients would benefit from periodic training on prone CPR.