Periapical cysts are inflammatory in nature. Patients must practice good oral hygiene and seek routine and preventive dental care. It is essential to discuss clinical and radiographic findings with patients and offer treatment options. Lastly, the provider should counsel the patient on outcomes for any lesions identified. Patients will better understand, especially if they are unresponsive to the initial treatment.

Residual cysts are inflammatory and occur after incomplete surgical treatment. Routine dental visits are key to early diagnosis. In addition, patients should be made aware of any radiographic findings and counseled on lesion biopsy to rule out other lesions.

Paradental cysts are inflammatory in nature. Therefore, patients need to practice good oral hygiene and seek routine dental care, including a radiographic examination.

Dentigerous cysts are developmental in origin. The provider should discuss the findings and offer a differential diagnosis to the patient. Treatment options should include conservative management, such as extracting impacted teeth with biopsy to rule out other lesions. The surgical removal of these lesions typically results in complete resolution.

Eruption cysts are developmental in origin, often self-limiting, and usually present with no complications. Patients should be informed and reassured that the lesions will most likely self-resolve with the eruption of the underlying tooth.

Lateral periodontal cysts are developmental in origin. Therefore, patients should be made aware of these lesions and plan to have them excised. Conservative management and subsequent removal of these lesions classically result in resolution.

Odontogenic keratocysts are developmental in origin. Patients should be made aware of these lesions and plan to have them excised. Conservative management and subsequent removal of these lesions usually result in their resolution. However, patients should schedule a close and long-term clinical and radiographic follow-up due to the high recurrence rate.

Orthokeratinizing odontogenic cysts are developmental in origin. Patients should be made aware of these lesions and plan to have them excised. Conservative management and subsequent removal of these lesions normally result in permanent resolution.

Glandular odontogenic cysts are developmental in origin. Patients should be made aware of these lesions and counseled on the general statistics and outcomes. Treatment options must be thoroughly discussed, and the patient is given the opportunity to ask questions. However, due to its high recurrence, close clinical and radiographic follow-up is required.