Brain ischemia in its broad sense can be focal or multifocal, caused by a sudden closure or marked diameter reduction of the artery supplying an area of the brain, be it of previously stenotic or normal arteries (i.e. aorta, supra-aortic trunk or intracranial arteries). Brain ischemia can frequently be triggered through the lack of global brain blood supply, in more proximal causes of hemodynamic dysfunction causing sudden blood pressure fall.

Ischemic brain tissue stops working in seconds and suffers necrosis in as soon as 5 minutes after complete lack of oxygen and glucose supply, compared to 20-40 minutes in other parts of the body. Some areas are particularly susceptible to ischemia, a phenomenon known as selective vulnerability. These areas include the arterial border zones, pyramidal cells in the hippocampal CA1 area, and cerebellar Purkinje cells. Arterial border zones are also known as watershed areas; one common location is the superior cerebral convexity which is the area between the territories of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries, which is highly susceptible to decreased cerebral perfusion pressure. The reason for the selective vulnerability of specific neuron types is not completely understood but is believed to be due to variations in the expression of excitatory glutamate neurotransmitter receptors on neurons.

The persistent complications of brain ischemia are due to permanent brain damage and are a final common pathway to necrosis: neuronal shrinkage and death, gliosis with astrocytosis, and loss of volume. Neuronal sensitivity to ischemia is multifactorial: the brain has a high basal metabolic rate and high cell-cell signaling activates pathways such as glutamate-induced neuronal death, dopamine-induced potentiation of ischemic injury, free radical release, zinc toxicity, and release of enzymes leading to combination apoptosis and catabolic necrosis.