Feeding jejunostomy is a surgical route of enteral access. Indications for the placement of a feeding jejunostomy is when the oral route cannot be accessed for nutrition, when nasoenteral access is impossible when the time duration of artificial nutrition is more than six weeks and as an additional procedure after major gastrointestinal surgery with prolonged recovery time. Although the most common type of surgical enteral access is a gastrostomy, feeding jejunostomies are indicated when the GI tract is functioning, but there is an obstruction in the proximal part of the gut precluding placement of a gastrostomy tube.

One of the major group of candidates for jejunostomy feeding are patients with major gastrointestinal resection of the esophagus, stomach, pancreas, and duodenum. Myers et al. reviewed 2022 consecutive cases if needle catheter jejunostomies and reported that 89.7% (1939) was performed as an adjunct to laparotomies.

Jejunostomy feeding is indicated in patients with gastroparesis, which is characterized by decreased gastric motor function in the absence of mechanical obstruction. Strijbos et al. showed that 19 of 86 patients with gastroparesis ultimately required enteral nutrition through the placement of a PEG-Jejunostomy tube. The remaining responded to prokinetics and bowel rest.

A feeding jejunostomy tube may be used for the delivery of drugs like levodopa-carbidopa for the treatment of Parkinson disease. Continuous jejunal infusion of levodopa and carbidopa was associated with reduced motor fluctuations compared to oral delivery of the drug in patients with Parkinson disease.

The selection of a candidate for placement of a feeding jejunostomy involves multiple factors. The general condition of the patient, risk for aspiration, institutional facilities, and surgeons' experience must all be evaluated when determining the route for enteral nutrition.