**Diet and Lifestyle Changes**

The initial goal of the management of gastroparesis is the restoration of fluid and electrolyte balance. Also, nutritional status and blood sugar levels should be optimized. Dietary modifications include switching to small frequent meals, low-fat diet. Drinks such as carbonated and alcoholic beverages and foods rich in insoluble fiber should be avoided entirely. In addition, quitting smoking has also been reported to be helpful. Oral intake is encouraged, and if the patient does not tolerate solid foods, then a liquid diet could be attempted. In case of intolerance to oral diet, enteral feeding by post-pyloric feeding tube can be used. Parenteral nutrition is not encouraged and remains the last alternative if everything else fails.

**Pharmacological and Surgical Methods**

The use of prokinetics like metoclopramide, erythromycin and anti-emetics can help relieve symptoms. Metoclopramide is the first-line agent; it is a dopamine D2 receptor antagonist that increases contractility, resting tone of GI tract and thereby promotes gastric emptying. It is recommended to use the lowest possible dose for the shortest duration of time given its extrapyramidal side effects unless benefits outweigh risks. Domperidone is similar to metoclopramide but with fewer central side effects and can be used when there are adverse effects with the use of metoclopramide. It is not FDA approved for use in the USA.  Domperidone can be prescribed by obtaining expanded access to investigational new drugs from the FDA. Erythromycin can be used for a short course to promote gastric emptying, but prolonged use is associated with tachyphylaxis and should be used sparingly. Other antiemetics used are prochlorperazine, promethazine, ondansetron, and tricyclic agents such as nortriptyline in the case of refractory emesis.

Intrapyloric botulinum injections have been demonstrated to improve symptoms in patients that are refractory to the above medical therapies. The effects of the botulinum injections last for about 3 to 6 months. Lack of randomized controlled trials to support the use of botulinum is the main limitation. A gastric electrical stimulator (GES) used in refractory patients as an alternative modality, it delivers high frequency and low energy stimulation to the stomach, thus enhancing gastric motility. Studies have also shown improvement in symptoms and gastric emptying from the use of GES. Surgical approaches include venting gastrostomy, feeding jejunostomy, pyloroplasty, and partial gastrectomy are performed when medical therapy fails for symptom relief. A new emerging, less invasive endoscopic technique gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy (G-POEM) is being evaluated to relieve the symptoms of gastroparesis. The initial studies are encouraging, will need further studies to evaluate efficacy and safety.