Broad-spectrum antibiotics and hydration are essential. Once cultures become available, one can use specific antibiotics, as noted by their sensitivity. Intravenous hydration is required. A nasogastric tube may help decompress the bowel and lower the emesis.

Percutaneous CT-guided drainage is widely used to drain abdominal abscesses. The procedure can be done under local anesthesia and decreases the duration of hospitalization. In most patients, improvement occurs within 48 hours after drainage. In localized abscesses, CT-guided drainage has a success rate of over 90%.

Percutaneous abscess drainage (PAD) has been a widely approved treatment modality for accessible postoperative intra-abdominal abscesses.**appendicular abscesses**in the pediatric population have been well-documented.

The threshold for percutaneous drainage interventions in IAA differs according to the abscess origin, and an abscess size of 3 to 6 cm is generally accepted as a cutoff for **diverticular abscess**treatments.

If the patients fail to improve within 24 to 48 hours, surgical consultation is required. Both laparoscopic, interventional radiology and open procedures can be used to evacuate the abdominal abscess. However, if surgery is required, the necrotic tissue will be removed, and all adhesions can be lysed. Most of these patients require monitoring in the intensive care unit (ICU) and need aggressive resuscitation with fluids. If the abscess is localized and promptly treated, the prognosis is good.

A **pelvic abscess**may be drained transrectally or transvaginally. Pelvic abscesses present a serious and challenging management problem. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided drainage provides a safe and effective minimally invasive treatment option. The likelihood of a successful outcome is dependent on appropriate patient selection, drainage technique, and postoperative management.

Open surgery for an abdominal abscess is a difficult undertaking and can be difficult because of adhesions and the lack of proper anatomical pathways to separate the bowel.

As with most abscesses and contained infected spaces, drainage is the definitive treatment of a **subdiaphragmatic abscess**. It prevents progressive sepsis. It can be accomplished either by percutaneous or surgical drainage. Percutaneous drainage is the least invasive and just as effective as surgical drainage and is currently the standard of care. CT-guided drainage with interventional radiology is highly effective and can prevent the morbidity and mortality associated with surgical drainage.

Percutaneous computed tomography (CT)-guided drainage is considered the gold standard in management and has a very high success rate. The advantages include that it avoids general anesthesia, especially in the elderly with multiple comorbidities, prevents complications of the surgical wound, and reduces the length of hospitalization. Percutaneous drainage can be used as both a diagnostic and therapeutic modality. Especially in critically ill patients, it can be used to control sepsis and improve the general condition of the patient before definitive surgical treatment. Persistent drainage usually suggests the presence of an enteric fistula, which can be diagnosed with a contrast CT. Complications include bleeding, injury to nearby visceral organs, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, and mediastinitis. Hence, transmural drainage has been developed using endoscopic ultrasound (EUS-TD). It is beneficial due to real-time visualization of the abscess cavity, a doppler to avoid major vessels, and a high success rate.

If percutaneous or endoscopic drainage fails, then surgical drainage, either by an open or laparoscopic method, is indicated. Laparoscopic drainage is minimally invasive and permits exploration of the abdominal cavity without the use of a wide incision, and hence purulent exudate can be aspirated under direct vision. If the patient does not improve with the laparoscopic technique, an open surgical technique should be considered. The open approach may be difficult due to adhered bowel, loss of anatomic delineation, and fragile viscera. Of late, there has been increased use of open abdomen therapy (OAT), mainly in managing abdominal compartment syndrome and trauma patients. The concept of damage control surgery is being used. The use of a vacuum dressing to close the abdomen is preferred.

Most patients with a timely intervention will recover with supportive care like intravenous hydration. Patients who worsen and develop septic shock will need admission to the intensive care unit. Need for multiorgan support like mechanical ventilation, vasopressors, and dialysis will be needed in patients with significant organ failures.