PNS requires the availability of a nerve stimulation kit that usually includes a transducer needle and a stimulation electrode. After the patient is prepped under sterile conditions using a chlorhexidine/iodine solution, a sterile drape is used to cover the area of surgery. We identify the desired location of needle entry and administer local anesthesia. The target nerve is identified with the help of ultrasound guidance. A transducer needle is used to access the target nerve. The ideal target of stimulation is approximately 1 cm away from the target nerve. A PNS electrode is introduced through the transducer needle and is ideally set parallel to the nerve. The battery source is connected to the proximal end of the electrode. Once a connection is established, the electrode is tested intraoperatively to assess the distribution of paresthesia. If the paresthesia corresponds to the area of pain, the electrode is tunneled under the skin and secured in place using a suture.

This procedure is also performed by the direct exploration of the nerve where a surgeon (usually a neurosurgeon) dissects the area surrounding the nerve and places the electrode on top of the nerve.

Recently, surgeons have directed focus on using wireless nerve stimulation devices that preclude the use of an implantable pulse generator. These wireless devices use an implantable electrode that has inbuilt microelectrodes, which are stimulated by an external source generator, usually in the form of a patch or wearable device. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration has approved 4 devices for wireless peripheral nerve stimulation.