Folic acid deficiency is an easily treatable nutritional deficiency, but if left untreated, it can lead to multiple serious complications. Folic acid deficiency is a public health issue, and the education of the public is vital. Clinicians at all levels should encourage patients to consume diets that are rich in fruits and vegetables. The pharmacist should educate the patient on eating natural foods instead of consuming supplements; a point of note, there is literature to suggest that over-consuming of folate supplements may lead to a higher risk of cancer. Patients need to be told to abstain from alcohol.

In most cases, dietary counseling can prevent the development of deficiency and supplementing folic acid to high-risk individuals. Folic acid deficiency is ideally managed with an interprofessional team, including primary care physicians, internists, obstetricians, gastroenterologists, dieticians, pharmacists, and nurses. The focus is on the prevention of the development of deficiency. Primary care physicians, internists, obstetricians, and nurses can identify patients at high risk, educate them, and treat consultation with a dietician and a pharmacist. Women of childbearing age, patients with malabsorption syndromes, or those with bowel resections are at increased risks of developing a folic acid deficiency and should be provided with folic acid supplements.

Finally, all clinicians should note that failing to educate pregnant women on the importance of folic acid can result in medical malpractice litigation if the infant is born with a neural tube defect.

Outcomes

The outcomes are excellent for most patients with folic acid deficiency if it is corrected.