Evaluation of CAP and HAP involves:

**Clinical Evaluation**

Involves performing a thorough history and physical examination as summarized in the section above.

**Radiological Evaluation**

According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and American Thoracic Society (ATS) guidelines, a demonstratable infiltrate by chest x-ray is necessary and is considered the best method (with supportive clinical findings) for the diagnosis of pneumonia.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

These include a series of tests like blood culture, sputum culture and microscopy, routine blood counts, and lymphocyte count. Special tests such as urinary antigen testing, bronchial aspirate, or induced sputum may be used for certain pathogens. Two tests, procalcitonin and C-reactive protein help differentiate viral from bacterial causes when clinical and radiological findings may not be obvious. It is also noteworthy that empiric antibiotic treatment may be initiated in all typical cases of pneumonia, and the entire battery of tests is seldom needed.

Evaluation of VAP, on the other hand, is a bit different from that of CAP. It requires radiological and microbiological evidence prior to initiation of antimicrobial therapy. VAP should be suspected in ventilated patients who have new onset dyspnea, fall in oxygen saturation on the same ventilator settings, fevers with chills or new onset lung infiltrates. All suspected patients require a chest x-ray (or a CT scan if x-ray findings are inconclusive). This must be followed by invasive sampling techniques like mini broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) or bronchoscopic BAL or even protected specimen brush (PSB) to identify causal organisms. Once the diagnosis is confirmed, the appropriate antimicrobial therapy can be initiated.