**Infective Causes**

**Protozoa**

Toxoplasma gondii is a ubiquitous intracellular parasitic protozoan commonly causing posterior uveitis. Humans and other mammals act as intermediate hosts, while cats are the definitive hosts for T. gondii. T. gondii exists in 3 forms, including sporozoites, which are contained within oocysts, tachyzoites, which are the active replicating forms responsible for systemic dissemination in intermediate hosts and bradyzoites which are the dormant forms residng in tissue cysts.

**Viruses**

- Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is an enveloped, double-stranded DNA virus belonging to the Herpes family. Ocular CMV infection may manifest as anterior uveitis, corneal endotheliitis, or as the potentially blinding chorioretinitis.

- Acute retinal necrosis (ARN) syndrome is most often caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV), other less common causes include Herpes simplex viruses (HSV-1 or HSV-2), Cytomegalovirus (CMV) or rarely Epstein-Barr virus (EBV).  The patients can be immunocompetent or immunocompromised.

- Progressive outer retinal necrosis (PORN) is a clinical variant of necrotizing herpetic retinopathy caused by the varicella-zoster virus and seen in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).

- Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by a genetically altered form of the measles virus. It is commonly seen in children and young adults.

- Dengue can cause retinitis and foveolitis.

- Chikungunya infection can have varied anterior and posterior segment manifestations with iridocyclitis and retinitis being the most common.

**Bacteria**

- Syphilis caused by the bacterium, Treponema pallidum, is a leading cause of posterior uveitis. Ocular manifestations can occur in all stages of the disease though they are more prevalent in secondary and tertiary syphilis.

- Cat scratch disease caused by Bartonella henselae, a gram-negative hemotrophic bacillus, is acquired when humans come in contact with flea feces or via trauma from a cat scratch or cat bite.

- Rocky Mountain Spotted fever is a zoonosis caused by obligate intracellular small Gram-negative bacteria R. rickettsii transmitted to humans by the bite of contaminated ticks. Common ocular findings are retinitis (seen in 30% of patients with acute RMSF), retinal vascular involvement, and optic disc changes.

- Lyme disease (Borreliosis) is a vector-borne zoonosis caused by the bite of Ixodid tick infected by the bacteria Borrelia burgdorferi. Retinitis is a rare presentation seen in the late disseminated stage (>3 months) of the disease.

- Endogenous endophthalmitis or metastatic endophthalmitis accounts for 2% to 8% of all cases of endophthalmitis.

**Fungus**

- Candida and Aspergillus are the most common causes of fungal endogenous endophthalmitis.  Immunocompromised patients are at particular risk of developing the disease.

- Presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS) occurs in immunocompetent individuals and is recognized by the presence of peripapillary atrophy and multiple atrophic chorioretinal scars without vitreous or aqueous humor inflammation.

**Helminth**

- Toxocariasis caused by the nematode Toxocara canis is a rare but important cause of posterior uveitis in infants and young children. Ocular toxocariasis can present as posterior pole or peripheral granuloma, with few patients developing dense vitritis mimicking endophthalmitis.

- Diffuse unilateral subacute neuro retinitis (DUSN) is an ocular infectious disease caused by a worm whose etiology has not been completely understood that can lead to visual impairment and blindness.

**Post-fever retinitis**is the term used to describe the various retinal manifestations seen after a systemic febrile illness caused by either bacteria, viruses, or protozoa. It manifests approximately 2 to 4 weeks after onset of fever in the immunocompetent and responds favorably to steroids, suggesting a possible immunological basis for this condition.

**Noninfective Causes**

- Behcet disease is an autoimmune, chronic inflammatory disease that can affect multiple organ systems with the primary histologic feature being occlusive vasculitis.

- Sarcoidosis

- Other causes including

- Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
- Churg–Strauss syndrome
- Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
- Birdshot retinochoroiditis