**Diagnostic Marker:**LPS can serve as an early diagnostic marker for infections. The presence of LPS in the serum, as low as 1 to 2 mg, can induce toxicity in the host mainly through the lipid A portion (the endotoxin). Endotoxin can induce symptoms of inflammation, fever, and leukopenia, and damage to blood vessels, finally leading to hypotension. High endotoxin can cause septicemia and shock.

**Immunomodulation:**LPS can help immune modulation in low doses by stimulating the polyclonal differentiation and multiplication of B-cells to secrete antibodies, especially IgG and IgM. In infants, LPS from the gut assists the development of the immune system.Bifidobacterium LPS is helpful during the development of a healthy immune system, while Bacteroides LPS demonstrates induction of food allergy and anti-insulin antibodies, an early sign of immune dysfunction.

**Enhance the effect of Vaccines and Drugs:**TLR activation is inducible by low levels of endotoxin, present in vaccines, and other immunotherapeutics, which provides improved immunization and drug effect, leading to better therapeutic outcomes. Low levels of LPS present in adjuvant can enhance their activity. Hence, the term for it is innate immune response modulation impurities (IIRMIs).

**Clinical Research**: In clinical research, LPS preparations are useful for elucidating LPS biosynthesis, metabolism, immunology, physiology, and toxicity. LPS is also used to induce the synthesis and secretion of growth-promoting factors such as interleukins in in-vitro and in vivo research studies. Because of its direct function in causing septicemia, LPS has been studied to identify possible antibody targets and inhibitors.