Prehospital considerations include immobilizing the extremity and transportation to a healthcare facility. There is no role for constrictive tourniquets in pit viper envenomation. Additionally, there is no role for any venom extraction device.

Hematologic laboratory abnormalities are common after pit viper envenomation, especially with rattlesnakes. Significant abnormalities are less frequent and less severe with cottonmouth or copperhead envenomations.

Most patients with a confirmed or presumed envenomation require observation for eight hours. If there are no physical or laboratory signs of envenomation during this observation period, then the envenomation is presumed to be a “dry bite,” meaning that a bite occurred with little or no venom injected. In these cases, patients can be discharged from the emergency department with customary return precautions. During the observation, if there are signs of progressive soft tissue injury, then hospital observation would be reasonable. All patients receiving antivenom require admission. Reasonable laboratory studies for a cottonmouth envenomation can include a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, fibrinogen, and prothrombin time.

Compartment syndrome is a theoretical concern given many similarities between envenomation and compartment syndrome. The majority of pit viper envenomations occur in the subcutaneous space, and involvement of the muscle is very uncommon. If compartment syndrome does occur, it could be in the setting of a severe rattlesnake envenomation with myonecrosis.