The measurement of carbon dioxide (CO2) was first developed in the early 1900s; however, it was complex and of limited clinical use.

Although CO2 detectors ultimately measure exhaled CO2, there are design differences between some units. Detectors can be divided into quantitative and qualitative types. Qualitative detectors simply demonstrate the presence or absence of CO2. The most basic unit of this type is the colorimetric detector producing a color change as the gas flows through a litmus paper film in the airway circuit. Qualitative detectors are primarily used to initially confirm proper placement of an endotracheal tube by demonstrating the presence (connoting successful placement in the trachea) or lack (esophageal placement) of exhaled CO2. These detectors are usually very simple, light and portable devices that do not require power. Quantitative detectors measure the level of CO2 that is exhaled and therefore, provide more detailed information. Qualitative detection can be further subdivided into capnography and capnometry. Capnography produces a waveform in a graphic format, while capnometry provides a numeric display of the CO2 concentration. Waveform capnography provides more information to the clinician. Alterations of the waveform morphology can be interpreted to provide clues to the clinical situation.

Their location in the airway circuit is also used to categorize detectors. These are typically divided into mainstream and sidestream devices. Mainstream detectors utilize an IR sensor positioned directly within the path of gas flow and produced real-time graphs of the CO2 waveform. These tend to be more costly units and are used primarily for intubated patients. Sidestream detectors are located off the main path of flow in the airway circuit. Sidestream detectors utilize often use small diameter tubing leading to a detector that allows gas sampling. Nasal monitoring of end-tidal CO2 typically makes use of this configuration.

There are some pitfalls and considerations when using CO2 detectors. Fluid such as vomitus, frothy secretions from a patient experiencing in acute pulmonary edema, sputum from pneumonia, or moisture can render CO2 detectors ineffective. The detector paper in colorimetric units is particularly sensitive to fluids. Mainstream detectors are located directly in the path of the airway circuit and therefore increase the volume of undesirable dead space. Sidestream detectors, on the other hand, may experience a delay compared to mainstream detectors because of the remote location of the sensor.