# Continuing Education Activity

This activity describes the spectrum of supraspinatus tendonitis. This activity discusses information relevant to all portions of clinical care by an interprofessional team for rotator cuff tendonitis. The first objective is to be able to understand the underlying pathophysiology of supraspinatus tendonitis. The second objective is to understand the clinical presentation, workup, and management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of supraspinatus tendonitis. 
- Outline the evaluation of supraspinatus tendonitis. 
- Summarize the treatment and management options available for supraspinatus tendonitis. 
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance rotator cuff health and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Primary care, sports medicine, and orthopedic surgeons commonly manage shoulder injuries and shoulder pain. Some reports in the literature cite that up to half of the clinical shoulder complaints are handled in a single visit by a primary care provider.

The original thinking was that this is impingement phenomenon was the inciting event that would cause the eventual cascade of rotator cuff pathologies. Neer's description was the mainstay of impingement shoulder theory for years to come.

# Etiology

The supraspinatus tendon muscle unit sees its greatest stress forces during shoulder abduction. It acts to depress the humeral head during abduction and forward flexion positions. This depression keeps the humeral head centered on the glenoid and functions to allow for the deltoid to maintain its mechanical advantage, and thereby its power.

Sources of rotator cuff dysfunction can include traumatic events as well as degenerative tears. As discussed above, supraspinatus tendonitis is on the spectrum of rotator cuff syndrome/dysfunction.

While traumatic tears can be from a single event, Neer estimated that 95% of rotator cuff tears might find their origin in supraspinatus tendonitis associated with anatomic impingement predisposition environments. The impingement pathway supposes a slower erosive degeneration of the tendon during arm abduction and overhead lifting events. The latter describes the classic scenario now more accurately referred to as "external impingement" of the shoulder.

Indeed, several studies have challenged the previously proposed 95% external impingement pathway.  Moreover, there is some data to suggest there is a significant genetic predisposition to rotator cuff pathologies, which may predispose to rotator cuff tendonitis or tearing from either etiology.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of rotator cuff breakdown is so common that the reported incidence in octogenarians is at least 50%.

Owens et al. reported on the epidemiology in the military, showing subacromial impingement occurred at roughly 7.77 per 1000 person-years amongst military personnel.

# Pathophysiology

There are multiple proposed etiologies for rotator cuff tendonitis. It is important to appreciate the difference between external and impingement mechanisms as these result in differing clinical presentations and underlying rotator cuff pathologies.

Traditionally, Neer's hypothesis of a predictable breakdown in three stages is still commonly used.

# History and Physical

Rotator cuff dysfunction does not always isolate the most superior aspect of the shoulder. Pain is the most common reason for presentation in rotator cuff injury, and pain lateral or anterior are the most common sites of pain in all comers.

Patients with subacromial impingement will often complain of pain with overhead activities and may also endorse weakness. In one study, >98% of presenting patients had pain as an element of their presentation.

To examine the shoulder, first inspect the shoulder, as well as the scapula, for any obvious asymmetry. Evaluate for scapular winging or dyskinesia.  There may or may not be wasting about the scapula if rotator cuff pathology is present. To perform a focused examination of the supraspinatus, ask the patient to forward flex the arm. Pain at liftoff or pain at 90 to 120 degrees of active elevation may indicate rotator cuff pathology.

Furthermore, pain during active slow de-elevation of the arm may indicate cuff pathology.

The neurovascular exam should be normal in patients with isolated rotator cuff dysfunction or tendonitis. Decreased pulsed with overhead arm positioning, radicular or dermatomal sensory abnormalities, or focal weakness outside of the shoulder should raise the evaluator to look for alternate or concomitant diagnoses including cervical radiculopathy, thoracic outlet syndrome, brachial plexopathy, or peripheral nerve compression.

The Hawkins test (90 degrees forward flexion and passive significant internal rotation of the arm) may also recreate acromial contact with the inflamed bursa/tendon creating pain. Furthermore, the Jobe (or empty can) test has the patient hold their arm in 90 degrees of abduction, 30 degrees of forward flexion, and resist a downward force while in the thumbs down position.

Some constellation of positive findings may lead to the diagnosis of subacromial bursitis, external shoulder impingement, or supraspinatus tendonitis. Weakness that is frank or painless may be more indicative of a complete supraspinatus tear, but a lack of this finding does not rule out the diagnosis.

# Evaluation

The initial evaluation of the patient complaining of shoulder pain is variable. Many patients can be diagnosed based on exam and do not require additional workup at the initial presentation. The presence of profound weakness marked swelling, erythema, or deformity should prompt a more aggressive workup. Initial imaging of the shoulder with routine radiographs including an AP, axillary lateral, true AP, and scapular-Y view may help visualize pathology about the shoulder. Furthermore, using a true supraspinatus outlet view instead of a regular scapular-Y view may improve acromial characterization.

The Dutch Orthopedic Association published guidelines for treating what they refer to as subacromial pain syndrome. Their recommendations include early anti-inflammatories, injections for persistent cases, and advanced imaging (MRI) for cases lasting longer than six weeks.

In cases when the evaluator may be less certain regarding the diagnosis, an MRI of the shoulder without contrast is the best study to characterize the soft tissues. Usually, this is indicated in patients who fail a conservative treatment effort of more than six weeks, who have profound symptoms, or who have an unclear diagnosis.

Secondary impingement, which is usually associated with swimmers or overhead athletes, is a part of the constellation of symptoms of overuse and instability. There are reports regarding athletic patients who have lax shoulders, scapular dyskinesia, and train often. The mainstay of treatment in that population involves rest, physical therapy, and a gradual return to activities. It is a separate entity from degenerative shoulder pathologies and may be on the differential in a younger or more athletic population.

# Treatment / Management

Less than one in every four patients will require surgery even if the condition progresses to a symptomatic full-thickness tear.

Multiple authors have debated the importance of corticosteroids beyond eight weeks.

At this time, there is much debate about the surgical treatment of the supraspinatus tendonitis and its associated pathology. Some studies show good improvement with isolated subacromial decompression with or without acromioplasty.

With regards to prognosis, a significant portion of untreated supraspinatus tendonitis may go on to rotator cuff tears. In some patients, these early changes may be subclinical and may not present until the tear has been present for some time. Keener et al. described asymptomatic shoulders with rotator cuff changes visible on ultrasound. He found that a significant portion of these patients had a rotator cuff defect that enlarged and became symptomatic over time.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis should include subacromial impingement, rotator cuff tear (partial versus full-thickness), bicipital tendonitis, glenohumeral arthritis, acromioclavicular arthritis, adhesive capsulitis, and calcific tendonitis.  Note that many of these occur as a continuum of supraspinatus tendonitis and can occur concomitantly.

# Complications

Complications of supraspinatus tendonitis include progression to a rotator cuff tear. Rotator cuff tears were initially described by near to be the produce of untreated impingement secondary to tendon hemorrhage and tendonitis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education about proper overhead work techniques may be beneficial. Unfortunately, given the widespread commonality of the disease process, it seems unlikely that the prevention effort would render the disease process eliminated.  With that in mind, educating the patient on the need for non-operative measures, the possibility of progression, and the continuum of options for their shoulders will help them become active participants in their care.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing a patient with supraspinatus tendonitis can be challenging, and requires collaborative interprofessional teamwork, particularly in more complicated cases. The team will include imaging colleagues, nursing, and physical therapy team can help this patient have an optimal outcome. It is pivotal that all team members communicate clearly about their perceived role in the care delivery for the supraspinatus tendonitis patient. The best data to date reports that a therapy-based approach that avoids surgery may be best for the patient.