An initial randomized study by DeVries compared the efficacy of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion to multiple daily injections with NPH and regular insulin and demonstrated a reduction in the hemoglobin A1c of 0.84% at 16 weeks.

A larger clinical trial called the 5-Nations trial performed in 11 European centers reported a hemoglobin A1c decrease of 0.22% with a lower incidence of hypoglycemic events and higher user perception of satisfaction when comparing continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion to multiple daily injections using NPH.

Hypoglycemia: Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion is associated with lower hemoglobin A1c levels, so there are concerns for an increased risk of hypoglycemia. Studies have shown that event rates of severe hypoglycemia and hypoglycemic coma were significantly lower with continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus multiple daily injections.

There has been a reported decrease in blood glucose variability in the users of insulin pumps, as described in various studies.

Clinical indications for insulin pump therapy:

- All patients with type 1 diabetes.

- Patients with type 1 diabetes are difficult to manage due to frequent hypoglycemia.

- Patients with type 2 diabetes who do not meet glycemic targets despite multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) and extensive lifestyle changes.

- Individuals suffering from gastroparesis will benefit from insulin pumps' extended bolus delivery feature.

- Pregnancy

- Variable schedule or shift workers.

- Patients requiring small doses of insulin-like, for example, the pediatric diabetic population.

Ideal candidates for insulin pump therapy:

- Willingness to wear the insulin pump and the sensor.

- Motivation and interest in pump education.

- Good vision and ability to operate the pump and make necessary adjustments.

- Knowledge of carb counting.

- Ability to calculate the insulin bolus from the device.

Insulin pump technology will continue to develop rapidly, improving the quality of life for patients with diabetes. It will be challenging for healthcare professionals to stay abreast of every advancement, but a basic understanding of insulin pump delivery can help avoid common complications and improve outcomes.