**Rationale: Potentially Inappropriate Medication**

Polypharmacy is associated with an increased incidence of adverse drug events, decreased functional status, and increased healthcare costs. A relationship between PIM and multiple geriatric syndromes (e.g., falls, cognitive decline, urinary retention) has been established. Adverse effects are one of the leading causes of hospitalization in geriatric patients in the United States and Canada.

Explicit tools such as the AGS Beers Criteria® and STOPP/START criteria are designed to reduce complications caused by PIM. Nonetheless, inappropriate prescriptions are still common, with several studies demonstrating that around half of the geriatric population takes at least one medication included in these lists.

The use of multiple medications, long durations of treatment, and shared mechanisms of action, are associated with higher morbidity, particularly regarding falls and functional capacity. Drugs such as diuretics and other antihypertensives, sedatives, and antipsychotics contribute to the high incidence of adverse effects. Moreover, there is an important correlation between polypharmacy and frailty.

Although an objective reduction in mortality or improvement in quality of life is yet to be proven, it is understood that addressing polypharmacy and optimizing pharmacological treatment contribute to better patient outcomes. The ongoing POLITE-RCT trial attempts to prove this relationship directly via critical primary and secondary interprofessional interventions.