Early-onset sepsis(EOS) is generally caused by the transmission of pathogens from the female genitourinary system to the newborn or the fetus. These pathogens can ascend the vagina, the cervix, and the uterus, and can also infect the amniotic fluid. Neonates can also become infected in utero or during delivery as they pass through the vaginal canal. Typical bacterial pathogens for EOS include Group B streptococcus (GBS), Escherichia coli, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, Haemophilus influenza, and Listeria monocytogenes. Maternal factors that increase the risk of neonatal sepsis include chorioamnionitis, GBS colonization, delivery before 37 weeks, and prolonged rupture of membranes greater than 18 hours

Late-onset sepsis (LOS) usually occurs via the transmission of pathogens from the surrounding environment after delivery, such as contact from healthcare workers or caregivers. A percentage ofLOS may also be caused by a late manifestation of vertically transmitted infection. Infants requiring intravascular catheter insertion, or other invasive procedures that disrupt the mucosa, are at increased risk for developing LOS.

Preterm neonates are at higher risk for sepsis/infection than term neonates. The increased susceptibility for infections seen in preterm neonates is mainly due to :

- Deficient immune system, mainly due to decreased IgG antibodies and incompetent opsonization and complement activation

- Comprised innate immune system, caused primarily by the immature epithelial barrier

- The increased need for invasive devices ( vascular access, endotracheal tube, feeding tubes and uriarny tract catheters) due to associated severe illnesses

Coagulase-negative staphylococcal species, especially Staphylococcus epidermis, is the leading cause, responsible for greater than 50% of LOS cases in industrialized countries. However, many other bacterial and viral pathogens can be associated with LOS