The overall complication rate differs by published report and can be as high as 40% to as low as 5%.

**Major Complications**

- Death (less than 1/1000)

- Need for surgery due to a complication of the procedure, such as arterial perforation (2 to 3 in 100)

- Abscess/other serious intrauterine infection (1 in 100)

- Pulmonary embolism

- Subsequent pregnancy-related complications, such as spontaneous uterine rupture at the mid-posterior wall during subsequent pregnancy or placenta accreta

- Premature ovarian failure

- Buttock/leg ischemia

**Death**

Deaths have occurred from UAE via uterine infection/sepsis and pulmonary embolism.

**Infection-Spectrum Findings**

Postembolization syndrome is the most common adverse event and includes pain, low-grade fever, malaise, nausea, and appetite loss.  Symptoms and signs of bacterial endometritis include pain, fever, vaginal discharge, and/or leukocytosis.  Initial therapy includes intravenous antibiotics and medications to reduce pain and inflammation.  Noninfectious endometritis can manifest as watery vaginal discharge, fever, and/or leukocytosis occurring days to weeks after the procedure.  Imaging findings do not reliably differentiate infected fibroids from non-infected fibroids immediately after UAE.

**Amenorrhea Spectrum Findings**

Amenorrhea of any kind occurs in less than 10% of cases when considering patients treated for all UAE indications and is much more likely in patients older than 45 to 50 years old.  It is usually limited to a few cycles and is not typically associated with increased FSH levels or menopausal symptoms.  Premature ovarian failure is defined as the presence of persistent amenorrhea, increased FSH levels, and symptoms of menopause (night sweats, mood swings, irritability, and/or vaginal dryness).

**Expulsion of Fibroids**

Expulsion is defined as a detachment of fibroid tissue from the uterine wall and its subsequent transvaginal passage, most commonly occurring with submucosal fibroids that have thin points of attachment.  This process may present with uterine contractions, abdominal pain, fever, nausea, vomiting, and vaginal bleeding or discharge.  Surgical intervention may be necessary to relieve persistent discomfort and remove the tissue.

**Angiography Complications**

These include hematoma, dissection, pseudoaneurysm, and contrast-induced nephropathy.

**Complications Other**

- Patients may have persistent pain.  Contrast-enhanced CT or MRI may be used in these circumstances to assess for findings of non-target embolization or for fibroid sloughing into the pelvis.

- The radiation doses for UAE are an order of magnitude less than those required to produce radiation burns.

- There have been reports of petechial rash on the torso and limbs (1% to 7%) after UAE.