The initial evaluation of the trauma patient is the primary survey. The mnemonic ABCDE is a helpful way to remember the order of the evaluation.

- A: Airway and cervical spine protection. An easy way to assess the airway is to have the patient speak. Ask them their name.

- B: Breathing. Listen for bilateral breath sounds and look at the chest wall motion during the respiratory cycle

- C: Circulation. This helps determine whether the patient is in shock.

- D: Disability. This is the Glasgow coma scale (GCS)

- E: Exposure and environmental control. Here the examiner undresses the patient the provide head-to-toe evaluation for injury.

The secondary survey follows the primary survey.

Laboratory markers are often useful in traumatic settings. Sensitive markers for hemorrhage include serum lactate level and a base deficit, which can both be obtained from an arterial blood gas. Serum lactate and base deficit can also be used to monitor resuscitation. It is important to remember hemoglobin or hematocrit levels are not sensitive for identifying acute traumatic hemorrhage.

Multiple imaging modalities can be useful in evaluating pelvic trauma. An ultrasound can be used to perform a Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) exam while in the trauma/resuscitation area. A FAST exam is used to identify free fluid. It cannot differentiate bowel contents from blood.

X-ray, while useful for quick evaluation in an unstable patient, is still inferior to computed tomography (CT) for the evaluation of fractures.

A urethrogram can help diagnose a urethral injury. As urethral injuries alone are not life-threatening, any vascular or visceral injury should be managed prior to undergoing urethrogram. In the trauma setting, a urethrogram should be performed in a fluoroscopic suite by a trained radiologist. In an ascending study, a 6-8 French Foley catheter is inserted into the fossa navicularis, which is just beyond the meatus. The foley balloon is filled with 2 to 3 mL of water. A C-arm is brought over the bed and is rotated to either the left or right 30 degrees to an anterior oblique position. The patient then elevates his left side to the same degree. 30 mL of iodinated contrast is slowly injected into the foley catheter until the contrast is visualized within the bladder. A descending study fills the bladder with 400 mL of contrast. The patient is then asked to micturate into a bottle in a standing oblique position. An injury is visualized as contrast extravasation. A complete urethral transection typically requires both an ascending and descending urethrogram to estimate the length of transection.