Neuromuscular junction testing in skeletal muscle is done by a specific nerve conduction study called repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS). Neuromuscular transmission failure during RNS is a trademark of NMJ diseases such as Myasthenia Gravis (MG) and Lambert-Eaton syndrome (LES).

During RNS testing, a sequence of supramaximal intensity impulses are applied to the nerve, and the response is recorded from the corresponding muscle. Decrement or increment of response indicates a specific NMJ pathology. A decremental response to RNS is seen in clinical muscle fatigue and weakness. Abnormal RNS is seen in more than 50% to 70% of generalized MG patients, but in patients having only ocular MG, it is often normal. A 10% decrement on slow RNS (2-3 Hz) is typically seen in patients with MG. In patients with ocular MG, electromyographic abnormalities may be detectable only in facial muscles. It is important to maintain a skin temperature between 32ºC – 34ºC before beginning RNS because cold extremities may give false-negative results. If the skin is cold, there may be a reduced release of Ach with the first stimuli, and this will leave more quanta for subsequent stimuli. In the LES, repetitive nerve stimulation at high rates (30-50 Hz) will cause considerable increments, usually exceeding 50% to 200% of the baseline value. Botulism also shows an incremental response on fast RNS. Before conducting RNS testing, it is recommended to at least test one motor and one sensory nerve in an upper and lower extremity first. The idea is to rule out any other underlying cause that involves nerve or muscle, such as peripheral neuropathy or motor neuron disease. Needle EMG test is done utilizing singer fiber studies.  These studies utilize a response called "jitter." Jitter is usually a stable action, but when unstable, it suggests NMJ disorder is present.

Detection of specific antibodies in a patient's serum also aids the diagnosis of MG and LES. Both MG and LES are autoimmune diseases. Around 85% of generalized MG and 50% of only ocular MG patients have ACh receptor antibodies in their serum. For patients with ocular MG, who do not have ACh receptor antibodies in their serum, the detection of muscle-specific kinase (MuSK) antibodies can be helpful in making the diagnosis. A positive serum voltage-gated calcium channel antibody test and characteristic EMG findings may help the diagnosis of LES.

Clinically, intravenous edrophonium is used to help make a diagnosis of MG. Edrophonium is a short-acting cholinesterase inhibitor; its administration transiently improves weakness due to MG. Since edrophonium administration may lead to severe cholinergic reactions, including syncope, it is important to have atropine and proper resuscitative facilities available before conducting this test.