The suprascapular nerve block can be performed on the posterior aspect of the shoulder at the suprascapular notch or via an anterior approach just lateral to the supraclavicular brachial plexus.  Ultrasound guidance can be used to facilitate both techniques.

**Anterior Suprascapular Nerve Block**

Place the ultrasound transducer above the patient’s clavicle to begin to visualize the supraclavicular brachial plexus.

Trace the brachial plexus in the cephalad direction to the level of the cricoid cartilage (C6) to identify the interscalene brachial plexus between the anterior and middle scalene muscle.

The composition of the interscalene brachial plexus at this level is variable. Still, the three hypoechoic structures between the scalene muscles are usually the C5 nerve root on top and the C6 nerve root splitting in two. The C7 nerve root can also be present.  Scan in the caudad directly, observing for a branch of C5 that moves laterally under the belly of the omohyoid muscle. This is the suprascapular nerve.

Follow the suprascapular nerve down towards the level of the supraclavicular brachial plexus, where it will be 1 to 3 centimeters lateral to the rest of the brachial plexus.

Utilize color doppler to identify any nearby vascular structures.

Insert the block needle with an in-plane approach from lateral to medial towards the suprascapular nerve. When below the omohyoid muscle and close to the nerve, confirm that the needle placement is extravascular by negative aspiration.

Inject a small amount (1 to 2 mL) of the block solution to verify appropriate needle tip placement and spread the solution around the suprascapular nerve. Continue to inject the block solution until adequate spread around the nerve is achieved, keeping in mind that the larger the volume injected, the higher the chance of phrenic nerve blockade.

**Posterior Suprascapular Nerve Block**

Place the ultrasound transducer above the spine of the patient’s scapula to visualize the trapezius and supraspinatus muscles.

Below these muscles, the scapula is seen as a hyperechoic line obscuring any deeper visualization. Ultrasound scanning of the surface of the scapula will reveal a slight depression of the bone known as the suprascapular canal.

Identify the suprascapular artery within this canal, using color doppler if possible. The suprascapular nerve runs alongside the artery.

An ideal location to block the suprascapular nerve is at the midpoint between the suprascapular notch and the spinoglenoid notch.

Insert the block needle with an in-plane approach from medial to lateral to avoid the acromion process laterally. Advance the needle through the trapezius and supraspinatus muscles until the tip of the needle is below the supraspinatus fascia and adjacent to the suprascapular artery and nerve.

Confirm that the needle is not intravascular by negative aspiration.

Inject a small amount (1 to 2 mL) of the block solution to verify appropriate needle tip placement and spread the solution around the suprascapular artery and nerve. Continue to inject the block solution until adequate spread around the nerve is achieved.  If the nerve is not visualized (up to 27% of patients), inject 10 to 15 mL of block solution below the supraspinatus fascia.