Quadriceps tendon ruptures are rare, and patellar tendon ruptures even more so. They have an incidence of 1.37 and 0.68, respectively, per 100,000 people. Quadriceps tendon ruptures are more common in male patients above the age of 40. Patellar tendon ruptures require significant force and are more common in athletes under the age of 40.

Patellar fractures comprise 1% of all skeletal injuries and tend to be associated with direct trauma to the patella, such as in a car accident or a fall. They are most common in patients aged 20 to 50 years and are twice as common in men. Closed fractures are most common, but open fractures occur in 7% of cases. Patellar fractures are twice as common as patellar tendon ruptures.

Patellar dislocations comprise 3% of all knee injuries, and 70% of these injuries occur in patients younger than 20. Dancers, other athletes, and those in military service are more prone to dislocations. Dislocations can result from direct trauma or indirect trauma to a knee with inherent patellar instability. The incidence of dislocation decreases with age. Patellar subluxation is a partial dislocation that self-resolves and is more common than a complete dislocation.

Osgood-Schlatter disease is an apophysitis of the tibial tubercle that is most common in young teens, especially males. Onset typically coincides with increasing physical activity or a recent growth spurt. Females will present anywhere from 8 to 13 years of age, while males can present from 10 to 15 years of age due to a later age of growth plate maturation.

The most common cause of knee pain in young athletes is idiopathic chondromalacia patellae (ICP), often referred to by its more generic name of patellofemoral syndrome, or patellofemoral pain syndrome. ICP is an overuse or overload injury and is more prevalent in women (at a rate of 2 to 10 times that of men), runners, and obese patients. Idiopathic knee pain affects close to 30% of all adolescents.