An interprofessional approach to patient care is paramount to delivering optimal care for patients affected with these conditions. Treatment can begin at the scene and may include removal from a hot environment, supine positioning, and rehydration. Once evaluated by an initial medical professional like an on-site physical trainer or by emergency medical services, transport concerns may require discussion with an online medical control physician depending on the stability of the patient. Also, specific centers may be more appropriate for the care of the patient depending on the availability of additional resources, including critical care units. If transport is necessary for a patient, different treatment modalities may need to be employed, including cardiac monitoring, glucose point-of-care testing, and IV placement by technicians or nursing staff, or more invasive cooling measures depending on the severity of the patient's illness that may require specialist consultation. Once at a tertiary care facility, care coordination between pharmacists, nurses, and clinicians is critical to delivering adequate care. Emergency department nurses can assist the clinicians with close patient monitoring to ensure vital sign changes are quickly addressed. Pharmacists can help in delivering medications and assessing for drug-drug interactions to minimize potential side effects. Depending on the degree of dysfunction, specialists in critical care may also need to be consulted, although this would be more consistent with heatstroke. With an interprofessional approach to these cases, heat-related illness can achieve optimal patient outcomes.[Level 5]