The clinical presentations of sleep disorders depend on the specific disease. In general, sleep disturbances can present with a wide range of clinical pictures and commonly include insomnia, hypersomnia, or unusual sleep-related behaviors. Early identification of the underlying sleep disorder is essential to prevent complications and health consequences. A detailed history, sleep habits, and work schedule are critical to the assessment. Obtaining a complete list of medications (both prescribed and over-the-counter) is essential in assessing patients with sleep disturbances. In addition, evaluating detailed family and social history is very important, including any substances used by patients that can affect sleep and/or breathing.

**Insomnia**

Insomnia may present as difficulty falling asleep and/or staying asleep. Patients report taking thirty minutes or more to fall asleep (for those with sleep initiation difficulties) or spending thirty minutes or more awake during the night (for those with sleep maintenance difficulties). The diagnosis of insomnia also requires the presence of compromised daytime function, which includes one or more symptoms like fatigue, daytime sleepiness, poor attention, increased accidents, aggression, reduced motivation, or energy. Insomnia can often be a persistent or recurrent condition with exacerbations connected to medical, psychiatric, and psychosocial stressors. Recently insomnia was classified as a short-term and chronic type.

The ICSD-3 criteria of the diagnosis of chronic insomnia disorder include the following three conditions: (1) difficulty in sleep initiation or maintenance, (2) adequate opportunity to sleep, and (3) presence of daytime consequences due to difficulty sleeping. These conditions should last for at least three months and thrice weekly.

**Hypersomnia**

Patients with hypersomnia complain of disabling excessive daytime sleepiness. They find it difficult to maintain alertness during significant waking hours, with sleep occurring unintentionally or at inappropriate times that interfere with the daily routine. Many patients describe a considerable impact on their cognitive function, calling it brain fog. In addition, in idiopathic hypersomnia, there has been an association between excessive sleepiness and depressive symptom, and low quality of life.

The severity of hypersomnia and fatigue are commonly measured by questionnaires such as the Epworth sleepiness scale and fatigue severity scale.

Patients with narcolepsy complain of excessive chronic daytime sleepiness with cataplexy (type I) or without cataplexy (type II) (transient loss of muscle tone in response to intense emotion such as laughter), hallucinations while falling asleep (hypnagogic hallucinations), or hallucinations while waking (hypnopompic hallucinations), and sleep paralysis (inability to move immediately after awakening). Cataplexy can be manifested commonly (more than 50% of the time) as nontypical presentations (including spontaneous cataplectic attacks or cataplexy induced by non-humorous triggers such as anger) and 30% as partial cataplexy (involves the jaw and the face).

Excessive daytime sleepiness is one of the most common clinical presentations of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) (reported usually in up to 50% of patients), in addition to loud snoring and observed apnea or gasping by a bed partner.

******Unusual Sleep-Related Behaviors******

Features of specific behavior before, during, or after sleep can provide essential clues to certain sleep disorders such as movement disorders, eating disorders, or parasomnia. For example, reporting sleep-related movement disorders such as the urge to move legs during a specific time of the evening could suggest restless leg movements or periodic leg movements, and further questions are needed to confirm the diagnosis. Confusional arousal or sleep drunkenness during arousal or awakening from sleep is a common manifestation of hypersomnolence disorder, such as idiopathic hypersomnia or, less commonly, sleep-related sex (sexsomnia).

Patients who report movements during sleep, such as kicking, punching, arm-flailing, or jumping from bed in response to violent dreams, could suffer from REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD). The patient can recall the dream if he awakens during the episode. This disorder may be associated with other medical conditions such as Parkinson disease, Lewy body dementia, or multiple system atrophy.

The difference between nightmares and night terrors is that the person can become fully alert when awakened during a nightmare. Also, there is a memory of the event in a nightmare, i.e., a person can recall a nightmare. Sleep-eating disorders are other unusual sleep-related behaviors that require detailed histories to differentiate from each other.****Sleep-related eating disorders (SRED) manifest as recurrent episodes of involuntary eating during the first one-third of sleep with reduced consciousness. However, night eating syndrome (NES) manifests by excessive eating between dinner and bedtime or after a complete awakening from sleep.

The symptoms associated with sleep disorders are commonly exacerbated by sleep deprivation, physical or emotional stress, traumatic events, and the use and abuse of substances or medications. Some of the medicines that are commonly linked to unusual sleep-related behaviors are antipsychotics and psychotropic medications (e.g., anticholinergics), sedatives, and hypnotic agents, particularly the class of Z drugs or nonbenzodiazepine benzodiazepine receptor agonists (e.g., zolpidem and eszopiclone) which now have a black box warning from US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) due to increased risk of complex sleep behaviors.