The diagnosis and management of anginal pain are with an interprofessional healthcare team that consists of the primary care provider, nurse practitioner, cardiologist, radiologist, cardiac specialty nurses, and pharmacist. When patients with chest pain are encountered, healthcare workers should consider Takotsubo cardiomyopathy in the differential diagnosis. Since the initial presentation of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy mimics acute coronary syndrome, initial treatment involves aspirin, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitor, lipid-lowering agent, and coronary angiography to rule out obstructive coronary artery disease. The interprofessional approach will result in improved outcomes. [Level 5]

Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a temporary condition, and hence the goals of treatment are usually conservative and supportive care. The therapy is guided by the patient’s clinical presentation and hemodynamic status. In stable patients, treatment modalities include cardioselective beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors for a short period of around 3 to 6 months, with serial imaging studies to determine wall motion abnormalities and ventricular ejection fraction to determine progression or improvement. Anticoagulation is usually reserved for those with documented ventricular thrombus or evidence of embolic events; that occurs in 5% of patients with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. The outlook in most patients with treatment is good, especially with a coordinated interprofessional team managing the case, as outlined above, with the chest pain resolving in a matter of weeks.