Acute cholangitis is a life-threatening condition if not intervened early with medical management or surgical intervention. It is important to recognize cholangitis promptly and understand the risk factors of this condition. Tokyo guidelines proposed an evidence-based management bundle to help guide clinical practice for patients with acute cholangitis. A relevant example of bundle effectiveness is the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines introduced in 2008. Several reports since they came out have shown a marked reduction of in-hospital mortality rates in those institutions compliant with care bundles.

The management bundle includes the diagnostic tools highlighted in the recent update, the Tokyo 2018 guidelines, and includes additional diagnostic and prognostic elements. It also includes helpful timelines for favorable responses to initial treatment in patients with mild cases, as well as the performance of the biliary tract drainage in those with moderate and severe disease. There are also helpful criteria to identify those patients who may benefit from ICU-level care and patient transfer to a hospital capable of providing endoscopic or percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage. The bundle can be found in a simple checklist that is not only great for healthcare providers to follow but can help ensure the use of the bundle throughout the patients' hospital course.

That is why all interprofessional team members who engage with cholangitis cases need to be aware of these recommendations and engage in open communication and information sharing with other healthcare team members, particularly if they are less familiar with such cases and/or recommendations. This interprofessional team would include clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists, each contributing from their areas of expertise. An interprofessional team of clinicians and nurses is necessary to utilize these guidelines and improve patient outcomes. Future evaluations of these bundles are promising in hopes of improving prognosis and enhancing team performance.