Conventional OCT devices obtain an axial scan or A-scan by analyzing the reflectance or scatter of light of various structures of tissue at various depths. A B-scan, cross-sectional image, is then generated by combining multiple A-scans obtained as the light beam scans the tissue in the transverse direction. Acquiring multiple B-scans that are displaced perpendicular to the B-scan image can provide volumetric information that composes a raster scan. The elements expanded upon through OCT-A is provided by the motion of blood within the tissue being predominantly the only movement when scanning the stationary retina. Thus, the comparison of repeated OCT B-scans allows for imaging of blood flow by comparing the pixel-by-pixel differences between scans.

OCT-A allows for noninvasive detection of blood flow and 3D representation of vasculature. OCT-A identifies vasculature by analyzing differences within a repeatedly scanned transverse cross-sectional area of tissue. Two of the current methods for motion detection used are amplitude-decorrelation and phase variance. Amplitude decorrelations work by detecting the difference in amplitude between OCT B-scans while phase variance compares the variations of the emitted light wave properties when it intercepts moving objects.

Due to the high sensitivity to movement during OCT-A imaging, devices commonly implement eye-tracking methods to improve visualization and reduce background interference. The most notable methods in use are the split spectrum amplitude decorrelation technique and volume averaging technique.