The prognosis of benign salivary gland tumors varies widely based on the myriad of tumor histologies with different rates of recurrence and malignant transformation.

- **Pleomorphic Adenoma**recurrence has been reported in 1% to 5% of cases at 7-10 years after initial treatment, likely secondary to incomplete excision, capsule rupture, pseudopodia presence, and satellite lesions.

- **Warthin’s tumor**recurs at a rate of 7% to 12% due to incomplete excisions, tumor spillage, multicentric tumors, or de novo growth.

- **Myoepithelioma**recurrence is rare and is usually attributed to incomplete excision of the primary tumor.

- **Lymphadenoma**rarely recurs. The sebaceous variant has been reported to transform into sebaceous carcinoma in 4 cases in the literature.

- **Sebaceous adenoma**after adequate surgical resection has not been reported to recur. Sebaceous carcinoma has been documented to arise de novo and not from pre-existing sebaceous adenoma lesions.

- **Oncocytoma**can present as a multifocal lesion and recur if not completely resected. There is no evidence that oncocytic carcinoma arises from existing oncocytoma.

- **Cystadenoma**does not recur after complete surgical resection, but there are rare reports of cystadenocarcinoma developing from preexisting cystadenoma.

- **Sialadenoma papilliferum**recurrence is extremely rare, with only 2 reported cases of suspected malignant transformation.

- **Ductal papilloma**(intraductal and inverted type) have no tendency to recur or undergo malignant transformation.

- **Canalicular adenoma**has a recurrence rate of 3%, likely due to its multifocal presentation and incomplete excision.

- **Membranous BCA**has a recurrence rate of 25%.