Heavy metal toxicity is typically secondary to occupational exposure, such as mining and metallurgy, or from contact with industrial waste, either directly or through contaminated food and water sources. Shellfish can be of particular concern. Polluted runoff can cause heavy metals to accumulate in shellfish that are then consumed by humans.

Medications and supplements can also be of concern. While supplements of essential metals can be necessary for patients with deficiencies, inappropriate use could lead to clinical manifestations. Other supplements may have unknown amounts of metals, such as the case with ayurvedic medicines. One study found 65% of ayurvedic medicines contained lead while one third contained arsenic and mercury.

Other specific sources of common heavy metals are listed below:

**Arsenic:**Inorganic arsenic, the toxic form of arsenic, is most commonly ingested from contaminated water and food. Sources of contamination include pesticides, smelting processes of copper and lead, wood preservatives, and volcanic eruptions.

**Lead:**Leaded paint from older homes and lead leaching from pipes can still be a major source.

**Cadmium:**Smoking is a significant source of cadmium.

**Mercury:**The most common source of mercury is methylmercury found in fish secondary to pollution. Mercury is also an occupational hazard for dentists in countries where the production of amalgam (filling material for cavities), is still allowed.

**Thallium:**Sources include coal combustion, semiconductor manufacturing, and exhaust emissions.