**Avascular necrosis (AVN):**

Fractures of the talus have a high risk of developing AVN due to its inherently tenuous and limited blood supply.  Talar fractures make up one percent of all foot and ankle fractures, and the most common (around 50%) talar fractures occur in the talar neck since it is the weakest part of the talus.  Talar neck fractures are classified using Hawkins classification system:

- Hawkins I

- Nondisplaced fracture of the talar neck
- AVN rate: 0% to 13%

- Hawkins II

- Talar neck fracture plus subtalar dislocation
- AVN rate: 20% to 50%

- Hawkins III

- Talar neck fracture plus subtalar and tibiotalar dislocations
- AVN rate: 20% to 100%

- Hawkins IV

- Talar neck fracture plus subtalar, tibiotalar, and talonavicular dislocations
- AVN rate: 70% to 100%

Talar body fractures make up 20% of all talar fractures, and if a fracture extends through an articulating surface on the talar body, sequelae of osteoarthritis can occur.

**Avulsion Fractures of the Talus:**

Lateral ankle sprains are the most common athletic injury, constituting 15 to 20% of all athletic injuries, and 85% of all ankle sprains. Due to the attachment of the ATFL and PTFL on the talus, avulsion fractures of the talus may occur when those ligaments suffer injury in lateral ankle sprains. One percent of all ankle sprains cause avulsion fractures of the talus, so it’s important to consider them in the differential diagnosis when patients present with symptoms a lateral ankle sprain, especially if patients have marked swelling, bruising, or difficulty weight-bearing.

**Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome:**

Located on the ankle's medial aspect, the tarsal tunnel forms a bony floor consisting of the tibia, talus, and calcaneus, and a fibrous roof consisting of the fibrous flexor retinaculum. The posterior tibial nerve, artery, vein, and posterior tibialis, flexor hallicus longus, and flexor digitorum longus tendons are inside of the tarsal tunnel, and the posterior tibial nerve has the potential to become entrapped within the space, known as tarsal tunnel syndrome. Characterized by pain, paresthesia, loss of sensation over the medial foot and ankle, patients may also experience weakness and muscle atrophy in severe cases. Bony lesions on the talus, such as osteophytes or osteosarcoma, may cause the posterior tibial nerve to get compressed in the tarsal tunnel, leading to tarsal tunnel syndrome.

Pes Planus:

Through the subtalar joint, the talus maintains the medial and lateral longitudinal arches. When there is an alteration of talus morphology of the articular facets, the biomechanics of the subtalar joint change, which can lead to pes planus. Three facets are involved in subtalar biomechanics, the anterior, middle, and posterior facets; patients with a separate anterior and middle articular facet have more subtalar stability than other facet configurations. In areas with a high prevalence of pes planus, morphology with fused anterior and middle facets was more common, which may draw a link between talus morphology and pes planus, as well as other conditions such as osteoarthritis of the subtalar joint.