# Continuing Education Activity

Extensor tendon lacerations are relatively common injuries and, when not treated appropriately, may result in a lasting impairment of hand function. The injury mostly affects the working-age group; therefore, these injuries have a great economic impact on society. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of extensor tendon lacerations in the hand and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this injury.

**Objectives:**
- Review the epidemiology of extensor tendon laceration.
- Outline the anatomy relevant to the extensor tendon laceration
- Summarize the options for rehabilitation post extensor tendon laceration.
- Describe the importance of collaboration and communication among the interdisciplinary team to improve outcomes for patients affected by extensor tendon laceration.

# Introduction

Extensor tendon lacerations are relatively common injuries and, when not treated appropriately, may result in a lasting impairment of hand function.

# Etiology

Extensor tendon lacerations are very common injuries among young manual workers.

# Epidemiology

Patients affected are mostly men in their thirties, and as they are the working-age group, these injuries have a great economic impact on society.

# History and Physical

Accurate assessment and management are essential as it has a direct impact on livelihood and work of affected individuals.

Both a systemic and an in-depth examination of both hands is crucial, comparing like for like.

Once that is done, open injuries should be explored with care under local anesthetic and with appropriate magnification.

The radial nerve innervates all extrinsic extensor tendons of the hand. The clinician should look out for radial nerve injury but not forget also to assess median and ulnar nerves.

**Superficial Extrinsic Extensors**

- Extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL)

- Extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB)

- Extensor digitorum communis, (EDC)

- Extensor digiti minimi (EDM)

- Extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU)

**Deep Extrinsic Extensors**

- Abductor pollicis longus (APL)

- Extensor pollicis longus (EPL)

- Extensor indicis proprius (EIP)

The above can be grossly tested even in the case where the patient is unable or unwilling to cooperate by checking for normal tenodesis and digital cascade.

At the level of the wrist, they are divided into six compartments numbered from radial to ulnar side, as shown in figure 1.

- Compartment 1 - APL and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB)

- Compartment 2 - ECRL and ECRB

- Compartment 3 - EPL

- Compartment 4 - EDC and EIP

- Compartment 5 - EDM

- Compartment 6 - ECU

In addition to the above divisions, extensor tendons have been classified into a zone system by Kleinert and Verdan. They have described 8 zones relating to underlying bones and joints. Doyle has later added on an additional 9 zone in the musculotendinous junction in the forearm, which is about 4 cm proximal to the wrist.

Extension in each finger needs to be tested on a joint by a joint basis in isolation, looking at the active range of movement and movement against resistance. Some special considerations need to be taken depending on the zone affected by the injury as per their specialized anatomy and in cases where there is more than one tendon per digit (both EDM and EIP can be tested by extending the relevant finger with the hand flat on a surface). It is worth noting that the full extension of small joints is occasionally possible even after those tendons have been lacerated.

Junctura tendinae prevent independent extension of digits, and they allow for an ongoing extension of the metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ) even if one of the tendons is lacerated. Saggital bands are crucial for MCPJ extension without direct tendon attachment to the proximal phalanx. The extensor mechanism gets more complex past MCPJ (zone V).

Distally lateral bands join and insert into the base of the distal phalanx, just proximal to the nail germinal matrix.

# Evaluation

After the initial assessment is performed, further evaluation should take place. Radiographs must be taken to assess if there are any associated fractures. Glass and some other foreign bodies may also be discovered that way.

Complex injuries such as those associated with significant tissue compromise (be that bone or soft tissue) may require reconstruction well beyond simple tendon repair, which is outside of the scope of this review. A thorough assessment must be conducted and documented, and basic reconstructive principles may be used to approach defects of any complexity

- Restore reliable vascular supply

- Stabilize the wound bed (debridement)

- Reestablish skeletal stability

Once the above is fulfilled, the tendons themselves may be assessed for reconstruction as well as any potential requirement for graft coverage or fascial flaps may be considered.

# Treatment / Management

There is not a clear gold standard for the treatment of extensor tendon lacerations.

Tendon injury repair may include primary repair, secondary repair, immediate reconstruction with a tendon graft, staged tendon reconstruction, and tendon transfer. The greater the number of tissues involved in the injury, the more challenging it is to restore the hand function.

Preserving or restoring appropriate tendon length is crucial to the outcome of repair, as even seemingly minor changes in tension can have a detrimental effect on finger movement.

Miller’s criteria are used to evaluate extensor tendon injuries, and they have shown that laceration severity, the zone of injury, surgical technique used for repair, accompanying trauma to surrounding tissues, hand therapy, and patient compliance are all important to the outcome.

Surgery is indicated if

- more than 25% of the tendon has been cut

- the patient is unable to extend the digit

- there is associated contamination requiring a formal washout and debridement

- the joint is unstable

- conservative approach trial has failed

- the patient can comply with the postoperative protocol.

The procedure can be performed under a local anesthetic or a nerve block, with the patient supine and the arm at their side on an arm table. A pneumatic tourniquet is very useful to control bleeding intraoperatively. Because of varying morphology depending on the zone of injury, treatment is best planned by anatomic classification.

Proximal zones (VI to IX) can take a 3-0 suture, but the size needs to be reduced the more distal the injury.

Contaminated wounds may need to be washed out and left to repair at a later date when the wound bed is clean. If the cut is clear and both ends are seen, they can be repaired in an emergency setting. Alternatively, the skin may be loosely closed over the lacerated tendons as a temporary measure if a surgical repair is required in theatre. Extensor tendon injuries should be managed in extension splinting to avoid exacerbating the injury and tendon end separation.

Partial injuries can be managed with wound care and splinting, but most complete injuries require a primary repair. If not immediately possible patient may be a candidate for delayed treatment, two-stage reconstruction, tendon transfer, or graft, but these may result in subpar outcomes. Often that is due to stiffness and reduced range of motion (ROM). This is seen in both adult and pediatric populations, although it is much more pronounced in the former.

If immobilization in children is difficult due to small digit size, a K wire fixation may be considered. Alternatively, an alumifoam splint can be incorporated into the cast.

**Zone 1**

Zone 1 lacerations are lacerations at or distal to DIPJ and can be referred to as open mallet finger.

**Zone 2**

Zone two injuries are overlaying the middle phalanx. Injures of over 50% of the tendon should be repaired.

**Zone 3**

A zone three laceration is over the PIPJ and results in a boutonniere deformity. It disrupts the central slip. Absent or weak PIPJ extension is a positive finding. It can be either reconstructed directly, or a tendon flap can be raised from the proximal part of it.

**Zone 4**

The injuries are over the proximal phalanx and usually involve the broad extensor mechanism.

**Zone 5**

These are over the MCPJ and must be assumed to be human bites until proven otherwise. They ought to be repaired, and care must be taken to ensure sagittal bands are intact or repaired to ensure central tendon position and a good clinical outcome. If there is a bite involved, the wound must be extended, washed out, left open, and the patient should be started on antibiotics after the cultures have been sent off from the theatre.

**Zone 6**

This area covers the dorsum of the hand over the metacarpals. There may not necessarily be a loss of extension at MCPJ in these injuries because of the presence of the junctures, even if the laceration involves the whole tendon. This makes diagnosis more difficult if not explored.

**Zone 7**

These injuries happen underneath the extensor retinaculum, and it is unclear if releasing it to visualize the damage and repair it is necessary, and there’s no other way to repair the damage.

**Zone 8**

This zone lies in the distal forearm, and lacerations are likely to involve more than just one tendon, as well as muscle bellies themselves and musculotendinous junction. Repair should start with the thumb and wrist extensor and move from there.

**Thumb**

Mallet is less likely here as the tendon is broader, but if it occurs, it should be repaired primarily.

# Differential Diagnosis

The term laceration implies the mechanism of injury; however, other things may present with a similar clinical picture of a deficit in the extensor mechanism function:

- Mallet finger (avulsion of the extensor tendon insertion from the distal phalanx, with or without the involvement of a bony fragment)

- Arthritis (chronic irritation to the tendon may result in damage to the extensor mechanism causing a classical deformity like boutonniere, swan neck or a simple tendon rupture near the joint affected)

- Trigger finger (will result in loss of passive extension as well as active)

- Posterior interosseous nerve (PIN) syndrome (patient will be unable to extend actively, but tenodesis will remain normal)

# Treatment Planning

Given that there is more than one way to manage these types of injuries, care must be taken when planning your treatment and adjustments have to made depending on several factors including anatomical location, concomitant injuries, and patient compliance, for example in case of young children.

# Prognosis

Because of the population, these injuries often happen to, often an early return to work is the goal of treatment.

# Complications

Complications include:

- tendon rupture

- reduction in both active and passive ROM

- adhesions

- extension lag (especially in MCPJ)

- loss of flexion and reduced ability to grip

- finger deformities

- Swan neck deformity: This is usually due to prolonged flexion of the DIPJ and dorsal subluxation of lateral bands with consequent PIPJ hyperextension.

- Boutonniere deformity which is characterized by DIPJ hyperextension and PIPJ flexion. It is usually due to central slip injury and volar subluxation of the lateral bands.

The adhesions are the most common of the above and can result in a loss of flexion.

Extensor tendon laceration outcomes can be measured using Miller's criteria which divide them in to excellent (extension lag, 0 flexion loss), good (less than 10 extension lag, less than 20 flexion loss), fair (11 to 45 extension lag, 21 to 45 flexion loss) and poor (greater than 45 extension lag, greater than 45 flexion loss). Notably, all of the above is measured purely on the extent of complications.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Postoperative rehabilitation minimizes tendon gapping while reducing the chances of adhesions at the same time.

Traditionally extensor tendon lacerations have been splinted statically for 4 to 6 weeks, which often resulted in a loss of flexion due to adhesion formation.

Studies of dynamic and static splinting have shown that the former results in much-improved outcomes in the context of extensor tendon injuries.

There are now splinting methods which allow a degree of movement – just enough to prevent stiffness, but not so much that it ruptures the repair. Relative motion splint (RM) is a compact splint where the injured tendon is placed in a 15 to 20 degree less relative motion than adjacent tendons from a common muscle. This means its particularly applicable in extensor tendons in zones IV to VII.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

With these injuries always being a result of trauma, deterrence must be focused on the safe use of equipment (from the kitchen to the workplace). Once the injury is present, patient education must focus on following the chosen rehabilitation protocol to ensure the optimal outcome.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Good clinical assessment with thorough wound irrigation and using local anesthetics is essential to assess the extensor mechanism, including against resistance.

- In the resting position of the hand, look for the normal cascade of fingers.

- Where there are deeper lacerations that need surgical repair, early referral to a specialist is recommended.

- Fist injuries with teeth or oral cavity induced lacerations over zone 5 can appear very benign, but they need aggressive debridement and antibiotics.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Due to the potential high impact of extensor tendon injury to the patient, if misdiagnosed and mismanaged, the patients' journey through the healthcare system must be robust and well joined. This may include:

- Immediate management by the emergency department staff

- Further management by the hand surgery team

- Anesthetic team support for injuries requiring nerve blocks or general anesthetic

- Involved hand therapy team to fit splints and implement rehab protocols

- Outpatient department to monitor patients progress and highlight the need for further input

An interdisciplinary team approach is the key to achieving good outcomes. Initial evaluation by emergency department personnel is followed by appropriate repair by surgeons, and follow up care by physical or occupational therapists. Nurses in the emergency and orthopedic nurses provide wound care, provide patient and family education, monitor patients, and collaborate with physicians. [Level 5]