Members of the interprofessional healthcare team, such as physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and nurse practitioners, must work together to ensure that the best possible treatment outcomes occur in type 2 diabetes patients. Consistent monitoring of blood glucose and HbA1C is vital in determining treatment success with glyburide. It is also crucial for all interprofessional healthcare providers to recognize the signs, symptoms, and frequency of hypoglycemia if it occurs while the patient is on glyburide and report back to the senior clinician managing the patient. The best clinician judgment is necessary at the first signs of hypoglycemia to determine if therapy should continue or not. If patients with diabetes mellitus type 2 are not at their goal HbA1C or blood glucose targets, glyburide dosages may be increased every 2 to 4 weeks until meeting the desired objective.****

Nursing is also integral to glyburide therapy management for reporting possible hypoglycemia and educating patients of the signs of hypoglycemia, which should be reported to the rest of the team immediately if present. At the same time, the pharmacist, nurse practitioner, and primary care provider should inform the patient regarding a positive lifestyle; this means the discontinuation of smoking, eating a healthy diet, joining an exercise program, and maintaining a healthy body weight. There is ample evidence indicating that a lower body weight leads to better control of diabetes.

In summary, while glyburide therapy can be useful for glycemic control in type 2 diabetes patients, it requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]