Enterococci are found in the soil, water, food, sewage, plants, human skin, the oral cavity, and the large intestine, constituting less than 1% of the total microbiota.

There are about 58 species recognized of enterococci so far, the most important and common being E. faecalis and E .faecium.E. avium, E. caccae, E. casseliflavus, E. dispar, E. durans, E. gallinarum, E. hirae, and E. raffinosus. These so-called non-faecium non-faecalis enterococci are increasingly recognized in reports as causes of the bloodstream and endovascular infections in humans nowadays.

Enterococci are highly resilient and can survive various difficult conditions like common antiseptics and disinfectants, promoting their widespread persistence on ordinary hospital inanimate items.

Enterococcal colonization of the GI tract is the main predisposing factor for severe infections, which occur through gut translocation. Enterococci are phagocytosed and transported across the intestinal wall and resist killing by the lymph system.

The risk of VRE colonization and infections is associated with previous antibiotic exposure disrupting normal gut microbiomes, especially vancomycin and cephalosporins use. In addition, prolonged hospitalization, ICU stays, residence in long term care (LTC) facilities, hemodialysis patients, diabetes, cancer, and transplant patients, stomach acid suppression, use of invasive devices, and exposure to contaminated surfaces including shared medical equipment can also predispose individuals to get enterococci/VRE infections.