**General Anatomy**

- Superficial cervical fascia: continuous with the platysma inferiorly, superficial muscular aponeurotic system (SMAS) of the midface, and galea of the upper face. The superficial fascia covers the majority of superficial facial fat.

- Deep cervical fascia: this fascia encompasses deep structures of the face, including the masseter, facial nerve, and buccal fat.

The skin consists of three layers, epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue (hypodermis).

- Epidermis represents an avascular layer that consists of 4 layers (superficial to deep): stratum corneum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale.

- The dermis consists of connective tissue that contains structures including hair follicles, sebaceous glands, nerves, and blood vessels. The dermis is divided from superficial to deep into the papillary and reticular layer, respectively.

- The subcutaneous tissue (i.e., hypodermis layer) is the deepest layer of skin and consists of loose connective tissue and fat.

**Relevant Forehead Anatomy**

- Supraorbital nerve: sensory nerve supplying the frontoparietal skin and upper eyelid. It originates from the superior aspect of the orbit in the mid-pupillary line.

- Supratrochlear nerve: It is the sensory nerve supplying the skin of the midline glabella, medial upper eyelid, and part of the conjunctiva. It originates approximately 1 cm medial to the supraorbital nerve, usually adjacent to the medial aspect of the brow.

- Arterial supply: It is primarily from the supratrochlear and supraorbital arteries arising from the ophthalmic artery via the internal carotid artery. The superficial temporal artery also provides blood supply to the lateral aspect of the forehead via the external carotid artery.

- Hair follicles: noting the orientation of the hair follicles can assist with placing parallel incisions. In addition to tension-free closure, limiting cauterization of the undersurface can assist with reducing hair loss from procedures.

**Relevant Nasal Anatomy**

- Nasal Subunits- Include the nasal tip, dorsum, columella, and paired sidewalls, alar lobules, and soft tissue triangles.

- Radix- It forms from the junction of the frontal and nasal bone.

- Rhinion- It is at the bony cartilaginous junction along the nasal dorsum.

- Supratip area- describes the region cephalad to where the caudal nasal dorsum meets the tip

- Columella- area between the nasal tip and base of the nose, lying between each nostril

- Skin and soft tissue envelope- overlies the structural support externally and consists of five layers. From superficial to deep, this includes the skin, superficial subcutaneous layer, nasal superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS), a deep fatty layer, and the perichondrium/periosteum. NOTE: Skin thickness varies based on the area of the nose, with the radix and supratip being thicker than the columella and rhinion (thinnest). Also note that sebaceous glands exist in higher density at the caudal aspect of the nose, compared to the cephalic half of nose

- Muscles- transverse nasalis, anomalous nasi, levator labii superioris alaeque nasi, dilator naris, compressor narium minor, depressor septi, and alar nasalis.

- Structural support- the upper-third of the nose receives support from the nasal bone, the middle-third primarily by the septum and upper lateral cartilages, and the lower-third by the nasal septum and lower lateral cartilages.

**Relevant Cheek Anatomy**

- Cheek Subunits: include the medial, buccal, lateral, and zygomatic subunits

- Arterial supply- from medial to lateral, this includes the facial artery and its angular branches, the infraorbital branch of the internal maxillary artery, and transverse facial branch of the superficial temporal artery.

- Fixation points- occur via retaining ligaments anchoring the skin to underlying bone (e.g., zygomatic, masseteric, mandibular).

- Facial nerve: responsible for innervating the muscles of facial expression through five branches: temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical

**Relevant Perioral Anatomy**

- Subunits: The upper lip divides into the philtral subunit and two lateral subunits, bounded by the melolabial creases laterally. The lower lip involves one subunit, separated from the chin by the mental crease. The vermillion border represents the mucocutaneous junction of the lips, with the superior and inferior red lips (i.e., mucous membrane) representing individual subunits.

- Layers: from superficial to deep, this includes the skin, muscle (e.g., orbicularis oris muscle), and mucosa.

- Blood supply: superior and inferior labial arteries that normally travel deep to the orbicularis oris muscle