Prescribing clinicians should recognize the benefit of using hyaluronidase in certain medical conditions. They should collaborate with the pharmacist to achieve an appropriate dose and method of administration. It is essential that hyaluronidase is administered by a medical professional and that patients undergo monitoring for serious complications. Patients must be adequately hydrated before dosage administration and monitored for signs of thrombosis, anaphylaxis, and injection site reaction. If hyaluronidase use is in the inpatient setting, the nursing staff monitors patient vital signs and assesses any acute changes.

When using hyaluronidase for labeled indications, health care providers should know that it is ineffective to deliver the medication intravenously. This enzyme rapidly degrades in the bloodstream, and the beneficial effects terminate. Also, the person administering the subcutaneous injection (typically nursing) should examine the injection site and note that it is clear of any infections. The administration of hyaluronidase in inflamed or infected tissues could precipitate the spread of the local infection.

Communication is key between the patient and all healthcare providers, working as part of an interprofessional medical team. Nurses should note any changes in the patient's health status and notify the attending physician. Nursing will also almost always have the task of administering the medications. The patient should also receive instruction on drug delivery methods and possible adverse reactions should they be able to administer self-injections at home.

The adjuvant therapy of adding hyaluronidase with injectable medications has improved the efficacy of many treatments. Pharmacists should consult with the prescribing/ordering clinician regarding potential dose adjustments and perform their usual function of checking doses and performing medication reconciliation. Patients require smaller dosages of their medications and can receive less frequent injections due to better systemic absorption, contributing to overall improved patient compliance and satisfaction with treatment.