**History**

Small aneurysms are usually asymptomatic and are typically diagnosed by routine investigations. However, large aneurysms present with signs and symptoms of thromboembolism, wall motion abnormalities, contractility defects, arrhythmias, and sudden cardiac death. Common symptoms associated with the ventricular aneurysm include:

- Fatigue

- Shortness of breath

- Chest pain

- Palpitations

- Syncope

- Fluid retention causes swelling of ankles, feet, or abdomen

- Stroke, or thromboembolic phenomenon to any organ in the body

- Limb or visceral ischemia

**Physical Exam**

Clinical examination of the cardiovascular system reveals abnormalities pertinent to associated complications with the ventricular aneurysm. The physical signs which should suspect the presence of ventricular aneurysm include:

- Tachycardia

- Arrhythmias

- Pericardial rub

- Abnormalities of cardiac impulse

- Paradoxical splitting of the S2

- S3 heart sound

- Pedal edema

- Fine inspiratory basal crept

- Murmurs

**Complications**

The following complications can occur after an LV aneurysm.

**Heart Failure and Ischemia**

The LV dilation, paradoxical motion, and high end-diastolic pressure due to aneurysm result in ischemia and heart failure secondary to cardiac output loss. The long-standing volume overload can further cause worsening of LV aneurysm entering a loop that enforces worsening heart failure and ischemia with worsening LV aneurysm.

**Ventricular Arrhythmias**

The LV aneurysm can generate severe ventricular tachyarrhythmias leading to sudden cardiac death. The fibrous tissue at the LV aneurysm site or the transition zone of normal myocardium and the aneurysmal wall can be arrhythmia focus.

**Thromboembolization**

Stasis of blood at the aneurysmal site can increase the formation of a mural thrombus that can eventually dislodge and put the patient at risk of embolization to body organs, including the brain, to cause a stroke.

**Ventricular Rupture and Cardiac Tamponade**

Mature LV aneurysms have fewer chances of rupture due to dense fibrous tissue, but early immature aneurysms can rupture with the potential to cause cardiac tamponade and shock.