**Resectable Tumors**

Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for malignant tracheal lesions whenever possible. The resectability of primary tracheal tumors is assessed using evaluation techniques described above, including CT imaging and bronchoscopy with ultrasound. However, several factors play a role in determining the possibility of safe resection followed by appropriate reconstruction with primary anastomosis. Though up to half of tracheal length can be safely resected, this depends on individual patient characteristics like weight, age, neck mobility, and underlying comorbidities. Given the rarity of these tumors, it is essential that patients be referred to high-volume, tertiary centers for proper evaluation and treatment in a multidisciplinary setting. Five-year survival is 50% for patients treated with surgery, while it is only 10% for patients who are not surgical candidates.

The surgical preparation and anesthetic management for the resection of primary tracheal tumors are standard as used for upper airway procedures and include securing a peripheral arterial line, bladder catheterization, securing an airway, using muscle relaxers, providing appropriate ventilation during the resection using suitable cuffed tubes or catheters for jet ventilation.

Adjunctive therapy with radiation is recommended for all types of tracheal cancers that are locally advanced and in tumors that may not have disease-free margins post-surgery. In patients with squamous cell carcinoma, radiotherapy correlates with improved survival, even in the absence of cancer cells in the resected margins.

Because of the risk of anastomotic leakage or persistence of anastomotic tension after surgery, adjuvant radiation is offered at least two months after the surgery or sometimes even delayed further as determined by any concerns for anastomotic integrity. Aside from positive margins, additional high-risk factors that help identify appropriate candidates for adjuvant radiotherapy include T3 to T4 staging of cancer, perineural invasion, lymphovascular invasion, or extracapsular extension of the tumor.

The literature lacks randomized controlled trials examining chemotherapy in patients with tracheal cell cancers, and the role of chemotherapy remains unclear. However, cisplatin-based chemotherapy is combined with radiotherapy for unresectable diseases or after surgery for bronchogenic carcinomas, especially targeting more peripheral lung cancer.

In poor surgical candidates or those with advanced unresectable tumors, interventional procedures such as stent placement are sometimes necessary, in combination with radiation as palliative therapy. Stents are also used in emergencies in patients presenting with complete or significant obstruction of airways as a bridge to surgery.

**Surveillance**

Disease recurrence has been seen in patients with primary tracheal cancer after surgery, with a 10-year-recurrence-free survival rate of 60%. In squamous cell carcinoma of the trachea, given its association with smoking and due to the "field cancerization" effect, second primary squamous cell cancers may arise elsewhere in the airway. Adenoid cystic carcinomas, on the other hand, are associated with late local recurrences and metastases. Therefore,  regular endoscopic surveillance is recommended, although the ability and options to undergo additional interventions might be limited, especially in patients who received adjuvant high-dose radiotherapy.