Besides treating any identifiable and reversible underlying causes, the management and treatment of Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM) are in concordance with the standard heart failure guidelines.

In patients with acute congestive heart failure exacerbation, intravenous loop diuretics are given to treat hypervolemia. Management of chronic and stable disease with oral diuretics often is needed to achieve a euvolemic state. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) have shown benefit in the treatment of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction and are recommended in patients with DCM. Aldosterone receptor blockade with spironolactone or eplerenone also is recommended in patients with New York Heart Association (NYHA) heart failure class II-IV and systolic dysfunction. Similarly, beta-blockade with carvedilol, bisoprolol, or long-acting metoprolol is recommended in all patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction without any contraindications. The addition of isosorbide dinitrate plus hydralazine also has shown to increase survival amongst those with advanced disease.

Anticoagulation should be used for patients with artificial valves, atrial fibrillation, and known mural thrombus. Oral anticoagulants can reduce the risk of stroke, but the risk of bleeding is always present.

Finally, patients with disease refractory to maximum medical therapy should be considered for cardiac transplantation and LVAD as a bridge or for "destination" therapy in those who are not candidates for transplantation. Implanted cardioverter defibrillators (ICD) for primary prevention of sudden cardiac death and cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) can be considered and are recommended by the heart failure guidelines.

A heart transplant is an option but the lack of donors is a major stumbling block. Indications for a heart transplant include refractory cardiogenic shock, ventricular arrhythmias, dependence on high levels of inotropes and dependency on an IABP or a ventricular assist device.