There are two types of quality control methods

**Internal****Quality Control**

It ensures the accuracy and precision of all procedures and equipment by daily checking by the laboratory staff. The following tools are utilized.

**Levy-Jennings Chart (LJ Chart)**

Levy-Jennings chart estimates accuracy and precision. Serial daily measurements of controls are used to calculate the mean values of standard deviation (SD). The values are then plotted on a graph paper representing mean +-1SD, +-2SD, and +-3SD in horizontal lines. Both normal and abnormal values of controls are plotted on the LJ chart and are monitored daily using Westguard rules.

**Five Cycle Quality Control Charts**

This chart facilitated the recording of daily values by running controls 5 times repeatedly, giving a wide range of values. Horizontal lines are drawn at mean and +-2SD from standard reference. Control is randomly introduced in daily runs, and the mean is calculated at the end of the day. The results are then plotted on the graph. If the numbers keep increasing or decreasing on one side of the mean value, it is denoted as the upward or downward trend.

**Moving Two Standard Deviation Charts**

These charts comprise four columns. The left-most column is for recording daily changes from mean assigned to a control. The mean value in the control run during a particular day is calculated, and the difference from the assigned mean is deduced. The values are entered in the assigned slots for respective days. At the end of the week, the values are added and divided by two, which gives 2SD reading. The weekly 2SD values should not differ remarkably from the assigned 2SD value of the control.

**Youden Plots**

These are specially designed to compare results on two controls. One set is plotted on the x-axis and another set on the y-axis. Zero lines are drawn joining crossing points of axes and +-2SD values. It is inferred that 95% of all results fall in 2SD squares on sides of zero lines.

**Results on Patient’s Sample**

Specific patient’s sample from the previous day is selected and run to check between run precisions. Mean is calculated from patient results within a defined range and should be relatively constant. The values could be plotted in a graph format. Laboratory errors and non-analytical sampling, and transportation errors affect this method.

**Cumulative Sum (CUSUM) Charts**

It is applied to daily means or control values. The values are graphically plotted such that the SD value of a given day is added or subtracted from previous day results to obtain a CUSUM chart rather than plotting mean values daily. The outcome should be a straight line of cusum values if accuracy remains unchanged.

**2.****External Quality Control**

This ensures quality control by merging the performance of different laboratories. Samples are distributed to participating laboratories, and results are analyzed critically and statistically. These techniques also allow comparison of various methodologies used by different laboratories and infer recommendations for standard methods.

**Laboratory Safety Practices**

- Proper handwashing before and after work

- Use personal protective equipment, e.g., gloves, mask, goggles, gowns, etc., while handling reagents and testing materials.

- Do not eat, drink, or smoke on laboratory premises

- Never pipette with mouth

- The work area should be free of sharps, glassware, and chemicals

- Read manufacturer instructions before storage of all laboratory equipment and chemicals

- Properly label all containers in bold letters and always read labels before using any chemicals

- Put warning signs at hazardous places

- Learn proper skills before using unfamiliar equipment and unknown techniques

- Use caution during transferring and mixing chemicals.