**Complications**

Procedural Complications

A percutaneous angioplasty with coronary artery stent placement has several procedural/stent-related complications and late complications.

- **Coronary Perforation:**It is an immediate procedure-related complication. It is associated with a 5-fold increase in the mortality rate within 30 days of the procedure. Coronary perforation is most commonly caused by a balloon or stent to the arterial wall mismatch. Less commonly, perforation can occur in the presence of arterial calcifications, use of atherectomy devices, advanced age, history of CABG, or female sex.

- **Device Embolization:**It is a rare PCI complication, but there have been several incidences reported. This complication results from a loss of a device during the procedure. Stents are the most commonly embolized devices. Other devices that are reported are guidewires and catheter fragments

- **Longitudinal Stent Deformity (LSD):**The newer generation chromium or platinum stents are thinner. These stents have good radial strength and radio-opacity but lack longitudinal strength because of a reduction in the number of fixed links between cells and the alteration of their geometry. LSD can lead to stent strut protrusion into the lumen and extensive strut mal-apposition, which causes flow disruption and increased risk of stent thrombosis.

There are several other procedural complications like coronary artery dissections, intramural hematoma, myocardial ischemia, myocardial infarction, access site bleeding, retroperitoneal hematoma, atheroembolism, acute kidney injuries, strokes, hypersensitive reactions, arrhythmia. All the complications in detail are explained in the percutaneous coronary intervention procedure section.

Coronary Artery Stent-related Complications

Failure of stent deployment is a serious problem associated usually with first-generation stents. It occurs in 2.0 to 8.3 percent of the procedures performed. Failure of stent deployment with dislodgment from the balloon tip leads to serious complications. Several studies have shown second, and third-generation stents have a higher rate of successful deployment.

Stent Thrombosis: Stent thrombosis is a serious complication that leads to myocardial infarction or death. This is a medical emergency and should be managed per protocol. Stent thrombosis is classified into acute, subacute, or late. If the thrombosis occurs during the PCI or within a few hours of the procedure, it is termed "acute". Subacute thrombosis is when it occurs within 30 days of stent placement. Late thrombosis is defined as thrombosis that occurs 1 year or later and is often associated with a drug-eluting stent. Stent thrombosis has been associated with premature cessation of dual antiplatelet therapy.

Stent Infection: Coronary artery stent Infections are rare but are potentially catastrophic complications. These infections can lead to coronary perforations and mycotic aneurysms.

Coronary artery aneurysm is a very rare complication mostly associated with drug-eluting stents.