All Monteggia fractures are considered unstable and require intervention. Emergent orthopedic consultation is essential for open fractures and vascular compromise. Urgent orthopedic consultation is indicated for neurologic deficits without vascular compromise.

Initial management for a suspected fracture includes rest, ice, immobilization, and elevation. In most circumstances, closed reduction should be attempted. If the annular ligament is trapped within the joint, reduction may be unobtainable. Patients with a Monteggia fracture should be placed in a sugar-tong splint with urgent referral to an orthopedist.

**Pediatrics
**

Children usually have better overall outcomes than adults. This is thought to be due to multiple influences, including the remodeling ability of small angle deformities, shorter healing time, and overall solidity of Monteggia fractures in children. Management is determined by the characteristics of the ulna fracture. Non-operative management is successful in this population if the ulna has undergone a plastic deformation (bending or bowing without fracture) or an incomplete fracture (greenstick). This fracture should be treated with a closed reduction and splinted with the elbow flexed at approximately 110-degrees in full supination for 6 weeks. Complete ulnar fractures will require operative management. Short, oblique fractures should be stabilized with elastic intramedullary titanium nail fixation. Comminuted or long oblique ulna fractures are fixed by ORIF using plates and screws.

**Adults
**

Operative management is crucial for the majority of adult Monteggia fractures. Adults are more prone to the persistent angulation and shortening despite closed reduction techniques. The most common operative repair is an ORIF. In most cases, a single compression plate is placed with approximately six cortical screws anchored proximally and distally. The radial head dislocation usually reduces easily after the ulna fracture is realigned. After surgery, the extremity is placed in a long-arm splint with full supination and elbow flexion around 100-degrees for Babo types 1, 3, and 4 fractures. For Babo type 2 fractures the elbow should be splinted at 70-degrees.

As with all fractures, the length of recovery depends on multiple variables including the severity of the injury, intended use of the extremity, and the individual’s ability to heal. Rehabilitation usually begins at 2 weeks after surgical fixation. The goal of rehabilitation is the return of full range of motion and fine motor skills with the absence of pain. Total return to activity depends upon the severity of the injury as well as the patient’s intended use of their upper extremities. Athletes and manual workers may require more prolonged rehabilitation. Typical return to full activity in patients with low physical demands can occur after 8 to 12 weeks. Patients with high demand activity (athletes and manual workers) may require up to 12 to 16 weeks of rehab. Surgical hardware is usually left in permanently, with less than 10% of patients needing hardware removal.