**Cyclosporine**

The drug is metabolized in the liver, and hepatic dysfunction has been reported; periodic monitoring of liver function tests is recommended. Hypertension is another common side effect hence blood pressure monitoring is warranted. The recommendation is to prescribe an antihypertensive drug that is not a potassium-sparing diuretic to avoid life-threatening hyperkalemia.

When non-modified capsules are administered chronically, the absorption is variable. Therefore, clinicians should monitor patients taking non-modified capsules over at regular intervals for cyclosporine blood concentrations and make subsequent dose titrations to avoid toxicity or therapeutic failure, especially in patients with liver transplants. Numerous new assays are being developed to measure cyclosporine blood concentration. Therefore, clinicians should validate when comparing concentrations in the published literature to patient concentrations using new assay methods employed.

**Tacrolimus**

CYP3A enzymes metabolize tacrolimus; hence frequent monitoring of the drug levels is indicated when patients are on concomitant medications that activate and inhibit these enzymes. African Americans need higher drug dosage to reach the comparable plasma concentration trough values. Patients with renal and hepatic impairment should receive the lowest doses of the initial oral dosing range.

**Pimecrolimus**

The drug undergoes metabolism via the CYP3A enzyme pathway. FDA recommends that patients who use this drug avoid tanning beds, sun lamps, UV light therapy. Patients should not wear bandages or dressings covering the skin but rather regular clothes.

**Voclosporin**

It is recommended to establish a baseline for the glomerular filtration rate and measure it every two weeks for the first month and every four weeks after that. Also, measuring urinary protein excretion as clinically indicated is recommended. Blood pressure monitoring at baseline and every two weeks for the first month is mandatory. In addition, EKG and serial potassium monitoring are of significant importance.