**Scapular Winging**

Injury causing denervation of the long thoracic nerve leads to paralysis of the serratus anterior, the primary muscle involved in protracting and pulling the scapula toward the rib cage. This weakened protraction allows the rhomboid muscles and the trapezius to work unopposed, leading to retraction of the medial scapula and elevation of the entire scapula. The result is medial winging of the scapula and limitation functionality of the upper extremity. Less commonly, palsy of the trapezius or rhomboids may cause lateral winging. The diagnosis of serratus anterior palsy is easy to make via visualization of the scapula, and the winging can be accentuated by asking the patient is to push against a wall. Treatment is generally conservative, with pain reduction, activity modification, and physical therapy being the mainstays. Twenty-five percent of patients fail conservative treatment and are candidates for surgical reconstruction.

**Snapping Scapula Syndrome (Scapulothoracic Crepitus)**

In this syndrome, disruption of the gliding motion of the anterior scapula along the posterior thoracic cage (the scapulothoracic joint) leads to audible and painful crepitus with motion of the scapula. Repetitive use, trauma, osteophyte formation, and bursitis have been suggested as possible etiologies of this syndrome. Conservative treatment is the first option in the majority of cases with successful results. This treatment includes the use of physical therapy to increase the space between the chest wall and scapula, as well as corticosteroid injection or NSAIDs for pain management. Surgical treatment is reserved for refractory cases and involves resecting any lesions in the scapulothoracic joint.

**Scapulothoracic Dissociation**

The scapulothoracic joint is disrupted by traumatic injury, leading to lateral displacement of the scapula and damage to nerves and blood vessels. Loss of limb and life are potential outcomes of this injury depending on the extent of neurologic and arterial damage. On exam, swelling of the shoulder, numbness, weakness, and pulselessness in the upper extremity may be present. Radiographs should be taken to determine if there is a fracture of the clavicle or scapula, or if there is detachment in the acromioclavicular or sternoclavicular joints. Surgery is indicated when there is active arterial bleeding, or the limb is at risk of becoming ischemic. Surgery is also required to repair fractures and joint detachments.

**Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy**

This condition is an autosomal dominant muscular dystrophy that affects muscles of the face, humerus, and scapula before moving to the muscles of the trunk and lower extremities. Slowly progressive physical therapy is used to strengthen the muscles while attempting to avoid causing more damage to them. Surgery to stabilize the scapula against the thoracic cage has been shown to improve shoulder function in these patients.

**Impingement**

Rotator cuff tendonitis/impingement presents with pain during overhead activities and results from the tendon of the supraspinatus muscle being pinched down by the acromion in most cases. This condition can cause inflammation around the tendon and in the fluid-filled bursae surrounding it.