**Anatomy of the Vidian Nerve**

The vidian nerve, along with the vidian artery, runs along the pterygoid canal - an osseous tunnel along the floor of the sphenoid sinus (hence also called the nerve of the pterygoid canal). Parasympathetic fibers from the greater superficial petrosal nerve, which runs along the floor of the middle cranial fossa, and the sympathetic fibers via the deep petrosal nerve from the ICA plexus merge to form the vidian nerve.  The pterygoid canal connects the foramen lacerum in the middle cranial fossa with the pterygopalatine fossa. This canal runs in a medial to lateral direction, traversing the floor of the sphenoid sinus, to its funnel-shaped opening into the pterygopalatine fossa at the pterygoid "wedge."

The pterygoid wedge, a useful landmark for identification of the vidian canal, is the base of the pterygoid plates - which is pyramid-shaped - with the apex pointed towards the sphenoid sinus floor. Along the floor of the sphenoid sinus, there are three openings, and the exact location of the vidian canal opening is to be ascertained pre- and intra-operatively. From medial to lateral, the openings are the palatovaginal canal, vidian canal, and foramen rotundum.

It is critical to understand the variations in the course as well as location relative to the sphenoid sinus before embarking on surgery. The vidian canal has a medial to lateral course from the pterygopalatine fossa to foramen lacerum in 80 to 98% of radiographic studies.

**Endoscopic Landmarks for Vidian Canal**

- The vidian canal is visible as an elevation along the lateral aspect of the sphenoid sinus floor

- The intersection between a line drawn along the posterior border of palatine bone and a horizontal line drawn along the sphenoid sinus floor denotes the opening of the vidian canal into the pterygopalatine fossa

**Surgical Relevance of Vidian Canal**

- Endoscopic management of juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibromas

- As a landmark for petrous carotid artery in expanded endonasal approaches

- Vidian neurectomy