At the very premise of gaining a thorough understanding of wounds is acquiring solid foundational knowledge in skin anatomy, physiology, and the biological cascade of normal wound healing.

- Skin layers:

- 
              
- Epidermis (superficial to deep): stratum corneum, stratum lucidum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, stratum basalis
              
              
- 
                  
- Primary cell: keratinocyte 
                  
                

              
              
- Dermis: 2 layers - papillary (superficial) and reticular (deep) dermis
              
              
- 
                  
- It contains hair follicles, sebaceous glands, sweat glands, blood vessels, and nerve fibers.

- Skin offers protection from UV light and serves as a mechanical, chemical, and thermal barrier. Moreover, the skin is involved in the Vitamin D synthesis process.

The series of events associated with wound healing instantaneously begins at the moment of injury. Each of the potential underlying causes must be addressed and optimized for the wound to progress successfully through a complex biological healing procession of hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling. All four highly integrated and overlapping physiological phases must occur in the proper sequence and time frame for wound healing success.

- Hemostasis begins shortly after wound infliction.

- 
              
- Platelets are the first cells to arrive at the injury site and are critical in clot formation to establish hemostasis
              
              
- Platelets release platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and transform growth factor-beta (TGF-B) to stimulate chemotaxis and proliferation of inflammatory cells 
              
              
- (Hemostasis is sometimes included within the inflammatory phase, depending on the source)

- Inflammation is initiated at the moment of tissue disruption (Days 1 to 6)

- 
              
- Polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) first appear during this phase, with a primary role of clearing devitalized tissue, blood clot, foreign material, and bacteria from the wound 
              
              
- Macrophages appear within 48 hours and complete the clean-up activities. Macrophages are the most critical cell in wound healing. They secrete cytokines and growth factors to induce activation and recruitment of additional macrophages while stimulating angiogenesis, the proliferation of fibroblasts, and extracellular matrix (ECM) production, thus prompting the proliferative phase.

- The defining role of the fibroproliferation/proliferative phase is ECM production (Day 4 - Week 3)

- 
              
- While the inflammatory phase is most active, proliferation lays the foundation of a transitional ECM to stabilize the wound edges and provide a healing framework.
              
              
- Fibroblasts replace macrophages to generate new tissue and stimulate collagen production for enhanced structural integrity.
              
              
- Tensile strength begins to increase on days 4 to 5
              
              
- Angiogenesis occurs simultaneously

- Maturation/remodeling is characterized by continued synthesis and degradation of the ECM components in efforts to establish a new equilibrium and organized scar formation (Week 3 - Years)

- 
              
- As the scar matures, late remodeling occurs
              
              
- Type I collagen replaces type III collagen 
              
              
- Peak tensile strength at 60 days is approximately 80% of pre-injury strength.
              
              
- The scar eventually contracts and thins out.

Clinicians perform wound assessments to determine the appropriate treatment for extremely diverse disease processes.

How do professionals then approach wound assessment when the causes are so diverse? Below are some basic questions for the interprofessional team during initial and subsequent wound assessments to best classify and treat a wound to optimize outcomes.

The initial assessment is crucial.

- How: How was the wound created? If chronic, why is it still open? What is the underlying etiology?

- Where: Where on the body is it located? Is it in an area that is difficult to offload or to keep clean? Is it in a region of high skin tension? Is it near any vital structures such as a major artery?

- When: How long has this wound been present? (e.g., acute or chronic)

- What: What anatomy does it involve (e.g., epidermis, dermis, subcutaneous tissue, fascia, muscle, tendon, bone, arteries, nerves)?

- What: What comorbidities or social factors does the patient have that might negatively impact their healing ability?

- Is it life-threatening?

All of these factors significantly impact the treatment plan moving forward. While there are many excellent biologics, skin grafts, and other options available, without the proper understanding of the nature of the wound, the chances of healing will decline significantly.