The ability to properly evaluate the female pelvis sonographically requires proficiency in anatomy. An ultrasonographer will always position the probe so that a marker that propagates on every image consistently indicates cephalad on sagittal imaging and the right side on transverse imaging. Beginning externally, the introitus gives way to the vaginal canal, which ends at the cervix. The cervix has two portions: the ectocervix, which protrudes out into the vagina, and the supravaginal portion, which connects with the uterus.

The endocervical canal connects the vagina and uterine cavity. Circumferentially to the cervix, the fornices are invaginations of the distal vaginal mucosa. A transvaginal ultrasound probe may be placed anteriorly, posteriorly, or on either side of the cervix by placement within the fornix. The posterior fornix creates the inferior border of the Pouch of Douglas, while the anterior fornix borders the vesicouterine pouch inferiorly.

The external os of the cervix gives rise to the endocervical canal and terminates at the internal cervical os. This marks the entrance to the uterus. The fallopian tubes are located on either side of the uterus and are composed of three regions. The portion of the fallopian tube closest to the uterus is called the isthmus, followed by the ampullary segment and then the infundibulum. On the ends of the infundibulum, there are finger-like projections called fimbriae that move like cilia and are responsible for drawing an ovulated ovum into the fallopian tubes. The junction between the uterus and the fallopian tube is termed the cornu.

The ovary is suspended to the pelvic sidewall by the infundibulopelvic ligament (suspensory ligament of the ovary), containing the ovarian vessels.