A thorough history and physical examination along with collateral history from the parents as needed and initial laboratory testing should include:

- Basic metabolic panel (BMP) or comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP)

- Urine analysis

- Complete blood count

- Urine protein to creatinine ratio

Various imaging options are available, and renal ultrasound is the most common and usually first evaluation of postnatal hydronephrosis and UTI in children. Renal USG should be used for siblings of children with VUR. USG is less sensitive for the diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis. Though helpful in renal abscess detection and perinephric space abnormalities, it is not diagnostic for VUR and is not sensitive for renal scars.

Diagnostic voiding cystourethrogram (VCU) is useful in patients with bilateral or unilateral hydronephrosis on renal USG in a patient with the appropriate clinical presentation. It is the primary diagnostic modality for the identification of VUR.

Nuclear cystography can be used to prevent radiation exposure in patients with post-surgical VUR follow-up. It is more sensitive than VCU, but does not aid in the specific grading of VUR or detection of other anatomic defects, for example, ureterocele and diverticulum.

DMSA scan (a radionuclide scan using dimercaptosuccinic acid),

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), can be used to diagnose renal scarring as it differentiates swelling from scarring, unlike a DMSA scan. It is not practical for use in infants and children, moreover, the cost is a hindrance.

Renal biopsy aids in both diagnosis and prognostication.