**Complications of Glottic Cancer**

Compared to other laryngeal cancers, glottic cancer has a reduced propensity for regional and distant spread, but may still cause significant complications when left untreated. Dysphonia may occur through the direct invasion of the thyroarytenoid muscle and vocal ligament, progressing to dyspnoea, aspiration pneumonia, stridor, and acute airway emergencies necessitating tracheostomy in severe cases. Invasion of adjacent structures in the larynx and pharynx may also result in dysphagia and weight loss requiring nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding. The advanced local disease may encase and erode into the internal jugular vein and carotid artery, with the latter resulting in a carotid blowout and fatal hemorrhage.

**Complications of Chemoradiotherapy**

Despite its proven efficacy in the management of moderately advanced laryngeal cancer, chemoradiotherapy has a high rate of highly debilitating side effects and complications. Most commonly, patients will have complaints of xerostomia, mucositis, pain, and swallowing difficulty. These may manifest as late toxicity, resulting in gastrostomy support for nutritional intake in 13 to 14% of patients 1 to 2 years post-treatment.

**Complications of Surgery**

Complications following transoral laser surgery are not infrequent, but are often minor and result in minimal morbidity for a patient. These can include local infection and bleeding, perforation and surgical emphysema, cutaneous fistula, dyspnoea, swallowing difficulties, and aspiration pneumonia.

In more advanced cases, laryngectomy has a high rate of postoperative complications, with this rising further in salvage cases in previously irradiated patients. Pharyngocutaneous fistula remains one of the most common and challenging postoperative complications, frequently prolonging inpatient stay and delaying a return to an oral diet. Other potential complications include localized wound and lower respiratory tract infections, bleeding, damage to nerves (including the accessory, marginal mandibular and hypoglossal), and embolism.