Treatment planning in both bone forearm fractures depends on many factors. Some of these factors include affected bones, mechanism of the injury, fracture pattern, soft tissue status, demographics, degree of initial displacement, etc. The treatment outcome also depends on the above factors and the accuracy of the reduction with regard to angulation, length, and rotation of the reduced fractures.

**Surgical Approaches for Radius**

**Henry's Approach**

A fair exposure of the whole radius is best provided by the anterior (Henry) approach. The landmark of the incision extends from the bicep tendon to the radial styloid. The incision is made over the fracture site, and dissection is made between the brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis muscle. The radial nerve and radial artery, which run under the brachioradialis muscle, are retracted. Every effort should be made to maintain the forearm in supination to move the posterior interosseous nerve away from the operative field. For proximal forearm exposure, the supinator muscle is cut medially at the insertion site, and the plate is placed under the reflected part. The forearm is pronated to partially release the pronator teres from insertion. For distal radius exposures, flexor policies longus and pronator quadratus are mobilized from the radius.

**Thompson Approach**

This posterolateral approach is less commonly used due to implant-related complications (tendon injury & implant irritation). The landmark for incision extends from the lateral epicondyle to the Lister's tubercle. The dissection is made between the extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) and extensor digitorum communis (EDC) proximally, while the inter-nervous plane between extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) and extensor pollicis longus (EPL) is used for distal forearm exposure. Similar to the volar approach, supination is maintained to save the posterior interosseous nerve.

**Direct Lateral Approach**

This approach avoids major neurovascular bundle, which is at risk in both above-mentioned surgical approaches. The incision is made over the mobile wad, and the plane is made between the extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) and extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) proximally. The distal direct lateral approach involves an interval between extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) and brachioradialis (BR).

**Surgical Approach for Ulna**

The universal approach for the ulna involves an incision over the shaft of the ulnar border. The dissection is made between the extensor carpi ulnaris and flexor carpi ulnaris muscle. The plate is usually placed over the medial or ulnar surface of the ulna.