Opioid therapy should begin as a trial for a predefined period, usually less than 30 days. Treatment goals should be established with the patient prior to the initiation of opioid therapy.

Before initiating opioid therapy, the clinician and patient should agree on a set of practical goals in terms of pain relief, functionality with activities of daily living, and management of co-existing conditions such as anxiety and depression. In addition, the plan should include therapy selection, progress measures, and involvement of other specialty providers if needed. When developing a pain management plan that involves opioids, the clinician should:

- Start at the lowest possible dose and titrate to effect

- Start with short-acting opioid formulations

- Discuss the need for frequent risk and benefit assessments

- Instruct the patient (and include family members if possible) of the signs and symptoms of respiratory depression

- Reassess risks and benefits with each dose increase

- Use extra precaution and be able to justify reason when prescribing 50 or more morphine milligram equivalents per day

- Be knowledgeable of federal and state opioid prescribing regulations

- Be knowledgeable of patient monitoring, equianalgesic dosing, and cross-tolerance with opioid conversion

- Augment treatment with nonopioid or, if necessary, immediate-release opioids over long-acting opioids

- Taper opioid dose whenever possible

**Consent and Treatment**

According to the American Medical Association, a physician can proceed with informed consent after assessing the patient’s ability to understand the medical information to make an independent decision. The informed consent should include a discussion of the following:

- Patient diagnosis

- Purpose of recommended treatment

- Risks and benefits of treatment

- Alternative treatment or no treatment and their associated risks and benefits

**Informed Consent for Opioid Therapy Should Include the Following Potential Risks**

- Physical side effects/complications

- Addiction

- Physical dependence

- Cognitive effects

- Psychological dependence

- Tolerance

- Hyperalgesia

- Patient victimization****

Prescribing policies should be clearly described, including policies regarding the number and frequency of refills and procedures for lost or stolen medications.

**Patient and Physician Treatment Agreement**

There is no consensus as to what should be specified in an opioid treatment agreement or contract. Still, it should promote a discussion of information, adherence to treatment, and an understanding of treatment goals.

Many physicians include descriptions in the opioid treatment agreement documentation that specify that the patient should agree to use medications safely, avoid "doctor shopping," and consent to drug testing.  The physician also has an active role in the agreement to address issues related to the treatment plan and have appropriate follow-up visits to assess the progress of the interventions.

Reasons for opioid therapy change or discontinuation should be included. Agreements can also include monitoring strategies and mechanisms for the safe storage and disposal of unused drugs.

**Discontinuing Opioid Therapy**

Discontinuing opioid therapy should be based on a physician-patient discussion. Prescribers should consider ending opioid treatment when pain is minimal or resolved, side effects develop, analgesia is inadequate, quality of life has not improved, the function has deteriorated, or evidence of aberrant medication use is present. Opioids should be tapered slowly to minimize withdrawal symptoms. An addiction specialist may need to be involved in cases of aberrant behavior or when tapering is difficult to tolerate.