**Methods**

- Identify restricted joint movement for all possible planes of motion

- Move the joint into its restriction for all planes

- Apply a short quick thrust through one of the restricted joint planes

- Retest motion

**Techniques**

**Diversified**— This method is the high-speed, low-amplitude route typically synonymous with manual physiotherapy corrections. For this procedure, therapists use a fast torque (low amplitude) throughout varying joints to recover the flexibility and mobility range throughout the joint. The body of the patient is put in particular forms to maximize the spinal change.

**Palmer Gonstead Adjustment**— Although the Gonstead adaptation is an HVLA adaptation, close to the previous technique, it varies in the assessment (localization) of the target joint and joint localization parameters. To position the patient, devices such as the cervix chair or the chest-knee table, specially built chairs, and tables can be used.

**Thompson Terminal Point**—This technique involves physiotherapy treatment tables with areas that fall short distances through an HVLA threshold, thus promoting mobility by minimizing the table's component. This modification strategy is also used in preference or for a combination of more conventional diversified HVLA modifications. This may or may not have the typical "cracking tone," so this coercion method may also be viewed as a form of mobilization or gentle adaptation.

**Alternative Lumbar Manipulation**— Other HVLA techniques do not explicitly fall into a direct or indirect model. Some techniques include soft tissue manipulation, which is essentially a massage technique that reduces muscle tension. For illustration, to make HVLA convenient, we typically make the area with soft tissue techniques before conducting HVLA.

**Balance and Control**— The practitioner and patient must have a reasonably relaxed, comfortably controlled, and secure posture in their body. For optimum placement, the table should be at the appropriate height. The patient has to be put on the table properly. While conducting the thrust, the patient should be calm. The thrust is better applied with (1) leverage used to change the joint with the hand and/or forearms and (2) to position and focus the thrust into a particular joint.