In one study of congenital limb deficiencies, 64.8% of cases had an identifiable cause. Of the 162 births with limb deformities that were considered, 13 (8.0%) were caused by chromosomal abnormalities. Trisomy 18 (Edward's syndrome) was the most common, but also thrombocytopenia-absent radius (TAR) syndrome and trisomy 13 were observed. 14 (8.6%) of cases were caused by a known syndrome, association, sequence, or related anomaly. Vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies, and limb abnormalities (VACTERL) association and anencephaly were most common in this category, while cloacal exstrophy, encephalocele, sirenomelia, prune belly syndrome, and urethral atresia were also noted. A total of 16.1% of cases were attributed to Mendelian or familial inheritance. Ectrodactyly (i.e., cleft hand syndrome) was most common, but also Fanconi anemia, Holt-Oram syndrome, and many others were noted. Teratogenic exposure to drugs accounted for 3.7% of cases in this study, with most resulting in infants of mothers with diabetes, and one due to misoprostol exposure in utero. Take note, however, that thalidomide is classically associated with the truncation of limbs as phocomelia, and while not observed in this study is a well-known complication of the drug. Vascular disruptions accounted for 28.4% of cases of limb defects and were most commonly caused by amniotic band syndrome. Poland syndrome and acardiac twins were other less common causes of limb deficiency. The remaining 35.1% of limb deformities had an unknown cause.