Structurally, HDV is made up of an RNA genome, hepatitis D antigen (HDAg), and a lipoprotein envelope from HBV. The genome only codes for the HDAg. There are two types of HDAgs named after their size, i.e., long and short. Viral replication occurs in the hepatocytes. The virus is unique as it uses the host RNA polymerase II to transcribe its messenger RNA. While the short HDAg activates viral replication via direct binding to the HDV RNA, the long HDAg directs viral assembly and also inhibits viral replication. The virus is completely assembled after incorporation of HBV envelope after which it is released.

HDV infection only occurs in the presence of HBV. In individuals who are susceptible to HBV, co-infection with both viruses results in an acute hepatitis B and D infection. Clinically, co-infection resembles classic acute hepatitis B, except that a biphasic course of two peaks of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) may be seen several weeks apart. This is because HBV infection must be established first during the acute coinfection before HDV starts to spread. More severe cases than acute HBV mono-infection may be seen in some cases with an increased risk for liver failure. Most patients recover during the acute coinfection with HBV and HDV, and only about 5% of the patients go on to develop chronic infection (defined as persistence of infection beyond 6 months).

In individuals who are chronic carriers of HBsAg, a full-blown superinfection can occur which may present as severe acute hepatitis or exacerbation of preexisting chronic hepatitis B. In patients with chronic HBV infection, acute HDV infection may be mistaken for a hepatitis B virus flare. In those with hitherto undiagnosed hepatitis B infection, clinical presentation and initial investigations may be mistaken for acute HBV infection if HDV superinfection is not entertained as a diagnostic possibility. The clinical course during a superinfection is often more severe than HBV/HDV coinfection. As the presence of HBsAg allows for continuous viral replication, 90% of these individuals progress to chronic hepatitis D. Chronic HDV infection causes more severe morbidity and complications (progressive fibrosis, cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and hepatic decompensation) than chronic HBV infection.

In cases of triple infection with HBV,  hepatitis C virus (HCV) and HDV, either HDV or HCV will dominate the other viruses depending on the geographic region, host immune factors, activity, and genotype of the HDV involved.

While the mechanism by which HDV induces liver damage is not entirely known, it is thought to be due to the host immune response.