The etiology of fetal macrosomia can be categorized under two major classes:

**Maternal Causes**

- Maternal diabetes: diabetes in pregnancy could be gestational diabetes, insulin-dependent, or drug-induced/chemical diabetes. Jordan Pederson in 1920 hypothesized that maternal hyperglycemia is associated with fetal hyperinsulinemia and fetal hyperglycemia, which ultimately leads to the overutilization of glucose by the fetus and hence the abnormal increase in growth.

- Obesity: globally, there is a current epidemic of obesity. Obesity constitutes a significant risk for diabetes mellitus in all demographics. Precisely, maternal obesity is linked to a 4 to 12 folds increase in the prospect of fetal macrosomia. The standard metabolic basis of macrosomia is believed to be increased insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia.

-  Multiparity: when compared to other maternal risk factors, multiparity is not a major risk factor for macrosomia. Still, it can contribute to maternal diabetes mellitus and obesity, which are more important causes. Women with parity greater than three are prone to have macrosomic babies.

- Previous LGA (large for gestational age) infants: women who have had previous macrocosmic babies are at five to ten folds at an increased risk of another macrosomic baby.

- Post date pregnancy: prolonged gestation of more than 42 weeks is more likely linked with an increased chance of macrosomia due to the continuous supply of nutrients and oxygen-rich blood to the developing fetus.

**Fetal Causes******

- ****Fetal gender: macrosomia is more commonly observed in the male gender over the female gender. This can be partly attributed to the fact that male fetuses are usually about 150 grams heavier than female fetuses.

-  Genetic and congenital disorders: a couple of congenital disorders that have been shown to have associations with macrosomia and LGA fetuses are:

-  Beckwith – Weiderman syndrome

-  Sotos syndrome

-  Fragile X syndrome

-  Weaver syndrome