Ideally, investigations checking inflammatory markers and blood culture should be performed prior to starting antibiotic therapy. Routine blood work is somewhat unhelpful in the diagnosis and distinguishing septic bursitis versus non-infectious bursitis. The peripheral white blood count (WBC) may not differ between infectious and non-infectious bursitis and may not even be elevated above the normal range. However, C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) usually are elevated in septic bursitis. A uric blood acid level should also be checked if suspicion of underlying crystal arthropathy exists. Antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor can be ordered in chronic cases or when the underlying autoimmune disease is suspected. Plain film radiography is usually performed, but it is unnecessary and unhelpful in most cases of septic bursitis. Spurs may be seen in chronic cases of bursitis, but joint effusions are not normally present. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imagining (MRI) are not needed unless suspicion for osteomyelitis or septic arthritis exists, or if the physician is evaluating a severe case of septic bursitis in which surgical management may be necessary.

Aspiration and analysis of bursal fluid is the gold standard of diagnostic criteria. A bursal fluid analysis should always be performed in any case of bursitis to rule out septic or crystal-induced bursitis. Fluid should be evaluated for cell count with differential, gram stain, culture, and crystals. In recent literature summaries, the average bursal WBC was found to be around 63,000/mm; although, other studies show leukocytosis of more than 2000/mm was 94% sensitive and 79% specific for septic bursitis. Septic bursitis usually has a predominance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes while non-infectious has a predominance of mononuclear cells. Gram staining can vary between 15% and 100% sensitive and may only be positive in half of septic bursitis cases. However, a negative gram stain with WBC more than 50,000/hpf, and clinical signs and suspicion for septic bursitis should be treated accordingly. The culture of bursal fluid should always be done in order to evaluate for any bacterial growth in order to help guide treatment.