Numerous meta-analyses have demonstrated that long-term efficacy, predictability, and safety outcomes of SMILE are comparable to those of femtosecond-LASIK.

Current research has suggested numerous benefits of SMILE over femtosecond LASIK. Numerous clinical trials have demonstrated reduced postoperative dry eye associated with SMILE than LASIK.

There are some drawbacks with the use of SMILE as compared to femtosecond LASIK. Patient-reported discomfort is often higher during tissue manipulation in SMILE than flap lifting in LASIK; for this reason, inexperienced surgeons should consider administering more topical anesthesia or prescribing anxiolytics or sedatives before surgery.

Notably, SMILE has shown slightly worse outcomes for the treatment of low-to-moderate astigmatism than LASIK, but comparable results in the correction of high astigmatism.

Though most SMILE patients are satisfied with their long-term visual outcomes, approximately 3% undergo enhancement procedures within two years of their initial procedure.

Of note, there remains no consensus on the best procedure for retreatment after SMILE. Among the numerous options proposed include repeat SMILE below the cap, surface ablation (PRK) augmented by mitomycin-C (MMC), thin-flap LASIK in the cap, or cap-to-flap (also known as the CIRCLE approach).

Some emerging developments include the potential use of SMILE or lenticule implantation procedures for the treatment of hyperopia. Limited research has suggested that SMILE results in similar visual outcomes, recovery rate, and safety outcomes as hyperopic LASIK.

Another area of ongoing research is the combination of SMILE with accelerated corneal cross-linking (CXL), also known as SMILE XTRA. This procedure requires the intraoperative injection and application of 0.25% riboflavin in the stromal interface for 1 minute, following by 75 second of UV-A radiation exposure. This procedure is hypothesized to improve the accessibility of laser refractive surgery to individuals with thin corneas at baseline by minimizing the risk of postoperative ectasia. Recent trials on SMILE XTRA have shown promise, but the long-term effects still need to be evaluated.