Tobramycin is administered via IV, IM, topical and inhalational routes. The efflux P-glycoprotein pump located in the brush border of the intestines leads to poor bioavailability, so oral administration is avoided.

- Clinicians can use tobramycin as a 0.3% ophthalmic solution or 0.3% ointment to treat ocular infections.

- Tobramycin administration via oral inhalation is available to treat cystic fibrosis-associated pneumonia.

- Intramuscular injection, intravenous infusion, and intraventricular (off-label) administration have been used to treat serious bacterial infections.

**Adult Dosing**

For severe infections, the dosage for tobramycin is 3 mg/kg/d in divided doses every 8 hours. If the infections are life-threatening, the dose can be increased to 5 mg/kg/d in equally divided doses every 6 to 8 hours and reduced to 3 mg/kg/d as clinically appropriate. However, dosage should not exceed 5 mg/kg/d unless serum levels are monitored to prevent potential toxicity due to excessive serum levels. According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 2022 guidelines,  a single dose of 5 mg/kg is recommended for cystitis caused by extended-spectrum β-lactamase–producing Enterobacterales (ESBL-E), Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE).

**Intravenous Administration**

For intravenous administration, the usual volume of diluent (0.9% sodium chloride injection or 5% dextrose injection) is 50 to 100 mL for adult doses. Tobramycin is usually infused for over 20 to 60 minutes. A shorter infusion period (<20 min) is not recommended as peak serum levels can exceed 12 mcg/mL, resulting in supratherapeutic concentrations. Tobramycin injection should not be premixed with other drugs and should be administered separately according to the recommended dose and route. The usual treatment duration is 7 to 10 days.

**Inhalation Solution**

Tobramycin, 300 mg/5 mL solution, is administered by oral inhalation for 15 minutes using a nebulizer in patients with cystic fibrosis. The recommended dose of tobramycin inhalation solution for pediatric patients 6 years of age and older and adults is 1 single-dose ampule (300 mg) inhaled twice daily for 28 days. Dosage need not be adjusted by weight. Tobramycin inhalation solution after 28 days of treatment should be stopped for the next 28 days and then resume for the next 28 days. The doses should be inhaled as close to 12 hours apart as possible; doses should not be taken less than 6 hours apart.

Tobramycin should not be diluted or mixed with any other medication or dornase alfa in the nebulizer. Tobramycin inhalation solution should not be used for subcutaneous, intravenous, or intrathecal administration. The drug should be used cautiously in premature neonates, as renal immaturity can prolong the serum half-life of other medications.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic impairment:**Tobramycin does not undergo clinically significant hepatic metabolism. No dose adjustment is generally required.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Serum tobramycin concentrations should be monitored during therapy for dose adjustment. A tobramycin loading dose of 1 mg/kg is followed by subsequent dose adjustments based on the patient's serum creatinine or creatinine clearance. The half-life of tobramycin increases as the creatinine clearance of the patient decreases. Therefore, either normal doses are given at prolonged intervals or reduced doses are administered at 8-hour intervals. However, therapeutic drug monitoring is recommended. Consider monitoring patients' clinical and laboratory parameters for better therapeutic efficacy. The clinical evidence suggests the dosing of tobramycin following hemodialysis sessions.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Tobramycin is an FDA pregnancy category D medication. Aminoglycosides may cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. Aminoglycoside antibiotics can cross the placenta, and there have been reported cases of irreversible bilateral congenital deafness in children when streptomycin was administered to the mother during pregnancy. There have been no reports of serious adverse effects on pregnant women, fetuses, or newborns with maternal use of other aminoglycosides. Use with caution only if potential benefits overweight potential risks. Tobramycin can be considered an alternative agent in cesarean section, although it is generally less preferred than other antibiotics.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Tobramycin is poorly excreted into breast milk, and the amount transferred to infants through breastfeeding is expected to be minimal. Older infants are likely to absorb even less tobramycin, reducing the risk of systemic adverse effects. However, monitor the infant for possible diarrhea, candidiasis, and CDAD. Inhaled tobramycin is compatible with breastfeeding. Maternal use of a tobramycin ear or eye drops poses an insignificant risk for the infant.

**Pediatric Patients:**Tobramycin can be administered up to 4 mg/kg/d during early neonatal periods. Weight-based dosing is recommended in pediatric patients. Therapy duration should be limited to 7 to 10 days to prevent neurotoxicity.

**Elderly Patients:**Meta-analysis has implied that elderly patients are at a higher risk for acute kidney injury due to aminoglycosides. Use with caution.