The following concepts are involved in the regulation of blood flow and should be considered.

1) Monroe-Kellie Doctrine

- Related to the understanding of intracranial pressure (ICP) dynamics.

- Any individual component of the intracranial vault may undergo alterations, but the total volume of intracranial contents remains constant since the space within the skull is fixed. In other words, the brain has a compensatory mechanism to maintain an equilibrium thereby maintaining normal intracranial pressure.

- According to this, the displacement of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or blood occurs to maintain normal ICP. A rise in ICP will occur when the compensatory mechanisms are exhausted.

2) Regulation of Cerebral Blood Flow (CBF) (Autoregulation)

- Under normal circumstances, the brain maintains CBF via auto-regulation which maintains equilibrium between oxygen delivery and metabolism.

- Autoregulation adjusts Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) from 50 to 150 mm Hg. Beyond this range, autoregulation is lost, and blood flow is only dependent on blood pressure.

- Severe brain injury may disrupt the autoregulation of CBF.

3) Cerebral Perfusion Pressure (CPP)

- The difference between the mean arterial pressure (MAP) and the ICP (CPP = MAP – ICP)

- Target CPP is 55 mm Hg  to 60 mm Hg

- An increase in ICP can decrease the CPP

- A decrease in ICP may improve CPP

- Remember, lowering MAP in a hypotensive patient may lower CPP.

- A minimum CPP should be maintained to avoid cerebral insult. It is age-dependent and is as follows: Infants - 50 mm Hg, Children - 60 mm Hg, and Adults - 70 mm Hg.

- CBF is quite sensitive to oxygen and carbon dioxide.

- Hypoxia causes vasodilation and therefore increases CBF and may worsen ICP.

- Hypercarbia also results in vasodilation and can alter ICP via effects on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pH and increases CBF.

4) Mean arterial pressure (MAP)

- Maintain = 80 mm Hg

- 60 mm Hg = cerebral vessels maximally dilated

- < 60 mm Hg = cerebral ischemia

- > 150mmHg =  increased ICP

5) Intracranial pressure (ICP)

- An increase in ICP can decrease CPP.

- ICP is dependent on the volume of the following compartments:

- Brain parenchyma (< 1300 mL)

- Cerebrospinal fluid (100 - 150 mL)

- Intravascular blood (100 - 150 mL)

- Cushing reflex (hypertension, bradycardia, and respiratory irregularity) due to an increase in ICP

- Normal ICP is age-dependent (adult younger than ten years old, child 3-7 years old, infant 1.5-6 years old)

- > 20 mm Hg= increased morbidity and mortality and should be treated. It is perhaps more important to maintain an adequate CPP.

TBI can be classified as primary injury and secondary injury:

**Primary Injury**

Primary injury includes injury upon the initial impact that causes displacement of the brain due to direct impact, rapid acceleration-deceleration, or penetration. These injuries may cause contusions, hematomas, or axonal injuries.

- Contusion (bruise on the brain parenchyma)

- Hematoma (subdural, epidural, intraparenchymal, intraventricular, and subarachnoid)

- Diffuse axonal injury (stress or damage to axons)

**Secondary Injury/Secondary Neurotoxic Cascade**

Secondary injury consists of the changes that occur after the initial insult. It can be due to:

- Systemic hypotension

- Hypoxia

- Increase in ICP

After a primary brain injury, a cascade of cellular and biochemical events occurs which include the release of glutamate into the presynaptic space resulting in activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate, a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid, and other receptors. This ionic shift may activate cytoplasmic and nuclear enzymes, resulting in mitochondrial damage, and cell death and necrosis.

**Brain Herniation**

Herniation occurs due to increased ICP. The following are the types of herniations.

1) Uncal transtentorial

- The uncus is the****most medial portion of the hemisphere, and the first structure to shift below the tentorium.

- Compression of parasympathetic fibers running with the third cranial nerve

- Ipsilateral fixed and dilated pupil with contralateral hemiparesis

2) Central transtentorial

- Midline lesions, such as lesions of the frontal or occipital lobes or vertex

- Bilateral pinpoint pupils, bilateral Babinski signs, and increased muscle tone. Fixed midpoint pupils follow along with prolonged hyperventilation and decorticate posturing

3) Cerebellar tonsillar

- Cerebellar tonsils herniate in a downward direction through the foramen magnum

- Compression on the lower brainstem and upper cervical spinal cord

- Pinpoint pupils, flaccid paralysis, and sudden death

4) Upward posterior fossa/cerebellar herniation

- The cerebellum is displaced in an upward direction through the tentorial opening

- Conjugate downward gaze with an absence of vertical eye movements and pinpoint pupils