Monitor blood pressure, renal function (BUN and serum creatinine [SCr]), and potassium levels in patients taking losartan.

**Heart Failure**

Reevaluate blood pressure (including orthostatic blood pressure), renal function, and serum potassium. Patients with systolic blood pressure <80 mm Hg, low serum sodium, diabetes mellitus, and impaired renal function should be closely monitored (ACC/AHA).

**Hypertension**

**The 2017 Guideline for Management, Prevention, Detection, Evaluation of High Blood Pressure in Adults (ACC/AHA)**

Confirmed hypertension with known CVD or 10-year ASCVD risk greater than or equal to 10%: blood pressure less than 130/80 mm Hg is the recommended target. Confirmed hypertension without markers of increased ASCVD risk.

**Diabetes and Hypertension**

**The American Diabetes Association (ADA) Guidelines**

The goal of therapy for patients 18 to 65 years of age is systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 140 mm Hg and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) less than 90 mm Hg. The goal for patients 18 to 65 years and at high risk of cardiovascular disease is SBP less than 130 mm Hg and DBP less than 80 mm Hg if this is achievable without undue treatment burden.

For patients 65 years and older who are healthy or of complex/intermediate health), the goal of therapy is SBP less than 140 mm Hg and DBP greater than 90 mm Hg.

The goal of therapy for patients 65 years of age and older and of very complex/poor health is SBP less than 150 mm Hg and DBP less than 90 mm Hg.