Valproic acid is contraindicated in patients with hepatic disorders, significant hepatic impairment, hypersensitivity to components of the drug and class of drug, urea cycle disorders, mitochondrial disorders, or suspected disorders in patients <2-year-old, and pregnancy (for migraine headache prophylaxis use of valproic acid).

Also, valproic acid use requires caution in patients under two years old, pediatric, elderly, renal impairment, organic brain disorders, head injury, mental retardation with seizure disorders, congenital metabolic disorders, hereditary mitochondrial disorders, multiple anticonvulsant treatments, myelosuppression, decreased GI transit time, hepatic disease, an active or a history of depression, and bleeding risk.

**Black Box Warnings**

- Serious or fatal hepatic failure has been reported during the first six months of treatment. Patients <2-year-old are in greater danger of hepatic toxicity. There is an increased risk of fatality in anticonvulsant polytherapy. In older patients, hepatotoxicity may present with symptoms of weakness, lethargy, anorexia, facial edema, vomiting, and loss of seizure control; monitoring symptoms and LFTs at baseline and then frequently is recommended, particularly during the first 6months of treatment.

- The use of valproic acid in patients with mitochondrial disease (POLG-related Mitochondrial disorders) has been demonstrated to increase the risk of hepatotoxicity and death. Valproic acid should only be used in patients over two years old with suspected Mitochondrial disorders who have failed to respond to other anticonvulsant treatments, with frequent monitoring of LFT and POLG mutation screening.

- It can cause life-threatening pancreatitis. Cases of hemorrhagic-pancreatitis with rapid progression to death have been reported in all ages regardless of treatment duration. If patients have symptoms of pancreatitis such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or anorexia, advise them to discontinue the medication and start alternative treatment based on clinical indication.

- It can cause severe congenital malformations such as neural tube defects and lower IQ scores after in-utero exposure. Additionally, in-utero exposure to valproic acid correlates with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorders in children.