The long thoracic nerve is the motor nerve to the serratus anterior muscle, which functions to pull the scapula forward around the thorax, allowing for anteversion of the arm, and to lift the ribs, assisting in respiration. Also, the serratus anterior inferior is responsible for the anterolateral motion of the scapula, which allows for arm elevation.

The long thoracic nerve runs downward and passes anterior to the scalenus posterior muscle, courses distal and laterally deep to the clavicle and superficial to the first and second rib, and travels inferiorly on the chest wall along the mid-axillary line on the outer surface of the serratus anterior muscle for a distance of approximately 22 to 24 centimeters.

The long thoracic nerve forms as an upper portion originating from the C5 and C6 nerve roots and a lower portion coming from the C7 nerve root. The fusion of these two portions occurs in the axilla. Within the supraclavicular region, the upper division of the long thoracic nerve travels parallel to the brachial plexus near the suprascapular nerve.

A distinct characteristic of the long thoracic nerve is its superficial course along the entire length of the serratus anterior muscle it supplies. The nerve further divides into smaller branches that are parallel to the main trunk before turning at right angles and providing innervation to the individual slips by entering via the superior aspect of the slips. A collateral branch of the thoracodorsal artery, specifically the serratus anterior branch, joins the long thoracic nerve at the proximal edge of the distal serratus anterior head, and eventually travels over the nerve and divides into the terminal muscle branches. This juncture is known as Crow’s feet and is significant in serving as a landmark in flap transfer surgeries.