Management includes addressing the leak and also the etiology of the leak after diagnosis. Thoracic duct leak is classified into low output if the volume is < 1 liter and high volume if > 1 liter.

Low output chylothorax - Drainage of the fluid in symptomatic patients along with dietary control measures and concomitantly treating the underlying cause is the goal of treatment. Octreotide is often used to reduce the number of leaks and to avoid surgery.

High output chylothorax - Most commonly seen post-surgically. Though conservative management is tried initially, many end up needing an intervention such as thoracic duct ligation or embolization.

Ancillary measures include complete bowel rest, initiation of parenteral nutrition, and also octreotide/somatostatin and etilefrine therapy for patients awaiting surgery.

Alternatively, non-surgical treatment, including thoracic duct embolization or disruption, may be utilized in high-risk patients.

An alternative route to approach the thoracic duct is by retrograde transvenous approach or even direct ultrasound-guided puncture in the neck followed by embolization.

In post-pneumonectomy patients with chylothorax, the leak is managed without chest tube drainage if there is no evidence of a mediastinal shift. A drain may be a necessity if there is a contralateral mediastinal shift, and further evaluation for thoracic duct ligation or embolization should be carried out. Thoracic fistulas are usually treated by direct suture ligation of the thoracic duct with or without adjuncts, including biologic glues or sclerosing agents.

Efficacy of conservative management depends on etiology and volume of pleural fluid drainage, with benign conditions such as infection or sarcoidosis.

Pleurodesis: In patients who are not surgical candidates, pleurodesis is an option and is done by installing substances like talc or chemicals such as bleomycin and tetracycline through a catheter into the chest drainage. In surgical pleurodesis with abrasion, pleurectomy can be done during thoracotomy or thoracoscopically, depending on the fitness of the patient. It is observed that surgical pleurodesis is more effective compared to medical pleurodesis.

Thoracic duct ligation and thoracic duct embolization are done through catheterization and embolization or disruption of prominent retroperitoneal lymphatics. After every thoracic duct ligation, it is advisable to confirm by looking at their frozen section tissues.

Shunts: In patients with failed definitive procedures, a pleuroperitoneal or pleurovenous shunt may be performed.

Bypass: Terminal thoracic duct bypass is said to be a novel procedure that improves the condition and also cures patients suffering from thoracic leaks due to central conducting lymphatic anomalies.