Indinavir is administered orally in 100 mg, 200 mg, 333 mg, and 400 mg capsules. The most common indinavir dosage is 800 mg, which is taken as two 400 mg capsules every 8 hours. Recommendations are that patients do not take the medication with food, only water or other liquids (i.e., tea, juice, or coffee). Patients may choose to take indinavir either 1 hour before a meal or two hours after consuming a meal to maximize absorption. If taken with a large meal rich in protein and/or fat, it will diminish the drug's efficacy because of reduced absorption.

**Dual Combination Therapy with Protease Inhibitors (PI)**

The following are protease inhibitors used in combination with indinavir. Only one PI would typically be administered concurrently with indinavir. The most common regiment for dual therapy is as follows:

Indinavir (800 mg, orally, every 8 hours) + ritonavir****(100 mg to 200 mg, orally twice daily). Note: take ritonavir with 48 oz of water.

**Combination Therapy with two Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NRTIs)**

Indinavir (800 mg, orally, every 8 hours) + zidovudine (200 mg, orally, every 8 hours) + lamivudine (150 mg, orally, twice a day) reduces HIV RNA levels below 500 copies per milliliter.

Studies suggest that both treatment plans result in similar plasma HIV RNA and CD4+ levels.

Optimal dosing remains undetermined for pediatric patients. However, indinavir was considered a category C medication under the prior FDA categorization for drugs in pregnancy.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic impairment:**If a patient is diagnosed with hepatic insufficiency before starting treatment, the prescriber should lower the indinavir dosage to 600 mg.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The pharmacokinetics of indinavir have not been evaluated in patients with renal insufficiency. Furthermore, patients should consume an average of 1.5 liters or approximately six glasses of 8 fluid ounces of liquid daily to ensure adequate hydration. Remaining hydrated will help prevent and severity both nephrolithiasis and/or urolithiasis. Additionally, if nephrolithiasis or urolithiasis occurs, the medication should be held for 24 to 72 hours or discontinued altogether.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Optimal dosing remains undetermined for pregnant patients. However, indinavir was considered a category C medication under the prior FDA categorization for drugs in pregnancy. According to the manufacturer's product labeling, there is a lack of adequate studies on pregnant patients. Given the inadequate information on the use of indinavir during pregnancy, its use is not recommended in HIV-infected pregnant patients. Clinicians should encourage patients exposed to indinavir during pregnancy to register in the antiretroviral pregnancy registry.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Information regarding the evidence of indinavir use during breastfeeding is limited. Indinavir is not a recommended antiretroviral medication during breastfeeding.