A succinct clinical history is useful in identifying the various etiologies of malignant pleural effusions. Identifying various comorbidities (pulmonary, renal, cardiac, and hepatic) is useful in determining the patient's physiological reserve and may have management implications.

**Symptoms**- Clinical presentation depends upon the extent of effusion, rapidity of development, and physiological reserves of the patient.

**Dyspnea**- Dyspnea is the most common presenting complaint in a patient with an underlying pleural effusion, seen in more than 50 percent of all cases. Mechanical factors such as a decrease in chest wall compliance, altered biomechanics resulting from a contralateral shift of the mediastinum, decrease in ipsilateral lung volume, activation of compensatory reflex phenomenon (from chest wall receptors), and caudal displacement of the diaphragm have been identified as contributory factors.

Assessment of dyspnea in cancer can be performed using the unidimensional and multidimensional scale (which factor in functional impairment).

Other tools used in assessing dyspnea include dyspnea interview schedule, pulmonary functional status scale, and baseline dyspnea index.

**Pain**- Chest wall pain signifies the presence of underlying chest wall involvement or malignant pleural mesothelioma.

**Cough**- May be productive and associated with hemoptysis. Denotes underlying pleural inflammation, which may accompany tumor involvement of the pleura or bronchial involvement by the tumor. Constitutional symptoms such as loss of appetite, loss of weight, easy fatiguability, and lethargy might indicate the advanced stage of the disease.

**Symptomatology related to paraneoplastic manifestations**- Muscle weakness - Lambert Eaton Myasthenic syndrome (small-cell lung cancer).

Headache, engorged veins in the anterior chest wall, dyspnea, altered voice, confusion, obtundation, swelling of face, swelling of the arm - superior vena cava obstruction (small cell lung cancer).****Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy - most commonly associated with non-small cell lung cancer.

**Occupational history**- History of occupational asbestos exposure should be sought.

**Family history**- A family history of malignancy may offer a clue to the diagnosis of an underlying malignancy.

**Past medical history**- A review of medications should also be performed as medications such as amiodarone, nitrofurantoin, and methotrexate can be associated with the development of exudative effusions.

**Clubbing -**Presence of Lovibond sign, Schamroth sign, and Distal phalangeal (DPD) to interphalangeal depth (IPD) ratio of more than 1 are physical signs required for establishing a diagnosis.

**Physical Examination**

**Inspection**- Asymmetrical chest wall expansion, tracheal shift, intercostal fullness, Trail's sign, scars of previously performed thoracocentesis or biopsies, a predominance of abdominal breathing.

**Evaluation**(**General Physical Examination) -**Poor performance status may signal an urgent need for imminent palliation. Prognostication may be performed using a palliative prognostic scale which is a component of the palliative prognostic index (PPI). A score more than 4.5 on the PPI may signal a survival lesser than six weeks.

**Percussion**- Dullness is usually observed on percussion. The percussion note has been traditionally described as being woody dull.

Joseph Leopold Auenbrugger is regarded as the inventor of direct percussion, which has been replaced mainly by the digitodigital method of percussion. Percussion is preferentially performed with the patient sitting up. Topographic comparative percussion is performed in the apical regions, fourth and fifth intercostal spaces (right middle lobe and lingular lobe), and basal areas of the lung.

**Cardinal Rules of Percussion**

The pleximeter finger (middle finger of the left hand) should be in firm apposition to the chest wall, while the remaining fingers should be kept off the chest wall. The tip of the middle finger of the right hand or the plessor should strike the middle phalanx of the pleximeter finger swiftly at a right angle. Percussion must be performed in the intercostal spaces. Percussion may be performed directly over the clavicle. Percuss should proceed from a more resonant to a less resonant area. Percussion from a resonant towards a flat area is also considered acceptable. This ensures that a difference between the two areas is felt (if present). While performing the percussion act, the plessor finger should strike the middle phalanx of the pleximeter finger at a right angle. The sudden movement of the plessor finger should originate at the relaxed wrist. It is advised to keep the long axis of the pleximeter finger parallel to the border of the organ being percussed. The note should be compared in similar areas between both sides.

The force of the stroke of the plessor finger depends upon patient factors (age, sex, and built), tissue type, differential diagnoses being considered, the area being examined, and thickness of the chest wall. Damping of the percussion stroke can be avoided by withdrawing the plessor finger immediately after striking the middle phalanx. Both the sound and the feeling of the percussion note are considered crucial to formulating a differential diagnosis. Heavy percussion causes large areas of the lung to resonate (as a result of which it is possible to miss small areas of impaired note) and should be avoided.

**Auscultation**- Diminished or absent breath sounds are present on auscultation. A pleural rub is usually heard in dry pleurisy.

**Egophony**(E to A change) - Change in the timber of voice from E to A (but not pitch or volume). They are usually heard as a high-pitched nasal sound and described by Laennec as the bleating of a goat. It is characterized by the intensity and suddenness with which it appears—usually confined over a small area on one side of the chest. An absence of similar change in sound over the contralateral side should be used before making a definitive diagnosis. Underlying mechanism - accumulation of fluid enhances the transmission of high-frequency sounds while filtering out low-frequency sounds.

**Whispering pectoriloquy**- Pectoriloquy is defined as the increased resonance of voice while passing through the lung structures. Whispered sound is heard clearly after placing a stethoscope over the patient's chest. Both whispered pectoriloquy, as well as egophony, are heard at the upper border of the pleural effusion.

**Summary**- Physical findings of dullness to percussion and decreased vocal fremitus have been used clinically to diagnose pleural effusion. The presence of dullness on percussion makes the diagnosis likely. A chest radiograph is required to confirm the diagnosis. In the presence of a low clinical suspicion of a diagnosis, the absence of a reduced vocal fremitus decreases the likelihood of diagnosis. A chest radiograph is usually not advised without a finding of reduced vocal fremitus on physical examination.

According to Auenbrugger and Forbes, dullness is a prerequisite for diagnosing pleural effusion, although this particular physical finding might be challenging to discern in bilateral pleural effusion. Percussive sounds have been shown to penetrate up to a maximum depth of 6 cm (2 cms of chest wall and 4 cm of fluid). At least 500 ml of fluid should be present in the pleural cavity to yield positive findings on physical examination. The finding of significant tachypnea, significantly decreased chest expansion, absent tactile fremitus, absent breath sounds, contralateral tracheal or mediastinal shift (presence of Trail's sign, tracheal deviation), bulging intercostal spaces, and presence of egophony has been shown to correlate with accumulation of more than 1500 ml of fluid in the pleural space.