Hen egg allergy often presents in infancy and most symptoms are typically cutaneous in nature, often presenting with diffuse urticaria and angioedema.  However, gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting, and/or respiratory symptoms can also occur. Symptoms often present within minutes post-exposure but can sometimes be delayed to 2 hours after ingestion.  In severe cases, life-threatening anaphylaxis can occur with hen egg exposure, often requiring epinephrine administration.

Egg allergy can also present with two related disorders: eosinophilic esophagitis and food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES).  Eosinophilic esophagitis is an inflammatory disorder associated with the accumulation of intraepithelial eosinophils, and it is mediated by both IgE and non-IgE processes.   Egg protein is one of the more common triggering factors for the development of eosinophilic esophagitis

FPIES is also an inflammatory disorder characterized by vomiting, lethargy, and diarrhea.  Typically symptomatic presentation in FPIES occurs 2 - 6 hours after ingestion of egg protein.

As previously mentioned, dermatitis can be a presenting symptom of an allergic reaction to egg protein exposure.  This finding, however, is typically found in children less than one year of age. Atopic dermatitis onset after one year of age is not usually associated with egg allergy, and any workup should include other differentials beyond egg allergy.

Asthma has often been associated with food allergies due to the association with IgE mediated reactions.  A small cohort study involving 1218 children indicated an incidence of asthma in 80% of the children with egg allergy with a calculated odds ratio of 5.0