Estrogen enters the systemic circulation as a free hormone or protein-bound, either to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) or albumin. Non-protein-bound estrogen has the property to diffuse into cells freely with no regulation. Cellular physiological response to estrogen begins in the cell cytoplasm with estrogen binding to either alpha-estrogen receptor or beta-estrogen receptor. The activated estrogen-estrogen receptor complex then crosses into the nucleus of cells to induce DNA transcription by binding to nucleotide sequences known as estrogen response elements (ERE) to enact a physiological response. Estrogen hormone levels in the body are regulated by the negative feedback effect of estrogen on the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. An example of negative feedback can be observed during the menstrual cycle. Estrogen metabolic activity primarily occurs within the liver hepatocytes CYP3A4, and it is excreted from the body in the urine.

The effects of estrogen on various systems of the body are described below:

- Breast: Estrogen is responsible for developing mammary gland tissue and parenchymal and stromal changes in breast tissue at puberty in females. Estrogen is also responsible for the development of mammary ducts during puberty and pregnancy, functions to secrete breast milk in postpartum lactation.

- Uterus: In the uterus, estrogen helps proliferate endometrial cells in the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, thickening the endometrial lining in preparation for pregnancy.

- Contraception: Ethinyl estradiol, an ingredient of OCPs, functions to suppress the hypothalamus release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and pituitary release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) in preventing ovulation during the menstrual cycle.

- Vagina: Estrogen supports the proliferation of epithelial mucosa cells of the vagina and the vulva. In the absence of estrogen, the vaginal and vulvar mucosal epithelium becomes thin and presents with symptoms of dryness known as vulvovaginal atrophy.

- Bone: During puberty, estrogen aids in the development of long bones and the fusion of the epiphyseal growth plates.

- Cardiovascular: Estrogen affects plasma lipids by increasing high-density lipoproteins (HDL) and triglyceride levels while decreasing low-density lipoproteins (LDL) and total plasma cholesterol and reducing the risk of coronary artery disease with early use in postmenopausal women.