The distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) formes from volar and dorsal radioulnar ligaments (RULs) and the triangular fibrocartilagenous complex (TFCC). The latter components consist of individual anatomic structures including the central articular disc, meniscal homolog, the ulnolunate and ulnotriquetral ligaments, the extensor carpi ulnaris tendon sheath/floor, and part of the joint capsule. The primary role of the distal radioulnar joint is to stabilize the articulation of the radius around the stationary ulna during pronation and supination.

Beginning with osteology, the ulnar head sits within the sigmoid notch of the radius. An anatomic study of this osseous anatomy revealed that the length of the sigmoid notch increases from volar to dorsal. There is additionally significant variation of the ulnar length, which was found to have a negative correlation to the mid-coronal length of the sigmoid notch. Obliquity of the distal radioulnar joint was also found to correlate with the ulnar variance. In patients with a typical negative ulnar variance, the sigmoid notch was found to be angled in a proximal-ulnar direction, but as ulnar variance became more positive, this became progressively less angled, eventually resulting in a reverse obliquity.  There was considerable variability found between the specimens analyzed, but bilateral consistency in a given specimen. This variability indicates that comparison may be made within a particular patient but should be made with caution when comparing anatomy between patients.

Concerning ligamentous components, the radioulnar ligaments are the major stabilizers of the distal radioulnar joint. These are proximal condensations of the triangular fibrocartilage complex. The current school of thought states that during pronation, the dorsal radioulnar ligament becomes tight while the palmar radioulnar ligament becomes lax; during supination, the inverse occurs. Though some debate surrounds the role of ligamentous stability to the distal radioulnar joint, a growing body of evidence supports this model. Several studies have also looked into the role of the radioulnar ligaments in the translational stability of the distal radioulnar joint. These studies have agreed that the dorsal radioulnar ligament is of particular importance to dorsal translational stability when the forearm is in pronation. The palmar radioulnar ligament correlates with the stability of volar translational stability with the forearm in supination. Additionally, radioulnar ligament disruption was found to increase the rotational range of motion in the biomechanical study performed by Ward, et al.  This is a novel report and indicates the importance of the ligamentous complexes to the rotational stability of the distal radioulnar joint.

The role of the interosseous membrane, joint capsule, and articular disc in maintaining joint stability have been less well studied but are part of the sectioning sequences used in biomechanical studies and have not consistently correlated to gross instability of the joint.