Omeprazole is considered a benign drug; however, the primary adverse effects reported in drug labeling include headache (6.9%), abdominal pain (5.2%), diarrhea (3.7%), nausea (4.0%),  vomiting (3.2%), and flatulence (2.7%) in adults. Other than these adverse effects, cough, rash, asthenia, back pain, regurgitation, upper respiratory infection, constipation, and dizziness are also reported in 1 to 2 % of patients.

The major adverse effects in the pediatric population are similar to adults; the most frequent events were reportedly fever and respiratory infections.

Proton pump inhibitors (PPI) therapy may correlate with an increased risk of Clostridioides difficile (C. diff) associated diarrhea.

There are rare reports of hypomagnesemia with prolonged treatment with PPIs.

Avoid concomitant use of omeprazole with St John’s wort or rifampin and other CYP450 inducers due to the potential reduction in omeprazole concentration.

There is an increased risk of drug resistance or toxic effect of antiretroviral medicines when used with omeprazole.

Patients on warfarin could experience increased INR, resulting in bleeding when used with omeprazole.

Some evidence has shown a diminished antiplatelet activity of clopidogrel due to impaired CYP2C19 function when used in conjunction with 80 mg omeprazole.

According to product labeling, warnings and precautions are advised for patients who develop acute tubulointerstitial nephritis,  cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12) deficiency, and cutaneous or systemic lupus erythematosus while on omeprazole.

Long-term and multiple daily dose PPI treatment may have connections with an increased risk for osteoporosis-related fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine. However, newer studies show that long-term PPI use does not correlate with changes in bone mineral density or bone strength that would predispose to increased fracture risk, suggesting this relationship is not causal.

**Drug Interactions**

**Coadministration with Amoxicillin:**Combine therapy of omeprazole and amoxicillin may lead to serious fatal hypersensitivity reactions in patients on penicillin therapy. These reactions are more common in patients with a history of hypersensitivity reactions to penicillins, cephalosporins, or other allergens. During combined therapy, if such reactions occur, amoxicillin therapy should be discontinued, and appropriate therapy should be implemented.

**Coadministration with Clarithromycin:**Combine therapy of omeprazole and clarithromycin may increase the plasma levels of omeprazole and clarithromycin.

**CYP2C19 Substrates:**Omeprazole competitively inhibits CYP2C19, which may increase the plasma concentration of other CYP2C19 substrates like diazepam, proguanil, moclobemide, phenytoin, and warfarin.