Proper management of hypernatremia involves identifying the underlying condition and correcting the hypertonicity. The goal of therapy is to correct both the serum sodium and the intravascular volume. Fluids should be administered orally or via a feeding tube whenever possible. In patients with severe dehydration or shock, the initial step is fluid resuscitation with isotonic fluids before free water correction. Hypernatremia is corrected by calculating the free water deficit using one of the following formulas.

- Total Body Water[0.6 in men and 0.5 in women x body weight(kg)] x [(plasma sodium/140) -1]

- 4ml x bodyweight x (desired change in serum sodium meq/L)

It is important to remember that rapid correction of hypernatremia can lead to cerebral edema because water moves from the serum into the brain cells. The goal is to decrease serum sodium by not more than 12 meq in 24 hours. Close serial monitoring of serum sodium every 2 to 4 hours is essential during the acute phase of correction. Seizures occurring during correction of hypernatremia is a sign of cerebral edema due to rapid shifts in osmolality, and the administration of hypotonic fluids should be halted. The estimated free water deficit should be corrected over 48 to 72 hours with a decrease in serum sodium not exceeding 0.5 meq per hour. Patients should be carefully monitored for the rate of correction, urine output, and ongoing losses. In cases of sodium intoxication, the free water requirement may be too large and cause volume overload, requiring the use of loop diuretics and, at times, peritoneal dialysis to remove excess sodium. Older children and adults with central DI may need desmopressin, which is available in intranasal and oral forms. Water intoxication and hyponatremia are adverse effects seen with the use of desmopressin.