A prostatic abscess often develops as a complication of acute prostatitis, primarily from reflux of infected urine into the prostatic ducts during voiding. Generally, they occur in patients with poorly controlled diabetes or a compromised immune system. Over 50 percent of patients with prostatic abscesses are diabetics.

In literature from the pre-antibiotic era, sexually transmitted organisms like Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia were commonly identified pathogens in prostatic abscesses. This was often complicated by spontaneous rupture into the urethra, perineum, or rectum and was associated with a 50% mortality rate.Escherichia coli has been attributed to more than 70 percent of all prostatic abscess cases followed by Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, Proteus, Enterobacter, Serratia, and Enterococcus species.Staphylococcus aureus causing prostatic abscesses is also well documented, possibly through hematogenous spread from osteomyelitis, chronic gingivitis, extensive boils (furunculosis), or rheumatic fever.taphylococcus aureus also appears to be an increasingly common causative organism.Klebsiella pneumoniae is increasingly being found in cultures of prostatic abscesses as well as fungal organisms like Blastomyces, Cryptococcus, and Nocardia.Burkholderia pseudomallei was found to be a relatively common prostatic abscess pathogen.Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a rare cause and is almost always associated with some degree of immunodeficiency.

While E. coli is the most common causative organism for community-acquired prostatic infections, nosocomial infections are much more likely to involve Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterococcus, or Staphylococcus aureus, have a more virulent and aggressive presentation, are more likely to develop sepsis, will more frequently demonstrate increased antibiotic resistance, and are more prone to progress to a prostatic abscess.

In general, older men will develop a prostatic abscess as a complication of a prostate biopsy, benign prostatic hyperplasia, or inadequately treated acute bacterial prostatitis. Often patients will have a good initial response to antibiotic treatment. Several studies have shown that about 10% of men who present with prostatic abscesses had recently undergone prostate biopsies.

A prostate abscess may be the first sign of an underlying chronic or debilitating medical condition in younger men.