Renal angiomyolipomas can be classified histologically as either typical (triphasic) or atypical (monophasic or epithelioid).

**Gross Pathology Descriptions**

- The mean tumor size is 6 cm, but the range varies from 0.5 to 25 cm.

- A "large" tumor would be >6 cm. (Historically, this was previously 4 cm.)

- Circumscribed, not encapsulated.

- Tumors rarely have a cystic component.

- Tumors are usually unifocal and unilateral but could be bilateral or multiple, suggesting underlying tuberous sclerosis.

- The cut surface appearance could be gray-white (smooth muscle component), red (vascular component), or yellow (adipose component); the typical golden-yellow appearance depends on the fat content.

- It may or may not invade the local perinephric fat, lymphatics, or renal sinus.

- May rarely invade the renal vein and develop a tumor thrombus similar to malignant renal tumors with possible intracardiac extensions and pulmonary embolisms.

- Epitheliod variant tends to have minimal fat and may show metastasis in a third of cases.

**Microscopic Pathology Descriptions**

- The classic triphasic renal angiomyolipoma contains thick-walled dysmorphic, disorganized hyalinized blood vessels without elastic lamina.

- The tumor also contains mature adipose tissue and myoid spindle cells.

- Epithelioid variant usually contains predominant polygonal cells with densely eosinophilic cytoplasm. Hemorrhage, necrosis, epithelioid cellular proliferation, and mitotic figures are typically common.

- In renal angiomyolipomas with epithelial cysts, the cysts are lined by cuboidal or hobnail epithelial cells.

**Biomarkers**

Renal angiomyolipomas are comprised of three cell types, all originating from pericytes.-smooth muscle actin, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2.

Renal angiomyolipomas typically stain strongly positive for estrogen, progesterone, and androgen receptors which partly explains the increased incidence in females and the accelerated growth in patients on hormonal therapy.

Melanocytic markers for spindle cells (HMB-45 and Melan-A) can help differentiate angiomyolipomas from various sarcomas.

Malignant angiomyolipomas are extremely rare. Risk factors would include fat-invisible lesions on imaging, pure epithelioid histology, a size greater than 7 cm, and the presence of intralesional necrosis.