Knowledge of the mechanisms and triggers of coronary artery spasm in the clinical setting is still somewhat limited. Experimental and clinical studies point out the presence of hyperreactivity of coronary smooth muscle to constrictor stimuli. This hyperreactivity is nonspecific and appears multifactorial. The causes of vascular smooth muscle cell hyperreactivity remain poorly understood, but chances are they will be different among patients. While it has been suggested that endothelial dysfunction is involved in coronary spasm, it is not likely to be a direct cause. However, it can facilitate the effects of vasoconstrictor stimuli in the spastic segment. Several triggers have also been identified that could act in the same patient with the potential to cause angina attacks in different conditions. Accordingly, these triggers usually represent an elusive therapeutic target.

Microembolization needs to be a consideration in the pathophysiology of coronary artery disease (CAD), and it represents a key event during coronary intervention, especially in the ACS setting. Spontaneous and procedural micro-embolization can both lead to myocardial injury, but the main clinical implications are in ACS patients. A number of diagnostic tools are available for the detection of myocardial injury following micro-embolization and progress in intravascular imaging, and functional intracoronary tests will be helpful in early detection and upstream identification of those anatomical settings at higher risk of microembolization.

Thrombus aspiration, GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors, dual antiplatelet therapy, and intensive statin treatment are recommended to limit its impact.