The overall structure of rRNA is conserved across different species; however, aminoglycosides exhibit a significantly higher affinity, approximately 10-fold, for the rRNA of prokaryotes compared to eukaryotes. This increased binding affinity is not significant enough to explain the adverse effect profile of tobramycin. The most common adverse effects are dizziness, headache, confusion, nausea, and skin rash. Serious adverse drug reactions of tobramycin include ototoxicity, neuropathy, and nephrotoxicity. Rare cases of liver injury have been reported with the use of tobramycin.

**Resistance**

Resistance to aminoglycosides occurs, as with any group of antibiotics; however, resistance occurs far less frequently than with other classes of antibiotics. There are different explanations for this finding, such as aminoglycosides are not prescribed as readily as other classes of antibiotics, like beta-lactams. Resistance to aminoglycosides includes modification of the target site. Three classes of enzymes that modify and decrease the efficacy of tobramycin include aminoglycoside phosphotransferases (APHs), nucleotidyltransferases (ANTs), and acetyltransferases (AACs).

Bacteria with biofilm have greater resistance to aminoglycosides. Another mechanism of resistance to aminoglycosides is related to the reversible down-regulation of drug uptake into the bacteria.Pseudomonas aeruginosa have developed aminoglycoside resistance through enzyme modification and decreased outer membrane permeability for the drug.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

Concurrent use of other nephrotoxic and neurotoxic antibiotics, especially other aminoglycosides (eg, streptomycin, amikacin, kanamycin, neomycin, paromomycin, and gentamicin), cephaloridine, polymyxin B, viomycin, colistin, vancomycin, and cisplatin should be avoided.

Concurrent use of aminoglycosides with potent diuretics, such as furosemide and ethacrynic acid, should be avoided.

Administration of intravesical BCG should be avoided with tobramycin, as antibiotics can diminish the therapeutic efficacy of intravesical BCG.