**Available Dosage**

- Oral Tablet: 2.5 mg, 5mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg, 40mg

- Oral Solution: 1 mg/mL

**General Dose Considerations**

- The usual adult dosage ranges from 2.5 to 40 mg per day, depending on the indication.

- For adolescents and children greater than or equal to 6 years, the initial dose is 0.07 to 0.1 mg/kg once daily with a maximum initial dose of 5 mg/day and increments of 1- to 2-week intervals.

- In general, the recommendation is that dosing and administration adjustments are necessary with lisinopril for patients whose glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is less than or equal to 30 mL/min.

**Hypertension**

- According to the recent 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults, among patients in whom pharmacological therapy is indicated, ACE inhibitors are among the recommended first-line agents for the management of hypertension.

- The lisinopril is started at 10 mg and titrated upwards to 40 mg once daily.

- If the blood pressure is not controlled with lisinopril tablets alone, a low dose of a diuretic can be added. After adding a low-dose diuretic, it is possible to reduce the dose of lisinopril tablets. The recommended starting dose in adult patients with hypertension taking diuretics is 5 mg once per day.

**Heart failure**

- For heart failure, the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure (HF) recommends ACE inhibitors in all patients with HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFreEF) to reduce morbidity and mortality with a level A of evidence.

- The initial dose recommended is 2.5 mg per day, with a maximum daily dose of 40 mg.

- An inclination to higher doses is influenced by the findings of the SOLVD trial, where people in the high-dose group had an overall 8% decrease in death compared to those in the low-dose group.

**STEMI within 24 hours in Hemodynamically Stable Patients**

- Lisinopril is also strongly recommended by the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline (Level of Evidence, A) within the first 24 hours to all patients with STEMI with the anterior location, HF, or those with reduced Ejection Fraction (EF) less than or equal to 40%, unless contraindicated.

- The recommended starting dose for this indication is 2.5 to 5 mg per day, with a 10 mg daily titration up to maximal dose tolerated in hemodynamically stable patients.

**Patients with Diabetes and Hypertension**

- The American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends using ACE inhibitors as one of the first-line agents for hypertension in patients with diabetes and urinary albumin to creatinine ratio greater than or equal to 300 mg/g creatinine or 30 to 299 mg/g creatinine.

- As an off-label indication for proteinuric chronic kidney disease, it should be initiated at 2.5 to 10 mg once daily depending on blood pressure and slowly titrate as tolerated to a maximum daily dose of 40 mg. The goal for proteinuria is less than 1 g/day as per KDIGO-2013.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pregnant Patients:**Lisinopril is pregnancy category Class D due to its teratogenic effects (e.g., decreased fetal renal function, oligohydramnios, lung hypoplasia, skeletal malformations, fetal/neonatal death, etc.); thus, its use is contraindicated in pregnant women and/or fertile women without proper contraception.

**Breastfeeding Consideration:**Manufacturers recommend against using lisinopril in breastfeeding women because the amount secreted in breast milk and its effects in the breastfed infant is unknown.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer recommends dose adjustment based on creatinine clearance.

- No dose adjustment is required in patients with creatinine clearance of more than 30 mL/min.

- In patients with creatinine clearance ≥ 10 mL/min and ≤ 30 mL/min, reduce the initial dose of lisinopril tablets to 50%f of the usual recommended dose.

- For patients on hemodialysis or creatinine clearance less than 10 mL/min, the recommended initial dose is 2.5 mg once daily.

**Patients with Liver Impairment:**No contraindications are known for patients with hepatic impairment.