**The Evaluation of Patients with Suspected Brain Trauma**

Laboratory studies may be considered, including CBC, CMP, coagulation profile, type and screen, and ABG. Whether to obtain or what laboratory studies are of value may depend on the severity of the injury or associated polytrauma.

The initial imaging study of choice is the head CT, as it is often readily available and rapidly obtainable. Head X-rays are not recommended due to inferior usefulness, and CT studies are available in most centers. MRI can be of utility but takes much longer to obtain than head CT. It may be indicated in follow up for head injuries, but is not used as the initial evaluation.

**Clinical Decision Rules**

Several clinical decision rules apply to the initial evaluation of head trauma. These rules essentially allow the provider to stratify, in which patients require CT imaging to evaluate their head trauma further.

Perhaps the most widely known and best-studied rule is the Canadian head CT rule. The Canadian head CT rule has inclusion and exclusion criteria. Patients to whom this rule applies are those with GCS 13 to 15 with loss of consciousness, amnesia to the head injury event, or witnessed disorientation. Patients who are less than 16 years old, are on blood-thinning medications or have a seizure after the injury are excluded from this decision rule. The Canadian head CT rule puts forth the following high-risk criteria: GCS less than 15 at 2 hours post-injury, suspected open or depressed skull fracture, any signs of basilar skull fracture (hemotympanum, raccoon eyes, Battle sign, CSF otorrhea or rhinorrhea, two or more episodes of emesis, and age 65 years or older. Medium risk criteria include retrograde amnesia to the event of 30 minutes or greater, or a dangerous mechanism (pedestrian struck by motor vehicle, occupant ejected from a motor vehicle, or fall from over 3 feet or more than five stairs). If the patient is a candidate for the application of the rule and has no high or medium risk criteria, CT is not a recommendation. The sensitivity of this rule is 83 to 100% for all traumatic intracranial findings and 100% for findings requiring neurosurgical intervention. If either of the medium-risk criteria is positive, CT merits consideration, and if any of the high-risk criteria are positive, the decision rule cannot rule out the need for imaging.

Other decision rules to determine whether initial head CT is a recommendation include New Orleans Rule and Nexus II Rule.

The New Orleans Rule has more stringent inclusion criteria, requiring age greater than 18 and GCS of 15 in patients with blunt head trauma occurring within 24 hours, causing loss of consciousness, amnesia, or disorientation. These rules recommend head CT in any patients with headache, vomiting, age greater than 60, drug or alcohol intoxication, persistent anterograde amnesia, visible trauma above the clavicles, or seizures.

Nexus II Rule recommends CT in any of the following: patients greater 65 years or older, evidence of skull fracture, scalp hematoma, neurologic deficit, altered level of alertness, abnormal behavior, coagulopathy, recurrent or forceful vomiting.

In pediatric patients, the best decision tool to determine the recommendation of the CT scan is PECARN, which is based on a large-scale clinical trial of the same name and has had repeated external validation. This decision tool divides patients into two initial groups based on age. Those less than two years old are further stratified using one algorithm, and those 2 years old or older are further stratified using another algorithm. Children less than 2 years old who have GCS less than 15, altered mental status, or a palpable of a skull fracture should undergo CT. If a child less than 2 has a loss of consciousness longer than 5 seconds, non-frontal hematoma, severe mechanism of injury, or not acting normally per parents should undergo CT or observation; this decision should be made using shared decision making with parents. If not meeting any of the criteria mentioned above, the clinician may safely discharge the child. In children 2 years or older, AMS, GCS less than 15, or signs of basilar skull fracture should precipitate CT imaging. Children 2 years or older who have a loss of consciousness for longer than 5 seconds, recurrent vomiting, severe headache, or high mechanism of injury should either be observed or undergo CT imaging. If the child presents none of these symptoms, the clinician may safely discharge the child.

**Rancho Los Amigos Scale**

This scale is used to describe the behaviors, cognitions, and emotional responses in patients who are emerging from a coma.

- **Level I: No Response: Total Assistance**- no response to stimuli

- **Level II: Generalized Response: Total Assistance**- inconsistent and non-purposeful responses

- **Level III: Localized Response:****Total Assistance**- inconsistent response

- **Level IV: Confused/Agitated: Maximal Assistance**-  bizarre, non-purposeful behavior, agitation

- **Level V: Confused, Inappropriate Non-Agitated:****Maximal Assistance**- response to simple commands, non-purposeful, and random response to complex commands.

- **Level VI: Confused, Appropriate: Moderate Assistance**- follows simple commands, able to understand familiar tasks, but not new tasks

- **Level VII: Automatic, Appropriate: Minimal Assistance for Daily Living Skills -**Able to perform daily routine and understands familiar settings. Aware of diagnosis, but not impairments.

- **Level VIII: Purposeful, Appropriate: Stand By Assistance -**Consistently oriented to person, place and time, and some awareness of impairments and how to compensate. They can carry out familiar tasks independently but might be depressed, and/or irritable

- **Level IX: Purposeful, Appropriate: Stand By Assistance on Request**- Able to complete different tasks, aware of impairments, able to think about consequences with assistance

- **Level X: Purposeful, Appropriate: Modified Independent**- Able to multitask in many different environments. May create tools for memory retention and anticipate obstacles which may result from impairments