Tricyclic antidepressants have many side effects, some of which are life-threatening. Among the tricyclic antidepressants, protriptyline is the most potent and most likely to cause hypotension, agitation, and cardiac effects. For this reason, protriptyline has multiple contraindications, including people with the following

- Heart problems such as prolonged QTC interval, uncompensated heart failure, arrhythmias, heart block, palpitations, hypotension, hypertension, and recent myocardial infarction.

- Use of drugs that inhibit TCA metabolism, inhibit CYP450 2D6, or prolong QTc interval. (Look for hypokalemia before starting protriptyline.)

- Use of tramadol (increase the risk of seizures with TCAs), and people with a seizure disorder require careful monitoring.

- Use of anticholinergic drugs (risk of hyperthermia and paralytic ileus).

- Use of SSRIs, SNRIs, and MAOIs to prevent serotonin syndrome, hypertensive crisis or hypotensive crisis, hyper-pyretic, and convulsions, a washout period of at least 14 days must take effect before starting one of these drugs.

- Weight gain concerns and/or metabolic syndrome.

- Psychosis due to TCAs aggravating psychotic symptoms

- Possible pregnancy or women who are breastfeeding (due to potential adverse effects to the fetus such as fetal malformations, lethargy, and withdrawal symptoms. protriptyline is classified in pregnancy category C)

- Age younger than 12 due to the increased risk of suicidal thoughts/suicidal attempts in children

- History of hypersensitivity to protriptyline

- Hyperthyroidism, urinary retention, and angle-closure glaucoma merit closer monitoring.

- Renal or hepatic impairment may need to lower dose and may need to monitor closely.

- Consumption of alcohol should also be avoided due to the additive CNS effects.