**Methods**

**Applanation Tonometry**

**Goldmann Applanation Tonometer (GAT)**

In 1948, Hans Goldmann proposed GAT to measure IOP.

Eye clinicians use GAT as a standard component of a slit-lamp (See slit-lamp and GAT tonometer images) eye exam.

Several factors can influence the accuracy and precision of IOP measurements, which include central corneal thickness (CCT), elevated astigmatism, ocular rigidity, corneal hysteresis, tear film, corneal edema, the amount of fluorescein, previous refractive surgery, etc.

**Perkins and Draeger Applanation Tonometer**

The Perkins and Drager handheld tonometers use the same mechanism of applanation as the Goldmann.

**Non-contact Tonometers**

Non-contact tonometers (NCT),

**Ocular-Response Analyzer (ORA) and Corvis ST Tonometers**

ORA was developed in 2005 and represented a newer version of NCT that utilizes a column of air as the applanating force.

Corneal hysteresis is the ability of the cornea to absorb and dissipate applied forces based on its viscoelastic and elasticity properties. ORA was designed to theoretically improve IOP accuracy, allowing clinicians to account for the variability in corneal biomechanical properties seen among patients.

Corvis ST is an NCT based on the indentation of the cornea by a jet of air, which was proposed in 2011 by Oculus in Germany.

**Indentation Tonometry**

**Schiotz Tonometer**

The principle of indentation is based on the fact that weight or force will sink more into a softer object than a harder one. The Norwegian physician, Hjalmar Schiotz, invented the first clinically useful indentation tonometer in 1905.

**Tono-Pen Indentation/Applanation Tonometer**

The Tono-pen is a battery-powered, lightweight, portable handheld device that uses a small plunger to record the force needed to applanate the cornea. This tonometer is based on both the indentation and applanation principles. An early version of this instrument was introduced in 1959 by McKay and Marg.

It requires daily recalibration and topical anesthesia and uses disposable covers (See Tono-pen image). It can prove useful in portable screenings, emergency rooms, bedridden patients, or operating rooms to measure intraocular pressure. Advantages of this method include the ability to measure over a soft contact lens, on an irregular corneal surface, averaging multiple readings, and the potential to measure at the peripheral cornea if a central corneal scar or ulcer exists. It can also measure intraocular pressure independent of patient position.

**Pneumatonometer**

The pneumatonometer uses a stream of air to indent the cornea with a 5 mm diameter silicone tip on a piston that rides on the air.

The Pulsatile Ocular Blood Flow pneumotonometer is the newer version that provides pulse fluctuation and information regarding ocular blood pulse.

**Rebound Tonometry**

**iCare tonometer**

The iCare tonometer, based on the principles of rebound, is a portable battery-powered handheld device that is easy to use.

The HOME version can be used autonomously for at-home use in managing glaucoma patients, especially in suspect normal-tension glaucoma patients that tend to have normal IOP during clinical examinations.

Several studies have shown that when compared to GAT and other tonometers, iCare showed good agreement, specificity, reliability, and reproducibility, especially for low-to-moderate IOP measurements.

**Dynamic Contour Tonometry (DCT)**

DCT was developed in 2003 and calculates IOP based on the Pascal principle, which deals with the pressure of a fluid within an enclosed space.

Studies have shown DCT to have good precision, reproducibility, and correlatability compared to GAT and other tonometers.

**Continuous IOP Monitoring**

The routine clinical setting normally provides the ophthalmologist with only a few spot readings of IOP for each patient. Patients can have ophthalmologic examinations up to 4 times yearly; however, in normal cases, this tends to be biannual or annual for the most part. In the ideal world of glaucoma management, IOP would be continuously measured 24 hours a day to provide the true fluctuations of IOP and IOP spikes during the waking and sleeping hours, which could have a great impact on understanding the true target pressure, progression rates, and the best individually tailored treatment strategies for each patient.

Regarding sensors applied to contact lenses on the cornea surface, a company from Switzerland launched the Sensimed Triggerfish system.

The main limits of this system, however, include no direct correlation between corneal changes and IOP readings and poor correlation with GAT readings regarding measurements taken several hours after the device has been activated.

Implantable IOP-sensor devices, which can be positioned during cataract surgery in the anterior chamber, suprachoroidal space, or embedded in a foldable artificial intraocular lens, have been proposed; however, they remain experimental and not of widespread use yet.