In the US, obesity rates have increased to current rates of 42% for men and women in 2017-2018, per the Centers for Disease Control. Of note, it disproportionately affects non-Hispanic black women with a prevalence as high as 56.9% in this group.

**Effectiveness**

MI - in a large meta-analysis of 48 studies (9618 participants), patients receiving MI were shown to have one and a half times the chance to make positive behavioral changes to impact healthcare outcomes compared with controls.

CBT - Eating disorders have a prevalence of 3% in US adults and up to 50% in persons with severe obesity. CBT is recommended as a first-line treatment for eating disorders and is also the most effective treatment for depressive symptoms that co-occur with eating disorders.

**Application**

When treating a person with obesity, MI acts as a bridge between evaluation and management decisions in the clinician's mind and interventions. Standard interventions for obesity management include intensive lifestyle interventions (diet, exercise, and behavioral treatments), pharmacotherapy, and bariatric surgery. Intensive lifestyle intervention remains one of the most foundational tools available for treating obesity. It has the lowest cost and lowest risk. Persons with eating disorders do not respond as well to MI and may need further behavioral treatments, specifically CBT or ACT. This is especially applicable if the patient is being considered for bariatric surgery - a high cost and high-risk procedure, where there is a high prevalence of eating disorders and depression in preoperative candidates.

Weight regain is turning out to be one of the most significant obstacles in obesity treatment, perpetuating the epidemic. Of all the therapies available for weight loss, behavioral treatments have the most impact on maintenance, with some treatments producing a magnitude of 10% weight loss maintained after 36 months.