Even though mycoplasma pneumonia in most people is a benign infection, it can lead to several complications, especially in children and the elderly. The list of complications includes the following:

- ARDS

- Bronchiolitis obliterans

- Lobar consolidation

- Lung abscess

- Necrotizing pneumonitis

- Pleural effusion (15% to 20%), empyema (rare)

- Respiratory failure

**Extrapulmonary Complications**

Mycoplasma can also be associated with severe extrapulmonary complications. These complications may be due to the organism itself; it may be triggered by the resulting immunological response to the bacteria. The list of extrapulmonary complications includes:

- Myocardium problems: Conduction abnormalities, heart blocks, or rhythm disturbances. Both pericarditis and congestive heart failure have been reported in young people.

- The central nervous system (CNS): Rare but can include encephalitis, transverse myelitis, aseptic meningitis, and cerebellar ataxia. These CNS complications are more common in children.

- Hematologic problems: Hemolytic anemia due to cross-reactivity of antibodies to M. Pneumoniae antigens to red blood cells. The hemolysis is mild.

- Dermatology: M. Pneumoniae infection may be associated with urticaria, erythema nodosum, or steven johnson syndrome. The skin lesions are seen in about one-third of patients.

- Musculoskeletal problems include myalgia and arthralgia. Septic arthritis is very rare. Rare cases of rhabdomyolysis have been reported.

- Gastrointestinal (GI) dysfunction include pancreatitis or hepatitis and are linked to the circulating IgM antibodies.

- Ophthalmologic problems include conjunctivitis, optic papillitis, anterior uveitis, and cranial neuropathies.

- Kidney problems are rare and may result in glomerulonephritis due to immune complex precipitation in the glomeruli.