Peripheral neuropathy, also known as peripheral polyneuropathy, is a general term for a broad range of disorders that cause damage and dysfunction of the nerves of the peripheral nervous system in several different patterns.

Common symptoms to most peripheral polyneuropathies involve paresthesias, numbness, or pain in the distal extremities, such as in the feet or hands. Some can present acutely, while many have a more insidious onset. A patient may describe difficulty with buttoning their clothes or tripping over their feet, which may be signs of worsening weakness and progression of the disease. Inherited polyneuropathies may present with ataxia and muscle cramping while acquired polyneuropathies typically present as burning or paraesthesias.

Electrodiagnostic testing can be a useful tool in finding an etiology and thus guiding treatment. Therefore, it is critical to obtain a detailed history, including medications, diet, social/occupational history, and family history. Exposure to heavy metal toxins or certain medications, such as vincristine and amiodarone or a medical history significant for hypothyroidism or vitamin b12 deficiency, indicate a risk for developing peripheral polyneuropathies. Patients with a family history of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies (HMSN) such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type 1 disease (HMSN I) or Refsum’s disease (HMSN IV) might point the clinician toward a hereditary cause for the neuropathy. Infectious diseases such as Lyme’s disease and HIV and autoimmune-mediated diseases such as acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy(AIDP) or chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) can also present with symptoms of peripheral neuropathy.

The physical examination may also assist in identifying the etiology and characteristics of peripheral neuropathy. Patients with diabetic peripheral neuropathy often describe a “stocking-glove” distribution of numbness in the hands and feet. Deafness, cataracts, or musculoskeletal deformities point toward a hereditary cause. A predominant sensory neuropathy may have decreased sensation to light touch or vibration while distal muscle weakness and decreased Deep Tendon Reflexes (DTR) may indicate a motor predominant neuropathy.