From age 0 to 4 years, the femoral head receives significant blood supply from the medial femoral circumflex artery (MFCA), lateral femoral circumflex artery (LFCA), and the artery of ligamentum teres.  From age 4 to 8 years, the MFCA provides the majority of the blood supply with supplementary contributions from the LFCA and artery of ligamentum teres. After 8 years of age, the MFCA predominates with negligible contribution from the LFCA and artery of ligamentum teres.

The MFCA most commonly originates from the profunda femoris. However cadaveric studies have shown that it may also originate from the common femoral artery.

The consistency of contributions from the inferior gluteal artery to femoral head blood supply is a subject of debate. In a recent cadaveric study, A.W. Grose, et al. examined the contribution of the inferior gluteal artery to the extracapsular anastomosis supplying the femoral head and demonstrated that the deep branch of MFCA receives a significant and consistent inflow from vessels derived from the inferior gluteal artery.

These findings support the belief that the inferior gluteal artery is capable of providing a compensatory blood supply after an injury to the deep branch of MFCA.

The acetabular branch of the obturator artery provides the blood supply to the acetabular fossa as it courses through the acetabular notch. The pelvic surface of the acetabulum receives blood supply from pubic branches of the obturator artery. The superior and posteroinferior regions of the acetabulum are supplied by an anastomosis of deep branches of the superior and inferior gluteal arteries.

Lymphatic drainage from the anterior aspect drains to the deep inguinal nodes, while the medial and posterior aspects drain into the internal iliac nodes.