Purkinje cells start differentiating in early development. Experiments in mice have shown that they begin as a collection of precursor cells in the cerebellar nuclei, which then migrate outward to the cortex. The migrating cells are thought to climb radial glia as directed by chemical signals in the cortex. However, they also may communicate with each other during the migration, as the immature Purkinje cells have been found to synapse on each other while traveling. These synapses then disappear after the migration is complete.

After the Purkinje cell layer has formed, the surrounding granule cells, whose axons make up the parallel fiber inputs to the Purkinje cells, also migrate through the Purkinje cell layer to the inner granule cell layer, where they remain in the adult. The parallel fibers, as well as climbing fibers from the inferior olive, synapse on the developing Purkinje cells and influence their development; obliterating either cell line results in a dendritic tree of lower-than-normal complexity.

Different neurotransmitters and receptors are essential in Purkinje cell development, although the exact sequence of their use and even whether they are excitatory or inhibitory is still under investigation. The NMDA glutamate receptor is particularly important as a potential mediator for the long-term potentiation and depression that is so important for dendritic tree remodeling in early development and throughout life; the receptor subunits that express during development have different properties from those expressed in adults. GABA, the neurotransmitter released by Purkinje cells, is also thought to affect the cells during development.