**Medical Therapy**

Dissolution of bladder stones, particularly uric acid, can sometimes be accomplished with oral alkalinizing agents alone if the higher pH level necessary (usually 6.5 to 7) can be maintained long enough. This is typically done with oral potassium citrate, which can be supplemented with sodium bicarbonate if necessary. For most patients, this will require roughly 60 mEq per day of potassium citrate. Serum potassium levels and urinary pH levels should be checked periodically while on this therapy. The dosage of potassium citrate should be titrated and adjusted to maintain the optimal pH level.

Patients with a history of nephrolithiasis may benefit from a metabolic evaluation, including a 24-hour urine test for kidney stone production risk factors and directed prophylactic therapy.

Citric acid, glucono delta-lactone, and magnesium carbonate can be used to dissolve struvite (infection) type stones but requires irrigating catheters. Dissolution is relatively slow, so this treatment is infrequently used.

Calcium phosphate is the primary component of the encrustations and debris that typically clogs urinary stents and catheters. It only forms in an alkaline solution and can be dissolved by a mild acid. Periodic bladder instillations of 1/4% acetic acid solution can help dissolve calcium phosphate crystals and prevent bladder stone formation. It can also help maintain patency in Foley catheters, and suprapubic tubes in patients whose urinary drainage tubes tend to become clogged with debris prematurely.

**Surgical Therapy**

Most stones can be managed with endoscopic surgery. The underlying cause should also be addressed at the same time, if possible.

Cystolitholapaxy can be achieved cystoscopically with most stone types. Various sources of disruptive or ablative therapy can be used, including lasers, pneumatic-powered mechanical contact jackhammer, ultrasound, and direct mechanical crushing with a lithotrite. Electrohydraulic devices are not generally used for bladder stones as the calculi tend to move, and higher rates of mucosal bladder injury are reported. Ultrasound and the lithoclast can usually fragment bladder stones faster than lasers, although all are considered effective.

Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) can work for bladder stones, but it requires the treatment head to be above the patient or prone positioning.

Percutaneous suprapubic cystolitholapaxy is the primary means of treatment for pediatric bladder stones, to minimize urethral trauma in children. Larger caliber instruments can be placed suprapubically than transurethrally, particularly in the pediatric age groups. In some cases, a combined procedure with simultaneous suprapubic and cystoscopic approaches are used.

In male adults with outlet obstruction, transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is recommended, when indicated, immediately after the stone has been fragmented and removed.

In some cases of extremely large bladder stones or prostates, it may be reasonable to do open suprapubic surgery. This allows for the removal of the intact stone, followed by an open, suprapubic prostatectomy (usually for prostates more than 75 g in size). The main advantage of an open suprapubic cystostomy for bladder stone removal is the reduced overall surgery time (roughly half the time compared to endoscopic means), easy removal of large or multiple stones, ability to remove stones that might be difficult or hard to fragment with endoscopic treatments and the ability to handle stones that are stuck to the bladder lining. The disadvantages of this approach include a longer hospital stay, additional postoperative pain, the need for an abdominal incision and drains, and possible wound complications and prolonged Foley catheterization time.