Like many orthopedic conditions, evaluation begins with plain radiographs in order to localize the lesion, evaluate the growth plates and rule out other conditions. The typical series includes standing A/P, lateral, sunrise and notch views. Osteochondritis dissecans lesions are often initially missed on radiographs. The notch view, an A/P projection taken in 30 to 50 degrees of knee flexion, allows for better evaluation of the posterior femoral condyles.

Plain radiographs are limited in determining the stability of osteochondritis dissecans lesions, which is vitally important for clinical decision making. As a result, magnetic resonance imaging is often indicated for further evaluation. MRI allows for more precise evaluation of the size of the lesion in addition to the structure of the overlying cartilage. Hefti et. al developed a classification system based on magnetic resonance findings as listed below.

**Stage**

- A small change of signal in the subchondral bone without clear margins

- Osteochondral lesion with clear margins, no underlying fluid between fragment and bone

- Fluid partially visible between the fragment and underlying bone

- Fluid completely surrounding fragment, fragment remains in situ

- Loose body

Several authors have studied the correlation between MRI findings and the prognosis of osteochondritis dissecans lesions. De Smet et al. described several T2 weighted MRI signs that may be associated with an unstable lesions including a line of intense signal equal to that of fluid at the fragment-bone interface measuring 5 mm or more in length, a discrete round focus of intense signal deep to the osteochondritis dissecans lesion measuring 5 mm or more, a focal defect in the overlying articular cartilage that measures 5 mm or more in width and an intense signal equal to that of fluid that traverses both the articular cartilage and subchondral bone and extends into the lesion.

Ultimately, arthroscopy in the gold standard for assessing lesion stability and determining the appropriate management. The International Cartilage Repair Society developed an intraoperative classification which defines the integrity and stability of the fragment, as described below.

**Types**

- Softening of intact cartilage

- Cartilage breached, stable fragment when probed

- Fragment discontinuity, unstable when probed, the fragment is in place

- Osteochondral crater and loose body