Evaluation begins during the antenatal period. Maternal medical history and history of the index pregnancy are very important in directing the prenatal diagnosis of FGR SGA.

Antenatal Diagnosis: During antenatal care, symphysis-fundal height measurement using a measuring tape is a simple, affordable, and common ways of detecting FGR SGA or other conditions that can cause size/date discrepancy. Suspicion for FGR SGA is raised when there is a discordance between the measured fundal length and the expected size for gestational age. The measurement is said to be discordant when the fundal height is at least 3 cm less than the gestational age in weeks.

The routine ultrasound examination is another method of screening for FGR SGA, but there is no agreement on the timing and number of screening required. When two screening is obtained, the exams are usually performed at 32 and 36 weeks of gestation, while for a single screening, the exam is performed between 32 to 36 weeks of gestation.

In many countries, including the United States, serial fundal height measurement, and risk assessment for impaired fetal growth such as the history of maternal chronic disease, substance use disorder, smoking, placental insufficiency are recommended for each antenatal visit.

Postnatal Diagnosis: FGR SGA is diagnosed in postnatal life when the birth weight is less than the 10th percentile for gestational age. Other features in support of FGR SGA include physical evidence of malnutrition, such as decreased skeletal muscles, subcutaneous fat tissues, and loose peeling skin.

Accurate determination of gestational age is important in making a reliable diagnosis of FGR SGA. The two reliable methods used in assessing the gestational age of the fetus are calculated using the date of the last menstrual period or from the measurement from a prenatal ultrasound performed before a gestational age of 20 weeks.