Fetal growth-restricted small for gestational age (FGR SGA) infants are at increased risk of mortality and morbidity compared to constitutional SGA and the appropriate for gestational age (AGA) infants. Maternal medical conditions, pregnancy history, as well as fetal genetic conditions, are contributory risk factors for FGR SGA. The evaluation for FGR SGA begins during the antenatal period with routine ultrasound and obstetric exams.

The management of FGR SGA begins during pregnancy with close monitoring of fetal conditions, and the decision on the timing and approach of delivery are made by obstetricians. In preparation for delivery, a Neonatal Resuscitation Program trained professional should be present for initial resuscitation.  In cases of severe FGR, a perinatal center with an experienced neonatal interprofessional team may be selected. This interprofessional team consists of neonatologists, delivery room nurses, neonatal intensive care unit nurses, respiratory therapists, and pharmacists.

The nurses will ensure that patient’s vital signs are monitored and also will assist in providing education to the parents and family members. The pharmacists will ensure that the newborns are placed on appropriate medication and correct dosing. Infants needing extensive monitoring are admitted to the neonatal intensive care units and are managed by the neonatologist. Other consultants are involved based on the need of the individual patient. Endocrinologists are involved in patients with difficult-to-control hypoglycemia. Pediatric cardiac surgeons are involved in patients with congenital cardiac diseases. Pediatric general surgeons are involved in patients with conditions such as intestinal atresia or necrotizing enterocolitis. Genetic counselors are involved with patients born with underlying genetic diseases.