The arterial supply to the upper extremity originates from the subclavian artery. These vessels exist on both sides of the body to provide upper extremity blood supply. Both arteries receive their blood supply from the arch of the aorta. The subclavian artery branches on both sides of the body include the vertebral artery, internal thoracic artery, thyrocervical trunk, and dorsal scapular artery.

The subclavian artery becomes the axillary artery once it reaches the lateral border of the first rib.

There are three parts to the axillary artery, with each portion having arterial branches to supply the shoulder muscles. Multiple arteries branch from the axillary artery, including the superior thoracic artery, thoracoacromial artery, circumflex humeral artery, and the lateral thoracic artery. The subscapular artery is a division of the third part of the axillary artery. The subscapular artery gives off the circumflex scapular artery and the thoracodorsal artery. In general, the muscles of the shoulder receive vascular supply by named arteries associated with the muscles they supply.

Efferent lymphatic vessels arise from the distal upper extremity and pass through the shoulder. Additionally, axillary lymph nodes contribute to efferent lymphatic vessels in the shoulder region and pass proximally through the shoulder. Deep lymphatic vessels accompany superficial lymphatic vessels. The deep lymphatic vessels drain lymph from the joint capsule, tendons, and nerves. The lymphatics of the shoulder and axillary region are drained by the subclavian lymphatic trunk. On the right, the subclavian trunk drains into the right lymphatic duct.  On the left, the subclavian trunk drains into the thoracic duct.