Manipulation of xanthine oxidase within the body has a plethora of pharmacological indications, the most significant being that of treating the symptoms of gout. Gout is a painful condition in which there is excess uric acid metabolism. The excess uric acid then precipitates and forms monosodium urate crystals within the joints and the kidney, causing painful gouty arthritis and uric acid kidney stones, respectively. The pharmacological interventions used widely for the prevention of gout involve drugs such as allopurinol and febuxostat. These drugs achieve the desired effect by inhibiting xanthine oxidase, which limits the conversion of purine products and eventually leads to decreased production of uric acid within the body and limitation of gout symptoms.

Additionally, xanthine oxidase has inhibitory effects on certain drugs. These include the antimetabolite class of cancer drugs like azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine, both of which are metabolized by xanthine oxidase. Concurrent use of XO inhibitors and anti-cancer drugs leads to excess anti-cancer drug accumulation in the body due to the limited breakdown, and subsequent dose reductions then become mandatory. If there is poor dose and drug regimen management, anti-cancer drug overdose, and associated toxic adverse effects can occur.

As aforementioned above, higher activity of xanthine oxidase correlates with an elevated risk of cardiovascular disease along with other pathologies. As such, it has been postulated and should be further studied, that patients on xanthine oxidase inhibitors such as allopurinol who display decreased enzymatic activity, can potentially have lowered risks of cardiovascular and other pathological conditions. This effect can be tied to liver diseases as well as the presence of xanthine oxidase in greater quantities has also been seen in patients with severe liver injury. Although the reason for the correlation is not definitive as of yet, expectations are that the greater the severity of liver diseases, the higher the levels of xanthine oxidase will be in the serum. There remain more specific tests to evaluate liver function, but xanthine oxidase levels can also be an indicator of hepatic health.