**General Principles, Tips, and Techniques for TURP**

**The Beginning - Getting Started**

"A good beginning makes a good ending." Proverb

- The use of a thin plastic barrier sheath placed immediately before standard draping is recommended to maintain better sterility and protect the operative field. It also allows protected digital manipulation of the prostate through the rectum.

- The patient should be positioned with the buttocks flush with the end of the cystoscopy table. Resection of the anterior prostrate at the bladder neck can be impeded when the downward movement of the external portion of the resectoscope is restricted by the edge of the cystoscopy table.

- The table height should be adjusted to a comfortable position for the surgeon.

- If the patient has been catheterized, gentle irrigation of the urethra with a Toomey or bulb syringe should be performed to rinse mucus, blood clots, and other debris into the bladder, where they will not interfere with vision. This will be rinsed out as soon as the resectoscope is positioned inside the bladder.

- A cystoscopic examination of the urethra, prostate, and bladder is recommended immediately prior to inserting the resectoscope. This allows for optimal visualization and localization of important landmarks as well as identifying any previously unrecognized pathology.

- Landmarks to be identified include the external urinary sphincter, prostatic urethra, median lobe, verumontanum, ureteral orifices, and trigone. Before starting the surgery, the surgeon should have a clear 3-dimensional mental image of the patient's specific anatomical features and relationships.

- The area between the veru and the external sphincter should be examined, and the precise distance noted.

- Care should be taken to avoid inadvertent resection of the very, as this is an important landmark that helps avoid injuries to the external sphincter.

- The external sphincter is identified by the red muscle bands directed centrally in the deep bulbous urethra, as well as the wrinkling and constricting action of the membranous urethra as the cystoscope is removed. There may also be a bunching up of the superficial mucosa just in front of the sphincter as the scopes are inserted.

- Confirm that the cutting wire loops fit perfectly into the resectoscope sheath without gaps. Otherwise, resection may be incomplete, leaving tags on tissue that interfere with vision and require a second cut that wastes valuable time.

- Check the instruments carefully before getting started. For example, some instruments may have a tip or beak that can come loose or break inside the bladder. Such pieces can be challenging to remove in the middle of a case.

- A spare set of instruments, including extra cutting loops, connectors, and a backup electrosurgical generator, should be immediately available if necessary.

- Make sure there are more than sufficient irrigation bags to complete the surgery. In the unlikely event that the irrigating fluid runs out, be prepared to use an alternative such as 1-liter bags instead of the usual 3 liters.

- The irrigation should ideally be heated to body temperature prior to use to avoid chilling the patient. If core body temperature drops below 95 F (35 C), this can induce shivering and increases the risk for angina, cardiac arrhythmias, and myocardial infarctions.

- Maintain the irrigation fluid at the minimum height necessary to provide adequate visualization; 60 cm above the height of the surgical table is generally sufficient.

- A perineal urethrostomy may occasionally be necessary for patients with severe contractures of the lower extremities or similar deformities that could otherwise interfere with positioning for the resection.

- Insertion of the resectoscope should optimally be done with a visual obturator to avoid false passages and inadvertent injury to the prostate, urethra, or bladder. Blind obturators should be avoided, if possible.

- Prepare the urethra by dilating with urethral sounds prior to insertion of the resectoscope sheath. If substantial resistance is encountered, use a smaller sheath or perform a perineal urethrostomy.

**The Middle - Performing the Resection**

"The secret of getting ahead is getting started. The secret of getting started is breaking your complex overwhelming task into small manageable tasks and then starting on the first one." Mark Twain

- Always resect while pulling the cutting loop back or towards you; never by pushing it forward. This should cleanly separate one chip or slice of tissue from the rest of the prostate and prevent tunneling, perforation, bladder injury, and extravasation.

- If the resected chip is not separating cleanly from the prostate with one cut, readjust the wire loop until it works efficiently. This will save a lot of time.

- If there is a large and obstructing median lobe, resect this first, regardless of the technique used for the rest of the procedure.

- Follow an orderly resection plan regardless of which technique is used.

- Once the surgery has started in a particular area, that portion of the resection should be finished completely before moving to another location.

- Performing partial or incomplete resections in multiple sites is discouraged, leading to additional bleeding and greater irrigation fluid absorption. It also makes it far more difficult to terminate the procedure quickly if it becomes necessary.

- Always be prepared to terminate the surgery quickly. Surprisingly good results occur if even only one lateral lobe is completely resected.

- Always have sufficient fluid in the bladder to keep the posterior wall away from the surgical area, especially when resecting the bladder neck. Typically, 100 mL or more is sufficient for this.

- Once the bladder neck area has been resected, be careful not to return there too often for more resection. It is very easy to continue resecting and end up well into the trigone and bladder.

- Visually check the ureteral orifices periodically when resecting near the bladder neck and the veru when cutting in the distal prostate.

- Never hesitate to recheck the landmarks for reorientation.

- Try to resect using long, smooth strokes. This avoids chippiness, minimizes perforations, and minimizes bleeding.

- The lateral lobes should generally be resected with curving strokes while the floor is less concave, and the roof should be resected straight.

- As the resection gets laterally deeper, the nature of the prostate tissue changes from an irregular off-white/yellowish color to the smooth, white, glistening, vertically striated surface of the surgical capsule, which is the lateral surgical margin.

- If one or both ureters are accidentally resected, avoid using cautery near the cut ends to minimize scarring. They will usually heal just fine.

- Resection of the lateral and posterior lobes should be somewhat curved or concave. Resection of the roof at 12 o'clock should be straight to avoid inadvertent perforation. The prostate is very thin here, and there is a large plexus of veins on the other side.

- Try to remove as much bulk tissue as reasonably possible without perforating the capsule or overly extending the operating time.

- Do not waste time cauterizing areas where the capsule may be perforated, as this can only be controlled by hemostasis from the Foley catheter at the end.

- If priapism is encountered during surgery, ask the anesthesiologist to change the level of anesthesia or consider an intracorporal injection of diluted phenylephrine, just as would be used for pathological priapisms.

- When resecting at an angle where the veru is not visible, be especially careful to hold the resectoscope steady without any distal migration. If unsure, stop and recheck the position of the veru.

- Avoid cutting off a large block of tissue as it will tend to float freely inside the bladder. This can be difficult to extract from the bladder lumen and usually requires chopping or resecting the tissue, which is highly mobile and unstable. This wastes valuable time and risks a possible bladder injury.

- When resecting the median lobe, a flap of bladder neck tissue may fall or collapse into the bladder. To resect this tissue, get behind and below the flap of tissue with the loop, gently lift it off the bladder surface, and only then apply the cutting current to free it.

- Check the surgical time periodically and when finished with one side.

- Try to develop a rhythm, as this is the most efficient way to remove prostatic tissue quickly and safely.

- When resecting a larger prostate, try to make the chips full length from the bladder neck to the veru. Consider using a larger diameter resectoscope and loop for particularly large glands.

- Resection of the posterior lobe may uncover one or both seminal vesicles. This is harmless and requires no treatment.

- An obturator reflex may occur during the surgery. This will cause the patient to jump suddenly. If this happens, stop the resection immediately and ask anesthesia to paralyze the patient if possible.

- Another technique is to inject a local anesthetic into the sidewall of the prostatic fossa near the point of resection where the reflex occurred.

- If the resectoscope is not held firmly by the sphincter, it will "wobble." If wobbling is noticed, stop the resection immediately and reposition the resectoscope to avoid possible permanent sphincteric damage and incontinence.

- Avoid unnecessary use of cautery as it damages normal tissue, increases postoperative irritative symptoms, and promotes scarring, especially at the bladder neck.

- Do not cauterize bleeding vessels until the surgical capsule is reached unless they interfere with vision. Otherwise, the same vessel will be cauterized multiple times instead of just once, wasting time.

- Do not cauterize the very, as it can cause painful ejaculation later.

- Do not cauterize or resect if visibility is not adequate. Try readjusting the resectoscope position or increasing the irrigation flow. Make sure there is adequate fluid, and the suction/drainage is working. Consider using an Ellik or similar evacuator to remove chips, clots, and debris.

- If still having trouble, place the end of the resectoscope near the lateral wall at the bladder neck and slowly move it back towards the very, looking for the bleeding vessel, usually just a small artery. If unsuccessful, rotate the resectoscope slightly and repeat the procedure.

- If totally unable to see due to hematuria, rotate the resectoscope 180 degrees and inspect the opposite wall. Often, a small bleeding artery will be found there or at the roof.

- A bleeding vessel at the bladder neck can best be visualized by filling the bladder, which rotates the inner bladder neck lip upwards and distally (towards the surgeon), where it can now be seen and cauterized.

- Do not proceed with surgery in other parts of the prostate if there is significant bleeding in previously resected areas.

- Arterial bleeders pointed directly at the lens can be difficult to identify. Change the angle of attack of the resectoscope or reposition it close to the bladder neck and slowly withdraw.

- It is advisable to leave the apical tissue for the end of the procedure as this requires a slow, careful approach.

- If possible, consider leaving the roof resection until the end, as avoiding it to save time will tend to have a minimal clinical effect on the final result.

**End of the Surgery - Finishing it Up**

"It's not how you start that counts; it's how you finish." Proverb

- Do not attempt a TURP on a prostate that is clearly too large to be completed within 90 minutes. While not as critical with bipolar compared to monopolar instruments, it's still a good general rule.

- Avoid the temptation to return to the bladder neck and resect additional tissue. Advancing the resection well into the trigone and bladder is likely.

- If the bladder neck still appears obstructing, use the Collings knife and make a vertical incision in the midline instead. This avoids any potential ureteral injury.

- Unless very skilled and experienced, hold the resectoscope very still when cutting. Experts can move the cutting loop and the resectoscope at the same time, but this is an acquired skill and much more challenging to master with video surgery compared to the old-fashioned direct vision.

- Save the riskiest parts of the surgery for the end, specifically the roof and the tissue around the veru. Leaving some extra tissue in these areas is far better than risking permanent incontinence through an injury to the external sphincter.

- When the resection is complete, slow the irrigation fluid to a minimum. This will allow additional bleeding sites to become visible, and "floating tags" will fall into view.

- Try filling the bladder, then shut the inflow and let the bladder fluid evacuate. This will permit any hanging tissue tags to become visible for resection.

- After the evacuation of the prostatic chips, always take a final look inside the bladder to make sure there are no remaining pieces inside the bladder. Also, inspect the instrument to ensure there are no missing pieces that could possibly still be in the patient!

- Investing a few extra minutes in checking bleeding sites is usually a good idea.

- Place the Foley catheter carefully and without undue pressure. It is very easy to inadvertently place the catheter in the retroperitoneum or under the trigone, which is why a wire catheter guide is suggested, as it elevates the tip of the Foley and minimizes subtrigonal positioning.

- In difficult cases, consider placing a guide wire through the scope and feeding the catheter over the guidewire using the Blitz technique.

- If unsure about the final Foley position, obtain a cystogram.

- Irrigation should be absolutely clear at the end of the surgery with the Foley catheter in the proper position. The 30 mL balloon can be overinflated up to 60 mL if necessary to help control bleeding. Traction may also be used. If these techniques are not controlling the hematuria, remove the Foley and replace the resectoscope for an inspection to control bleeding.

- Placing a belladonna and opium (B & O) suppository just before taking the patient's legs down from the lithotomy position can significantly help reduce postoperative bladder spasms.

- Postoperative irrigation fluid should be with normal saline, particularly after monopolar surgery. There is no reason to use a hypotonic irrigation fluid once the resection is completed.

**The Nesbit technique**

The first practical, safe, and effective technique for transurethral prostate resection was originally described by Dr. Reed Nesbit in his landmark 1943 book "Transurethral Prostatectomy."

The surgery begins with the resectoscope positioned at the midpoint of the prostate. The resection starts by removing the intravesical prostate, bladder neck, and immediately adjacent prostatic tissue, starting at the 12 o'clock position and working clockwise. After this, further proximal resection is not recommended.

The next step is to reposition the resectoscope to the very, and the resection is continued from the prior margin to just in front of the verumontanum again, starting at the 12 o'clock position creating a channel. The resection extends laterally to the 4 o'clock position of the patient's left lateral lobe, and then a similar extended channel is made on the patient's right side to the 8 o'clock position. The intention is to make a wide channel on the anterior aspect of the prostate, which will cause the bulk of the remaining lateral lobe tissue to fall posteriorly to the floor of the prostatic fossa. It also significantly devascularizes the remaining tissue to minimize further bleeding. This lateral lobe tissue can now be resected similarly, slowly rotating the resectoscope to remove all the bulk prostate remaining.

The final step is to carefully remove any apical tissue blockage around the veru.

**Discussion**

The Nesbit technique has several significant advantages. Starting at the roof allows the bulk tissue to fall down into the prostatic fossa making for an easier resection of that bulky portion of the prostate. There is also early control of the prostatic blood vessels, starting with the perforating urethral blood vessels.

There are also some disadvantages. There are essentially three distinct, separate stages to the surgery, and it would be difficult to quickly stop the procedure until all the surgical steps are completed. The initial groove made at the roof is done without any visual landmarks in an area where the prostate is the thinnest. Any early bleeding or perforation will significantly increase the complication rate and severity. The lateral lobes can easily overcrowd the prostatic fossa, hide bleeding sites, and not leave enough room for easy resection due to interference with the mobility of the resectoscope. Any early bleeding can be difficult to see or control with bulky lateral lobe tissue in the way.

**The Milner Technique**

Dr. William A. Milner was a highly skilled and respected urologist who was a contemporary of Dr. Nesbit. Dr. Milner received an early working resectoscope model from Joseph F. McCarthy in 1931 and then proceeded to develop his own technique for safe, rapid transurethral prostate resections on animal models until he had perfected the procedure. In 1941, he reported on his first 700 human cases in the Journal of Urology which achieved excellent success rates together with remarkably low mortality and few complications.

An initial groove is made at the 9 o'clock position from the bladder neck to a point parallel to the veru. This groove is deepened and extended until capsular fibers are visualized. The chips are cut, with the deepest portion being in the middle of the resection. This mirrors the concave shape of the prostatic capsule. The capsule is easily identified by the white, smooth vertical striations, which are clearly distinguishable from the heterogenous, bulky prostatic tissue. Coagulation is only used minimally until the resection is at the capsular level. The groove is then extended up to the 11 o'clock position and down to the 7 o'clock position by simply rotating the resectoscope slightly. No attempt is made to encircle the bulk lateral lobe tissue but rather to resect it quickly from the inside out and reach the surgical capsule expeditiously, at which point any perforating or bleeding vessels can be cauterized. The resectoscope can then be rotated slightly and the procedure repeated. When the patient's right lateral lobe has been resected, a similar procedure is done on the left side.

The posterior and median lobes are resected similarly to the technique described by Dr. Nesbit.

The tissue around the veru is resected next, and the scope is inverted. The remaining tissue between 11 and 1 o'clock is resected with straight strokes, and care is being taken to keep the scope parallel or proximal to the level of the veru.

**Discussion**

The Milner technique offers several advantages over the Nesbit procedure. Immediate attention is given to the bulky lateral lobe tissue, removing it quickly, offering improved vision and better irrigation with increased resectoscope mobility. One entire side is completed before moving to the opposite side, which provides the opportunity to stop the procedure midway if necessary. Partially resected lateral lobes tend to bleed more than if only incompletely resected, as with the Nesbit technique. If the initial groove is made incorrectly or too deeply, there is minimal harm if it is done at the extreme lateral position of 9 or 3 o'clock, where the tissue is thickest, and any inadvertent capsular perforation will have a minimal clinical effect. The full-length prostatic groove provides its own distal and proximal landmarks, which then only have to be extended by rotating the resectoscope and repeating the linear resection. Leaving the anterior prostatic tissue for last minimizes the risk of any accidental perforation in this risky area.

There are many variations of these surgeries (including separate techniques described by Barnes, Alcock, Flocks, and Mauermayer). Still, as long as the general principles are followed, they are all likely to give good results.

Transurethral resection of the prostate is an art that requires substantial practice to master. Since urologists are performing fewer of these procedures now than in the past, it is more difficult for most to develop very high skill levels.

"The actual technique is probably not as important as planning it carefully and executing it precisely so that the operation is complete and the surgeon remains oriented throughout the procedure." Winston Mebust

**Postoperative Care**

After transurethral prostate surgery, patients are typically admitted at least overnight. The continuous bladder irrigation is titrated to a "light pink" or "pink lemonade" color. If possible, the irrigation is stopped early the next morning to determine if it is clear enough for either a voiding trial or discharge. If significant hematuria remains, then the irrigation needs to be continued, and the hospital stay may need to be extended. Most patients go home with the Foley catheter and instructions to "take it easy" for the next few days. A stool softener is often recommended to avoid straining and Valsalva, which can increase prostatic bleeding.

Most patients will return to the clinic or office about one week after the surgery for catheter removal and a voiding trial. Pathology results can also be reviewed with the patient at that time. Finasteride is usually continued for an additional 2 to 4 weeks to help with hemostasis and minimize hematuria. Anticoagulation is typically resumed 24 hours after all visual bleeding has stopped. Some experts will recommend using 2 to 4 weeks of a low-dose antibiotic such as trimethoprim-sulfa or nitrofurantoin as prophylaxis immediately after Foley catheter removal based on the premise that there will be necrotic or devascularized prostatic tissue fragments remaining in the prostatic fossa which could become infected. This appears reasonable, at least in higher-risk patients.

There is minimal pain after surgery. Pelvic floor and Kegel exercises may help restore continence quicker and are generally recommended. Full urinary control, continence, and hemostasis may take 4 to 6 weeks after the procedure to fully normalize.

**Special Situations**

**Controlling bleeding**can be one of the more challenging aspects of transurethral prostate surgery. Here is a summary of some tips:

- Start patients on a 5 alpha-reductase inhibitor (finasteride or dutasteride) at least two weeks before the surgery.

- Stick with one area or lobe until it is completely finished. Partially resected lobes tend to bleed more.

- If a capsular perforation exists, do not waste time trying to cauterize it, as a Foley is usually necessary for bleeding control.

- Arterial bleeders should be cauterized but try to wait until the surgical capsule is reached.

- Do not use cautery if you cannot see the bleeding site. Instead, readjust the scope or increase the irrigation.

- If significant bleeding is encountered and a bleeding site cannot be seen, place the scope at the bladder neck and slowly withdraw it along the prostatic sidewall to the veru.

- If not successful, repeat the process after rotating the scope slightly.

- If still unable to find the bleeding site, check the opposite side and the roof.

- Bleeding sites at the bladder neck can be just inside the lip and bleed into the bladder. To identify, partially fill the bladder so the bladder neck lip will be pushed forward and into view.

- When bleeding is well controlled, stop or reduce the irrigation rate to visualize more bleeding sites for cautery.

- Ensure there are always more than enough bags of irrigation so you don't run out at a critical moment.

- Check for coagulopathy, especially in patients with known prostate cancer who are at increased risk for fibrinolysis. If confirmed, treatment of fibrinolysis would be aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid.

- Prostatic artery embolization by interventional radiology and limited radiation therapy can each help control otherwise intractable prostatic bleeding not amenable to surgical correction.

**Prostate cancer**may be discovered incidentally after a TURP, or patients with prostate cancer may develop urinary symptoms that are potentially amenable to transurethral surgery. TURP is not considered a definitive treatment for prostate cancer. For untreated prostate cancer patients, there is a higher incidence of postoperative incontinence and bleeding after TURP surgery. This is due to entrapment of the sphincter muscle by cancerous tissue, the reduced ability of small arteries to contract normally in malignant tissues, and the potential release of fibrinolysis from cancerous tissue during active resection.

Anti-fibrinolysis medications, such as aminocaproic acid, should be available in case of significant or life-threatening hematuria. Therefore, it is prudent and reasonable to perform only a "limited or channel" type TURP in patients with known prostate cancer. In these situations, only a central channel is made, and there is no attempt to extend out to the capsule. The immediate area around the veru is avoided to minimize postoperative incontinence. Prostate cancer patients who have undergone radiation therapy are at even higher risk of intractable, postoperative incontinence. TURP should not be done in patients considering brachytherapy or cryotherapy. Prostate cancer patients considering radiation therapy who have significant LUTS and are considering a TURP should have the surgery performed at least 30 days prior to starting definitive radiation therapy to minimize incontinence.

**Radical transurethral resection of the prostate (radical TURP)**constitutes an attempt at complete prostatic adenoma removal by transurethral surgery. While similar to a standard transurethral resection, the radical TURP involves extending the limits of resection to the prostatic capsule until all visible tissue has been removed. It is used as a last-ditch treatment for intractable prostatitis, where success rates of up to 70% have been reported.

**Pearls: Summary of Tips for Performing Large Prostates by TURP**

- Do not attempt a larger prostate than you can reasonably handle within 90 minutes of operating time.

- Have everything ready and prepared, so you don't have to stop for supplies, instruments, or catheters.

- Be prepared to stop after just completing one side if it's taking too long. It is always possible to return another day to finish if necessary.

- Establish a regular rhythm.

- Make full-length slices from the bladder neck to the veru.

- Do not waste time cauterizing bleeding sites unless vision is seriously impaired or the capsule is reached.

- The resection does not have to be perfect; just good enough.

- Try to leave some extra time at the end to search for bleeders.

- Using video can slow you down. Consider using just direct vision. The position of the surgeon's head will prevent inadvertent distal repositioning of the scope.

- It is a good idea to learn how to do the TURP both with video guidance and direct vision in case there is a problem with the video in the middle of the case.