The American College of Radiology (ACR) Appropriateness Criteria provide expert consensus recommendations for acute neurologic symptoms including a headache, FND, altered consciousness.

The hemosiderin rim lining the margins of CCMs generates a profound signal void on gradient-echo MRI due to the ferromagnetic dephasing of proton spins. The effect is a striking signal void or "blooming" artifact on gradient echo or susceptibility-weighted sequences (SWI) which is easily detected but can overestimate the actual size of the lesion. MRI has, therefore, become the gold standard tool for the diagnosis and staging of CCM. Guidelines for imaging follow-up of known CCM are not well-established, but it is generally recommended that new symptoms warrant repeat imaging to assess for acute or subacute hemorrhage.

CCMs are characteristically angiographically occult lesions due to the slow transit of blood via the dysplastic channels save for the frequently associated developmental venous anomalies (DVA). CT angiography and digital subtraction angiography are therefore of limited utility in the workup of CCM however they may show indirect evidence of CCM by highlighting adjacent DVAs which typically enhance and opacify briskly on angiogram.

CCM may present on non-contrast head CT (NCCT) as amorphous calcifications, but further imaging with MRI is warranted to confirm the diagnosis unless contraindicated. The principal role of NCCT is the identification of hemorrhage in symptomatic patients. The Angioma Alliance has defined standard definitions of CCM-related hemorrhage and recommended reporting criteria to improve diagnostic consistency and accuracy among neuroimagers and clinicians.

Advanced MR imaging is playing an increasingly important role in the management of surgically complex CCM. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) has been used to identify critical white matter tracts in preoperative planning for brainstem CCM.