The American Association of Physicists in Medicine and the International Commission on Radiological Protection described guidelines for assessing the potential fetal radiation exposure during maternal radiotherapy. They recognized three possible radiation sources that need to be evaluated: first, the photon leakage from the machine head; second, the scatter and leakage from the collimators and beam modifiers; and lastly, scattered radiation emerging from the treatment beams of the volume treated within the patient. To reduce the leakage and scatter from the treatment head, beam modifiers, and collimators, lead shielding is placed on the pregnant mother's abdomen and pelvis. Shielding is possible earlier in the pregnancy, but as the gravid uterus grows, it is difficult for adequate shielding. Also, as the abdominal size increases, the distance between the field and fetus reduces, thus increasing the risk of exposure while treating supradiaphragmatic areas. In this circumstance, the fetus receives 10 to 15 times more radiation dose for the same treatment field.

The developing fetus is most sensitive to ionizing radiation harmful effects during the first 14 days post-conception. In this period, either the pregnancy withstands the radiation exposure unharmed or is resorbed, often termed as an "all or none" phenomenon.

Diagnostic radiology imaging is essential. It is noted that the risks to the pregnant woman of not having imaging or a particular procedure are far greater than the speculated potential harm to the fetus. The fetal radiation dose from various conventional radiograph examinations is below 0.01 Gy. For fluoroscopic examinations, the dose resulting from barium enema might exceed 0.01 Gy, which can be further reduced by proper pre-requisites of the procedure. For a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the pelvis and abdomen, the fetal radiation dose is typically about 0.01–0.04 Gy, well below the threshold, which never exposes the fetus to dangerous radiation levels. In general, the doses involved in diagnostic radiology are much lower than the threshold dose for deterministic effects and present no substantial risk of causing fetal death, malformation, or mental development impairment.

**Effects of dose less than 0.05 Gy**— Various diagnostic imaging studies typically expose the fetus to less than 0.05 Gy (50 mGy, 5 rads), which poses no evidence of an elevated risk of fetal anomalies, intellectual disability, growth retardation, or pregnancy loss.

**Effects of dose more than 0.05 Gy**— This is the threshold at which there is an increased risk of deterministic effects. Evidence suggests that the risk increases at doses above 0.10 Gy (100 mGy, 10 rads), significantly above 0.15 to 0.20 Gy (150 to 200 mGy, 15 to 20 rads).

**Techniques for minimizing fetal exposure**— A pre-imaging consultation with the radiologist to ensure that the imaging and associated data necessary for maternal diagnosis and management is accomplished at the lowest possible fetal radiation dose. Various techniques are suggested to safeguard the fetus:

- **Non-abdominopelvic plain radiography**– Wearing a lead apron can minimize fetal exposure from radiation scatter whenever non-abdominopelvic sites are being scanned. A combination of fast film/screen or digital radiography can be used to reduce cumulative radiation exposure. Fortunately, diagnostic radiographs of the head, neck, chest, and limbs (ones that exclude the fetus from the imaging field) produce almost no scatter to the fetus. Thus it won't adversely increase the risk of any adverse outcome.

-  **Abdominopelvic plain radiography**– When the fetus is directly in the field of view, these techniques can be employed to minimize fetal radiation exposure:
- Doing a posterior-anterior (PA) exposure reduces the fetal radiation dose by 0.02 to 0.04 mGy (0.00002 to 0.00004 Gy) when compared with the traditional anterior-posterior (AP) exposure, since the uterus is located in an anterior pelvic position.
-  Shutters can be used to collimate the radiation beam to reduce scatter.
-  Avoiding near uterus magnification and using grids decreases fetal exposure.
-  Avoid repeat examinations

- **Fluoroscopy and angiography**– While doing fluoroscopic and angiographic imaging, radiation exposure can be reduced by modifying the exposure time, the number of images obtained, beam size, and imaging area.

- **Nuclear medicine**– Adequate maternal hydration and frequent urination reduce fetal exposure to radionuclides, which are eliminated via the urine accumulating in the maternal bladder, lying close to the gravid uterus. Most diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures use short-lived radionuclides such as technetium-99m that does not expose the fetus to large doses of radiation, keeping the exposure below 0.01 Gy.

- **Computed tomography scan**– When undergoing a CT scan, the estimation of fetal radiation exposure depends on several variables, such as the number, location, and thickness of slices. Doing a CT scan imaging during pregnancy while using narrow collimation and a wide pitch (i.e., the patient moves through the scanner at a faster rate) results in a slightly decreased image quality. Still, it provides a substantial reduction in radiation exposure.

- **Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB):**
- Gentilini et al. found that the dose to the affected breast was about 0.0022 Gy, to the other breast about 0.0009 Gy, and to the abdomen, about 0.00045 Gy, all far below the accepted threshold value.

- NCCN (National comprehensive cancer network) May 2021 update also recommends USG, MRI, X-ray (Mammogram) with shielding and advises against PET-CT.

- NCCN guidelines are unclear for SLNB as the evidence of fetal effects due to radiotracers is limited. It however recommends making individualized diagnostic decisions based on the patient's goals.