Hemostasis and thrombosis result from an integrated and interactive response of the coagulation factors, blood vessels, and platelets. During thrombosis, activated platelets convert circulating prothrombin to its active form of thrombin. Active thrombin then converts the fibrinogen into fibrin, eventually forming a fibrin matrix. This process is counterbalanced by plasmin derived from plasminogen, which gathers in the fibrin matrix. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is a natural fibrinolytic found in endothelial cells. It shows fibrin specificity and affinity. The end goal of this therapy is to convert plasminogen into plasmin which is accomplished at the location of the thrombus and on the surface of fibrin by the binding of tPA to plasminogen. This binding helps the conversion.

They can be subdivided into two categories which are as follows:

- Fibrin-specific agents: These agents mostly need the presence of fibrin for the conversion but, on a minimal scale, can do so in the absence of fibrin too. e.g. alteplase (tPA), reteplase (recombinant plasminogen activator [r-PA]), and tenecteplase

- Non-fibrin-specific agents: These do not need fibrin presence for conversion, which is why they can do this systemically. e.g., streptokinase

Streptokinase is the first historical thrombolytic agent extracted from certain streptococcal strains. Researchers found another potential fibrinolytic agent in human urine named urokinase. In contrast to streptokinase, urokinase lacks antigenicity and directly converts plasminogen to plasmin. These two substances catalyze plasminogen formation and are affected slightly by the local fibrin clot, thus having a higher systemic effect. Streptokinase and urokinase are not used widely in the United States but are used elsewhere because of their lower cost.

Alteplase (TPA) is the recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator and is identical to native tPA and is produced by recombinant DNA technology using complementary DNA for natural human tissue-type plasminogen activator obtained from a human melanoma cell line. Reteplase (recombinant plasminogen activator, r-PA)  is an unglycosylated single-chain t-PA deletion variant produced in E. coli. The kringle-1 domain is responsible for its rapid clearance. Tenecteplase (TNK-tPA) is a variant of t-PA with three-point mutations. Tenecteplase has a slow clearance rate; hence a simplified single bolus regimen is used.