Most individuals are asymptomatic or may present with the clinical picture of anemia (tiredness, headaches, palpitations, etc.) or vague upper gastrointestinal signs and symptoms like heartburn, epigastric pain, nausea, and rarely vomiting. Individuals with pernicious anemia might have sequelae of autoimmune conditions like associated thyroid disease, Diabetes Mellitus, dermatological, or joint disease.

Intestinal metaplasia is the most reliable marker for the progression of chronic atrophic gastritis. Specialized endoscopy with chromoendoscopy or high definition white light endoscopy with or without narrowband imaging is useful to map and take targetted biopsies. Though intestinal metaplasia at a focal location carries a higher risk of gastric cancer compared to no IM or CAG, the risk appears to be too small to justify surveillance for all individuals. It should be decided on individual risk factors already discussed.

- Single location IM with incomplete colonic type IM with persistent H. pylori or with a family history will require high-quality endoscopy in 3 years.

- Advanced stages of atrophic gastritis or IM in both antrum and corpus should have an endoscopy in 3 years.

- Individuals with pernicious anemia have a seven-fold relative risk of GC with a 0.27% per person-years incidence rate. Individuals with autoimmune atrophic gastritis should have an endoscopy in 3 to 5 years.

- Dysplasia, whether high grade or low grade, will need six-monthly and 12 monthly endoscopies, respectively, with the aim for resection of the dysplastic lesions.

In summary, chronic atrophic gastritis (gastric atrophy and gastric intestinal metaplasia) is a gastric precancerous lesion. There is evidence that advanced stages of CAG need surveillance in all the above higher risk groups of individuals to prevent progression to malignancy. High-quality endoscopy for the initial diagnosis and a multidisciplinary approach involving the primary care provider, nurse, and gastroenterologist is required for the appropriate investigation, staging, and long-term follow-up of these individuals. Primary care physicians could help to identify individuals with unclear etiology of anemia or other gastrointestinal symptoms. Nursing colleagues could help with obtaining a detailed history, including any family history or history of H. pylori infection. A gastroenterologist can help with endoscopy and refer patients back to the primary care provider with a plan for future surveillance and identification of signs and symptoms of complications, including gastric cancer.