The arterial supply of the upper extremity starts with the subclavian artery. The subclavian has a complicated course through the axilla, changing names twice before it gets to the upper arm. As it passes the one rib, it becomes the axillary artery. In the axilla, it passes deep to the pectoralis minor muscle toward the humerus. It gives off the anterior and posterior circumflex humeral arteries, before coursing posteriorly around the humeral head, giving rise to its largest branch, the subscapular artery. As it passes the teres minor, it becomes the brachial artery. At this point, it gives off the profundal brachii, which supplies the deep structures of the arm. It then travels along the humerus in the radial groove, along with the radial nerve. As it passes into the elbow, near the median nerve, it courses deep to the brachialis and splits into 2 branches, the radial (lateral branch) and ulnar (medial branch). The radial artery courses down the arm and supplies the deep palmar arch, while the ulnar artery supplies the superficial palmar arch. Due to its many anastomosing arteries, there are not many clinical correlates to the arterial injury of the upper extremity.

The venous drainage of the upper extremity is accomplished via two large veins. The first, the basilic vein, is formed by the radial and ulnar veins. It courses along the medial side of the arm where it meets with the brachial veins, forming the axillary vein. The cephalic vein arises around the hand and transverses the anterior-lateral area of the upper limb. It eventually courses between the pectoral and deltoid muscles, dumping into the axillary vein. The median cubital vein is a vein that is commonly used as a venipuncture site. It is a branch connecting the cephalic and basilic vein.