# Continuing Education Activity

Back pain is one of the most common causes for patients to seek emergency care. It has a broad range of potential etiologies for both adult and pediatric populations. The etiologies differ depending on the patient population, but most commonly, it is mechanical or non-specific. Back pain causes significant rates of disability and can be a problem that persists from childhood into adulthood. It is essential to be able to evaluate patients of all ages and recognize the unique differences in the presentation in these different populations. Knowing the typical red flags of back pain in both children and adults can guide the provider to appropriate evaluation and treatment. This activity describes the assessment, diagnosis, and management of low back pain and highlights the role of team-based interprofessional care for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the various etiologies of low back pain.
- Recall the evaluation of a patient with low back pain.
- List the treatment and management options available for low back pain.
- Explain the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication regarding the evaluation and management of patients with low back pain.

# Introduction

Back pain is one of the most common causes for patients to seek medical care in both primary care and emergency setting. An estimated 200 billion dollars are spent annually on the management of back pain

Inflammatory disorders, malignancy, pregnancy, trauma, osteoporosis, nerve root compression, radiculopathy, plexopathy, degenerative disc disease, disc herniation, spinal stenosis, sacroiliac joint dysfunction, facet joint injury, and infection are all part of the differential. Distinguishing the signs and symptoms of nociceptive pain (mechanical) from neuropathic pain (radiculopathy) is an essential first step in the diagnosis of back pain. Special tests such as the straight leg raise or Patrick's test can be used to help differentiate the origin of the patient's back pain. Back pain causes significant rates of disability and can be a problem that persists from childhood into adulthood. Back pain is a significant contributor to morbidity and mortality. Chronic back pain is also the most common cause of chronic pain in general.

The two most important aspects in the management of back pain are the identification of red flags that could be alarming for diagnoses such as malignancy or neurological conditions such as cauda equina syndrome

Conservative management often includes over-the-counter pain medications such as acetaminophen or NSAIDs. Muscle relaxants, gabapentin, topical analgesics, and opioids all play a role in the management of back pain, on a case-by-case basis

Furthermore, corticosteroid injections, radiofrequency ablative therapy, spinal cord stimulators, kyphoplasty, TENS units, and surgeries such as laminectomy, spinal fusion, or discectomy are possible treatments options as well for refractory cases. Comorbid conditions such as major depressive disorder or opioid use disorder must be addressed and treated to their fullest extent to help minimize the long-term effects of back pain. Separately, obesity plays a critical role in the development of back pain Integrative treatment modalities such as acupuncture, tai chi, and yoga have also been shown to have a moderate effect on the improvement of back pain

Back pain is and likely will continue to be the focus of many providers because of the profound effect it has on patients' well-being. Function becomes impaired, activities of daily living are changed to accommodate back pain, and quality of life suffers. Unlike injuries to almost everywhere else in the body, back pain (and axial skeletal injuries) affects almost every aspect of life. For example, sleeping is disrupted, it is difficult to bend, reach or turn, it is hard to drive or go to work, lifting and exercise become strenuous, anxiety-provoking activity, walking to the bathroom becomes a difficult task, and so on. This article address how to diagnosis back pain through a careful history and physical exam, evaluate back pain with various diagnostic tests, and treat back pain via pharmacological, interventional, surgical, non-pharmacological, and/or alternative treatment modalities.

# Etiology

Back pain is a broad topic with many potential etiologies that are broken mainly into five primary categories

- **Mechanical**: Most commonly this is due to injury to the spine, intervertebral discs, or soft tissues. Fractures such as spondylolisthesis can be both an acute or chronic process. Lumbago often is labeled as acute back pain or a strain to either the quadratus lumborum muscle or the paraspinal muscles. Disc herniation is a common type of traumatic back pain. Pregnancy is also a mechanical cause of back pain.

- **Degenerative**: Osteoarthritis of the spine includes facet joint osteoarthritis, sacroiliac joint osteoarthritis, spinal stenosis, and degenerative disc disease. Furthermore, osteoporotic compressive fractures are also a degenerative process.

- **Inflammatory**: This is caused primarily due to inflammatory (seronegative) spondyloarthropathies such as ankylosing spondylitis. Sacroiliitis is most commonly seen. The pathophysiology of back pain depends on the etiology. Most often, it may be a part of an acute inflammatory process.

- **Oncologic**: This is caused by lytic lesions to the spine, cancers of the marrow, or compressive nerve phenomena from adjacent space-occupying lesions. Often presenting as a pathological fracture.

- **Infectious**: Infections of the spine, discs, epidural abscesses, or muscular/soft tissue abscesses

It is important to note, however, that many non-back-related disorders may result in pain that patients perceive in the back, such as biliary colic, pneumonia, and obstructive or infectious renal disease. Therefore, it is prudent not to exclude these processes from your differential diagnosis while evaluating the patient.

# Epidemiology

Back pain is widespread in the adult population. Some studies have shown that up to 23% of the world’s adults suffer from chronic low back pain. This population has also shown a one-year recurrence rate of 24% to 80%

However, the prevalence is much less apparent in the pediatric literature. One Scandinavian study demonstrated that the point prevalence of back pain was approximately 1% for 12-year-olds and 5% for 15-year-olds, with a cumulative incidence of 50% by age 18 for females and age 20 for males

# History and Physical

A thorough history and physical exam are critical in the evaluation of the patient with back pain in both adult and pediatric populations.

The historical characteristics of the pain that require elucidation are very similar for the two populations. The mechanism of injury is often a valuable clue in diagnosis. The intensity and the quality of pain or whether the pain radiates helps narrow the differential. The alleviating and provoking factors of back pain can provide insight. Furthermore, previous treatments are all critical for gathering a thorough history of present illness. It may also be helpful to assess the impact on the patients daily living the pain has caused, such as work/school absenteeism, as useful clues for functional impairment. Past medical and family history (including the history of cancers or inflammatory conditions) and social history (including periods of injection drug use, exercise regimens, periods of exposure to tuberculosis) can also change the most likely working diagnosis. The character of the pain can help differentiate neuropathic pain from nociceptive pain, while the duration of pain helps establish the acute or chronic nature of the pain. Chronic pain is often centralized and has a specific set of signs and symptoms that include allodynia and hyperalgesia. The mechanism of the backs elucidates the likelihood of a herniated disc or acute muscle spasm. The location of the pain may help to decipher between a compression fracture, sacroiliac (SI) joint injury, and degenerative arthritic changes. Exacerbating and relieving factors such as positional changes to pain severity, as well, the effectiveness of various medications can also help narrow the differential diagnosis. Radiation of pain is a useful tool to help assess radicular symptoms. The severity of pain also helps the provider clue in on the effect the illness or injury may have on the patient's quality of life. Furthermore, associated symptoms such as weakness, sensation changes, difficulty with ambulation, bowel or bladder changes, fever, chills, unexplained weight loss, and pain awakening the patient from sleep are all useful questions to rule out for severe pathology.

The physical exam is also performed similarly between the age groups as long as the patient is old enough to communicate and participate in the review. The physical exam should include inspection, palpation, the range of motion, strength testing, provocative maneuvers, and neurologic (limb strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflex) assessments. Several provocative exercises help demonstrate or decrease suspicion of different processes.

A straight leg raise (SLR) can be completed by raising the patient’s leg to 30 to 70 degrees

One leg hyperextension test/stork test: Have the patient stand on one leg and (while being supported by the provider) have them hyper-extend their back. Repeat this maneuver on both sides. Pain with hyperextension is positive for a pars interarticularis defect

Adam test: Have the patient bend over with feet together and arms extended with palms together. The practitioner should observe from the front. If a thoracic lump is present on one side or the other, it is an indication of scoliosis

There are numerous other examination techniques; however, they have mixed evidence for inter-practitioner reliability and poor sensitivities or specificities.

Red flags features on history or physical exam should raise the provider’s suspicion for a process that may require imaging for proper diagnosis. These differ slightly from adults to children based on the incidence of diseases in these age groups:

Adults Red Flags:

- Malignancy:

- History: History of metastatic cancer, unexplained weight loss
- Physical exam: Focal tenderness to palpation in the setting of risk factors

- Infection:

- History: Spinal procedure within the last 12 months, Intravenous drug use, Immunosuppression, prior lumbar spine surgery
- Physical exam: Fever, wound in the spinal region, localized pain, and tenderness

- Fracture:

- History: Significant trauma (relative to age), Prolonged corticosteroid use, osteoporosis, and age greater than 70 years 
- Physical exam: Contusions, abrasions, tenderness to palpation over spinous processes

- Neurologic:

- History: Progressive motor/sensory loss, new urinary retention or incontinence, new fecal incontinence
- Physical exam: Saddle anesthesia, anal sphincter atony, significant motor deficits of multiple myotomes

Pediatric red flags are the same as adults with a few notable differences:

- Malignancy:

- History: age less than four years, nighttime pain 
- Physical exam: Focal tenderness to palpation in the setting of risk factors

- Infectious:

- History: age less than four years, nighttime pain, history of tuberculosis exposure 
- Physical exam: Fever, wound in the spinal region, localized pain, and tenderness

- Inflammatory:

- History: age less than four years, morning stiffness for greater than 30min, improving with activity or hot showers 
- Physical exam: limited range of motion, localized pain, and tenderness

- Fracture:

- History: activities with repetitive lumber hyperextension (sports such as cheerleading, gymnastics, wrestling, or football linemen)
- Physical exam: Tenderness to palpation over spinous process, positive Stork test

# Evaluation

While typically, history and physical exams are sufficient for evaluation of back pain, the presence of red flags requires further investigation. Early imaging in the adult population correlates with worse outcomes and more invasive treatments without a corresponding improvement in outcomes

Anteroposterior and lateral plain films should be sufficient to evaluate for boney pathology. In contrast, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be necessary to evaluate soft tissue lesions, nerve root/cord compression from a bulging disc, malignancy, and inflammatory conditions of the spine and surrounding tissues

In addition to imaging, one may consider laboratory evaluation if red flags are present. Rheumatologic assays such as HLA-B27, antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and Lyme are typically not helpful

# Treatment / Management

There are various treatments for pain based on etiology, age, and chronicity of back pain. The best evidence in adult back pain according to the "Noninvasive treatments for low back pain: current state of the evidence" clinician summary published by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality in 2016:

In adults:

For radicular low back pain, nonpharmacologic interventions such as exercise, traction, and spinal manipulation have shown some benefits but have relatively weak levels of evidence to support it. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have moderate evidence of benefit. However, other pharmacologic interventions, such as diazepam and systemic steroids, do not seem to provide benefits [AHRQ,  2016].

For non-radicular acute or subacute low back pain, acetaminophen appears to have weak evidence of no benefit. However, NSAIDs, heat, and muscle relaxants have moderate evidence for positive gain. Massage has weak evidence that leans toward being advantageous [AHRQ 2016].

For non-radicular chronic low back pain, there is moderate evidence to support physical therapy[AHRQ 2016], particularly utilizing the McKenzie method

According to the American Pain Society, surgical referral should be reserved for patients with disabling low back pain impacting the quality of life for greater than one year

In children:

In pediatrics, treatments for pain are less well studied. However, activity modification, physical therapy, and NSAIDs have broad support as first-line therapies

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for back pain is comprehensive when considering the pediatric population. Below is a review of the more common diagnoses along with history or physical exam features that may increase your index of suspicion. This list is not comprehensive but represents the more likely and more concerning conditions that make up the differential.

Adults:

- Lumbosacral muscle strains/sprains

- Presentation: follows traumatic incident or repetitive overuse, pain worse with movement, better with rest, restricted range of motion, tenderness to palpation of muscles

- Lumbar spondylosis

- Presentation: patient typically is greater than 40 years old, pain may be present or radiate from hips, pain with extension or rotation, the neurologic exam is usually normal

- Disk herniation

- Presentation: usually involves the L4 to S1 segments, may include paresthesia, sensory change, loss of strength or reflexes depending on severity and nerve root involved

- Spondylolysis, Spondylolisthesis

- Presentation: similar to pediatrics, spondylolisthesis may present back pain with radiation to the buttock and posterior thighs, neurologic deficits are usually in the L5 distribution

- Vertebral compression fracture

- Presentation: localized back pain worse with flexion, point tenderness on palpation, may be acute or occur insidiously over time, age, chronic steroid use, and osteoporosis are risk factors

- Spinal stenosis

- Presentation: back pain, which can be accompanied by sensory loss or weakness in legs relieved with rest (neurologic claudication), neuro exam can be within normal limits or can have progressive loss of sensation, as well as weakness

- Tumor

- Presentation: a history of metastatic cancer, unexplained weight loss, focal tenderness to palpation in the setting of risk factors
- Clinical note: 97% of spinal tumors are metastatic diseases; however, the provider should keep multiple myeloma in the differential

- Infection: vertebral osteomyelitis, discitis, septic sacroiliitis, epidural abscess, paraspinal muscle abscess

- Presentation: Spinal procedure within the last 12 months, Intravenous drug use, Immunosuppression, prior lumbar spine surgery, fever, wound in the spinal region, localized pain, and tenderness
- Clinical note: Granulomatous disease may represent as high as one-third of cases in developing countries

- Fracture

- Presentation: Significant trauma (relative to age), Prolonged corticosteroid use, osteoporosis, and age greater than 70 years, Contusions, abrasions, tenderness to palpation over spinous processes

Pediatrics:

- Tumor

- Presentation: fever, malaise, weight loss, nighttime pain, recent onset scoliosis 
- Clinical note: Osteoid osteoma is the most common tumor that presents with back pain - classically, the pain is promptly relieved with anti-inflammatory drugs such as NSAIDs

- Infection: vertebral osteomyelitis, discitis, septic sacroiliitis, epidural abscess, paraspinal muscle abscess

- Presentation: fever, malaise, weight loss, nighttime pain, recent onset scoliosis
- Clinical notes: Epidural abscess should be a consideration with the presence of fever, spinal pain, and neurologic deficits or radicular pain; discitis may present with a patient refusing to walk or crawl

- A herniated disk, slipped apophysis

- Presentation: Acute pain, radicular pain, positive straight leg raise test, pain with spinal forward flexion, recent onset scoliosis

- Spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, lesion, or injury to the posterior arch

- Presentation: Acute pain, radicular pain, positive straight leg raise test, pain with spinal extension, tight hamstrings

- Vertebral fracture

- Presentation: acute pain, other injuries, traumatic mechanism of injury, neurologic loss

- Muscle strain

- Presentation: acute pain, muscle tenderness without radiation

- Scheuermann’s kyphosis

- Presentation: chronic pain, rigid kyphosis

- Inflammatory spondyloarthropathies

- Presentation: chronic pain, morning stiffness lasting greater than 30min, sacroiliac joint tenderness

- Psychological Disorder (conversion, somatization disorder)

- Presentation: normal evaluation but persistent subjective pain

- Idiopathic Scoliosis:

- Presentation: positive Adam’s test (for more significant angle curvature), most commonly asymptomatic
- Clinical note: Of note, no definitive evidence that scoliosis causes pain, but patients with scoliosis have more frequently reported pain; therefore the provider should rule out other causes before attributing pain to scoliosis

# Prognosis

Many factors seem to predict worse outcomes for patients who suffer from back pain. Prior episodes of back pain, greater intensity of back pain, and the presence of leg or widespread symptoms are all associated with worse “chronic disabling pain.” Lifestyle activities also seem to play a role, including patients having higher body mass indexes (greater than 25) and smoking contributing to worse outcomes

There is less clear prognostic evidence for pediatrics. However, one valid assumption is that the prognosis largely relies on the underlying etiology of the pain

# Complications

Complications are largely determined based on underlying etiology; however, they can mostly subdivide into physical and social complications. Physically, complications can include chronic pain, deformity, and/or neurologic impact either with motor or sensory deficits, or bowel/bladder involvement. Socially, complications are usually measured by disability, decreased gross domestic product, and increased absenteeism. A study in 2015 found that back pain was responsible for 60.1 million years lived with disability worldwide. This data represents the most common cause of disability globally

# Deterrence and Patient Education

After a review of the evidence, it would seem that the best patient education that can be provided to prevent back pain is to maintain a healthy body weight with a body mass index (BMI) less than 25, as higher BMI correlates with worse outcomes

# Pearls and Other Issues

There are practice pearls worth remembering in the evaluation and treatment of back pain.

For adults:

- History and physical exam are sufficient for evaluation of non-traumatic, acute back pain in the absence of red flags - avoid imaging before six weeks in severe back pain in the absence of red flags

- NSAIDs, opioids, and topiramate are more effective than placebo in the short-term treatment of nonspecific chronic low back pain

- Acetaminophen, antidepressants (except duloxetine), lidocaine patches, and TENS are not consistently more effective than placebo in the treatment of chronic low back pain

- Consider a physical therapy referral for McKenzie method techniques to reduce the risk of recurrence; intensive patient education that includes advice to stay active, avoid aggravating movements, and return to regular activity as soon as possible is effective in patients with nonspecific pain

For children:

- Children with back pain who have no significant physical findings, a short duration of pain, and a history of minor injury can be treated conservatively with no further evaluation

- Children with back pain, either abnormal physical findings, constant pain, nighttime pain, or radicular pain, should receive further evaluation

- Anterioposterior and plain lateral films are the first-line radiographic studies

- Consider laboratory evaluation to accompany your radiographs as malignancy and infection are higher on the differential diagnosis for pediatric patients than adults

- Tumor and infection needs to be ruled out for back pain in children four years and younger

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Back pain affects millions of people and is a leading cause of chronic pain and disability. It also leads to higher costs of healthcare. The first line assessment of back pain comes from the patient's primary care provider. They are essential in the evaluation and treatment of back pain. It helps to identify red flags for urgent treatment and referral, and it aids to minimize unnecessary procedures or opioid prescriptions and is critical in limiting the development of chronic pain.

The patients who develop chronic pain may benefit from seeing a chronic pain specialist for possible medication management and/or interventional procedures. Signs and symptoms of inflammatory arthritis of the lumbar spine should be further evaluated by a rheumatologist. Either severe radiculopathy or rapid neurological changes should be evaluated by a neurosurgeon urgently. Management of comorbid depression is also paramount. Cognitive-behavioral therapists and/or psychiatrists are needed to help co-manage patients with back pain with comorbid mental health disorders. The physical therapist should be involved early in the care and urge the patient to exercise regularly. The dietitian should encourage a healthy diet and body weight maintenance.

Furthermore, a nutritionist or obesity medicine specialist can help with weight loss and is useful for both primary and secondary prevention of back pain. Acupuncturists, osteopathic manipulative medicine specialists,  yoga instructors, or tai chi instructors can all be instrumental in improving function in patients with both acute and chronic low back pain. Pharmacists play an essential role in the care of complex patients with chronic pain; patients may be on multiple opioids and sedatives requiring frequent monitoring. Furthermore, radiologists aid in the diagnosis of various etiologies of back pain, including spinal stenosis and disc herniation.

Back pain, if not treated appropriately, can become chronic and debilitating over time. There is some debate as to the most appropriate treatment for back pain to maximize outcomes. Disease-oriented medicine, not holistic, has proven to have relatively weak outcomes regarding chronic back pain.  Approaching the treatment of pain from an interprofessional approach maximizes the chances of having better results.

Nursing should assist the clinical team with educating the patient on non-narcotic pain medications and possibly on alternative means of pain control, including yoga, deep breathing, and acupuncture. Clinicians should refrain from empirically prescribing narcotics as they lead to addiction, tolerance, and abuse. In the rare instances when narcotics are specified, both the pharmacist and clinician should work together to avoid long-term prescriptions of controlled drugs.

Bearing in mind the clinical clues which provide worse prognostic outcomes such as underlying mental health disorders, kinesiophobia, obesity, and smoking, it is likely to be helpful to treat the whole patient with an interprofessional team. Screening for some of these comorbidities as a primary care provider may be of assistance if the patient is not responding to conservative therapy. The primary physician can also offer smoking cessation and other lifestyle management counseling to the patient. The interprofessional team should communicate with each other to prevent duplication of treatments and tests, and this also helps deliver the same message to the patient.

**Outcomes**

The addition of early physical therapy has shown benefit more rapid improvement of health care utilization and opioid use