The FDA has a voluntary reporting system called MedWatch that enables healthcare providers to report any significant abnormalities, prospective and existing product use faults, and product quality issues involving pharmaceuticals, biologics, medical devices, unique dietary items, and cosmetics the organization. The Access Data web platform has an official reporting form (FDA 3500) that may be viewed and filled online. Pharmacists are the ones who report the most adverse medication reactions, and they're also encouraged to report any issue with a drug, such as incorrect labeling, the existence of foreign or particle matter, improperly made dosage forms, aberrant color or taste, and doubtful durability.

The FDA, however, stresses interprofessional responsibility by asking healthcare practitioners to have a moral obligation to report suspected adverse events, product quality issues, and product faults to the organization. The Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA) of 2007 has expanded the scope of the MedWatch program to include patient feedback, which was initially meant for medical practitioners.

The organization encourages practitioners to file reports, emphasizing that a report is neither a legal claim nor an admission that an adverse event, issue, or error has occurred. The practitioners' and patients' identification are kept private. In addition to medication, biological, and device reports, the FDA asks professionals to report information with descriptions of clinically significant toxicity linked to consuming large amounts of nutrients or food elements in nutritional supplements, such as vitamins and minerals.