The cutaneous neoplasms that have been reported in Muir-Torre syndrome include sebaceous adenomas, sebaceous epitheliomas, sebaceous carcinomas, cystic sebaceous tumors, basal cell carcinomas with sebaceous differentiation, and keratoacanthomas usually displaying some sebaceous differentiation. Sebaceous adenomas are the most common among these tumors. The criteria to obtain a diagnosis of Muir-Torre syndrome include at least one sebaceous neoplasm and at least one internal malignancy at some point in the patient’s life, without other causative factors such as radiotherapy or immunosuppression. The diagnosis also can be made in the combined setting of multiple keratoacanthomas, visceral malignancy, and family history of MTS. Of note, sebaceous hyperplasia and nevus sebaceous of Jadassohn are not considered features of Muir-Torre syndrome.

The clinical presentation can differ due to the variable expression of defects in the mismatch repair genes, and the number of sebaceous neoplasms can range from a solitary lesion to hundreds. Sebaceous lesions often present as slow-growing, painless, yellowish-colored papules or nodules which may or may not have ulceration. The most common location is the face, but any part of the skin with a sebaceous gland can develop a tumor. The majority of sporadic sebaceous tumors in patients without Muir-Torre syndrome are seen on the nose and eyelid, and any sebaceous tumor below the neck should raise suspicion of Muir-Torre syndrome. The clinical presentation of keratoacanthomas is similar to the sporadic counterpart, and they may be seen as solitary lesions or multiple.

A thorough history should be performed in the evaluation of any patient suspected of having Muir-Torre syndrome. While the most common malignancy is colon carcinoma, numerous other cancers have been described in association with Muir-Torre syndrome including malignancies involving the endometrium, cervix, ovaries, breast, small bowel, bone, hepatobiliary tract, brain, pancreas, upper uroepithelial tract, blood (lymphoma and leukemia), and lung.