Besides physicians, the role of the nurse and pharmacist as part of the interprofessional healthcare team cannot be overemphasized in the management of HIV patients with CNS toxoplasmosis. The nurse should emphasize safe sex practices and counsel both partners on sex education. Washing hands after contact with cat litter is highly recommended. In addition, walking bare feet in contaminated soil is not recommended. Patients should be cautioned against the use of intravenous drugs. One should wash hands after coming into contact with raw meat and wear gloves when gardening. Because these patients are on many medications including HAART, the pharmacist is in the ideal position to encourage compliance and oversee the regimen. HIV patients with CNS toxoplasmosis require life long prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and the pharmacist should educate the patient on potential complications if one does not comply with therapy. Finally, these individuals should be told to avoid travel to areas where toxoplasmosis is endemic. Only through an established, integrative, interprofessional team approach can the morbidity and mortality of CNS toxoplasmosis be lowered in HIV patients.

**Evidence-based Outcomes**

The prognosis of CNS toxoplasmosis in HIV is guarded. Relapses are very common if the treatment is discontinued. Ongoing treatment can lower the risk of recurrent infection. If the disorder is not treated adequately, complications like deafness, seizures, and blindness can occur. Infants with congenitally acquired toxoplasmosis generally have a better outcome than HIV adults.