The etiology of hyperammonemia is vast. It is a part of numerous disorders that can be classified as congenital or acquired. The acquired disorders can further be classified as hyperammonemia due to hepatic causes and non-hepatic causes (causes other than a liver disease). Congenital disorders involving enzymatic defects include urea cycle defects, organic acidemias, congenital lactic acidosis, fatty acid oxidation defect, and dibasic amino acid deficiencies. Other disorders include transient hyperammonemia of the newborn, neonatal Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection, and severe perinatal asphyxia.

**Urea Cycle Enzyme Defects**

The urea cycle is an energy-dependent process responsible for the conversion of toxic ammonia into urea, which can then be excreted. Five major steps are involved, each requiring a different enzyme. These include N-acetyl-glutamate synthase, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CPS), ornithine transcarbamylase, argininosuccinate synthetase (AS), argininosuccinic acid lyase (AL), and arginase.

Other enzymatic defects causing hyperammonemia are associated with additional metabolic abnormalities. Ketosis and acidosis are associated with organic acidemias such as isovaleric acidemia. Elevated pyruvate and lactate levels in congenital lactic acidosis and severe hypoglycemia in acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency are seen along with hyperammonemia.

Transient hyperammonemia of infancy is possibly due to the slow maturation of the urea cycle function seen in premature infants. It usually presents with signs and symptoms of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and intracranial hypertension within the first 24 to 48 hours of life. Severe perinatal asphyxia or neonatal HSV infection may also result in elevated ammonia levels.

An acquired disease-causing hyperammonemia in children is Reye syndrome, a childhood disorder that occurs most commonly after influenza or varicella infection and ingestion of aspirin. Hyperammonemia is coupled with elevated liver enzymes and lactic acidosis. Hepatomegaly is usually seen on examination. **Liver Disease**

Hepatic encephalopathy is a syndrome of neuropsychiatric manifestations in patients with liver disease, and one of the mechanisms of its development is hypothesized to be hyperammonemia. 10% of the patients with hepatic encephalopathy, however, do not have raised levels of ammonia. Hepatic encephalopathy can be categorized into three main types depending on the underlying cause. They are:

- Type A hepatic encephalopathy: acute liver failure due to viral hepatitis, ischemic hepatitis, and ingestion of hepatotoxins. This usually presents with features of acute hepatic encephalopathy along with hepatic synthetic dysfunction.

- Type B encephalopathy: portosystemic shunts in patients with no underlying cirrhosis or liver disease. It may be congenital (a rare disorder) or artificially created (for portal vein thrombosis) and can result in hyperammonemia as the blood bypasses the liver.

- Type C hepatic encephalopathy: cirrhosis and portal hypertension due to chronic Hepatitis B or C virus, biliary atresia, alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency, Wilson disease, and cystic fibrosis.

Encephalopathy can be acutely precipitated by renal failure, gastrointestinal bleed, or infection.

Causes of noncirrhotic hyperammonemia in adults include:

- Hematological disorders: multiple myeloma (plasma cells have increased amino acid metabolism) and acute leukemia.

- Infections: infections with urease-producing organisms such as Proteus mirabilis, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella may result in severe hyperammonemia in children with congenital defects of the urinary tract and the elderly with urinary tract infections leading to urinary retention.

- Unmasked urea cycle defects: As mentioned previously, females who are heterozygous for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency and males with some residual function of the enzyme can present later in life. They can develop clinical features of hyperammonemia in stressful situations such as increased muscle catabolism due to seizures and starvation, increased protein load delivered in total parenteral nutrition, gastrointestinal bleeding, and infections.

- Drugs: Several drugs may give rise to hyperammonemia. Valproic acid is thought to cause hyperammonemia by inhibiting glutamate uptake by astrocytes.

Liver disease is not present in some patients with portosystemic shunts, as described above. The term ‘Type B hepatic encephalopathy,’ however, is used to describe the neuropsychiatric features seen in the patients with this abnormality.