The electrodiagnostic study’s goal is to confirm the presence of peripheral neuropathy and assess its pattern and severity. Electrodiagnostic (EDX) testing involves nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) testing.

Nerve conduction studies generally begin with motor conduction in one lower extremity and include routine Peroneal and Tibial motor studies and their F-wave responses. If motor responses are absent while recording over the usual distal muscles such as the Extensor Digitorum Brevis (EDB) muscles, peroneal motor studies may be performed using the Tibialis Anterior. Tibial motor studies may be performed more proximally at the Soleus if necessary. The contralateral limb should be tested for symmetry. Amplitude differences of more than 50% when comparing side by side would be seen as abnormal. The soleus H reflex can be performed; however, it is often absent in polyneuropathies where the ankle reflex is absent and often does not add to the study. After motor studies are completed in the lower extremities, the clinician should obtain a lower extremity sensory response, such as the Sural or Superficial Peroneal nerves. It is common for amplitude responses to be very small in polyneuropathies; therefore, averaging may be required.

After the lower extremity studies, an upper extremity test is conducted. The Ulnar motor and sensory nerve conduction study in the non-dominant hand may be chosen. It is less likely to be affected in a concurrent entrapment neuropathy at the wrist. One may also choose to use the radial sensory response, as it is much less commonly involved in entrapment neuropathy. In severe polyneuropathies, sensory responses distally may be absent in the lower extremities, but may still be present in the upper extremities; therefore, the clinician may choose to test bilateral upper extremities to assess symmetry in the absence of sensory responses in the lower extremities.

The EMG study is performed, assessing first for abnormal spontaneous muscle fiber activity when the muscle is at rest. Secondly, it can assess Motor Unit Action Potentials (MUAP) during voluntary muscle activity. The strategy for EMG testing in polyneuropathy is similar in that distal and proximal muscles of at least one upper and lower extremity should be sampled. Muscle sampling is continued until a negative proximal muscle is found. The anterior tibialis muscle is useful as it is usually mildly affected, but not usually atrophic. Though often affected, the intrinsic foot muscles are avoided in the EMG evaluation as they are often painful and activation of these muscles is usually difficult, making an assessment of MUAP difficult. Some degree of atrophy, especially in the EDB muscle, is common in some healthy older adults.