Awareness among health care providers, including paramedics regarding advanced trauma life support, could reduce the mortality in tracheal injuries. Most of the iatrogenic tracheobronchial injuries could be mitigated in severity with adequate precautions and backup. The use of high-volume low-pressure cuff could reduce the local tracheal trauma in intubated patients. Adequate training protocols, use of optimal endotracheal tube size, appropriate use of stylets and boogies, avoidance of overinflation of cuff could reduce the tracheal injury during intubation.

For difficult intubations and suspected tracheobronchial injuries, the use of a fiberoptic bronchoscope could not only reduces further trauma to the airways but also prevents the formation of life-threatening false passages. Adequate training of the surgical team to take appropriate precautions need to be underlined. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy is a must before every resection for esophageal malignancy to rule out the evidence for airway infiltration. Cautery should be used with caution in peritracheal areas while performing head and neck operations.

Patients and relatives should be adequately explained regarding the possibility of immediate and late complications of possible tracheobronchial tear, which could occur during iatrogenic interventions. They should also be educated regarding immediate and late complications, blunt or penetrating tracheobronchial injuries. Optimization of engineering measures to avoid blunt motor vehicle injuries using seatbelt and airbags constitutes another aspect of a preventive strategy. Head and neck protection measures need to be made imperative during motorcycling and mountain biking. Appropriate mental health measures could mitigate suicide-related airway injuries.