Bone marrow toxicity is the most commonly reported adverse effect, occurring in most patients treated with mitomycin in one study. It produces cumulative myelosuppression. Thrombocytopenia and possibly leukopenia may occur anytime within the first two months after beginning therapy, with an average duration of one month.

Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) has been observed in patients receiving systemic medication, with an incidence of <15%.****Patients presented with microangiopathic hemolytic anemia with fragmented red blood cells on peripheral blood smears. Patients with HUS also suffer the common and well-known side effects of the syndrome, including thrombocytopenia (≤100,000/mm) and renal failure (serum creatinine ≥1.6 mg/dL), which is irreversible. The use of blood product transfusions has correlated with exacerbation of the HUS symptoms. There is a high mortality rate of 52% associated with this syndrome.

In another study, nausea, fever, vomiting, and anorexia occurred in up to 14% of people taking mitomycin. Alopecia and stomatitis occurred in up to 4% of individuals. Roughly 2% of the patients showed a statistically significant rise in creatinine. However, there was no correlation between the dose given or duration of therapy with the degree of renal impairment.

Pulmonary toxicity has been infrequently reported, with patients presenting with dyspnea, nonproductive cough, and pulmonary infiltrates on radiologic imaging.

The most frequent adverse events with ocular administration of mitomycin occur locally and include blebitis, hypotony maculopathy, hypotony, endophthalmitis, cataract development, vascular reactions, and corneal reactions.