The impairment of STM involves forgetting information to which the subject has been recently exposed. An individual with signs of losing STM, indeed, asks for the same questions repeatedly, forgets where he just put something, forgets recent events or something he saw or read recently. The loss of immediate memory is also termed as fixation amnesia. The clinical features of STM impairment, however, are variable and depend on the underlying cause for the memory alteration. Within the STM, different memory domains such as verbal or visuospatial components, and in different degrees, can be altered. In most cases, the memory alterations are blurred and last as long as the pathology that caused them, or resolves over weeks or months (e.g., postoperative cognitive dysfunction).

In neurodegenerative diseases such as dementia, the decline of STM is generally progressive, involving different domains and, in turn, other memory systems. On the other side, memory loss in mild cognitive impairment can remain unaltered, worsen, or improve. In about 30% of brain aneurysm cases, STM/LTM problems disappear over time, although recovery may take weeks. In most cases (e.g., psychogenic amnesia) memories can be recovered for instance through psychological interventions (recover of undeleted files); nevertheless, if amnesia has lasted a long time such as months or years, the recovery is not possible (deleted files), and the subject projects into a new life (the fugue state).

Memory impairment can be part of complex clinical pictures. For example, alcohol-induced Korsakoff syndrome characteristically demonstrates STM/LTM memory impairment (anterograde, retrograde), confabulation (invented memories used to fill memory gaps and blackouts) and psychiatric symptoms. Neurological manifestations associated with thiamine deficiency (Wernicke encephalopathy) can accompany Korsakoff syndrome, and the combination is termed as Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.