This linear transformation of the original linear attenuation makes the Hounsfield scale a relative scale, rather than absolute. Different X-ray beam energies will result in different tissue absorption and hence, different HUs. Early studies showed the HU to be dependent on the various CT parameters.

CT artifacts can affect Hounsfield unit measurements.  One of the most encountered CT artifacts, beam-hardening artifact, affects the measurement of radiodensity. Polychromatic energies comprise the conventional CT X-ray. High-density tissue selectively absorbs X-rays of lower energy, thus altering the X-ray beam. This absorption, in turn, can alter the X-ray beam absorption in the center of high-density tissue and results in a change in the HU, leading to falsely lowered HU measurements and appears less dense, or darker, on CT images. Modern CT machines can correct this artifact in the reconstruction process.

Continued advancements in CT as a diagnostic tool have led to different CT designs. Different CT designs, in turn, can alter the HU. For example, cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT), used mainly in dentistry, cannot show the actual HU similar to conventional CT but does show a strong correlation.

Lastly, one should remember that the visualization of images on a CT has as its basis differences in tissue density and radiodensity. In the case of foreign body evaluation on CT imaging, if the foreign body has a similar physical density to the tissue that it is embedded in, it will have similar HU and will be hard to detect by visually CT. The radiologic evaluation of a wooden foreign body is complicated, given the varied appearance of wood and changes within the wood. There is documentation showing that a wooden foreign body demonstrates increasing HU over time.

HU for fat is around -50, cerebrospinal fluid +15, white matter +25, grey matter +40, and blood +30-45.