Before starting the chemical peeling procedure, the patient's skin requires cleaning with a degreasing agent such as isopropyl alcohol or acetone for the removal of any residue or makeup.

The peeling agent can be applied on the thicker skin regions first (i.e., chin, nose, cheeks, and forehead) followed by the thinner skin regions (i.e., around the eyes and mouth). A brush, gauze, or a wooden spatula can be used to apply the chemical in evenly distributed strokes, the choice of which application method will depend on the desired effect and chemical peel used. Peel-specific application nuances exist for each type and require experience until achieving mastery. As an example, gauze sponges can be more abrasive and more suitable for liquid formulations. Overlaps in brushstroke coverage should be avoided as it may cause overconcentration of the agent and an uneven outcome. The edge of the treatment site can be feathered to blur demarcation lines.

Certain areas requiring special attention include:

- Thicker keratoses: these areas tend to pick up solution unequally and thus frost unevenly; therefore, additional applications with vigorous rubbing may be needed to maximize penetration

- Wrinkled skin: should be stretched to ensure an even coating into troughs and folds

- Peri-oral rhytids: may require application with the wooden end of the cotton-tipped applicator, with extension to the vermilion of the lip

- Deep wrinkles (expression lines): should be treated as the surrounding skin since these areas are best treated with either neuromodulator and/or filler

- Eyelid skin: delicate and careful application is paramount so that excess peel solution does not come into the eyes or come into contact with tears; a semi-dry applicator should be gently rolled onto the lids and periorbital skin, with care to remain at least 3 mm from the lid margin;

Post-application, specific agents (primarily TCA) can induce a reaction called frosting. It has three levels based on the degree of protein denaturation. In level, I frosting (superficial peel), erythema, and patchy areas of frosting occur. Level II (medium peel) represents a white coat of frosting with some erythema being visible beneath, while level III (deep peel) exists when a white plaque-like formation with almost no erythema visible.

After peel application, cool saline compresses can be applied to help neutralize the solution (glycolic acid) and/or provide patient comfort. "Vinegar soaks" using 0.25% acetic acid facilitates healing, as does the application of a non-scented, bland emollient 3 to 5 times a day to the desquamated areas after soaks. Desquamation usually concludes within several days (depending on the depth of the peel) and is followed by intense erythema which gradually subsides over 1 to 2 weeks thereafter. After 24 hours, the patient may shower and use a non-detergent face wash. Protection against sun exposure and applying sunscreen requires re-emphasis.