The cerebellum receives afferent information about voluntary muscle movements from the cerebral cortex and from the muscles, tendons, and joints. It also receives information concerning balance from the vestibular nuclei. Each cerebellar hemisphere controls the same side of the body, thus if damaged the symptoms will occur ipsilaterally. Several signs and symptoms arise as a consequence of cerebellar dysfunction: During **hypotonia,**the muscles lose resistance to palpation due to diminished influence of the cerebellum on gamma motor neurons. The patient walks with a broad-based gait and leans toward the affected side. Disturbances of voluntary movements, called**ataxia,**involve tremors with fine movements, such as writing or buttoning the clothes. Finger to nose test is performed to examine the coordination of the muscle movements. When a patient is asked to touch the tip of the nose with the index finger, the movements are not properly coordinated, and tremor is observed at the end of the movement, called intention tremor. A similar test can be performed on the lower limbs by asking the patient to place the heel of one foot against the shin of the opposite leg. Ataxia of ocular muscles results in**nystagmus,**a rhythmical oscillation of the eyes. To provoke nystagmus, the patient should rotate eyes horizontally. Similarly, ataxia of the larynx muscles results in dysarthria. Speech is slurred and syllables are separated from one another.**Dysdiadochokinesia**is the lack of ability to perform rapidly alternating movements. One can ask the patient to quickly supinate and pronate both forearms simultaneously. Movements will be slow and incomplete on the side of the cerebellar lesion.

Cerebellar syndromes involve vermis and hemispheres. In **vermis syndrome,**muscle incoordination involves the head and trunk. Patients cannot maintain a straight posture and may fall. The most common cause of vermis syndrome is a medulloblastoma of the vermis in children.**The cerebellar syndrome**involves the incoordination of muscles of the limbs unilateral to the hemisphere lesion. Dysarthria and nystagmus are also common findings. Disorders of the lateral part of the cerebellar hemispheres produce delays in initiating movements. The most common cause of cerebellar dysfunction is alcohol poisoning, but also trauma, multiple sclerosis, tumors, thrombosis of the cerebellar arteries may occur.

Occlusion of PICA cause Wallenberg syndrome, which includes the following signs and symptoms: dysphagia and dysarthria resulting from paralysis of the ipsilateral palatal and laryngeal muscles; analgesia of the ipsilateral side of the face; vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and nystagmus; ipsilateral Horner syndrome; ipsilateral limb ataxia and contralateral loss of sensations of pain and temperature.

Some data indicate that cerebellum dysfunction may correlate with disorders like autism and schizophrenia.