Treatment options for methanol toxicity include supportive care, fomepizole (Antizole, 4-Methylpyrazole or 4MP), ethanol, dialysis, and theoretically, folate. Fomepizole is the antidote for toxic alcohols, and its mechanism of action is the inhibition of alcohol dehydrogenase. Ethanol may also be utilized therapeutically to inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase when fomepizole is unavailable. There are advantages and disadvantages to either treatment. Fomepizole is more easily dosed, does not cause any inebriation, strongly inhibits alcohol dehydrogenase, but is fairly expensive. Ethanol is less expensive but is harder to dose accurately, requires close monitoring of the serum ethanol concentration, and causes inebriation that may necessitate intensive care monitoring.

Indications for treatment include an elevated methanol concentration and severe or progressing acidosis, despite resuscitation, with clinical suspicion of methanol ingestion. Recommendations regarding specific methanol concentrations vary concerning when to start treatment. Most conservative recommendations are to start treatment if the methanol concentration is greater than 20 to 25 mg/dL. However, if metabolic acidosis is mild or not present, and there is no evidence of end-organ toxicity, then a methanol concentration of 32 mg/dL is an appropriate starting point for treatment as molar calculations indicate this would correlate with a maximum of 10mmol/L of a toxic metabolite (formate). This should not alone account for more than a 10 mmol/L base deficit or a toxic amount of metabolite. (Note: the molar-based treatment cutoff for ethylene glycol is 62 mg/dL; see ethylene glycol chapter). When methanol concentration is not attainable, then an appropriate indication for treatment should be when bicarbonate progresses below 15mmol/L or if there is evidence of retinal toxicity. After empiric treatment with fomepizole, there are 12 hours in which metabolism of methanol is halted, allowing adequate time to obtain a methanol concentration and arrange for dialysis, if needed.

Fomepizole or ethanol serves as alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitors to stop the conversion of methanol to its toxic metabolite, formate. When alcohol dehydrogenase is inhibited, clearance of methanol is prolonged from approximately 8.5 mg/dL/hr to an effective half-life of 45 to 90 hours. Fomepizole is given intravenously, with a loading dose of 15 mg/kg, and then maintenance dosing of 10 mg/kg every 12 hours for 4 doses or until the methanol concentration is less than 32 mg/dL with normal acid-base status. If additional dosing is required beyond 4 maintenance doses, then dosing increases to 15 mg/kg every 12 hours due to autoinduction of increased metabolism. During dialysis, fomepizole should be dosed every 4 hours as it is dialyzable.

Dosing of ethanol is more complicated, difficult to monitor, and has the added side effect of inebriation. Ethanol may be given intravenously or orally. However, it should only be given if fomepizole is unavailable as it would be inappropriate to cause the patient to be inebriated for such an extended period. When treating with ethanol, the goal therapeutic serum concentration is a range of 80 to 120 mg/dL. Intravenous ethanol formulary is usually 10%, and a loading dose is calculated using the product of the goal plasma concentration (C = 100mg/dL), the volume of distribution of ethanol (V = 0.6L/kg), and the patient’s weight. Maintenance dosing is then based on elimination rate. Empirically, 10% intravenous ethanol may be administered with a loading dose of 8 mL/kg over 30 to 60 minutes, followed by maintenance dosing of 1 to 2 mL/kg per hour. Maintenance dosing is doubled during dialysis. Oral dosing may be calculated using the above equation for serum alcohol concentrations by using 100 mg/dL for the serum concentration and then solving for the amount ingested. Empirically, 50% (100 proof) oral ethanol may be administered with a loading dose of 2 mL/kg followed by 0.2 to 0.4mL/kg per hour. Maintenance dosing is doubled during dialysis.

Patients with toxic methanol ingestion should be strongly considered for hemodialysis. Due to its low volume of distribution and lack of protein-binding, both methanol and the toxic metabolite, formate, are dialyzable. Hemodialysis is often beneficial for methanol toxicity because it can significantly decrease the patient’s length of stay. Once alcohol dehydrogenase is inhibited, clearance of methanol is prolonged from approximately 8.5 mg/dL per hour to an effective half-life of 45 to 90 hours. However, the only absolute indication for hemodialysis in methanol toxicity is a new visual impairment in the presence of metabolic acidosis. Relative indications for hemodialysis include methanol concentration greater than 50 mg/dL, severe metabolic acidosis refractory to resuscitation, history of ingestion of a lethal dose of 1gm/kg, renal failure, and other standard indications for dialysis.

Additional treatment of methanol toxicity includes folate. Folate administration is of theoretical benefit as it may enhance the metabolism of the toxic metabolite, formate, to carbon dioxide and water.

Admission to the intensive care unit is appropriate when a patient has severe symptomatology, severe metabolic derangements, is in need of dialysis, or is being treated with ethanol as an antidote.