Abciximab enjoys extensive use in interventional cardiology for the treatment of unstable angina and as an adjunct therapy following percutaneous coronary intervention. The drug is only available intravenously. Healthcare workers, including nurses, pharmacists, and clinicians, should be aware that one of the most common complications of abciximab is bleeding and work together as a team to identify this complication early. Patients who receive this agent require monitoring for bleeding especially at the IV access site. It is also critical to review patient history for any recent bleeding disorders, especially gastrointestinal bleeds.

Because there is no specific antidote to reverse bleeding, it is vital to avoid other anticoagulants at the same time; this is where the pharmacist must perform thorough medication record checking, to prevent additive effects with other anticoagulant agents, as well as verifying dosing, and alerting the healthcare team of any concerns. Also, the platelet count requires monitoring since abciximab can cause thrombocytopenia. Nursing will be administering this drug in most instances and needs to be vigilant for adverse effects (especially signs of bleeding), as well as assessing therapeutic effectiveness, and report any issues to the physician team. If bleeding occurs, a consult with the hematologist is a strong recommendation. Only with this type of interprofessional team approach can abciximab be successfully used to improve patient care. [Level 5]