Although the diagnosis is clinical, many professionals will require radiologic imaging to evaluate further and confirm the diagnosis.

The most accurate method is the CT scan with 3D reconstruction, where all sutures are assessable, but due to the radiation risk, this option requires thoughtful consideration. Plain x-rays are low-cost. Therefore they are useful to assess infants will low risk of craniosynostosis, but it is not accurate enough. MRI is less accurate when compared to CT, but is still a great method to use, but usually reserved for children in which the CT revealed any anomalies of the brain.

Ultrasound is a low-cost modality (but technician-dependent) that can only be used with open fontanelles but is very useful to visualize and follow up the sutures at every examination.

New modalities are now in use, like GRASE (gradient-and-spin-echo), a type of MRI, which enhances bone-soft tissue boundaries showing the cranial sutures as hyperintense.

When encountered with syndromic craniosynostosis, genetic testing is the usual followup (recommended mostly when two or more sutures are affected), testing for FGF receptor genes, which have been the genes most commonly related to these syndromes. FGFR2 and FGFR3 undergo testing, as well as transcription factors (TWIST, MSX2). Increasing levels of research have taken place to understand and determine the genetic causes of these syndromes. To date, 57 genes have been identified to have a relationship and be the underlying cause of the craniosynostosis, the most common ones being the ones mentioned above.