Most patients who ultimately are found to have Sertoli cell-only syndrome are initially evaluated by conducting two separate semen analyses. Azoospermia, which refers to the complete absence of sperm in the semen, is often seen in such patients. A small percentage of patients may still have a low detectable level of sperm (severe hypospermatogenesis and oligospermia).

Most patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome (up to 90%) will have elevated FSH levels, usually two to three times normal. (Such high readings typically indicate a severe failure of spermatogenesis.) Testosterone levels are usually normal.

The definitive test for non-obstructive azoospermia and diagnosing Sertoli cell-only syndrome is the testis biopsy.

**FSH**levels are routinely checked in infertile men. A study of 125 men with abnormal spermatogenesis and spermatogenic dysfunction suggested that these findings can be reliably predicted (89%) by finding elevated FSH levels over 7.6 IU/L and small testicles with a long axis of no more than 4.6 cm.

However, the predictive value of FSH levels is highly controversial, with several studies indicating that FSH is not a reliable predictor, while others suggest that high FSH levels were more likely to be associated with sperm retrieval failure. The consensus suggests that higher FSH levels overall tend to be associated with slightly higher sperm retrieval rates, but the data is too conflicting and inconsistent to make any conclusive recommendations.

Routine genetic testing yields a diagnosis in about 20% of cases.

Recently, testicular volume apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) histogram analysis has been used to help predict the presence of spermatozoa in patients with non-obstructive azoospermia prior to sperm extraction procedures. It was found that the median ADC was the most significant parameter predicting the presence of viable spermatozoa.

A Y chromosomal defect in a man is transmissible to his male offspring if assisted reproductive technologies (ART) using his sperm are successful. Thus, genetic counseling should be offered to all men with non-obstructive azoospermia or sperm concentrations with <5 million/mL before expensive assisted reproductive technologies, such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), are performed.

**Male infertility patients with azoospermia and Sertoli cell-only syndrome who are considering micro-TESE and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) should have karyotyping, genetic testing, a Y-chromosome microdeletion assay, and genetic counseling before proceeding with advanced assisted reproductive treatment.**