# Continuing Education Activity

Systemic scleroderma is a connective tissue disease that can affect internal organs. Cardiac manifestations of the disease can be a result of the primary disease or secondary to the involvement of another organ. Direct involvement can manifest as conduction system abnormalities, myocardial, and pericardial disease. Kidney and lung involvement can lead to hypertensive crisis and pulmonary hypertension (PAH), respectively. Cardiac manifestations can be subclinical, but overall, they portend a poor prognosis. This activity outlines the cardiac manifestations of scleroderma, evaluation, and treatment. It emphasizes the role of the interprofessional team in diagnosing this condition promptly.

**Objectives:**
-  Identify the findings of scleroderma and cardiac involvement.
- Explain the importance of diagnosing cardiac complications of scleroderma.
- Outline the management options available for cardiac complications of scleroderma.
- Review the importance of an interprofessional team in improving the quality of life in patients with scleroderma and the importance of continuity of care among the interprofessional team to ensure appropriate follow-up care.

# Introduction

Systemic sclerosis is a rare, complex, and chronic multisystem disease. Scleroderma means hard and thick skin. It is derived from the ancient Greek words "skleros," which means (hard) and "derma," which means (skin). Skin involvement is one of the features of systemic sclerosis (SSc). The hallmark features of systemic sclerosis include immune dysregulation with inflammation, vascular injury with an anatomic and functional abnormality, and systemic interstitial fibrosis of organs and skin, leading to multisystem organ damage.

# Etiology

The etiology of systemic sclerosis and the exact contributing genetic susceptibility is not fully understood. However, several factors are thought to play a role, and environmental exposure in genetically susceptible individuals is thought to be plausible. Some studies showed that the risk of systemic sclerosis is increased in first-degree relatives; on the other hand, in a twin study, the concordance for systemic sclerosis was found to be relatively low.

Some of these non-MHC loci have also been implicated in other autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, suggesting that immune dysregulation is a very important factor in systemic sclerosis development.

Infectious agents, specifically viruses, have been studied and thought to be a factor in SSc development. These include cytomegalovirus (CMV), parvovirus B19, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Several findings and theories have been studied in this regard. These include possible molecular mimicry as some of these viruses contain antigens that were found to share immunogenicity with endothelial peptides. Profibrotic molecules were found to be stimulated by CMV in certain tissues. Also, CMV has been implicated in the allograft vasculopathy, inducing similar vascular pathologic changes as SSc.

Certain drugs have been implicated in SSc such as bleomycin, taxol, pentazocine, and cocaine.

# Epidemiology

The incidence and prevalence of SSc vary among different studies. The overall worldwide incidence of SSc is reported to be between 8 to 56 new cases/million/year. Whereas, the overall prevalence is between 38 to 341 cases/million/year. SSc is more common in women (3 to 7: 1 female to male ratio), with an average age of disease onset being 35 to 50. There are several differences in disease presentation between males and females. For instance, females are found to have disease onset at a younger age with longer disease duration. Females are also found to have more limited SSc than men, more frequent but less severe peripheral vascular involvement, and increased frequency of anti-centromere antibodies with pulmonary hypertension being the most frequent cause of mortality.

Primary cardiac disease is reported in both diffuse and limited systemic sclerosis; however, it is more prevalent and more severe in diffuse systemic sclerosis.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of cardiac disease in SSc involves repeated abnormal vasoreactivity with coronary microvascular ischemia, reperfusion injury, and myocardial inflammation. Microvascular changes are often seen in the endocardium, whereas lesions suggestive of macrovascular coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis do not appear to be increased in SSc. It appears that microcirculation changes similar to Raynaud changes in peripheral circulation occur in the myocardium. These Recurrent episodes of ischemia and reperfusion often result in contraction band necrosis and replacement fibrosis. The result is an increased myocardial stiffness with reduced compliance. This is thought to be the cause of diastolic dysfunction in SSc, which is known to be associated with increase mortality. The changes in coronary microcirculation are thought to be reversible in early disease, with irreversible structural changes occurring late with disease progression. Acute myocarditis can also occur in SSc and is often reported to be associated with skeletal myositis.

# Histopathology

The hallmark pathologic features of SSc include proliferative and/or obliterative vasculopathy with minimal inflammation affecting mainly small vessels with capillary loss and fibrosis.

# History and Physical

Microvascular coronary artery disease is usually the underlying pathology, with many patients being asymptomatic years before presentation.

# Evaluation

Evaluation for myocardial disease in scleroderma is very important, given that the majority of patients have no cardiac symptoms early in the course of the disease. Therefore, cardiac screening for asymptomatic patients with SSc has been proposed. This includes obtaining a baseline cardiac clinical evaluation with history and exam, transthoracic echocardiogram, electrocardiogram, lab testing with troponin, and plasma brain natriuretic peptide. Additional testing is indicated in symptomatic patients include cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, stress testing, and/or cardiac catheterization. Referral to a cardiologist is warranted based on the findings of these studies. An interprofessional approach is recommended with the involvement of rheumatologists and cardiologists to provide comprehensive care and recommendations.

# Treatment / Management

Generally, the management of SSc mostly involves target organ management. Treatment of microvascular coronary artery disease is similar to the general population with optimization of anti-anginal therapy, including antiplatelets, lipid-lowering therapy, nitrates, and calcium channel blockers. Heart failure is generally similar to the general population. Non-selective beta-blockers should generally be considered due to the lower risk of worsening vasoreactivity. Limited data showed some benefits on myocardial function and perfusion with the use of vasodilators such as calcium channel blockers or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. One study of 601 patients on the use of vasodilators or low dose aspirin suggested potential myocardial preventive benefits in SSc.

Management of heart failure is not different than the general population. This generally varies based on the type of heart failure, whether diastolic, which is more common with SSc or systolic heart failure. The treatment of diastolic heart failure is mainly with diuretics and blood pressure control. The treatment of systolic heart failure is mainly with beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), diuresis, and the use of inotropes and device therapy in select cases if indicated. Care should be taken to address any underlying medical condition that may predispose to or worsen heart failure or coronary artery diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia. Myocardial inflammation in SSc, whether myocarditis or myopericarditis, was shown to respond to immunosuppression in some studies. However, these data are limited and mostly observational. Several treatments were suggested with reported success, including systemic steroids, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate, and intravenous immunoglobulin. Normalization of cardiac enzymes with clinical improvement was reported with the use of systemic steroids and cyclophosphamide.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several conditions can mimic SSc. These include scleredema, which is characterized by excess mucin deposition presenting with skin thickening and woody induration involving the upper back and posterior portion of the neck. Scleredema is associated with diabetes mellitus, viral infections, and monoclonal gammopathies.

# Prognosis

Myocardial involvement in SSc carries a poor prognosis. Several studies have shown that a significant number of SSc mortality was related to the presence of cardiac disease, including heart failure and arrhythmias. Cardiac disease was found to be the third leading cause of death in SSc after interstitial lung disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension. In a metanalysis, the hazard ratio of increased mortality was 2.8 (HR = 2.8; 95% CI: 2.1 to 3.8) in patients with cardiac disease.

# Complications

Cardiac involvement in SSc is associated with increased mortality. Several complications can occur with myocardial disease, including heart failure, conduction defects, and tachyarrhythmias.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be educated on living with scleroderma and educated about signs of cardiac involvement such as new-onset chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, weight gain, and fatigue. Patients with heart failure should be warned about symptoms and signs of volume overload.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Scleroderma is a multisystem disease and involves multiple organs. It affects the lives of our patients and their families. The timely diagnosis of this disease and its complications are very important. This population will benefit from an interprofessional team and a care coordinator who can manage their follow-ups.