It is essential to monitor serum sodium concentrations. Hyponatremia is a severe risk that can occur with the use of oxcarbazepine. The risk for hyponatremia is the highest in the first three months of medication use, and 2% to 3% of patients may experience hyponatremia. Hyponatremia is when sodium concentrations are below 125 mmol/L. It is essential to monitor the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) with oxcarbazepine, as these medications can cause a decrease in sodium concentrations through the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) production.

**Special Populations**

**Children**

Approved for use in children four years and older as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy for partial seizures. The initial dose should be 8 to 10 mg/kg per day, separated into two divided doses.

**Pregnancy**

Oxcarbazepine and licarbazepine (MHD) can cross the placenta, and research has found these drugs in newborns. Data from a limited number of pregnancy registries suggest congenital malformations can occur, e.g., craniofacial and cardiac. Pregnant patients taking oxcarbazepine are encouraged to enroll in a pregnancy registry (www.aedpregnancyregistry.org).

Oxcarbazepine breastmilk concentrations are low, and infants older than two months are expected not to cause any adverse effects.

**Renal Impairment**

The clinician may need to initiate a lower starting dose and titrate more slowly in patients with renal complications because the kidney excretes oxcarbazepine. In patients with creatinine clearance between 10 and 50, reduce the dose by 25%. If creatinine clearance is below 10, reduce the dose by 50%.

**Hepatic Impairment**

No adjustment in the oxcarbazepine dose is required.

**Cardiac Impairment**

No adjustment in the oxcarbazepine dose is required.

**Elderly**

The geriatric population may have decreased renal clearance and thus should be started at lower doses and titrated more slowly as oxcarbazepine undergoes renal excretion.