**Opioids Receptors and Classification**

The mu receptors are a class of receptors that neuromodulate different physiological functions, but above all, nociception but also stress, temperature, respiration, endocrine activity, gastrointestinal activity, memory, mood, and motivation. Because these receptors bind opioids, they are also commonly referred to as mu-opioid receptors (MORs). However, opioid receptors are a very large family of receptors that includes in addition to MORs also delta-opioid receptors (DORs), kappa opioid receptors (KORs), and nociceptin receptor (NOR) also referred to as opioid-receptor-like receptor 1 (ORL1) which seems to have a critical role in the development of tolerance to mu-opioid agonists used as analgesics. Also, there are some other opioid receptors such as the zeta, the epsilon, the lambda, and the iota opioid receptors. Sigma receptors are no longer considered to be opioid receptors as the opioid antagonist naloxone does not reverse their activation. Although according to the International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology (IUPHAR) recommendation the appropriate terminology for the three classical opioid receptors and the nociceptin receptor should be MOP ("Mu OPioid receptor"), DOP, KOP, and NOP respectively, in this chapter we will refer to the acronym MOR for indicating mu-opioid receptors as it is the most used in the scientific literature.

**Receptor Mechanism**

Opioid receptors are part of the G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) family. Crystallographic studies have allowed researchers to characterize this important superfamily of receptors that control different aspects of cellular function and are implicated in a vast number of neurotransmitter processes. Their basic structure consists of a single polypeptide chain that crosses the cell membrane seven times (seven-transmembrane domain receptors), has an N-terminal extracellular domain of variable length, and a C-terminal intracellular domain, and interacts with heterotrimeric G proteins.

Endogenous and exogenous opioids operate through both inhibitory and excitatory action at the presynaptic and postsynaptic sites. In particular, the MORs interact with a G protein of the inhibitory type, the G-alpha-iota/o class of adenylate cyclase inhibitory G-alpha proteins. Based on the structure of the alpha subunit, there are the G-alpha-iota forms (G-alpha-iota1, 2, and 3), G-alpha-omicron types (A and B), and G-alpha-zeta type. On the other hand, the beta-gamma heterodimer forms from one of the five different betas and one of the twelve different gamma subtypes. In the resting state, there is a G-alpha-beta-gamma complex, and the subunit α binds guanosine diphosphate (GDP). The binding of the opioid agonist (endogenous or exogenous) to the extracellular N-terminus domain of the MOR induces dissociation of GDP from the G-alpha subunit, which is replaced by guanosine triphosphate (GTP), and subsequent dissociation of the G-alpha-GTP from the beta-gamma heterodimer. The now active G-alpha-GTP and beta-gamma subunit complex interact with different intracellular signaling pathways such as the phospholipase C and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, as well as irk-mediated hyperpolarization mechanisms and calcium channels processes. The intracellular signal ends with the action of the GTPase, which hydrolyzes the G-alpha bound GTP to GDP. G-alpha-GDP is not able to activate effector proteins and re-associates with the beta-gamma heterodimer to restore the inactive GDP-bound heterotrimer. Because the enzymatic GTP turnover lasts for approximately 2 to 5 minutes, a new signal may find the receptor still not ready to respond. However, the regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) protein speed up the GTP hydrolysis up to 100-fold. This protein binds the G-alpha subunit and removes the active G-alpha-GTP and beta-gamma species. In turn, RGS works as a negative regulator of GPCR signaling. RGSs are a family of proteins and represent another interesting perspective for targeted therapy as their specific pharmacological inhibitors could potentiate opioids effects.

**MOR Subtypes and Tissue Expression**

There are several subtypes of MOR, which are splice variant forms. These variant forms were designated MOR-1A through MOR-1X; some of the variants express truncated forms of the receptor. The B, C, and D variants differ in the amino acid composition at the C-terminus. All variants get transcribed from a single gene (OPRM1 gene, chromosomal location 6q24-q25).

MORs are present in the central nervous system (CNS) and represent the most highly expressed of all the opioid receptors. These receptors get expressed in neurons throughout the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and in different brain regions (mainly somatosensorial cerebral cortex) involved in processing nociceptive information. In particular, in the spinal cord, MORs are localized (presynaptic and postsynaptic) into the substantia gelatinosa of Rolando (laminae I and II), which receives sensory information from primary afferent nerve fibers innervating the skin and deeper tissues of the body. Presynaptic MORs activation inhibits the release of excitatory neurotransmitters (e.g., substance P and glutamate), whereas the postsynaptic binding to MORs involves direct hyperpolarization of postsynaptic neurons and, in turn, inhibition of the afferent neural transmission of the painful information, and other types of information. Apart from the somatosensory system, MORs are localized in the extrapyramidal system and the limbic system including the limbic lobe, orbitofrontal cortex (involved in the process of decision-making), piriform cortex, entorhinal cortex (memory and associative functions), hippocampus (opioid-induced consolidation of new memories by increasing LTP in CA3 neurons)

**MOR Ligands**

**Endogenous Opioids**

Endogenous opioids are the natural ligands of opioid receptors that play a role in neurotransmission, pain modulation, and other homeostatic and functional pathways of the brain and peripherally. Beta-endorphin serves as an agonist for MORs and less for DORs. This peptide is derived from a larger precursor peptide, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), and is secreted by the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (via the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland) during stress and exercise, inducing euphoria, inhibition of postexercise pain, and muscular fatigue, and stimulating glucose uptake. Moreover, because beta-endorphin exerts a tonic inhibitory influence upon the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion, it is involved in the regulation of the reproductive function. Other endogenous opioids are the enkephalins that bind mainly the DORs and less the MORs, whereas the dynorphins bind mainly the KORs. Enkephalins are short (5-amino-acid) polypeptides, including met-enkephalin (YGGFM), and Leu-enkephalin (YGGFL). These pentapeptides are generated from a precursor protein called proenkephalin and are found primarily in the amygdala, brainstem, dorsal horn of the spinal cord, adrenal medulla, and other peripheral tissues. Again, dynorphins include dynorphin A (17 amino-acids of which the first five are Leu-enkephalin), dynorphin B (rimorphin), and dynorphin 1-8. They get secreted in the hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus, striatum, and spinal cord and are involved in numerous functions related to learning and memory, emotional control, stress response, and pain.

**Exogenous Ligands**

Drugs that activate MORs are useful for their pharmacological benefit in providing pain relief. These agents (i.e., opioid drugs) include the so-called weak opioids codeine and tramadol, and the strong opioids oxycodone, morphine, hydromorphone, meperidine, tapentadol, methadone, fentanyl, sufentanil, remifentanil.