The manifestations are variable and include:

- Severe headache

- Hypertension

- Profuse diaphoresis and flushing above the level of injury

- Piloerection above the level of injury

- Cool, pale skin below the level of injury because of severe vasoconstriction

- Visual disturbances

- Constricted pupils

- Nasal stuffiness

- Anxiety or feelings of doom

- Nausea and vomiting

- Dizziness

The initial presenting symptom is typically a severe headache. The headache is usually sudden, severe, throbbing, and bilateral. It may be frontal, temporal, or occipital. This is caused by significant vasodilation superior to the level of injury. When this cerebral vasodilation is combined with dangerously high blood pressure, a potentially lethal stroke may occur. Symptoms may not necessarily correlate with the severity of the blood pressure elevation.

Hypertension may be asymptomatic or severe enough to cause a hypertensive crisis complicated by pulmonary edema, left ventricular dysfunction, retinal detachment, intracranial hemorrhage, seizures, or death. Patients with T6 level injuries tend to have systolic blood pressures between 90 and 110 mmHg, but readings should be compared with the patient's usual baseline levels.

The combination of dangerously high blood pressure and cerebral vasodilation puts the patient at high risk for a hemorrhagic stroke that can be life-threatening.

**Any patient with paraplegia or quadriplegia who complains of a severe headache or is found unconscious should immediately undergo screening for possible autonomic dysreflexia by checking their blood pressure and comparing it to their baseline level. Systolic blood pressure >150 mmHg or >40 mmHg above baseline should be considered highly suggestive of autonomic dysreflexia and appropriate measures should be taken.**