The right and left subclavian veins are often used for central line placement to access the venous system. Central lines are inserted to administer parenteral fluids and medications, and can also be used to measure the central venous pressure. Indications for a central line include hemodynamic instability, the necessity of hyperosmolar agents, and inadequate peripheral IV access. The most common techniques involve the infraclavicular (IC) approach. To perform an infraclavicular subclavian vein central line placement, the patient should be positioned in a Trendelenburg position, with slightly extended shoulders. The proceduralist places the thumb of one hand on the middle part of the clavicle and the index finger on the jugular notch of the patient's manubrium. The needle should enter the skin inferior to the thumb, 1-cm lateral to the curvature of the middle third of the clavicle, with the needle pointing horizontally directed at the sternal notch. The needle is advanced medially toward the tip of the administrator's index finger until the tip of the needle enters the right venous angle posterior the sternoclavicular joint. It is important to ensure that the bevel of the needle is directed towards the SVC; a sterile finger can be placed in the ipsilateral supraclavicular fossa. The other method of subclavian central line placement is in a supraclavicular approach, in which the site of the puncture is the claviculo-sternocleidomastoid angle, just superior to the clavicle and lateral to the insertion of the clavicular head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The needle should be advanced toward the contralateral nipple, just inferior to the clavicle. Of anatomic note, the dome of the right lung is located in a lower position than the left lung which may extend above the first rib. If the needle is not inserted correctly, it may puncture the patient's pleural lining and lung resulting in a pneumothorax. If the needle is inserted too far posteriorly, it may enter the subclavian artery instead of the subclavian vein. Other complications of this procedure include hemothorax, chylothorax, catheter malposition, bleeding, infection, arrhythmia, air embolism, nerve injury, catheter malposition, and venous thrombosis.