Over the years, even though up to two-thirds of the aseptic meningitis cases are of unknown etiology, new diagnostic tools have appeared that have aided in identifying pathogens, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and next-generation sequencing. In the same way, significant advancements have been made in determining and diagnosing autoimmune or paraneoplastic neurological syndromes.

Primary evaluation should include laboratory testing to look for alternative causes of the presenting symptoms. These tests include complete blood counts (CBC) (including platelet count), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and IgM and IgG for enterovirus, adenovirus, EBV, and HSV.

A lumbar puncture (LP) should be performed to collect cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to make a definitive diagnosis.

On CSF analysis, obtain cell count, glucose, gram stain, protein, culture, bacterial PCR (which usually includes N. meningitides, S. pneumonia, H. influenza), and selected viral PCR studies (which should are based on the clinical presentation of the patient). Other tests to consider include syphilis serology, tuberculosis testing, serum human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing. Viral CSF PCR can detect enterovirus, Herpes Zoster Virus 1 (HSV-1), HSV-2, varicella-zoster, cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and arbovirus.

Typical CSF results in patients with aseptic meningitis include: Opening pressure either normal (<180 mmH2O) or slightly elevated, glucose normal to mildly decreased, protein normal to mildly elevated (<200mg/dL), cell count of 10-1000 cells per microliter (initially neutrophils (>50%) may predominate with a gradual shift toward lymphocytes (>80%).

Numerous differences have been found between adults and children concerning their presentation and their laboratory findings.

Adults complain of headache, nausea/vomiting, neck stiffness, malaise, photophobia, and have nuchal rigidity present on exam more than children. Fever, concurrent respiratory illness, and rash are symptoms more common to children.

It is critical to use age-adjusted values for leukocyte counts when interpreting CSF results in neonates and young infants. Neutrophils predominate the CSF in up to 57% of children with this condition, which means that cell type alone cannot be used to discriminate between aseptic and bacterial meningitis in children.

Drug-induced aseptic meningitis, in particular, may have few lab abnormalities, so clinicians have to maintain a high level of suspicion and perform a comprehensive history regarding all medications a patient might be taking and how much.

Although differentiation between aseptic and bacterial meningitis can be difficult, some tools have been developed to ease the choice. The Bacterial Meningitis Score has a sensitivity of 99% to 100% and a specificity of 52% to 62% and is the most specific tool readily available at the time. Other laboratory findings such as procalcitonin, serum C-reactive protein, and CSF lactate levels can help discern between aseptic and bacterial meningitis.

Of note: when the time comes for an LP, and there is any suspicion for elevated intracranial pressure due to a space-occupying lesion or inflammation, obtaining a computed tomography (CT) scan of the head before the LP is recommended.