Common complications:

- Persistent pain at the site of injection

- Muscle fibrosis and contracture

- Abscess at the injection site

- Gangrene

- Nerve injury -the sciatic nerve in gluteal injection, the femoral nerve in vastus lateralis injection, the superior gluteal nerve in dorsogluteal injection, the femoral nerve in vastus lateralis injection, radial nerve in deltoid injection

- Skin slough

- Periostitis, osteomyelitis

- Transmission of HIV, hepatitis virus

- Inadvertent injection of glass particles while using glass vials and ampoules.

- Vascular injury

**Pain**

Pain is one of the common complications of intramuscular injection.

Effective interventions to relieve pain include:

- Buzzy was more effective than ShotBlocker.

- Cold spray.****

- Palm Stimulator.

- Topical eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA).****

- Kangaroo care.

- Manual pressure, rhythmic tapping, acupressure.

- Virtual reality glasses, distraction cards, optical illusion pictures.****

- Ventrogluteal site compared to the dorsogluteal site.

- Internally rotated foot and Z-track techniques.

- A slow rate of injection at 10 s/cc.

- Performing a rapid intramuscular injection without aspiration.

Methods found not effective in relieving pain:

- Vapocoolant, ice packs in pediatric.

- Cold needle technique.

- Warming of the injectate

The simple step of asking the patient to cough vigorously immediately prior to injection also helps in reducing the pain associated with the procedure. The transmission of the cough impulse is faster than that of the pain impulse traveling through the slow conducting nerve fibers; thereby, it helps in minimizing the impact of the pain threshold perceived by the brain. A systematic review has shown that gender is the only major variable influencing pain during intramuscular injection.

**Neuropathy**

The incidence of injection-related neuropathy observed during a national vaccination campaign in Pakistan was 7.1 per 1,000,00.

Mechanisms governing nerve injury:

- Direct needle injury

- Compression from external hematoma

- Ischaemia

- Scar formation

Variables governing the risk of injury include:****

- Anatomical site of injection

- The length of the needle

- The angle of injection

- Positioning of the patient during injection and

- The expertise of the health personnel

The sciatic nerve, particularly its peroneal division, is the most common nerve injury, with an intrafascicular pattern the most common subtype. Dorsogluteal injections account for a majority of the same. Smaller gluteal muscle volume to sciatic nerve size ratio is a risk variable governing the same. Nearly 90% of patients with sciatic nerve injury are preset with an immediate foot drop. Magnetic resonance neurography shows increased signal intensity and neuroma formation. Electromyography shows signs of acute denervation as well as chronic denervation with reinnervation.

Sunderland classification and treatment algorithm**:**

- First degree showing reversible conduction block wherein conservative management will suffice,

- Second-degree showing Wallerian degeneration with reactive fibrosis. They often show slow and incomplete recovery, and therefore neurolysis is often indicated, and

- Third-degree comprises necrosis and fibrosis, and the chances of recovery are dismal

Surgical exploration is recommended only for cohorts with incapacitating or complete deficits without recovery, even at 3 to 6 months. Early surgical intervention prevents fibrosis. If an action potential is observed beyond the lesion, only neurolysis is advised; otherwise, suture or graft repair is advocated.

Radial nerve palsy, most occurring above the radial groove, is the second most common form of traumatic injection neuropathy.****

**Safe Landmarks**

The intersection between the anteroposterior axillary lines and the perpendicular line from the mid-acromion point is safe for IM in the deltoid.