**Secretory PLA**

The molecular structure of secretory PLA consists of six to eight disulfide bonds and uses a histidine/aspartate active site with a calcium cofactor for catalyzation. Activation of secretory PLA becomes increased in response to the aggregation of substrates as opposed to interaction with monomers. This phenomenon is known as interfacial aggregation and consists of an interplay between electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions to facilitate the binding between secretory PLA and phospholipid membranes. The binding capacity depends on the functional ability of various aromatic amino acids, of which the most notable in function is tryptophan. Within this group, research has identified ten primary subtypes.

**Cytosolic PLA**

The supergroup of cytosolic PLA consists of 6 members that each contain 749 amino acids and share other structural similarities. The activity of most forms of cytosolic PLA is dependent on intracellular calcium-binding that facilitates the action of the enzyme at the phospholipid membrane. Specifically, the enzyme works at the sn-2 position of arachidonic acid. Cytosolic PLA also acts on micelle substrates. In contrast to its action at phospholipid membranes, its action on micelles does not require calcium activation.

**Ca-Independent PLA**

Ca-independent PLA was named to differentiate it from secretory and cytosolic PLA that each requires activation by calcium to facilitate its primary function. The enzyme consists of a 752 amino acid sequence speculated to be regulated by various mechanisms, including binding of ATP, cleavage by caspase enzymes, and interaction with calmodulin.

**Lysosomal PLA**

Lysosomal PLA derives its name due to its studied localization to lysosomes within cells. It contains the characteristic catalytic amino acid triad consisting of aspartic acid, serine, and histidine that allows it to function as a phospholipase with acyl-transferase activity and specificity for the substrates phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and phosphatidylcholine (PC) within lysosomes. The enzyme can function independently without direct interaction with calcium. However, its activity can be altered by the presence of calcium that interacts with other upstream or downstream compounds that regulate its activity.

**Adipose-Specific PLA**

Similar to lysosomal PLA, adipose-specific PLA exhibits calcium-independent activity toward PE and PC. However, it does not have acyltransferase activity. Increased activity of adipose-specific PLA results in arachidonic acid release as a precursor for prostaglandin E, resulting in decreased intracellular cAMP and decreased lipolysis. The net effect of increased enzymatic activity is increased adiposity through the regulation of intracellular cAMP.

**Platelet-Activating Factor****Acetylhydrolase**

This group of enzymes function independently of calcium and contain both an amino acid catalytic triad involving aspartic acid, serine, and histidine and a binding motif for lipases and serine esterases. These molecular structures allow the enzyme to interact with lipoproteins in plasma and act on their substrate, platelet-activating factor (PAF). PAF is a powerful inflammatory mediator that plays a significant role in many inflammatory disease processes.