**Diagnosis and Management**

Carefully examine the patient for neurovascular compromise. Axillary nerve injury is most common. The axillary nerve innervates deltoid and teres minor and provides sensation to lateral shoulder. Axillary nerve compromise presents in over 40% of dislocations, but usually, resolves with reduction. Although dislocation is often obvious, pre-reduction imaging for associated fractures can be useful and should be done when trauma is known. Clinically important fractures occur in about 25% of dislocations.

- Fractures of tuberosity, surgical neck fractures may occur and should not be reduced in emergency department

- Bankart lesion develops when the glenoid labrum is disrupted with or without the addition of avulsed bone fragment (bony Bankart). Soft Bankart lesions involving the inferior anterior labrum are more common.

- Hill-Sachs deformity is a compression fracture of the posterolateral humeral head primarily with anterior dislocations.

- Reverse Hill-Sachs lesions seen in posterior dislocations (also called a McLaughlin lesion) which is an impaction fracture of the anteromedial aspect of the humeral head.

**Reduction of the Dislocated Shoulder**

Often conscious sedation with fentanyl, midazolam, ketamine, etomidate, or propofol used. This is done with continuous monitoring with capnography. If conscious sedation not needed, an intraarticular injection of 10 cc of local lidocaine or similar anesthetic may be helpful.

**Contraindications to reduction in ED**

**Anterior Dislocation**

- Fractures of humeral neck can lead to avascular necrosis

- Subclavicular and/or intrathoracic dislocations include a subacute dislocation in an elderly patient and an associated surgical neck fracture

- Avoid multiple attempts in injuries that include neurovascular compromise (including brachial plexus involvement, axillary nerve, a musculocutaneous nerve, etc.).  If prompt reduction cannot occur without further injury, may need surgical help.

- The suspected arterial injury may need urgent angiography first.

**Posterior Dislocation**

- Delayed presentation to the emergency department (more than 6 weeks)

- Multipart or displaced fracture/dislocations

**Inferior Dislocation**

- Humeral neck or shaft fractures should be done in a surgical setting

- Any potential of vascular injury