In most cases, the infectious etiology cannot be determined and gets marked as a fever of unknown origin (FUO). The definition of FUO is neutropenic cases with a fever greater than 38.3 C, without any clinically or microbiologically defined infection. Documented infections only comprise approximately 30% of cases. However, infections are the primary cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cancer who present with fever and neutropenia.

Most infections are bacterial, but viral or fungal etiology is possible. Common bacterial pathogens include gram-positive bacteria infections such as Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Enterococcus species. Drug-resistant organisms, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter species, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella species, have also been identified as infectious agents.

Other causes of neutropenia can be described as follows:

- **Congenital neutropenia:**It is suspected in adults with severe neutropenia (<500 cells/microL) along with a history of somatic findings (e.g., premature graying of the hair, pancreatic dysfunction, abnormalities of fingernails or skeleton).

- **Drugs:**Besides chemotherapeutic agents, the following list includes common drugs that may contribute to neutropenia.
- **Antibiotics**
- Macrolides
- Vancomycin
- Chloramphenicol
- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
- Sulfonamides


- **Antimalarials**
- Hydroxychloroquine
- Amodiaquine
- Quinine


- **Anti-inflammatory drugs**
- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
- Penicillamine
- Leflunomide
- Methotrexate
- Gold salts
- Sulfasalazine


- **Psychotropic drugs**
- Tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants
- Clozapine
- Phenothiazines


- **Antithyroid drugs (thionamides)**
- Propylthiouracil
- Methimazole
- Carbimazole


- **Cardiovascular drugs**
- ACE inhibitors (enalapril, captopril)
- Antiarrhythmic agents (tocainide, procainamide, flecainide)
- Propranolol
- Digoxin
- Dipyridamole


- **Antiseizure medications**
- Ethosuximide
- Carbamazepine
- Phenytoin

- **Nutritional deficiency:**
- Severe vitamin B12, folate, or copper deficiency can also result in neutropenia.