**Anatomy**

Extrinsic ligaments stabilize the carpus to the radius and ulna proximally and to the metacarpals distally. The intrinsic ligaments connect the carpal bones to each other. The volar extrinsic ligaments are stronger compared the dorsal extrinsics. The short radiolunate ligament is a volar ligament connecting the lunate to the distal radius.

**The Distal Radioulnar Joint**

The distal radioulnar joint is primarily stabilized by the deep dorsal and volar radioulnar ligaments within the fovea of the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). Disruption of these ligaments in the context of a TFCC tear and/or a Galeazzi fracture-dislocation can result in chronic DRUJ instability.

The lunate is a crescent-shaped carpal bone that articulates with the distal radius proximally, and the capitate distally. It is located between the scaphoid radially and the triquetrum ulnarly in the proximal row of carpal bones. The scapholunate, capitolunate, and lunotriquetral intrinsic ligaments all stabilize the lunates position in the wrist. There are no muscular of tendinous insertions onto the lunate. The proximal carpal row is relatively unstable when compared to the distal forearm and distal carpal row, resulting in a higher propensity for injury.

Carpal instability is frequently the result of trauma. These injuries frequently result in a fall on an outstretched hand, during which an axial force is directed on the carpals with the wrist in hyperextension. Injury progresses around the lunate in a clockwise semicircular pattern depending on the severity of the injury. The Mayfield classification involves 4 stages describing the sequence of ligamentous and carpal disruptions caused by wrist hyperextension, ulnar deviation, and intercarpal supination reliably reproduced on cadavers. The scapholunate ligament is disrupted in the first stage, resulting in instability between the scaphoid and lunate. In the second stage, there is a disruption of the capitolunate articulation resulting in possible dislocation of the capitate. In the third stage, there is disruption of the lunotriquetral articulation resulting in the lunate dislocating dorsally. In the fourth and final stage, there is a failure of the dorsal radiocarpal ligament, and this results in volar dislocation of the lunate into the carpal tunnel.