**The Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex's Reactions**

Pyruvate decarboxylase which is made up of 20 or 30 protein chains, is the first enzyme (E1) complex in the PDC. Its role is to release a molecule of carbon dioxide from pyruvate and subsequently attach the leftover carbons to thiamine pyrophosphate which is our first cofactor. The second (and more extensive, at 60 protein chains) enzyme (E2) is dihydrolipoyl transacetylase. This enzyme facilitates two carbon transfers (of those carbons that were once part of pyruvate). The first transfer involves moving these carbons from thiamine pyrophosphate to lipoic acid which is the endogenous second cofactor; the second carbon transfer moves these same carbons to coenzyme A which is the third cofactor. Therefore, the final enzyme, dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3) does not participate in a carbon transfer; instead, it reverses lipoic acid back to its disulfide form so that it can join in E2’s next carbon transfer. E3 does this by remaining bound to a flavin adenine dinucleotide which oxidizes said lipoic acid; flavin adenine dinucleotide is the fourth cofactor. The final step of the PDC pathway requires the transfer of protons and electrons from now FADH2 to NAD+, releasing NADH and H+ from the complex. This final reaction produces FAD which can then participate in the oxidation of lipoic acid.

**Steps of the Citric Acid Cycle:**

Citrate synthesis

Citrate synthase catalyzes the condensation reaction of acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate (the cycle’s final product) to form citrate, initiating the citric acid cycle. Note that this reaction is virtually irreversible with a delta-G-prime of -7.7 Kcal/M (thus strongly favoring citrate formation). Substrate and product availability regulate citrate synthase while citrate inhibits the enzyme oxaloacetate’s binding to the enzyme increases its affinity for acetyl-CoA. One should note that citrate serves as an inhibitory substrate for phosphofructokinase-1 in glycolysis and an activating substrate for acetyl CoA carboxylase in fatty acid synthesis. This point highlights the interconnectivity of our metabolic cycles - in short, no pathway occurs in a vacuum.

Isomerization of citrate

Aconitase, an enzyme with an iron-sulfur center facilitates the hydroxyl group migration that makes isocitrate out of citrate.

Oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate

This is the first step of the citric acid cycle that produces a reduced coenzyme. Here, isocitrate dehydrogenase oxidizes isocitrate, releasing a carbon dioxide molecule and reduces NAD+ to NADH and a proton. The nature of the reaction (releasing a gas) makes it irreversible. Isocitrate dehydrogenase is allosterically regulated: ADP and calcium ions activate it while ATP and NADH inhibit its activity.

Oxidative decarboxylation of alpha-ketoglutarate by the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex

The alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex functions analogously to that of the PDC. E1 of this complex decarboxylates alpha-ketoglutarate and transfers the four remaining carbons to thiamine pyrophosphate which is its first cofactor. Then E2 transfers the succinyl group to CoASH with the help of FAD. Finally, E3 resynthesizes FAD along with NADH from NAD+ so that the dehydrogenase complex maintains the substrates and cofactors necessary for continued reactions. The cofactors required in this complex are thiamine pyrophosphate, lipoic acid, coenzyme A, FAD, and NAD+.

Cleavage of succinyl coenzyme A

Succinate thiokinase catalyzes the cleavage of succinyl CoA’s thioester bond. The division of this high energy bond is coupled with the phosphorylation of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and therefore produces GTP in addition to succinate. This coupled reaction is an example of substrate-level phosphorylation, as seen in glycolysis.

Oxidation of succinate

Succinate dehydrogenase oxidizes succinate to fumarate, producing a reduced FADH2 (from FAD). Note that succinate dehydrogenase is the one step in this pathway that is associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane and is thus directly part of the electron transport chain, where it is Complex II.

Hydration of fumarate

Fumarase is the catalyst in the hydration of fumarate to malate.

Oxidation of Malate

Malate dehydrogenase catalyzes malate’s oxidation to oxaloacetate, reducing NAD+ to NADH producing the final NADH. The delta-G-prime is positive, which would otherwise indicate the reaction favoring malate; however, the citrate synthase reaction to which oxaloacetate is a substrate drives the reaction forward.