**Spinal Nerves**

The nerves are of two types based on their origin - the cranial and spinal nerves. Those nerves which begin in the cerebrum or the brain stem are called cranial nerves. There are twelve pairs of cranial nerves. The nerves coming from the spinal cord are called the spinal nerves. There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves coming from the spinal cord and spread on either side of the vertebral column. They are classified into cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal nerves.  The cervical nerves are in eight pairs; the thoracic are twelve pairs, the lumbar and sacral nerves are in five pairs, and one pair of coccygeal nerves.

**Spinal Tracts**

When we study the transverse section of a spinal cord, we can appreciate many spinal tracts within the white matter. They are categorized into two types - ascending and descending tracts. The descending tracks are mainly motor, and the ascending tracks are sensory.

Some of the most essential descending (motor) tracts passing through the spinal cord are as follows:

- Cortico-spinal tract (This is also known as the pyramidal tract, which is the most important of the motor tracts)

- Tectospinal tract

- Rubrospinal tract

- Vestibulospinal tract

- Reticulospinal tracts

- Olivospinal tract

Some of the most important ascending (sensory) tracts are as follows:

- Lateral spinothalamic tract (spinal lemniscus)

- Anterior spinothalamic tract (medial lemniscus)

- Trigeminal lemniscus

- Lateral lemniscus

- Spinotectal tract

- Spino-olivary tract

- Ventral spinocerebellar tract

- Dorsal spinocerebellar tract

- Dorsolateral tract (of Lissauer)

- Spino-cervico-thalamic tract

Here we will explain one descending tract in detail to better understand the whole course.

The cortico-spinal tract arises mainly from the motor area of the cerebral cortex (area 4) with some contribution from the premotor area (area 6), somatosensory area (area 3, 2, 1), and parietal cortex (area 5). The fibers run through the internal capsule's posterior limb and then occupy the middle part of the midbrain's crus cerebri. The tract then occupies the ventral part of the pons and descends through the pyramids in the medulla. At the lower end of the medulla, almost 70 to 80% of the fibers cross to the opposite side of the spinal cord, called the pyramidal (motor) decussation. These crossed fibers enter the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord and continue as the lateral corticospinal tract. They end at various levels of the spinal cord's grey matter by synapsing with internuncial neurons of dorsal and ventral columns. The remaining 20 to 30% of the corticospinal tract fibers, which have not crossed, will descend within the anterior funiculus as the anterior corticospinal tract. Finally, these anterior corticospinal tract fibers too cross to the opposite side at the appropriate levels. Thus all fibers of the corticospinal tract eventually cross to the opposite side and connect the cerebral cortex of one side with the ventral horn cells of the opposite part of the spinal cord. These fibers are called upper motor neurons. The fibers starting in the ventral horn cells and descending downwards will be called lower motor neurons. This knowledge is vital as the clinical presentation of upper and motor neuron lesions are quite different.

**Spinal Cord Lesions**

Lesions of the spinal cord fall into the following categories:

- Lesions of the afferent system:

- Dorsal nerve roots
- Spinothalamic tract
- Posterior white funiculus
- Syringomyelia

- Lesions of the efferent system:

- Upper motor neuron lesions
- Lower motor neuron lesions

- Lesions involving upper and lower motor neurons:

- Lesions involving posterior and lateral funiculi

- Thrombosis of the spinal artery

- Hemisections (Brown-Sequard syndrome)

- Transections

- Hereditary diseases: Friedreich ataxia

Details of some of these lesions will be discussed in the section of Clinical Significance.