Menstruating individuals may seek menstrual healthcare in various settings, ranging from community health clinics to large medical centers. These settings include primary care offices with family medicine or internal medicine physicians, general pediatricians, physician assistants, or nurse practitioners, as well as specialty care clinics with gynecologists, nurse midwives, adolescent or developmental pediatricians, or adult or pediatric endocrinologists. It is crucial for healthcare team members in these settings to have a comprehensive understanding of the indications and methods of menstrual suppression and to offer this option to their patients if desired.

Individual beliefs about menstrual suppression being "unnatural" or "unhealthy" create a barrier to menstrual suppression implementation.

There is no current evidence to support these beliefs. These beliefs may reflect a general lack of understanding or access to information among menstruating persons regarding the physiology of the menstrual cycle and hormonal contraceptives, as well as the absence or poor quality of counseling by clinicians on menstrual health. Clinicians may not have substantial knowledge or exposure to hormonal contraceptives for menstrual suppression or may only be familiar with the historical 28-day cyclic method.

**Parent and Caregiver Involvement**

For adolescents, the involvement of a parent or caregiver can be considered. Clinicians should encourage prioritization of adolescent autonomy when counseling adolescents and parents or caregivers on menstrual suppression options.

In individuals with developmental or physical disabilities, caregivers may be involved in decision-making or the sole decision-maker. When individuals with disabilities are cognitively impaired or have unclear decision-making capacity, clinicians should discuss management plans with those who have legal guardianship or medical decision-making power for the patient.

**Multi-Disciplinary Teams in Caring for**Transgender and Gender-Diverse Individuals****

As discussed in Special Populations, transgender and gender-diverse individuals should be cared for by an interprofessional team with medical and mental health professionals specializing in gender-affirming care.

**Disclosures**

The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy of Evans Army Community Hospital, Womack Army Medical Center, the Department of the Army, the U.S. Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government.