**Differential Diagnosis For Associated Signs And Symptoms**

Utilizing the following mnemonics will aid in the recall of the differential diagnoses associated with the weakness and ataxia of muscular dystrophy:

**Ataxia**(Can't Stand Very Well)

- **C**erebellar Ataxia

- **S**ensory Ataxia

- **V**estibular Ataxia

- **W**eakness

**Ataxia, Acute**(U.N.A.B.L.E. T.O. S.T.A.N.D.)

- **U**nderlying weakness (may mimic ataxia)

- **N**utritional neuropathy (vitamin B12 deficiency)

- **A**rteritis/vasculitis

- **B**asilar migraine

- **L**abyrinthitis/vestibular neuronitis

- **E**ncephalitis/infection

- **T**rauma (postconcussive)

- **O**ther (rare metabolic or genetic diseases)

- **S**troke (ischemia or hemorrhage)

- **T**oxins (drugs, toluene, mercury)

- **A**lcohol Intoxication

- **N**eoplasm/paraneoplastic syndromes

- **D**emyelination (Miller Fisher, Guillain Barre, MS)

**Ataxia, Chronic**(C.A.N.T. S.T.A.N.D.)

- **C**ongenital malformation/Chiari

- **A**utosomal recessive ataxias

- **N**utritional (vitamin B12 deficiency)

- **T**rauma (postconcussive)

- **S**troke (ischemia or hemorrhage)

- **T**oxins (drugs, toluene, mercury)

- **A**lcohol Intoxication/Autosomal dominant ataxia

- **N**eoplasm/paraneoplastic syndromes

- **D**emyelination (MS)

**Weakness, Acute**(M.I.S.S. G.I.M.P)

- **M**yelopathy (acute) / myopathy

- **I**nfection

- **S**troke

- **S**ystemic illness

- **G**uillain-Barre syndrome

- **I**atrogenic/drugs

- **M**yasthenia

- **P**aralytic toxins/periodic paralysis

**Weakness, Chronic**(G, I.' A.M. L.I.M.P, C.A.N.T. S.T.A.N.D.)

- **G**uillain-Barré syndrome

- **I**atrogenic (paralytic agents, aminoglycosides, steroids)

- **M**yopathy/myositis

- **L**ou Gehrig disease (ALS, motor neuron disease-usually gradual)

- **I**nfection (polio, botulism)

- **M**yelopathy (acute).

- **P**eriodic paralysis, porphyria, paraproteinemia

- 
**Cushing's**

- **A**rteritis/vasculitis/stroke

- **N**eoplastic (meningitis, paraneoplastic)

- **T**oxins (lead, arsenic, pufferfish, tick paralysis)

- * Acute/subacute, bilateral with minimal sensory involvement

- **S**ystemic illness (anemia)

- **T**hyroid

- 
**Addison's**

- **N**euromuscular junction disease (Myasthenia, Lambert-Eaton syndrome)

- **D**iabetic amyotrophy

**Diseases Or Conditions Potentially Mistaken For This Disease**

- Acid maltase deficiency

- Drug-induced myopathy

- Dermatomyositis sine dermatitis

- Endocrinopathy

- "Fatigue" syndromes

- Inclusion body myositis

- Late-onset spinal muscular atrophy

- McArdle's deficiency (myophosphorylase deficiency)

- Metabolic myopathies

- Motor neuron disease

- Neurogenic disorders

- Polymyositis

**Diseases Or Conditions That Must Be Ruled Out**

While muscular dystrophy is not a diagnosis of exclusion, it is often confused for several diseases due to their overlapping etiologies. The clinician must exclude the following diseases in a patient with a muscular disorder, which can otherwise cause significant morbidity and mortality:

- Adrenal insufficiency

- Electrolyte imbalance: sodium, potassium, and magnesium

- Hypercalcemia

- Porphyrias

- Rabies

- Complicated migraine

- Postictal (Todd's) paralysis

- Hypoglycemia

Acute spastic paraparesis is a medical emergency. The clinician should strongly suspect myasthenia gravis in any patient who reports excessive weakness at the end of the day. Consider Pancoast tumor of the lung in a patient presenting with upper limb weakness and painful neuropathy secondary to neoplastic infiltration of the lower trunk of the brachial plexus, particularly when Horner syndrome is present. Paraneoplastic syndromes must also merit consideration in the diagnosis. Rule out lesions of extrapyramidal tracts or cerebellar pathways which may also present as weakness, but without objective evidence of decreased muscle strength.

An acute onset gait disorder is likely to be due to acute systemic decompensation; a careful, systematic evaluation can exclude such catastrophic presentations. It is not advisable to attribute gait disorder to one single disease. An abnormal gait may be a risk factor for falls. Difficulty with getting out of a chair without arm support and initiate movement suggests limb-girdle dystrophy.

Gait abnormalities can indicate a serious medical emergency, especially when the problem is associated with any of these additional symptoms:

- Headache (raised intracranial pressure)

- Nausea or vomiting

- Decreased alertness

- Impaired coordination presenting on only one side of the body

- Recent viral illness/immunization (Guillain-Barré syndrome)

- Trauma.

**Discussion**

Muscular dystrophy may be mistaken for polymyositis, most often when the duration of symptoms appears to be short. The pattern of weakness may be very helpful in making a distinction. Secondary inflammatory infiltrates may cause pathological confusion, especially in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.

**Are Reflexes Hypoactive? **The presence of hypoactive reflexes would suggest myotonic dystrophy, tabes dorsalis, and progressive muscular atrophy.

**Is There Any Pain Present? **The typical features of muscle disease are weakness, potentially relative to exercise, and, on occasions, muscle pain (myalgia). Conversely, a short history of painful weakness in adulthood, would suggest an inflammatory myositis.

**Is The Problem Acute Or Chronic? **The age and rate of progression are often helpful in determining the type of muscle disease. Progressive slow weakness absent pain from childhood would suggest degenerative muscular dystrophy. Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and Bethlem myopathy cause fixed contractors that occur early and represent distinctive features of these diseases.

**Is Weakness Primarily Distal Or Proximal? **The distribution of weakness is also of assistance in defining the likely type of muscle disease, proximal arm, and leg weakness present in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.

**Is The Weakness Localized Or Diffuse? **Muscle weakness may be from a myopathy such as dermatomyositis, an inflammatory disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, a neurologic disorder such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, or an infection such as Lyme disease or trichinosis.

**Are There Any Focal Neurological Lesions?**Myotonic dystrophy, myasthenia gravis, and progressive muscular atrophy may present with partial ptosis.