While the most common adverse outcome associated with any cosmetic procedure is dissatisfaction, whether because the effect was insufficient or unexpected, there are several other potential complications that should be avoided if possible. With respect to surgery, hematomas and seromas are common in the early postoperative period, especially in hypertensive patients and patients on anticoagulants. Males are also at an increased risk of hematoma development because of the increased dermal blood flow associated with hair follicles. Over resection of fat in the submental area can result in a so-called "cobra neck" deformity, and excessive tension at closure can pull the ear lobe inferiorly into a "pixie ear" deformity, both of which can be avoided with a more conservative surgical technique.

Permanent or temporary nerve injury can occur as well, particularly to the great auricular nerve, but also to the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve. Great auricular nerve injury leaves the inferior aspect of the pinna hyperesthetic, and marginal mandibular branch injury causes an asymmetric smile, because the lower lip depressors become weak. The uninjured side of the upper lip will depress normally, leaving the affected side higher up and causing an overall crooked appearance. Other standard risks apply as well, such as may occur with any other surgery: pain, bleeding, infection, scarring, alopecia, and need for further surgery.

The best way to avoid these complications is to be familiar with the relevant anatomy, operate meticulously, and counsel the patient thoroughly before surgery to ensure reasonable expectations. Additionally, the surgeon should have a low threshold for returning to the operating room within a year to perform a "tuck up" procedure to help remove any additional redundant skin that persisted or returned after surgery, or to address any remaining or platysmal bands, which also frequently recur after neck lifting.

Non-surgical modalities can result in complications as well, including commonly the complaint that results fell short of expectations. Laser resurfacing may cause burns or scars if the settings are too aggressive; patients should be counseled to stay out of the sun for several months after laser treatments to help prevent any pigmentary abnormalities, either hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation, that may occur during healing. Hyperpigmentation is most often temporary and is more common than hypopigmentation. Hypopigmentation is less common, but more likely to be persistent and is more difficult to treat.

Injections may produce local reactions, and deoxycholic acid is known for causing significant edema as the adipocytes lyse. Botulinum toxin injection is generally very well tolerated, although if injected too superiorly, it may weaken the lower lip depressors and cause an asymmetric smile. Lastly, in rare cases, cryotherapy may cause paradoxical lipohypertrophy, which will require liposuction to treat.