# Continuing Education Activity

Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP), also known as polymorphic eruption of pregnancy (PEP) is the most common gestational dermatosis. It is a benign, pruritic, inflammatory skin disorder that is characterized by a polymorphous clinical presentation in the setting of normal laboratory tests and negative direct immunofluorescence. PUPPP usually affects primigravidas in their third trimester of pregnancy. It is less frequent in the immediate postpartum period and has no tendency to recur in subsequent pregnancies. This activity examines when pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy should be considered on differential diagnosis and how to properly evaluate a patient presenting with signs/ symptoms of this condition. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the typical presentation of pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy.
- Explain whether the presence of pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy warrants dermatology referral and/or biopsy.
- Describe the management of pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy.
- Incorporate a structured interprofessional team approach to provide effective care to and appropriate surveillance of patients with pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy.

# Introduction

Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP), also known as polymorphic eruption of pregnancy (PEP) is the most common gestational dermatosis.

# Etiology

The cause of pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy is still unknown, although various etiological theories have been proposed, including abdominal distension, hormonal changes, placental factors and the role of fetal DNA in skin lesions of patients with PUPPP.

# Epidemiology

The reported incidence of pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy in the literature is 0,5% in single pregnancies, 2.9 to 16% in twin pregnancies and 14 to 17 % in triplet pregnancies.

# Histopathology

Biopsy specimens from lesional skin reveal nonspecific findings. In early pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy lesions, there is epidermal and upper dermal edema, and occasionally focal mild spongiosis, with a deeper dermal lymphohistiocytic perivascular infiltrate,

# History and Physical

Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy occur most often during the last month of pregnancy and only rarely appear in the postpartum period. The rash consists of itchy small erythematous and edematous papules and plaques usually first start in the stretch marks, typically with periumbili­cal sparing. The lesions can coalesce to form larger urticarial abdominal plaques often surrounded by blanched halos. The eruption spreads over a matter of days, to the trunk and the extremities, but rarely involves the face, palms, or soles.

# Evaluation

Usually, routine laboratory tests are within normal limits in patients with PUPPP. Upon consideration of the diagnosis, the degree of discomfort related to pruritus should be evaluated in all cases as the treatment is mainly symptomatic. Additionally, maternal weight and fetus growth should be plotted during the pregnancy course. Generally, PUPPP is not an indication for early delivery.

# Treatment / Management

Only symptomatic treatment is usually necessary for patients with PUPPP. The majority of affected ladies achieve satisfactory control with topical corticosteroids and oral antihistamines. Further, sedating first-generation antihistamines appear to be safe in pregnancy and can be used as adjunct therapy to provide relief from pruritus. For severe disease with disturbed sleep leading to exhaustion of the mother, a short course of systemic corticosteroids can be helpful. General measures, such as cool, soothing baths, frequent application of emollients and light cotton clothing, offers additional symptomatic relief.

# Differential Diagnosis

The most important diagnosis to exclude is urticarial pemphigoid gestationis. As the clinical features can overlap, histological and immunological studies are necessary to make the distinction between these two disorders

# Prognosis

Apart from the discomfort of a pruritic urticarial eruption, maternal prognosis still unaffected. Early delivery is rarely used for relief of intractable pruritus.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy is a skin disorder with an ordinarily benign course, in almost all cases. Nevertheless, close cooperation between dermatologist, obstetrician, labor and delivery nurse and the neonatal pediatrician is necessary in the management of severe cases.