Alexia without agraphia, pure alexia, posterior alexia, or occipital alexia is associated with damage to the occipital region.

- Individuals lose the ability to comprehend written language but maintain the ability to spell and write. In this scenario, the individual will be able to write out a full sentence but then is unable to read back what was just written.

- Individuals may recognize the letters and be able to spell out the words and derive meaning from what is read by audition.

- Often associated with hemianopia. Individuals will have a right-sided visual field deficit.

Central or parietal-temporal alexia is associated with damage to the angular gyrus.

- Complete letter and word blindness the individual is unable to read or recognize words or letters. Therefore they are unable to create a phonographic interpretation of what is written, unlike what is seen with occipital alexia.

- Associated with the inability to interpret words spelled out to them as well as the inability to spell out words themselves.

- Associated with agraphia, the inability to write.

- Associated with aphasia of varying forms, fluent vs. non-fluent.

- Often associated with hemiparesis and visual field defect.

Frontal or anterior alexia is associated with an anterior lesion to the left hemisphere.

- Individuals will be able to guess content words, as well as short words, but have limited comprehension of the reading material.

- Inability to recognize individual letters, loss of letter interpretation when words are spelled out to them, and inability to spell out words themselves.

- Associated with non-fluent aphasia.

- Associated with right visual field defect and often contralateral hemisensory neglect or loss.