# Learning Outcome

- List the causes of hypothyroidism

- Describe the clinical features of hypothyroidism

- Summarize the treatment of hypothyroidism

- Recall the nursing management plans for hypothyroidism

# Introduction

The thyroid gland located in the anterior neck secretes thyroid hormones. It is essential for multiple metabolic functions spanning almost every organ system. Hypothyroidism results from low levels of thyroid hormone. It has varied etiology and manifestations. Clinicians treat hypothyroidism with levothyroxine. Untreated hypothyroidism increases morbidity and mortality. This article reviews etiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and management of hypothyroidism.

# Nursing Diagnosis

- Activity intolerance

- Obesity

- Overweight

- Risk for constipation

- Deficient knowledge

- Imbalance in nutrition

- Fatigue

# Causes

The most common etiology is iodine deficiency in iodine-deficient geographic areas worldwide. Autoimmune thyroid diseases are the leading cause of hypothyroidism in the United States and the iodine-sufficient regions. Etiology can be influenced locally by iodine fortification and emergence of new iodine-deficient areas.

Other common causes of hypothyroidism are drugs such as amiodarone and lithium,

# Risk Factors

The NHANESIII (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey) study found the prevalence of overt hypothyroidism among US adults (12 years of age and older) to be 0.3% and subclinical hypothyroidism 4.3%. Female gender and increasing age were associated with higher thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and prevalence of antithyroid antibodies.

# Assessment

It is important to maintain a high index of suspicion for hypothyroidism since the signs and symptoms can be mild and nonspecific and different symptoms may be present in different patients.

Inquire about dry skin, voice changes, hair loss, constipation, fatigue, muscle cramps, cold intolerance, sleep disturbances, menstrual cycle abnormalities, weight gain, galactorrhea.

History of adverse pregnancy and neonatal outcomes should also be sought.

Symptoms of depression, anxiety, psychosis, cognitive impairments such as memory loss can be present.

Patients can also present with carpal tunnel syndrome, sleep apnea, hyponatremia, Hypercholesterolemia, congestive heart failure, and prolonged QT interval.

A physical examination may reveal an enlarged thyroid gland, the presence of nodules, prolonged ankle reflex relaxation time, hoarse voice, and skin and hair changes.

# Evaluation

Serum TSH level is used to screen for primary hypothyroidism in most patients. In overt hypothyroidism, TSH levels are elevated, and free T4 levels are low. In subclinical hypothyroidism, TSH levels are elevated, and free T4 levels are normal.

Central hypothyroidism is of pituitary or hypothalamic origin. TSH produced can be biologically inactive and can affect the levels of bioactive TSH, hence diagnosis of central hypothyroidism should be based on free T4 rather than TSH.

Labs should include evaluation for autoimmune thyroid diseases with levels of anti-thyroid antibodies: the thyroid peroxidase antibodies and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies. Particularly in patients with thyroid nodules, fine-needle aspiration biopsy should be considered.

Patients with subclinical hypothyroidism and thyroid peroxidase antibody positivity have a greater risk of developing overt hypothyroidism

T3 levels are not a reliable or recommended test. Hospitalized patients should undergo TSH testing only when thyroid dysfunction is suspected.

On labs, hyperlipidemia, elevated serum CK, elevated hepatic enzymes, anemia can be present.

BUN, creatinine, and uric acid levels can also be elevated.

# Medical Management

Hypothyroidism is mainly treated with levothyroxine monotherapy.

Thyroid replacement treatment can exacerbate co-existing adrenal insufficiency. Patients with known or suspected adrenal insufficiency should be tested and treated for the adrenal insufficiency while awaiting results.

Replacement levothyroxine dose is 1.6 mcg/kg per day, should be taken 60 minutes before a meal and at least 3 hours post-meal which makes before breakfast or at bedtime the practical times for most patients. Maintaining a consistent formulation or brand of levothyroxine is important.

When switching to the intravenous (IV) form, reduce the dose to 70% of the oral dose. Malabsorption syndromes, medications such as sucralfate, calcium preparations, and bile acid sequestrants can interfere with the absorption of levothyroxine.

Based on the 2012 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Hypothyroidism in Adults by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association, therapy should be monitored and titrated based on TSH measurements. Serum free T4 can also be used. Labs should be drawn every 4 to 8 weeks until target levels are achieved after starting the treatment, after any dose changes, changes in formulation or brand of levothyroxine,

For elderly patients and patients with cardiac diseases, starting at a lower dose and titrating slowly is recommended.

Effective treatment should achieve a clinical improvement of signs and symptoms, along with an improved sense of patient well-being and normal TSH (or free T4 levels as applicable).

A comprehensive differential diagnosis workup is recommended for unresolved symptoms in the presence of biochemical euthyroidism. There is a lack of strong evidence supporting the routine inclusion of triiodothyronine (T3) preparations with levothyroxine in the treatment of hypothyroidism.

If symptoms persist despite normalization of TSH/free T4 levels, then consultation with an endocrinologist should also be considered.

# Nursing Management

- Assess client weight and appetite

- Consult with a dietitian to provide a menu for the patient (an increased fiber to counter constipation)

- Educate the patient and family

- Manage constipation with laxatives

- Encourage patient to use moisturizer if the skin is dry

- Educate patient on compliance with thyroid hormone therapy

- Encourage exercise

- Check labs for levels of thyroid hormone

- Monitor fluid intake

- Encourage patient to follow with a mental health nurse since depression is common in hypothyroidism

Monitor for signs and symptoms of overtreatment with levothyroxine. Indications of overtreatment mimic signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism such as anxiety, palpitations, tachycardia, heat intolerance, fever, excessive sweating, changes in appetite and weight loss. Report any signs of cardiac excitability, chest pain, and dysrhythmias to the medical provider.

# Coordination of Care

Hypothyroidism affects multiple organ systems across all age groups and affects patient well-being and ability to function on a daily basis. Treatment is with levothyroxine monotherapy (Grade A, Best Evidence Level 1).

Effective treatment calls for a team-based and patient-centered approach. When patient symptoms are not adequately controlled an endocrinology consult should be obtained.

Endocrinology consultation is also recommended in complex scenarios such as preconception, pregnancy, congenital and pediatric hypothyroidism, failure of treatment, co-existing cardiac or other endocrine disorders, difficulty in interpretation of thyroid test results, drug-induced hypothyroidism.

It is helpful to work closely with a pharmacist to determine medication and food interactions, the effect of changes in levothyroxine formulations, to investigate the causes for the requirement of unusually high doses of levothyroxine or fluctuating TSH levels. Prompt notification of unusually high levels of TSH by laboratory personnel, close monitoring of vital signs and mental status by nurses can facilitate early treatment and better outcomes, especially in the inpatient setting such as in myxedema coma. Rapid response teams can be effectively utilized when hypothyroidism causes hemodynamic instability.

# Health Teaching and Health Promotion

Advise patients that treatment for hypothyroidism is lifelong.

Instruct clients that it is essential to take medications 30-60 minutes before the first meal of the dayand not to take with medications as there are several food and medications interactions.