The diagnosis of alcohol withdrawal can be made by taking an excellent history and performing a thorough physical examination. It is a clinical diagnosis based on mild, moderate, or severe symptoms. Patients with suspicion for alcohol withdrawal should be evaluated for other underlying disease processes such as dehydration, infection, cardiac issues, electrolyte abnormalities, gastrointestinal bleeding, and traumatic injury. Laboratory studies (electrolytes, blood counts) may be drawn but will likely be nondiagnostic. Many chronic alcoholics will have baseline ketoacidosis due to their poor nutritional status, and labs may show acidemia with ketone production similar to a diabetic but with euglycemia or hypoglycemia due to lack of glycogen stores in their liver.

**Assessment**

The Clinical Institute for Withdrawal Assessment for alcohol revised scale (CIWA-Ar) is a tool used to assess the severity of alcohol withdrawal symptoms. The tool allows clinicians to monitor for the signs and symptoms of withdrawal and determine who needs medical therapy. The features that are used for the CIWA-Ar scale include the presence of:

- Nausea and vomiting

- Headache

- Auditory disturbances

- Agitation

- Paroxysmal sweating

- Visual disturbances

- Tremor

- Clouding of sensorium

- Orientation

- Anxiety

Some literature recommends checking an alcohol level at the time of onset of symptoms as symptomatic patients while still having a positive alcohol level with symptoms of autonomic dysfunction/withdrawal will have a higher morbidity/mortality, and their short-term prognosis can be poor.

Patients with prolonged altered sensorium or significant renal abnormalities should receive an evaluation for the potential ingestion of another toxic alcohol. Patients who become financially strapped due to alcoholism could ingest other alcohols to become intoxicated. These can include isopropyl alcohol, commonly known as rubbing alcohol, which can lead to acidemia without ketosis as well as hemorrhagic gastritis. Ethylene glycol (antifreeze) ingestion can lead to an altered sensorium, seizures, and severe renal dysfunction with acidemia that may require the initiation of hemodialysis. Methanol is rarely ingested as an ethanol substitute but can result in multisystem organ failure, blindness, and seizures.

Other common household substances can also contain a significant amount of alcohol if ingested in large quantities, including mouthwash and cough syrup. Some of these items may also contain a high content of salicylates or acetaminophen, so consider checking aspirin and acetaminophen levels in patients presenting with alcohol withdrawal.