# Continuing Education Activity

Biotin is an alternative medication used in the management and treatment of pathological hair conditions. It is in the vitamin class of drugs. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for biotin as a valuable agent in the therapy of biotin deficiency and hair conditions. In addition, this activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the healthcare team in the management of patients with brittle hair and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Review the treatment considerations for patients with brittle hair and nails.
- Explain the indications for biotin use.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with biotin deficiency.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by pathological hair conditions and patients receiving biotin.

# Indications

Biotin (B7 or vitamin H) is a water-soluble vitamin, which has received publicity for promoting the growth of hair and nails. There are limited studies, which confirm the exact indications of biotin.

# Mechanism of Action

Biotin also acts as a coenzyme for multiple carboxylases in humans, and it changes the irreversible carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA.

# Administration

Biotin appears to be widely protein-bound.

# Adverse Effects

Biotin consumption for beneficial means remains unclear, but it has been considered a very difficult drug to overdose on or cause injury to the body. When taking anticonvulsants such as carbamazepine or phenobarbital, the requirements for biotin increase due to these medications inhibiting uptake into the brush borders of membrane vesicles.

Biotin can interfere with some hormone assays. In immunoassays using the streptavidin-biotin interaction, the interference may induce both false-positive and false-negative results. The hormone levels affected may include thyroid functions, gonadotrophins, and vitamin D.

# Contraindications

Research supporting claims for the use of biotin for nails and hair remains ambiguous, but there has been well-documented research on the interactions of biotin and other drugs. There are no evident contraindications to taking this vitamin. Biotin is a safe and nontoxic vitamin that the body excretes when in excess. There are no known herbal interactions with biotin. Although not a contraindication, it is important to note that if a person is taking biotin and smoking, they may require increased doses due to increased biotin metabolism.

# Monitoring

Dermatologic manifestations appear to be the first sign of biotin deficiency. Biotin plasma concentration levels range from 400 to 1200 ng/L.

# Toxicity

There is no specific antidote for overdosing on biotin. Excess in the body is rare, and since biotin is a water-soluble vitamin, it is excreted in the urine when in excess. Signs and symptoms of biotin overdose may include and are not limited to insomnia, excessive thirst, and urination. Since biotin has documentation in playing a role in postprandial glucose control, it bears mention that excess would cause signs and symptoms of a person experiencing hyperglycemia (e.g., increased thirst).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Clinicians, nurses, physician assistants, and pharmacists must educate patients when confronted with the matter that regular biotin use is not indicated and also not well-documented. Interprofessional team members should be aware that biotin marketing often claims it is "a magic pill for hair and nails," but the benefits remain unclear. Without the research to support regular usage, heavily marketed claims by the beauty and supplementation industry need to be challenged to examine the efficacy and safety of this drug, which they advertise for regular use. With the epidemic of type 2 diabetes in the United States, further exploration regarding biotin's role in glucose control requires investigation since studies have concluded it may be beneficial for obese patients and those with type 2 diabetes.