**Visual System and Pathway**

**Cornea**

The cornea is the first anterior part of the eye that refracts light and helps transfer neural signals to the brain via the visual pathway. While the air-cornea interface is responsible for approximately 65% of the total refractive power of the eye, the corneal power has a fixed focus.

**Iris and Pupil**

The iris is the colored section located posterior to the anterior chamber of the eye. It surrounds the opening known as the pupil and allows the light to pass through the hole and reach the retina for phototransduction. The pupil either constricts or dilates to respond to light and near stimuli. The pupillary sphincter and dilator muscles are the two involuntary iris muscles that are required to control the amount of light traveling to the retina. Images displayed onto the retina are upside-down and backward.

**Lens**

The lens and the neighboring ciliary muscle are responsible for accommodation and focusing light onto the retina from different distances. The accommodation reflex occurs when the ciliary muscle contraction leads to the relaxation of the zonular fibers attached to the lens. As a result, the lens shape becomes more spherical, increasing its axial thickness and dioptric power, and bringing the focus, which is initially behind the retina, back onto the retina. The ciliary muscle receives parasympathetic inputs from the short ciliary nerve, and its contraction allows the eye to accommodate to nearer objects. When the ciliary muscle relaxes, an increase in zonular tension causes the lens to flatten and its dioptric power to decrease. The ability to accommodate progressively declines with age. Presbyopia is a common condition in the aging population where their lens becomes denser and more rigid. With its decreasing ability to change shape, the lens can no longer focus on nearer objects.

**Retina**

When the light reaches the retina, it must initially pass through multiple retinal layers before interacting with rods and cones in the photoreceptor outer segments. These two photoreceptors translate the light signal into a bioelectric message. Upon photon absorption, the activated rods and cones lead to the initiation of a phototransduction cascade and result in cell hyperpolarization, which decreases the release of neurotransmitter glutamate from the photoreceptors. The glutamate receptors on bipolar cells propagate signals to ganglion cells, which have axons in the retinal nerve fiber layer that travel through the optic nerve.

**Optic Nerve, Chiasm, and Tracts**

The optic nerve of each eye is composed of a group of unmyelinated axons of the retinal ganglion cells which emerge from the optic disc. The absence of retinal photoreceptors in the optic disc leads to a blind spot in the visual field of each eye. The optic nerve passes posteriorly from the disc through a mesh-like structure known as the lamina cribrosa, after which it becomes myelinated by oligodendrocytes.

The optic nerves traveling from both eyes meet at the optic chiasm anterior to the pituitary gland. The nerve fibers continue after the optic chiasm as the optic tracts. The retinal fibers which come from the nasal side of each eye decussate at the optic chiasm into the contralateral optic tract, whereas the retinal fibers from the temporal side of each eye do not cross but instead proceed through the ipsilateral optic tract; thus, each optic tract is composed of the ipsilateral temporal fibers and the contralateral nasal fibers. This decussation of the nasal, but not the retinal, fibers allows the right half of the visual field to be processed by the left cerebral hemisphere and the left half of the field to proceed to the right hemisphere.

**Lateral Geniculate Nucleus**

Most of the optic tract fibers synapse in the ipsilateral lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus for image processing. A small number of the optic tract fibers arrive at the pretectal nucleus in the midbrain instead of the LGN and participate in the pupillary light reflex. The axons of the LGN project to the calcarine (also known as striate) cortex as two bundles called temporal and parietal radiations. The temporal radiations, also known as Meyer’s loop, are fibers that relay information from the contralateral superior visual field. The parietal radiations, also known as Baum’s loop, are fibers that carry information from the contralateral inferior visual field.

**Calcarine Cortex**

The electrochemical signal finally arrives at the calcarine cortex (Brodmann area 17), which is the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe. The visual information is further processed by the higher-order visual cortex to identify an object.

**Pupillary Light Reflexes and Pathway**

The pupillary light reflex pathway is similar to the visual pathway; however, the optic tract fibers involved in pupillary light reflexes terminate at the pretectal nucleus in the midbrain and not at the LGN of the thalamus. The nasally aligned fibers decussate at the optic chiasm and transfer the signal to the contralateral pretectal nucleus, whereas the temporally aligned fibers relay the information to the ipsilateral pretectal nucleus.

When each pretectal nucleus projects bilaterally and synapses in both Edinger-Westphal nuclei (cranial nerve III), the activated Edinger-Westphal nuclei begin the efferent limb of the reflex by generating action potentials. The axons of these preganglionic parasympathetic neurons send the signals along the oculomotor nerve to the post-ganglionic nerve fibers of the ciliary ganglion. Subsequently, the short ciliary nerves arising from the ciliary ganglion stimulate the pupillary sphincter muscle and cause pupillary constriction. Even when the light is shined in only one eye, a consensual response occurs in the other eye since the nasal retinal fibers cross at the optic chiasm to reach the contralateral pretectal nucleus. Also, the projection of each pretectal nucleus to both Edinger-Westphal nuclei contributes to the consensual pupillary reflex in the contralateral eye. Each activated Edinger-Westphal nucleus is responsible for the ipsilateral pupillary constriction, and these stimulated nuclei together allow the bilateral pupillary reflex to occur.

In the dim light, pupillary dilator muscle fibers contract and widen the size of the pupil. The postganglionic sympathetic fibers from the long ciliary nerve innervate the dilator muscle.