Three terminal divisions of the trigeminal nerve arise from the trigeminal ganglion; the ophthalmic (V1), maxillary (V2), and mandibular nerves (V3). As V3 exits the foramen ovale, it runs inferiorly towards the mandible and approaches the infratemporal fossa, where it branches extensively. It contains motor fibers serving the muscles of mastication, mylohyoid, the anterior belly of the digastric, and sensory fibers. Two particularly important branches of the mandibular nerve (V3) are the inferior alveolar nerve and the lingual nerve. Before entering the mandible, the inferior alveolar nerve supplies the mandibular posterior teeth and divides to form the mylohyoid nerve. The inferior alveolar nerve traverses medial to the mandibular ramus and enters the mandible via the mandibular foramen to serve the rest of the mandibular teeth. It then divides into its terminal branches: the incisive nerve innervating the incisors, canines, premolars, and their associated gingiva, and the mental nerve returning sensation from the chin and lip.

The maxillary nerve (V2) is purely sensory. It passes through the foramen rotundum to enter the pterygopalatine fossa, where it divides into several branches. The V2 branch innervating the maxillary teeth is the superior alveolar nerve. It exits the infraorbital canal and gives off an anterior branch that innervates the incisors, canines, premolars, and a posterior superior alveolar nerve, innervating the molar teeth. The middle superior alveolar branch of V2 provides additional innervation to the premolars and maxillary sinuses.

Pain perception and transduction from the teeth are achieved through sensory nerves branching from V2 and V3, which enter the apical foramen of the teeth. They extend coronally alongside the blood vessels and branch extensively at the periphery to form the plexus of Raschkow, which contains unmyelinated C fibers (0.3 to 1.2 µm in diameter) and the larger myelinated A-fibers (2 to 5 µm in diameter). These fibers demyelinate close to the level of the cell-rich zone and proceed to form an abundant network of free nerve fibers that are nociception-specific receptors. These free nerve endings may then penetrate through the dentinal tubules of the inner dentine.

Fibers have been attributed to sharp pulpal pain in the absence of tissue damage due to their peripheral location, rapid conduction, and low excitability threshold. C fibers have a higher threshold of excitability and slow conduction, which produces dull pain with pulp tissue injury. The hydrodynamic theory is the most widely accepted theory explaining the mechanism of dentine hypersensitivity. It proposes that fluid movement and pressure changes within the dentinal tubules deform the low threshold nerve fibers at the periphery of the pulp, which increases its permeability to sodium ions, causing depolarization and initiation of an action potential or pain impulse.

The pulp also has sympathetic adrenergic vasomotor control. The cervical sympathetic ganglion conveys sympathetic nerve fibers, which join the trigeminal nerve ganglion and branch to either follow the path of the sensory nerve fibers from the teeth or travel alongside the blood vessels. Painful stimuli cause a release of noradrenaline or neuropeptide from sympathetic nerve endings, which promotes vasoconstriction and may modulate the excitability of sensory nerves. This effect is lessened in pulpal inflammation, where local sensory vasodilation becomes predominant and, as a result, can contribute to further pulpal inflammation.