Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma is diagnosed by identifying small malignant lymphocytes in the bone marrow that are usually admixed with plasma cells, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and/or mast cells. The small malignant lymphocytes can be monocytoid, centroblastic, or immunoblastic. The bone marrow infiltration in those patients can be diffuse, interstitial, paratrabecular, or focal non-paratrabecular. Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma involvement of the lymph nodes is associated with retained overall architecture, paracortical expansion with small lymphocytes, and dilated sinuses with periodic acid Schiff positive material. Other characteristics such as Dutcher bodies (periodic acid Schiff positive intranuclear pseudoinclusions), increased mast cells, and hemosiderin deposition may be helpful in making the diagnosis. Some cases may show amyloid or other immunoglobin deposition. The presence of large prominent cells should raise the suspicion of a diagnosis other than lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Overall, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma evaluation in the bone marrow and lymph node is a diagnostic challenge due to the variability of presentation and the wide differential diagnosis related to plasmacytoid differentiation. These include marginal zone lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, small lymphocytic lymphoma/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and mantle cell lymphoma

Complete blood count in lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma usually shows variable degrees of cytopenias, with anemia and thrombocytopenia being common. Examination of the peripheral blood smear in lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma patients can show normochromic anemia and rouleau formation. On flow cytometry, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma cells are surface IgM+, CD19+, CD20+, CD22+, CD25+, CD27+, FMC7+, CD5 variable, CD10-, CD23-, CD103-, and CD108-. Plasma cells are typically CD138-. Protein electrophoresis and immunofixation are usually required to assess the paraprotein in lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia serum. Assessment of serum viscosity can be helpful in making a diagnosis in some patients; levels commonly range between 4 to 8 cP

Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma usually shows immunoglobulin gene rearrangement and somatic hypermutation. Although no specific chromosomal abnormality has been reported in lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, the presence of an MYD88 L265P mutation can favor diagnosis. However, this mutation is nonspecific and not necessary for the identification of the disease. This mutation has also been reported in nongerminal center subtype diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), primary cutaneous DLBCL, leg type DLBCL, primary central nervous system DLBCL, and testicular DLBCL. Other genetic mutations that have been reported include ARID1A, TP53, CD79B, KMT2D, and MYBBP1A. The 2017 World Health Organization classification of tumors of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues stressed that the presence of IgM paraprotein only is not diagnostic for either lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma or Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia because paraproteins may be present in other lymphoproliferative disorders and even some benign conditions

In patients with suspected extramedullary disease (hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy), it is essential for CT scans to be with contrast. If it is confirmed, CT scans need to be used during and after treatment.