For diagnosis of medication overuse headache under the most recent ICHD-3b criteria, the following three points must be met:

- A headache must occur for 15 or more days per month in a patient with a previously diagnosed headache disorder.

- A patient must have misused the acute headache medication for over three months.

- A headache is not attributable to another ICHD-3 headache condition.

Medication overuse headache is thought to occur when patients are taking acute headache medication with the following frequencies: 15 days or more per month for simple analgesics (i.e., acetaminophen, NSAIDs); and ten days or more per month for ergotamine, triptans, opioids, or combination analgesics (i.e., butalbital/acetaminophen/caffeine).

ICHD-3b states that when a combination of different headache medications is used, their combined frequency can lead to medication overuse headache, even when the individual drugs are not overused separately.

Patients with headaches respond to acute medications differently. The use of an inappropriate headache abortive medication, or less effective medication, can increase the frequency of medication consumption and lead to medication overuse headache. For example, given the differences in efficacy in treating migraines between acetaminophen 1000 mg PO (NNT=12) and ibuprofen 400 mg by mouth (NNT= 7.2), the patient using acetaminophen will generally end up requiring more frequent dosages of this medication to control a headache compared to those who are using ibuprofen.