The treatment of lead intoxication in general, but particularly in lead encephalopathy, can be considered in 3 specific areas: Decontamination, supportive care, and chelation. Decontamination methods depend on the type of exposure.

Lead encephalopathy is a serious illness and requires ICU level of care. The main goals of care include mitigating the rise in ICP, optimization of urinary output and elimination of lead, and maintaining seizure prophylaxis and control. Measures to control ICP include treatment with mannitol or hyperosmolar saline as well as early hyperventilation. These patients generally require intubation and mechanical ventilation, given their depressed mental state. Benzodiazepines such as diazepam or lorazepam are the mainstay of seizure treatment.

A urine output of 1 to 2 mL/kg/hr should be achieved if possible. This often requires IV fluid resuscitation as these patients will frequently be volume depleted due to vomiting and decreased oral intake, though care should be taken to avoid hypervolemia and worsening of cerebral edema. In patients that are euvolemic, loop diuretics may be used to increase urine output to goal as needed. Patients with lead encephalopathy in acute renal failure will generally require renal replacement therapy.

The goal of chelation therapy is to bind lead in a soluble state, thus enhancing its excretion. To this end, multiple different chelation therapies have been recommended, many of which depend on the whole blood lead level or clinical severity of intoxication. As lead encephalopathy represents the most severe form of lead intoxication, most experts recommend initial treatment with both CaNaEDTA intravenously and British anti-lewisite (BAL) intramuscularly, if possible. Of note, BAL should be administered at least 4 hours prior to CaNaEDTA, as the latter may be associated with increased CNS absorption otherwise. Patients may later be transitioned to dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA, succimer) orally.

Whole blood lead levels should be obtained before and within 24 to 48 hours after chelation to help guide any further chelation doses that may be required. Finally, monitoring whole blood lead levels for 7 to 21 days after completion of chelation is suggested, as lead may redistribute in the tissues causing re-exposure.