The treatment of acneiform eruptions depends on the cause. In most cases, if the cause is an organism or a drug, then the exposure should be discontinued. Most patients recover within a few weeks. For any residual lesions, treatments that have been used to treat acneiform eruptions include laser ablation, excision, topical or oral antibiotics, drug withdrawal or use of topical or oral retinoids. If the cause is a fungal infection like pityrosporum folliculitis, then the use of a topical antifungal agent can be helpful like ciclopirox, econazole, and ketoconazole can be helpful.

Treatment of chloracne is difficult as it may persist for years, even without further exposure.

Some patients with eosinophilic pustular folliculitis may benefit from a short course of oral indomethacin. Lesions that fail to respond to indomethacin may be treated with cyclosporine.

The traditional agents used to treat acne vulgaris seldom work in patients with acneiform eruptions, but one may suggest the use of skin cleaners like salicylic acid or benzoyl peroxide to reduce the oily skin.

Itching is a very common symptom in patients with acneiform eruptions so that these patients may benefit from the use of antihistamines. If the itching is nocturnal, first-generation antihistamines are recommended because they also induce sleep.

There are some cases of acneiform eruptions that may benefit from the use of dapsone. Anecdotal reports indicate that eosinophilic pustular eruptions do respond to a short course of dapsone.

Patients who have gram-positive organisms causing the skin lesions may also benefit from doxycycline.

Over the years, the use of retinoids to treat acneiform eruptions has increased with success. Both oral and topical retinoids have been used. These agents are known to decrease the production of sebum and rapidly resolve the eruptions. These agents should not be prescribed to women of childbearing age because of their teratogenic potential.

Avoid the causative drug in drug-induced acne. Minimize contacts or friction which will prevent occupational and mechanical acne.   Protective clothing and removal of the worker from unsuitable environment also help.