Disease presenting similarly to HaNDL syndrome include:

- Migraine with aura: It can be differentiated from HaNDL syndrome because it lacks typical aura symptoms and CSF pleocytosis.

- Familial or sporadic forms of hemiplegic migraine: They don't have CSF lymphocytosis.

- Acute stroke: The symptoms of neurologic deficits in stroke are not transient, positive findings in the brain MRI, and lacks the typical finding of

- Meningoencephalitis, meningitis, and encephalitis: These are some infectious causes of headache which present with high fever, neck rigidity, and skin rashes. CSF study may reveal the etiology. Particularly relevant Mollaret meningitis (also known as recurrent benign lymphocytic meningitis), aseptic meningitis secondary to virus or pharmacological agents such as NSAIDs

- Epilepsy: The neurologic symptom in epilepsy usually present after a seizure in the postictal state. CSF pleocytosis is unusual. EEG may reveal epileptiform discharges.

- CNS vasculitis and granulomatous and neoplastic arachnoiditis: can be easily differentiated on brain imaging.

- Neurobrucellosis: History of close contact with animals, causes headache with fever, malaise, myalgias rather than neurologic deficits.

- Neurosyphylisis: A history of multiple sexual partners or STDs.

- Neuroborreliosis: A history of travel to Lyme endemic areas and bulls-eye skin rash.

- Reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome: differentiated by seizures and altered mental status. These patients have characteristic brain imaging abnormality.

- Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor encephalitis