In all the normal tissues of multicellular organisms, cell proliferation and cell death are balanced. This normal cell death, vital for the normal development and health of cells, is called apoptosis and involves the following pathways. All the pathways involve activation of caspases as the final tool.

**Intrinsic Pathway (Mitochondrial Pathway)**

It is activated when the cell is stressed from the inside due to an array of factors like DNA damage from x-ray exposure or UV light exposure; chemotherapeutic agents; hypoxia; accumulation of misfolded proteins inside the cell as, for example, Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, or Huntington disease; and many others. When the cell is stressed, there is leakage of cytochrome c from the intermembrane space of mitochondria into the cytosol which leads to the activation of caspases 9. Bcl-2 and TP53 family of genes regulate this pathway.

**Extrinsic Pathway**

This pathway is triggered when the cell receives death signals from the other cell(s). The extrinsic pathway is receptor-linked, and the ligands from the other cells bind to these death receptors on the cell surface, leading to the activation of apoptosis. This involves the following cell surface receptors and respective ligands, ultimately leading to activation of caspase 8:

- Fas (CD95) receptor activated by FasL (Fas ligand)

- TNFR activated by cytokine TNF

**Cytotoxic CD8+ T-Cell Mediated Pathway**

CD8+ T cells secrete perforins that create holes in the target cells. Next CD8+ T cells secrete granzymes which enter the target cells through these holes and activate caspases.

**Caspases**

Caspases are a group of enzymes that are protease in nature. They are the primary effectors of apoptotic response. They are divided into the following 2 types:

Initiator Caspases

The initiator caspases are 2,8.9.10,11,12, and effector caspases include caspases 3,6,7. Caspases exist in the cell in an inactive form and require proteolytic cleavage to an active form.

Effector Caspases

The activated initiator caspases cause the activation of effector caspases. These active effector caspases bring about the cleavage of several proteins in the cell that leads to cell death and ultimately phagocytosis and removal of the cell debris.

Of all the caspases, the most frequently activated caspase is caspase 3 which catalyzes the cleavage of major cellular proteins and condensation of chromatin. Caspase also activates DNAse enzymes that cause fragmentation of DNA followed by internucleosomal fragmentation.