Disruption of the pelvic ring causes an increase in the internal volume of the pelvis. The increased volume will decrease the tamponade effect of the retroperitoneal space, allowing increased blood loss.

There are two main classification systems of pelvic fractures: the Tile and the Young-Burgess classification systems. Tile et al. described three types of underlying mechanisms for pelvic fractures. Type A is a rotationally and vertically stable fracture. Type B is rotationally unstable but vertically stable. Finally, type C is both rotationally and vertically unstable.

The Young-Burgess and Tile classification both classify pelvic fractures on the anatomic classification of injuries but fail to consider hemodynamic stability. The World Society of Emergency Surgery (WSES) created a classification that is based on anatomic classification as well as the hemodynamic stability of the patient; this helps with consideration of a treatment algorithm. The WSES classification divides pelvic injuries into three categories: mild, moderate, and severe.

- Minor: WSES grade I; the fracture is stable, and the patient is hemodynamically stable

- 
              
- Grade I: APC I and LC I fractures

- Moderate: WSES grade II and grade III; the fracture is unstable, but the patient is hemodynamically stable

- 
              
- Grade II: APC II, APC III, and LC II, LC III fractures 
              
              
- Grade III: VS and CM fractures

- Severe: WSES grade IV: the fracture is either stable or unstable, but the patient is hemodynamically unstable.

- 
              
- Grade IV: any fracture pattern in a hemodynamically unstable patient

Minor injuries are typically treated with nonoperative management. Moderate injuries are given a pelvic binder in the field, and then should be considered for angioembolization if a blush is seen on CT scan. Severe injuries require more intense intervention. A pelvic binder should be placed in the field. Upon arrival, the patient should be treated with preperitoneal packing, resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA), or angioembolization.