Hysteroscopy was first performed on a patient in 1869 by Pantaleoni, who, using a cystoscope developed by Desormeaux, discovered and treated an endometrial polyp in a 60-year-old patient who presented with postmenopausal bleeding.

Hysteroscopy involves inserting a rigid or flexible hysteroscope through the cervical canal into the uterus and then using distending media to allow for complete visualization of the endometrial cavity. The type of distending media is selected based on the type of energy that will be used. Electrolyte-rich distention media may not be used if monopolar energy is used due to the risk of conducting electricity outside the operative field. Because of the potential for fluid overload and resulting complications, a fluid deficit upper limit of 1000 ml is recommended when using the hypotonic solution as the distending media. A fluid deficit upper limit of 2500 ml is recommended when using the isotonic solution as the distending media. This limit does not apply to patients who are elderly or have comorbidities. In that population, a fluid deficit cutoff of 750 ml for hypotonic solutions and 1500 ml for isotonic solutions is recommended.

The type of hysteroscope is selected based on operative needs. The three parts of the scope are the eyepiece, the barrel, and the objective lens. Scope viewing angles range from 0 degrees to 70 degrees, with a decreased angle giving a more panoramic view. An operative hysteroscope is needed for surgical intervention. Options include a resectoscope, a hysteroscopic tissue retrieval system, or the addition of an operative sheath.

With the invention of smaller hysteroscopes with reduced diameter and more technically advanced operating systems, in-office hysteroscopy has become a widely accepted method for diagnosing and treating intrauterine pathology. For women with abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB), hysteroscopy has been introduced as a viable or even superior alternative to hysterectomy in some cases.