The MP joint is responsible for two planes of motion: flexion and extension, as well as abduction and adduction.

**Thumb MP joint**

The proximal convex surface of the first metacarpal bone is opposed by the elliptical cavity of the proximal phalanx. Additionally, two sesamoid bones secured by intersesamoid ligaments are present in the palmar aspect of the joint capsule. The first MP joint provides additional flexion to the thumb in opposition, permitting the grasping and contouring objects to facilitate fine motor tasks. Unlike the other digits of the hand, the thumb joint only has one interphalangeal joint which the MP joint coordinates thumb opposition. Compared to the other MP joints of the hand, the MP joint of the thumb has a more restricted range of motion.

**Finger MP joints**

The finger MP joints have an oval convex metacarpal surface that articulates with a concave, shallow proximal phalangeal surface.

Various ligamentous structures such as the volar plate, longitudinal fibers of the joint capsule, and transverse metacarpal ligaments (superficial and deep) provide additional stability to the joint.

From deep to superficial, the anatomic structures of the MP joint facilitate the overall dynamic function of the MP joint include

- Volar plate

- Joint capsule fibers

- Deep transverse metacarpal ligament

- Flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendon

- Flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) tendon

- Digital tendon sheath

- A1 annular pulley

The volar plate is a short, transverse thickening of the joint capsule that functions to increase overall joint congruence and prevents MP joint hyperextension.

The joint capsule is a thin, fibrous, and durable network, reinforced by the flexor pollicis brevis and adductor pollicis brevis muscles, the palmar plate, and various collateral ligament connections. The radial and ulnar collateral ligaments arise proximally from their respective sides on the metacarpal bone, spanning the distal and volar sides of the joint to attach on the proximal phalanx.

The volar fan-shaped accessory ligament attaches to the middle of the metacarpal head and extends to the palmar plate and deep transverse metacarpal ligament which tightens during finger extension. The dorsal, cord-shaped, proper ligament attaches to the metacarpal head and extends to the proximal phalanx base, becoming taut at about 30 degrees of finger flexion. The natatory ligament, also known as the superficial transverse metacarpal ligament, originates distal to the MP joint and runs through the webspace to insert on the proximal phalanx. It functions to resist abduction.  The deep transverse metacarpal ligament connects the 2nd-5th metacarpal heads together at the volar plate and provides soft tissue support. Dorsal to this ligament, are the ribbon-shaped sagittal bands that centralize the MP joint and stabilize the extensor tendons in motion.