Imaging characteristics to narrow the differential diagnosis of lesions:

Periosteal reaction: Periosteal reaction or periostitis is a non-specific radiographic finding which occurs due to irritation caused by underlying bone tumor either benign or malignant. The periosteal reaction is classifiable into continuous versus interrupted, single versus multiple layers, and benign versus aggressive forms.

Benign periosteal reaction: Chronic low-grade irritation allows periosteum to lay down thick, wavy and uniform callus resulting in a solid periosteal reaction. Fracture healing, osteoid osteoma, and chronic osteomyelitis can all lead to a solid periosteal reaction.

Aggressive periosteal reaction: This results when there is not enough time for the periosteum to lay down and consolidate the bone formation. The cortex appears multilayered, lamellated, amorphous or spiculated (sunburst), sometimes there is Codman's periosteal reaction. A malignant lesion like osteosarcoma causes interrupted periosteal reaction and Codman's triangle. Ewing's sarcoma causes lamellated and interrupted periosteal reaction. The aggressive periosteal reaction can be present in benign lesions like infection, eosinophilic granuloma, ABC, osteoid osteoma, trauma, and hemophilia.

Zone of transition: A zone of transition can help differentiate benign versus malignant lesions. A narrow zone of transition results in a sharp well-circumscribed border and is a sign of poor biological activity. However, in patients more than 40 years of age, despite benign radiographic appearances metastasis and myeloma should be considered in differentials. A wide zone of transition results in an ill-defined or imperceptible border is a sign of high biological activity or aggressive growth and is a feature of malignant bone tumor. However, two benign bone lesions which may show similar aggressive features are infection and eosinophilic granuloma. Permeative or moth-eaten appearance of bone appears as multiple endosteal lucent lesions with a poor zone of transition. It is due to bone marrow involvement. They can present in multiple myeloma, lymphoma, infections and, eosinophilic granuloma.

Cortical destruction: Cortical destruction is a frequent finding in bone lesions. However, it is not very useful in differentiating benign versus malignant lesions. Complete cortical destruction may be present in high-grade malignant lesions like osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and also in locally aggressive benign lesions. Ballooning is a particular type of cortical destruction, involves the destruction of the inner cortex and new bone formation outside cortex at the same time. Seen in giant cell tumor (locally aggressive expansile lesion with cortical destruction, a wide zone of transition, interrupted new bone formation peripherally) and in case of chondromyxoid fibroma (well defined, expansile lesion with regular destruction of the cortex and uninterrupted new bone formation). A group of small cell tumors involving marrow like Ewing, lymphoma, small cell osteosarcoma can spread along entire Haversian canals without cortical destruction.

Matrix: Calcification or matrix mineralization are essential features to differentiate bone tumors. There are two types of matrix mineralization. The chondroid matrix presents in cases of cartilaginous tumors like enchondroma, chondroblastoma, chondrosarcoma and presents as a ring and arc, floccular, stippled, or popcorn-like. Osteoid tumors demonstrate the osteoid matrix. Trabecular ossification pattern in case of an osteoid matrix and cloud-like bone formation in case of osteosarcoma.

Location: Bone tumors are described according to their location in the skeleton (axial, appendicular, and flat bones), part of the bone (epiphysis, metaphysis, and diaphysis), and site of bone (centric, eccentric, or juxtacortical).

Age: Age is among the most vital criteria for possible differentials. At age over 40 years, multiple myeloma and metastasis must always be kept in differentials.