The 2016 ACR guidelines state that the healthcare professional requesting the PET-CT should provide the imaging facility with documentation that satisfies insurance approval for the medical necessity of the exam, including patient 1) signs and symptoms and/or 2) other relevant clinical histories (such as known medical diagnoses). In addition, information regarding a provisional diagnosis and information about past surgeries, radiation, biopsies, chemotherapy, and other scan findings of interest should also be provided. It may at times be critical to enable proper performance and interpretation of the examination.

PET-CT requires patient communication and cooperation. Therefore, prior to arriving for the scan, the ACR recommends that the patient should:

- Avoid exercise of any type during the 24 hours before the scan.

- Avoid exposure to inflammatory substances (smoking of any kind, tobacco, alcohol) during the 24 hours before the scan.

- Eat low-carbohydrate meals for at least 24 hours before the scan.

- Fast (including no parenteral nutrition or oral/intravenous fluids containing sugar or dextrose) for at least 4 hours before the scan.

- Hydrate with a goal of 1 L (34 oz) ingested within 2 hours before the scan.

For interpretation of 18-FDG uptake based on a normal physiologic distribution, serum glucose should be in the range of 70-200 mg/dL. Therefore, the ACR recommends that serum glucose analysis should be performed immediately before 18-FDG administration under the following conditions:

- If the serum glucose is >300 mg/dL, then the patient should be rescheduled.

- If the serum glucose is >200 mg/dL, then the patient may be rescheduled, but a repeat measurement could instead be performed about 20 to 30 minutes later.

- If the serum glucose level has decreased to less than 200 mg/dL, the scan can be performed.
- If the serum glucose level has decreased but is still >200 mg/dL, then the cycle can continue until the glucose is <200 mg/dL or FDG can be administered at the discretion of the interpreting physician.

- If the serum glucose is <70 mg/dL because the patient has taken an anti-diabetic medication, then waiting 30 minutes and repeating a finger-stick glucose measurement should be considered before rescheduling the exam.

- If the serum glucose is <70 mg/dL for another reason, then the exam should be rescheduled, and the cause should be treated.

Brown fat is a subtype of fat that is relatively hypermetabolic to white fat and is stimulated by processes such as shivering or anxiety.  To avoid false-positive interpretations due to brown fat uptake:

- Keep the patient warm (use heated blankets and a warm waiting room).

- Administer oral beta-blockers, such as propranolol 20 mg, 60 minutes prior to 18-FDG injection.

- Administer intravenous narcotics, such as fentanyl, shortly before the 18-FDG injection.

To avoid false-positive interpretations due to muscle uptake:

- Keep the patient seated or recumbent in a quiet room.

- Administer oral alprazolam 0.5 mg immediately after 18-FDG injection PMID: 8965182.

To avoid patient motion that causes the scanning equipment to produce anatomic imaging artifacts (called misregistration artifacts):

- Train the patient for using breathing and motion-reducing behaviors. Breathing should be shallow and consistent and should be performed the same way for both PET and CT imaging.

- Train the patient to think relaxing, calming thoughts.  Mindfulness techniques can help patients stay still for the 30-60 minutes that PET scanning is performed.