Since iritis involves anterior uveitis per se, the evaluation and treatment are focussed on anterior uveitis only. Further laboratory tests or imaging may be required if systemic involvement or infectious disease is suspected to be the underlying cause.

**Visual Acuity**

Visual acuity depends on the extent of inflammatory activity and associated complications. It is generally minimally reduced in AAU. Snellen's uncorrected and best-corrected visual acuity should be documented in each patient. The improvement in visual acuity is also an indicator of resolution of uveitis and reduction in inflammation.

**Intraocular Pressure**

Intraocular pressure (IOP) can be raised in uveitic cases. The reduction in IOP is due to ciliary shutdown or reduction in aqueous secretion from the ciliary epithelium. The raised IOP can be due to angle closure, trabeculitis, steroid-induced, and other causes. The IOP can be measured by noncontact tonometry, ICARE tonometer, or Goldman applanation tonometer and should be documented on each visit.

**Cases of Uveitis where Investigations are Not Mandatory**

- The first episode of unilateral mild NG AAU with no previous ocular or systemic history

- Classical clinical signs of a specific etiology for which investigation will not be helpful like FHIC

- When the systemic signs and symptoms are indicative of a particular etiology associated with uveitis like sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, multiple sclerosis, etc.

**Cases of Uveitis where Investigations Will be Helpful**

- Bilateral cases of AAU

- Severe cases AAU

- Recurrent cases of AAU

- Chronic A.U. resistance to treatment

- Granulomatous AU

- AAU associated with I.U. or posterior uveitis or panuveitis cases

- Ocular and systemic signs indication underlying pathology

Further laboratory tests or imaging may be required if systemic involvement or infectious disease is suspected to be the underlying cause.

**Imaging**

Chest radiography may be considered if sarcoidosis or tuberculosis is the underlying cause of uveitis. In granulomatous uveitis cases, a high index of suspicion should be kept to rule out these treatable systemic conditions as well as syphilis. X-ray of the sacroiliac joint reveals bamboo spine and sacroiliitis in cases with ankylosing spondylitis and other seronegative spondyloarthropathies.

**Ocular Imaging**

**B Scan Ultrasound**

A B scan should be performed in the fundus that is not visualized due to small pupil, anterior chamber reaction, fibrinous membrane, or vitreous haze.

**Optical Coherence Tomography**

It's a handy tool to rule out cystoid macular edema and epiretinal membrane and look for cells and flare.

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography**

This is an essential investigation in chronic uveitis cases to rule out posterior segment pathology like vasculitis macular ischemia delineate capillary non-perfusion areas and white dot syndrome spectrum.

**Fundus Autofluorescence**

Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) is essential in posterior segment pathologies to rule out white dot syndromes and severe inflammatory conditions.

**Indocyanine Green Angiography**

Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) is needed in cases with uveitis-associated choroidal pathology.

**Ultrasound Biomicroscopy**

Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) is helpful to rule out hypotony (ciliary shutdown), choroidal effusion, cyclodialysis cleft, and cyclitic membrane.

**Laboratory Workup**

Laboratory workup is usually not necessary. In mild unilateral non-granulomatous uveitis with trauma or no evidence of systemic disease, laboratory studies are unlikely to be helpful. If there is the presence of bilateral granulomatous or recurrent uveitis, a workup is indicated.

**Human Leucocyte Antigen tissue typing (HLA-B27)**

- HLA- B27 testing should be done in any patient with recurrent A.U. or chronic N.G. A.U. The various HLA types and their associations are detailed below.

- HLA B27- Recurrent AAU

- HLA-B51 and HLA B5- Behcet's disease

- HLA-A29- Birdshot retinochoroiditis

- HLA-DR4- Sympathetic Ophthalmia and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease

- HLA-B7 and HLA-DR- Presumed Ocular Histoplasmosis Syndrome

**Syphilis Serology**

The various test implicated in syphilis is treponemal antibody tests such as ELISA- enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, which has high specificity and sensitivity but takes approximately three months to show positivity. Anti-cardiolipin antibody tests (non-specific) like venereal research laboratory test (VDRL) and rapid plasma regain (RPR) demonstrate positive results in the acute phase of the disease and help to monitor the disease and treatment. The patients having features of ocular syphilis should be referred to an internist to rule out sexually transmitted syphilis.

**Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme**

This is a non-specific test to rule out the cause of N.G. A.U. such as sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, and Hansen disease. Serum levels of ACE are elevated in approximately 80% of patients with sarcoidosis but come down to normal levels during remission.

**Serum Lysozyme Assay**

Lysozyme, an enzyme, is found in neutrophils and tear secretion. It has antibacterial properties and can cause bacterial cell wall breakdown. This test has comparatively less sensitivity and specificity than serum ACE in diagnosing sarcoidosis, but the combined test may prove more beneficial.

**Complete Blood Count**

A raised leucocyte count is indicative of infective may be a hematological malignancy. Eosinophils are raised in parasitic causes of uveitis.

**Inflammatory Markers**

C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and acute phase reactants may be elevated in systemic inflammatory disorders.

**Lyme Disease Serology**

Disease-specific serology is essential in endemic areas, including serology for other infections like brucellosis and leptospirosis.

**Antinuclear Antibody**

Antinuclear antibody (ANA) is the most important marker for juvenile idiopathic arthritis in children. ANA positivity is an indicator of CAU.

**Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody**

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) is valuable for anterior uveitis associated with scleritis. It is a valuable marker for Wegner granulomatosis (c-ANCA) and Polyarteritis Nodosa (PAN) {p-ANCA}.

**Interferon-Gamma Release Assay**

Interferon-gamma Release Assay such as QuantiFERON-TB Gold for diagnosis of tuberculosis.

**HIV Serology**

HIV tridot test for suspected patients with immunosuppression.

**Anterior Chamber Tap**

An anterior chamber aqueous tap can be performed, and a sample can be sent for a polymerase chain reaction in cases of suspected viral uveitis like herpes, varicella, and rubella. PCR will also distinguish Propionibacterium acne infection in chronic uveitis in pseudophakic eyes.

**Iris Biopsy**

Iris biopsy is another critical investigation but is rarely done nowadays.

**Vitreous Biopsy**

In the case of associated posterior segment involvement, especially in the case of suspected endophthalmitis.

**Conjunctival Biopsy**

In case of suspected granulomas or infiltrative lesions, a conjunctival biopsy is indicated.

**Physician Referral**

To rule out systemic pathologies, timely referral to an internist is essential to pinpoint the etiology—for example, HRCT in pulmonary tuberculosis and MRI in cases of multiple sclerosis.