Surgical resection of the tumor is the treatment of choice for PCC and has a success rate of more than 90%. However, due to end organ damage resulting from excessive catecholamine and labile hemodynamics from fluctuating catecholamine levels, it is one of the most complex and challenging tasks for anesthesiologists.

Adequate pre-op optimization is mandatory to decrease perioperative morbidity and mortality. Perioperative management for PCC should be done by a multidisciplinary team, including an anesthesiologist, surgeon, and endocrinologist. Pre-operative evaluation should focus on assessing end-organ damage due to elevated catecholamine levels. These patients are at risk for catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy and may present with arrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, and reduced ventricular ejection fraction.

Pre-op preparation with alpha-adrenergic and beta blockade is recommended to control blood pressure and restore intravascular volume. Despite optimization, the patient may have labile hemodynamics in the perioperative period. General anesthesia is required for laparoscopic resection of PCC. Smooth induction with adequate depth of anesthesia is the goal of anesthesia. Invasive blood monitoring is mandatory during surgery. An arterial line should be placed before induction of anesthesia, which facilitates the early recognition and management of hemodynamic changes.

Hemodynamic instability is the most common complication during surgery. Hypertension and tachycardia are common during intubation and before the ligation of the tumor. Hypotension may be commonly seen after ligation/removal of the tumor—close communication with the surgeon help in anticipation of events that might cause hemodynamic fluctuation.