Trauma patients should undergo routine ATLS care such as airway, breathing, and cervical spine protection.  Identification of a blunt or penetrating cardiac injury should prompt further specific care.

BCI has many possible patterns, including dysrhythmias, contusions, rupture, valvular injury, and coronary artery injury. Dysrhythmias range from commotio cordis with non-perfusing ventricular fibrillation to stable first-degree atrioventricular blocks. Advanced cardiovascular life support (ACLS) management should be initiated for dysrhythmias, ruling out other traumatic injuries and alternative etiologies of the dysrhythmia.  Any dysrhythmia outside of sinus tachycardia that is presumed new should prompt consideration of further cardiac telemetry monitoring and echocardiography if not already done.  Patients with atrial dysrhythmias have been shown to benefit from treatment, and a beta or calcium channel blocker should be considered for the stable patient.  In the unstable patient, electrical cardioversion may be an option if their instability is suspected secondary to the dysrhythmia.

Myocardial contusions can present with electrical disturbances or may be found only with an elevated troponin. Treatment is supportive and determined by the severity of other findings, such as hypotension or high-grade dysrhythmias. Evaluation of these patients parallels that of patients with myocardial infarctions, with a similar range of outcomes and complications.

Cardiac rupture may be lethal depending on the location and extent of damage to cardiac tissue.  Operative repair is indicated with a sternotomy or thoracotomy and potentially cardiopulmonary bypass. Valvular injuries may be repaired depending on the nature of the damage. Certain cases, such as papillary muscle rupture, may require valve replacement.

Coronary artery lacerations or bleeding should be managed operatively to control the involved artery and coronary bypass.  In cases where non-bleeding coronary artery injuries are suspected, angiography with management based on findings is generally indicated, such as with stenting or medical management.

Using a Foley to close a cardiac wound temporarily allows for rapid transfusion of blood products. There are multiple acceptable means of temporarily closing a cardiac wound during an emergency thoracotomy, including Foley placement, digital pressure, sutures, or staples.  Each is acceptable, but only the placement of a Foley can provide a route for rapid resuscitation while also closing the wound.

Cardiac wounds may lead to exsanguination if nothing is done to temporize while waiting for definitive repair. Lacerations can be controlled initially with digital pressure, vascular clamp (atrial wounds), or the insertion of a Foley followed by inflation of the balloon and light traction.  Blood products may be able to be transfused through the Foley, in addition to helping temporize a cardiac wound. Cardiac laceration repair can be done using 3-0 polypropylene (Prolene) sutures, typically in running, horizontal mattress, or purse stitch.  Pledgets or pieces of the pericardium are often used to distribute tension when repairing ventricular wounds.

Penetrating cardiac trauma is more straightforward in management, with operative management ultimately required.  If the patient is unstable, a pericardiocentesis can be performed with a catheter placed for intermittent drainage to help temporarily stabilize the patient. A median sternotomy or thoracotomy is used to obtain the heart with a pericardiotomy done, avoiding the phrenic nerve.  Lacerations can be controlled initially with digital pressure, vascular clamp (atrial wounds*), or the insertion of a Foley followed by inflation of the balloon and light traction.  Blood products may be able to be transfused through the Foley, in addition to helping temporize a cardiac wound.

Cardiac laceration repair can be done using 3-0 polypropylene (Prolene) sutures, typically in running, horizontal mattress, or purse stitch.  Pledgets or pieces of the pericardium are often used to distribute tension when repairing ventricular wounds. Key points to remember while repairing the wound are to ensure taking adequate bites of the myocardium to help avoid tissue tearing, placing ventricular sutures during ventricular contraction to help minimize tearing of the myocardium, and to avoid ligating coronary arteries when repairing cardiac wounds.  Posterior heart lacerations may need to be done with patience as elevating the heart for a continued period of time to visualize, place sutures, and tie sutures, as lifting the heart can cause hypotension and potentially cardiac arrest. Finally, staples have also been used in place of sutures to help close the wound, though they are controversial.