Tension pneumothorax can occur anywhere, and treatment depends on the circumstance at the time of onset. It is usually managed in the emergency department or the intensive care unit. Management strategies depend on the hemodynamic stability of the patient. In any patient presenting with chest trauma, airway, breathing, and circulation should be assessed. Penetrating chest wounds must be covered with an airtight occlusive bandage and clean plastic sheeting. Administration of 100% supplemental oxygen can help reduce the size of the pneumothorax by decreasing the alveolar nitrogen partial pressure. This creates a diffusion gradient for nitrogen, thus accelerating the resolution of the pneumothorax. Only 1.25% of the air is absorbed without oxygen in 24 hours. Positive pressure ventilation should be avoided initially, as it will increase the tension pneumothorax's size. Patients can be placed on positive pressure ventilation after a chest tube is placed.

If the patient is hemodynamically unstable and clinical suspicion is high for pneumothorax, immediate needle decompression must be performed without delay. Needle decompression is done at the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line above the rib with an angio-catheter. It results in the re-expansion of the collapsed lung. However, the risk of lung re-expanding quickly increases the risk of pulmonary edema. Following needle decompression, a CXR is done, and a chest tube is usually placed.

Assessment of pneumothorax resolution is usually done with serial chest X-rays. Then, when the patient has improved, the lung has fully expanded, and no air leaks are visible, the chest tube is ready to be removed.

Chest tubes are usually managed by experienced nurses, respiratory therapists, surgeons, and ITU physicians. In 90% of the cases, a chest tube is sufficient; however, there are certain cases where surgical interventions are required, and that can either be video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) or thoracotomy.

Patients requiring surgical intervention are usually patients with bilateral pneumothoraces, recurrent ipsilateral pneumothoraces, first presentation in patients with high-risk professions like pilots and drivers, and patients with persistent air leaks (for more than seven days). During video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS), pneumothorax is treated with pleurodesis. There are two types of pleurodesis: mechanical and chemical. With mechanical pleurodesis, there is a less than 5% chance of recurrence of pneumothorax. Some options are abrasive scratchpad, dry gauze, or stripping of parietal pleura. Chemical pleurodesis options include talc, minocycline, doxycycline, or tetracycline. Chemical pleurodesis is an alternative if the patient cannot tolerate mechanical pleurodesis. Recent studies have shown that pleurodesis can decrease the rate of recurrence.