There are a number of contraindications to the insertion of a central line. Most of these should be considered by the provider at the time of insertion, but others can develop during the patient's treatment and period of care.

- Embolic Issues

- Existing central venous clots - Clots within the central circulation can be dislodged by CVCs, leading to embolic complications such as stroke.
- Valve vegetations - Bacterial vegetations on valves can be dislodged and lead to infarction or infectious complications.
- Tumors - Myocardial tumors can be friable or provide a prothrombotic surface for clots to form.

- Bleeding Risk

- Patients with existing hemorrhagic tendencies related to hematological conditions
- Previous trauma or surgery to the site increases the risk of arterial puncture
- Pharmacological treatment affecting the patient's clotting.

- Infection

- Infection at the site of insertion is an absolute contraindication.
- Infectious symptoms may develop at a central cannula site and must be monitored and treated, usually by removal of the catheter.
- Bloodstream infections are a relative contraindication acknowledging that a CVC may become a surface for biofilm formation and bacterial persistence and, therefore, likely to need more frequent changes.

- Skin Trauma

- Radiation damage to the insertion site
- Pressure ulceration or damage to the insertion site can occur from the CVC itself
- Direct trauma

The use of an existing site for the placement of a catheter may preclude the use of that site for further cannulation efforts, although a recent review suggests that the previous concerns around the presence of other central catheters do not mean the ipsilateral vein cannot be used for hemodialysis catheter placement. This suggests current or previous placement is unlikely to represent a contra-indication to placement, especially if the initial placement was not complicated.