Peripheral nerve injury can vary wildly in severity and presentation, ranging from mild soreness to severe muscle weakness. Axillary nerve injuries typically respond well to conservative management, though a surgical intervention may be required. Failure to accurately diagnose and manage patients may lead to life-long disability that can affect the overall quality of life. While axillary nerve lesions are somewhat rare, they should be considered when patients present with shoulder weakness and sensory loss.

**Anatomic Course**

The axillary nerve diverges from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus anterior to the subscapularis muscle, running posterior to the axillary artery. It then travels inferior to the glenohumeral joint capsule and passes through the quadrangular space with the posterior humeral circumflex artery. The axillary nerve proceeds to split into anterior and posterior divisions. The anterior division supplies motor innervation to the anterior and middle heads of the deltoid. The posterior division provides motor innervation to the posterior deltoid and teres minor before eventually terminating as the superior lateral cutaneous nerve and innervating the lateral shoulder.

**Functional Anatomy**

As stated above, the axillary nerve innervates the deltoid and teres minor muscles. The deltoid muscle, divided into three parts, performs and assists in a variety of actions. The primary function of the deltoid muscle is glenohumeral abduction, performed by the middle muscle belly. The anterior muscle belly assists in glenohumeral flexion and internal rotation. The posterior muscle belly assists in glenohumeral extension and external rotation.