An unstable patient should be taken without delay in the operating room. Obtaining adequate intravenous access to initiate massive transfusion is essential. In addition to expedient resuscitation with blood, immediate control of the bleeding is necessary. In patients with obvious neck or chest trauma and hard signs of vascular trauma, direct pressure to the site can be applied with a single digit to occlude the bleeding until operative intervention can commence. A Foley catheter with the balloon inflated into the wound can also be used to temporarily tamponade the bleeding vessel. Patients in extremis may require resuscitative thoracotomy in the emergency department for temporary vascular control through direct pressure at the thoracic cavity.

The identification of subclavian artery injuries is often made intra-operatively due to the hemodynamic instability of the patient precluding the ability to obtain imaging. In a stable patient with soft signs of vascular injury, imaging can be obtained to help elucidate the diagnosis. A chest radiograph in patients with associated subclavian artery injury may show a first rib fracture, widened mediastinum, apical pleural hematoma, or opacification along the expected course of the subclavian artery.

Angiography is important for appropriate preoperative planning. Once considered to be the gold standard for diagnosis, invasive arteriography has fallen out of favor due to possible complications and increased procedure time. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) provides the best diagnostic information on subclavian artery injuries.