Clinical presentation in peritoneal cancer is variable depending on the extent of involvement. It is usually diagnosed in late stages due to the vague symptomatology. EOPPC has an indistinguishable presentation from an epithelial ovarian cancer. The Gynecologic Oncology Group has defined the following criterion for EOPPC diagnosis:

- Both ovaries should be of normal size, and the enlargement is benign.

- The surface area of malignant involvement of extra-ovarian sites should be larger than either of the ovaries.

- There should be no malignancy in either ovaries or the tumor in serosa, and cortex of size less than 5X5 mm can be present.

- The tumor in the extra-ovarian site should be serosal both histologically and cytologically.

All the peritoneal carcinomas present with non-specific symptoms like abdominal bloating, distension, nausea, indigestion, anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, constipation, abdominal or back pain. The most common symptoms for presentation are abdominal distension and pain, while usual signs are palpable abdominal mass and ascites. Non-specific abdominal symptoms and ascites occur in 85% of the patients.

Peritoneal carcinomatosis has characteristic symptoms of the primary tumor itself and non-specific symptoms. The secondary metastatic deposits may range from microscopic involvement to nodules to bulky disease, and this extent of involvement and location determines the symptoms.

The growth in both primary and secondary tumors causes pressure effects resulting in mechanical intestinal obstruction. Such patients present in an emergency with an ‘acute abdomen.’  Bowel obstructions are seen mainly in colorectal cancers in about 20% of cases.