The traditional framework used in teaching the rights has remained largely unchanged, but there has been no significant reduction in error rates reported in the literature since their introduction.

An increasing number of recent studies have identified inadequacies of the ‘ five rights’ in significantly reducing errors due to factors that induce workplace strains on nursing staff members, frequently listing workload, being under-staffed, or interruptions as limitations that make the five R’s difficult to comply with all of the time.

Some other specific critiques of the five rights listed in medical literature surround the realities of modern nursing care. Consideration for the five reasons typically occurs right at the exact time of medication administration; however, a variety of factors impact patient care well before this step, including checking medication orders, follow up with the pharmacy on missing medications, assessing the patient, and preparing drugs to be administered.

Literature also states that the rights are not just the responsibility of nurses but a responsibility of the whole health care organization to have functionality.

It has been proposed that adding additional ‘rights’ to the globally accepted five may augment the functioning of a linear model for guiding medication administration.

Inconsistencies in which rights are taught or practiced have been noted as a hindrance to their suitability for modern practice due to a lack of local, national, or international accord regarding how many rights should be utilized and accepted.

The medical literature states that the value of nurses’ critical thinking, the role of patient advocacy, and clinical judgment are not accounted for by the five rights framework that is commonly observed in modern practice to deliver patient-centered care.

Nurses have accomplished this inclusion of patients by educating patients about their medications and the importance of their involvement during medication administration enabling trust and respect.

Medication safety requires the integrity and functionality of several complex, interrelated steps and the cooperation of medical personnel to prevent such adverse drug events (ADE).

Medical errors are a reality that will inevitably occur, as nurses, patients, and medical personnel are human and, therefore, prone to error. Examples of human error are lack of medical knowledge, lack of attention to detail or care, failing to verify information in an effort to save time, disorganization of workplace or supplies, and miscommunication among healthcare professionals or with a patient. While human nature does account for the majority of circumstances that may incite potential for medication administration errors, administrative or environment-related errors may also explain ADEs, such as lack of labeling or inadequate labeling systems or overwhelming workload with limited staffing.