Nursing management for identified nursing diagnoses includes:

1. Impaired respiratory function

The nurse will need to carefully monitor vital signs for changes in respiratory rate, quality of respirations, and decreasing vital capacity. Respiratory assessment for ascending paralysis and impending respiratory failure due to weakness of intercostal muscles and diaphragm along with shallow and irregular breathing, the use of accessory muscles, and difficulty in clearing secretions. If the patient is intubated, the nurse will need to work with the physician and respiratory therapist to manage all aspects of mechanical ventilation. During the course of GBS, the nurse will need to assess and monitor the patient for respiratory infections including pneumonia.

2. Immobility

The nurse will need to assess for problems associated with immobility related to muscle weakness and paralysis. The nurse should support and maintain paralyzed extremities in function positions, perform passive ROM exercises at least twice daily, ensure that the patient has position changes every two hours or ensure the patient is positioned on a foam, air, water, or gel support surface bed. Skin assessment for skin breakdown, assessment of bowel function through monitoring of bowel sounds and frequency of bowel movements, use of anti-embolism stockings and compression boots to prevent DVT and  PE, and maintenance of adequate hydration to decrease the risks of pressure ulcers are important nursing management considerations for the immobility related to GBS.

3. Nutritional imbalance

The nurse will need to carefully work to assist in the maintenance of optimal nutrition in the patient with GBS. The patient with impaired swallowing due to muscle weakness should be carefully assessed for aspiration. The nurse will need to manage gastrostomy tube feedings, IV fluid administration, or the administration of parenteral nutrition as needed to ensure that the patient receives necessary nutrients.

4. Communication impairments

The nurse will need to provide strategies for adequate communication with the patient who is unable to verbally communicate due to paralysis associated with GBS. Management of adequate patient communication may include the use of strategies such as eye blinks, use of pictures, or the use of computer graphics. The nurse should also consider discussing the use of communication strategies with family members and friends. Referrals to a speech therapist may also assist to address communication impairments due to GBS.

5. Pain

The nurse will need to carefully assess the patient for pain related to GBS related muscle changes. If the patient is unable to communicate verbally, the nurse should use assessment strategies including pictures or pain management scales to obtain an adequate understanding of the patient's pain level. Non-verbal signs of pain including restlessness, facial grimaces, or restlessness should also be noted in this assessment. Adequate pain management is essential, especially in the acute stages of GBS.

6. Psychological problems

The nurse will need to carefully assess and manage the GBS patient for potential psychological problems. The sudden onset of loss of control in the acute phase of a potentially life-threatening illness may result in anxiety, fear, and feelings of helplessness. Patients and family members may also confront uncertainty, helplessness, and loneliness when dealing with GBS. The impact of GBS on family members may be influenced by the role of the patient in the family. Social and economic issues may be exacerbated if the patient is the primary breadwinner or major source of family support. Patients and family members may experience fear and helplessness, especially within the ICU or acute care setting. The nurse will need to educate the patient and family members, providing information about GBS and the equipment, medications, and therapies used to treat GBS. The nurse may also suggest patient education materials, referrals to support groups, social workers, or psychologists as strategies to improve patient and family coping with GBS.