Small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) based therapies have been developing for 20 years. The first siRNA agent, patisiran, received US Food Drug Administration (FDA) approval in 2018. To date, FDA has approved four siRNA agents: patisiran, givosiran, lumasiran, and inclisiran.

Patisiran was the first siRNA agent to receive approval by the FDA on August 10, 2018. It is indicated in adult subjects with polyneuropathy due to hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR). A year later, givosiran was the second siRNA agent to receive approval by the FDA. It was indicated in adult subjects with acute hepatic porphyria (AHP). Lumasiran was the third siRNA agent to receive approval by the FDA on November 23, 2020. It was to be used in pediatric and adult subjects with primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) and reduced urinary oxalate levels. The latest siRNA agent to receive FDA approval on December 21, 2021, was inclisiran. The agent is indicated in adult subjects with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HeFH) or clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD). It lowers the levels of LDL-C.

Six other siRNA-based therapies are currently being evaluated in clinical trials (vutrisiran, nedosiran, fitusiran, teprasiran, cosdosiran, and tivanisiran). Similar to patisiran, vutrisiran is under evaluation for the treatment of hATTR, and clinical studies are underway comparing both agents. Nedosiran is currently being studied for the management of PH1 similarly to lumasiran but differs in its mechanism of action. Nedosiran exerts its effects by acting on the hepatic enzyme lactate dehydrogenase, whereas lumasiran acts on the hepatic enzyme glyoxylate oxidase.

Other ailments currently being evaluated for management with siRNA based therapies include hemophilia A and hemophilia B (fitusiran), prophylactic therapy for acute kidney injury (AKI) in patients undergoing transplantation or following cardiovascular surgery (teprasiran), nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, and primary angle glaucoma (cosdosiran), ocular pain and dry eye disease (tivanisiran).