All patients experiencing traumatic injury should first be assessed head to toe for any life or limb threatening injuries first. Obvious bony deformities may distract both the patient and the practitioner from more serious traumatic injuries. After the patient has been cleared of other significant injuries, attention can be turned to the affected extremity.

The initial history should consist of the mechanism of injury and the duration of the injury until initial presentation. The patient should be asked if this is a first-time occurrence or if there have been previous elbow injuries in the past. A physician should review associated symptoms suggesting a neurovascular compromise and inquire about numbness, tingling or coolness of the distal extremity.

The physical examination should begin with an inspection of the elbow joint looking for swelling, deformity or bruising. Posterior elbow dislocations often present with an upper extremity that is flexed and appears shortened. Anterior elbow dislocations are held in extension, and the upper extremity appears elongated. Specific attention should be paid to looking for open wounds which would suggest a complex dislocation. The functionality of the elbow joint should be assessed by observing a range of motion. It is also important to evaluate the remainder of the affected extremity and nearby joints for associated injury. Particular attention should be paid to the distal radioulnar joint for tenderness which can indicate disruption of the intraosseous ligament, eponymously referred to as an Essex-Lopresti lesion.

The most common neurovascular structures injured during an elbow dislocation include the brachial artery and the ulnar and median nerves. Perfusion can be assessed by palpating the radial and ulnar pulses and looking for a brisk capillary refill. Median nerve sensation can be assessed by a light touch of the palmar aspect of the thumb and second finger. Median motor function is tested by observing the strength of thumb opposition. A light touch on the palmar aspect of the fourth and fifth fingers can assess ulnar sensation. The ulnar motor function is tested by observing the strength of finger abduction and adduction.  Historical or physical findings concerning for neurovascular compromise must also raise the suspicion for compartment syndrome.