**Direct Local Spread**

A brain abscess can originate from infections in head and neck sites: otitis media (5%)and mastoiditis (secondarily cause inferior temporal lobe and cerebellar brain abscesses), paranasal sinus infection (approximately 30% to 50% as the reported cause), infection from frontal or ethmoid sinuses spreads to the frontal lobes, dental infection usually causes frontal lobar abscesses. Facial trauma, even from neurosurgical procedures, can result in necrotic tissue, and brain abscesses have been reported afterward. Metal fragments or other foreign bodies left in the brain parenchyma can also serve as a nidus for infection.

**Generalized Septicemia and Hematogenous Spread**

Various conditions can cause hematogenous seeding of the brain. Some common ones include lung, the most common associated organ; pulmonary infections, such as lung abscess and empyema, often in hosts with bronchiectasis; or cystic fibrosis from an important encountered cause. Others include pneumonia, pulmonary arteriovenous malformation, and bronchopleural fistula. Cyanotic congenital heart diseases in children are associated with more than 60% of cases. Bacterial endocarditis, ventricular aneurysms, and thrombosis are also among the causes. Skin, pelvic and intraabdominal infections also have been reported frequently as risk factors. Brain abscesses associated with bacteremia commonly cause multiple abscesses, mostly in the distribution of the middle cerebral artery and usually at the gray-white matter junction.

The most frequent microbial pathogens isolated from brain abscesses are Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. Among this class of bacteria, Staphylococcus aureus and Viridian streptococci are the commonest.