Differential diagnosis can be broad.

**Skin Lesions
**

- Erythema toxicum neonatorum (ETN): ETN presents with multiple erythematous macules and papules (1 to 3 mm in diameter) that rapidly progress to pustules on an erythematous base. The lesions are distributed over the trunk and proximal extremities, sparing the palms and soles. They may be present at birth but typically appear within 24 to 48 hours. The rash usually resolves in 5 to 7 days, although it may wax and wane before complete resolution. The diagnosis of ETN is usually made based on the clinical appearance. It can be confirmed by microscopic examination of a Wright-stained smear of the contents of a pustule that demonstrates numerous eosinophils and occasional neutrophils. However, this usually is not necessary. ETN resolves spontaneously. No treatment is necessary.

- Transient neonatal pustular melanosis: Transient neonatal pustular melanosis (TNPM) is less common than ETN. It mostly affects full-term black infants, although it is described in all ethnic groups. The diagnosis of TNPM is usually based on the clinical appearance. Microscopic examination of a Wright-stained smear of the contents of a pustule demonstrates numerous neutrophils and, in contrast with ETN, rare eosinophils. However, this is usually not necessary. Culture, if performed, yields no organism.

- Infantile acne: Infantile acne is an uncommon and distinct entity from neonatal cephalic pustulosis. It typically presents at 3 to 4 months of age but may rarely occur in the first few weeks of life

- Miliaria: Miliaria is a common finding in newborns, especially in warm climates. It is caused by an accumulation of sweat beneath eccrine sweat ducts that are obstructed by keratin at the level of the stratum corneum.

- Infantile acropustulosis: Infantile acropustulosis (IA) is a benign vesiculopustular condition with an often more chronic course than other benign neonatal lesions. The etiology is unknown. A nonspecific hypersensitivity reaction to scabies has been postulated because many patients have been treated for scabies before being diagnosed with IA.

- Sucking blisters: Congenital sucking blisters, a diagnosis of exclusion, are noninflammatory, oval, thick-walled vesicles or bullae that contain sterile fluid. The lesions may be unilateral or bilateral and typically are located on the dorsal or radial aspect of the wrists, hands, or fingers of neonates who are noted to suck excessively at the involved regions.

**Eye Disease
**

- Viral conjunctivitis due to adenovirus or enterovirus

- Bacterial conjunctivitis (Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae)

**CNS Disease
**

- Bacterial meningitis

- Viral meningoencephalitis (other than HSV), particularly Enterovirus and Parechovirus

- Inborn errors of metabolism

**Disseminated Disease
**

- Sepsis due to bacterial etiology

- Adenovirus or Enterovirus and Parechovirus

- Viral hepatitis (other than HSV), drug-induced hepatitis, or causes of neonatal liver disease

- Other neonatal infections, such as Cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasmosis, Syphilis, and Rubella