When discussing avulsion fractures as a whole, there are many factors to consider when trying to determine prognosis. The topic is complicated by the fact that a certain side effect after treatment may translate into a poor prognosis in some body parts, yet seem to yield very few negative consequences in other anatomic locations.

In general, the severity of the injury and the speed of the healing process will help determine the prognosis.

Outcomes of avulsion fractures are largely dependent on the body part involved. While some avulsion fractures tend to be less disabling and less symptomatic, others are much more so.

Another prognostic indicator appears dependent on the optimization of stability and articular congruity. However, despite appropriate treatment, avulsion fractures still frequently result in residual stiffness and arthrosis.

Avulsion fractures that are stable injuries and considered insignificant do have better functional outcomes when treatment of early motion and progression of weight bearing is applied compared to patients with the same injury who are treated with a period of immobilization or non-weight bearing.

Early diagnosis may also be a key to obtaining the best outcomes, as it can carefully direct the appropriate treatment.

Knowledge of developmental bone anatomy, growth, and physeal closure sequences is very important to assist in predicting the prognosis of avulsion injuries in the pediatric or adolescent population. Nevertheless, the adolescent population seems to have a better overall prognosis and higher return to the previous level of sport or activity, while older age and osteoporosis may be associated with worse outcomes.

Long-term outcomes of many adolescent avulsion fractures have not been well studied.

Certain anatomic areas are more prone to recurrent instability or laxity.

One study found that an avulsion fracture associated with an intraarticular soft tissue injury in the knee may indicate more instability, but was not found to have a higher risk of revision surgery compared to those who sustained the same soft tissue injury without the accompanying avulsion fracture.

Lastly, in cases of avulsion fractures associated with pathologic lesions, such as metastatic cancer, the overall prognosis of the patient may not be affected, or dependent on the treatment and outcome of the avulsion fracture, but rather on the prognosis of the underlying pathologic disease.