The ectoderm of a trilaminar staged embryo will thicken at the midline to be called the neural plate. This plate depresses to form a neural groove whose ends later fuse to convert it into a neural tube. This tube enlarges at the cranial end and remains tubular at the caudal part. The cranial part forms the brain. The spinal cord develops from the caudal tubular part of this neural tube.

The axons of the neuron start occupying the marginal zone during the fourth week of gestation. The axons now bundle up to form ascending and descending tracts within the marginal zone, further subdividing this region into anterior, posterior, and lateral white columns. With the development of limb buds, there is a simultaneous development of the cervical and lumbar enlargement at the fifth to sixth weeks of gestation. The tracts start forming during the third month, and the corticospinal tract appears by the fifth month of intra-uterine life. The myelination begins at the fourth month of embryonic life from short intersegmental tracts of the spinal cord and continues up to two to three years after birth till the child starts walking.

The vertebral bodies and the muscles surrounding the spinal cord develop from the surrounding dermatomes. The incomplete development of vertebras leads to several congenital anomalies that this article describes in clinical significance. The length of the spinal cord and the vertebral column are equal in size up to the third month of fetal life. Later the vertebral column develops rapidly in comparison to the spinal cord. Thus the spinal cord ends at a higher level within the vertebral canal. It has receded to the third lumbar vertebra at birth and reaches the first lumbar vertebra by puberty. Thus the spinal nerves arise from the spinal cord at a much higher level than their exit outside through the intervertebral foramina.

Many studies indicate a crucial role of some critical signaling factors in developing the spinal cord, like retinoic acid, bone morphogenetic proteins, Wnt, fibroblast growth factors, and Hedgehog proteins.