The history and physical are invaluable when initiating the evaluation of malabsorption syndromes. A malabsorption syndrome should be suspected when a patient’s history includes but is not limited to ongoing or chronic diarrhea, unintentional weight loss despite normal nutrient intake, greasy, voluminous, foul-smelling stools that reportedly float. Additional components of the history may include flatulence, bloating, borborygmi. Abdominal pain might be reported but is less common in most malabsorption syndromes.

Key questions in the history and a focused physical exam help create a more targeted approach to diagnosing the patient’s condition. A thorough history boosts cost-effectiveness and saves time. For those patients whose malabsorption syndrome is affected by emotions, early treatment can start through interviews alone. The therapeutic benefit comes from the nurturing of the patient-doctor relationship by empowering the patient and positively impacting the patient’s self-esteem in the face of their malabsorption syndrome.

Questioning should include a review of systems, symptom duration, symptom timing, presence or absence of pain/pain radiation, location/location changes, intensity/intensity changes, known precipitating factors, associated symptoms (e.g., change in bowel habits/frequency), the appearance of the stool, whether or not the presenting symptoms have happened previously. Stool description could be of floating, pale, greasy stools, and a patient may report seeing oil droplets in the toilet, stool color, stool bulk, stool consistency, stool smell. Important additional questions include past medical history (e.g., peptic ulcer disease), family history (especially for systemic and gastrointestinal conditions), medications, surgeries, radiation exposure/treatments, caustic substance ingestion, allergies, and social history (e.g., smoking, drinking, recreational drug use past or present).

Physical exam should include a full abdominal examination and inspection of neighboring systems to consider differential diagnoses that could also account for the patient’s clinical presentation. The physical exam may yield findings of hyper/hypoactive bowel sounds, abdominal distention, abdominal tenderness (less common), pallor (suggests anemia), muscle wasting, abnormal deep tendon reflexes, skeletal deformities, rashes, cardiac arrhythmia, delayed growth (in infants and children), poor wound healing, ecchymosis, decreased visual acuity, peripheral neuropathy, auditory disturbances, or cognitive impairment.

Findings through the history and physical exam guide the next steps for evaluation.