Benzodiazepines are especially important in the cessation of seizure activity, as 1% to 2% of emergency department visits annually in the United States are for seizures. Indications for benzodiazepine administration include but are not limited to anxiety disorders, insomnia, acute status epilepticus, induction of amnesia, spastic disorders, seizure disorders, and agitation. Non-FDA-approved administration of benzodiazepines is commonly found in the field of psychiatry. Indications here include Tourette's syndrome, delirium, delirium tremens, sleep disorders, and "abnormal movements associated with medications.

**FDA-approved Benzodiazepines**

- Alprazolam: Alprazolam is indicated for anxiety disorders and panic disorders, including agoraphobia.

- Chlordiazepoxide: Chlordiazepoxide is primarily indicated for the management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome.

- Clobazam: Clobazam is indicated for seizures associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.

- Clonazepam: Clonazepam is indicated for treating panic disorder and agoraphobia.

- Clorazepate: Clorzapte is used for adjunct treatment of short-term management of anxiety disorders. It is also indicated for focal (partial) onset seizures.

- Diazepam: Diazepam is used for alcohol withdrawal management,

- Estazolam: According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, estazolam is indicated for the treatment of insomnia.

- Flurazepam: Flurazepam is indicated for the treatment of insomnia.

- Lorazepam: Lorazepam is used for anxiety disorders. According to American Epilepsy Society guidelines, parenteral lorazepam is one of the first-line treatments for convulsive status epilepticus.

- Midazolam: Midazolam is indicated for convulsive status epilepticus and procedural sedation. Midazolam is used for sedation in mechanically ventilated patients in the MICU/SICU.

- Oxazepam: Oxazepam is indicated for anxiety disorders, and according to the ASAM (American Society of Addiction Medicine) guidelines, oxazepam is indicated for alcohol withdrawal syndrome.

- Quazepam: According to the American College of Physicians, quazepam is indicated mainly for treating chronic insomnia in adults.

- Temazepam: American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) clinical practice guideline suggests temazepam for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia.

- Triazolam: Triazolam is indicated primarily for sleep-onset insomnia.

- Remimazolam: Remimazolam was approved by the FDA in 2020 and is indicated for short(<30 mins) procedural sedation in adults.