Alternative Activation Pathway

The alternative pathway can begin with the spontaneous conversion of C3 to C3b, microbial surface molecules, complex carbohydrates, or other substances.  It is continually activated at low levels throughout the cell body and must be tightly regulated to ensure immunological homeostasis. For example, if C3b is unable to bind to an amino or hydroxyl group on a pathogenic surface, it is rapidly made inert by the arguably more ubiquitous water molecules in the plasma.

If a pathogenic surface stabilizes C3b, then complement protein B binds to it; complement protein D then cleaves the B attached to C3b to form Bb, thus yielding C3bBb, or C3 convertase. C3 convertase mediates C3's conversion to C3b in proximity to the pathogen, resulting in a "complement cascade."

Factor H serves an essential regulatory role in the alternative pathway, blocking its effects on host cells. Factor H is also synthesized in the liver and is acquired by host cells as it travels past them in the plasma; once on a host cell, it either inactivates C3b or ensures the decay of C3bBb.

Lectin Activation Pathway

The lectin pathway utilizes complement proteins 2 and 4 to achieve the same result as the alternative pathway. However, this pathway uses mannose-binding lectin (MBL), a glycoprotein also produced in the liver, to bind mannose on the surface of similar pathogens to that of the alternate pathway. MBLs circulate with and help 'dock' mannose associated serine proteases (MASPs) so that MASPs can cleave C2 and C4, forming C2b and C4b; the union of these two products, C2b4b, serves as a C3 convertase.

The resulting cascade carries out identically to the alternative activation pathway. However, MBL exhibits a higher affinity to Candida albicans than molecules of the other pathways.

Classical Activation Pathway

The classical activation pathway requires some level of adaptive response (humoral) to initiate its complement cascade. For this reason, the body produces IgM antibodies as a first-line response to early infection. The pattern in which IgM antibodies form antibody-antigen complexes (with proximal Fc regions) allows for the proximal binding of two C1 complexes to two Fc regions. The proximity between the two C1 complexes (which are specific to the classical activation pathway) results in the release of their inhibitors (C1-inhibitors). The release of C1-inhibitors activates each complex's neighboring C1r and C1s complement proteins, creating a C3 convertase that triggers the complement cascade on the pathogen's surface.

C-reactive protein (CRP), a protein synthesized in the liver in response to acute inflammation, has been found to enhance classical pathway activation weakly.