In the initial phase of imaging, blood flow should be prompt and symmetric to the area of interest. In cases of infection and/or inflammation, there will be asymmetric blood flow preferentially to the affected area.

Blood pool imaging should show symmetric radiotracer activity. Once again, an area of inflammation and/or infection will exhibit disproportionate blood pool activity to the affected region.

In the delayed phase, the interpreter of the study must know the normal anatomic distribution of the radiotracer so he or she can appropriately interpret the images. Activity is generally seen throughout the osseous structures with the soft tissue activity predominately cleared by normal renal activity and is often referred to as "washout." This makes patient hydration and renal function of importance to improve the target to background activity. If the kidneys and bladder are not visualized, this raises suspicion for a "superscan," which implies diffuse malignant metastatic disease secondary to increased metabolic osteoblastic activity.

The various phases of a 3-phase scan can demonstrate positive findings at certain time points in the exam while being negative at other time points.

Osteomyelitis, complex regional pain syndrome, acute fractures, abnormalities of orthopedic prostheses, inflammatory arthritides, immature myositis ossificans, and aggressive tumors can all demonstrate three phase positivity.

A 3-phase scan showing positive findings on the flow phase and the blood pool phase but negative uptake in the osseous structures is usually seen with soft tissue abnormalities, such as cellulitis or a soft tissue malignancy, such as a sarcoma. Of note, although the appearance on flow and blood pool imaging often appears indistinguishable in osteomyelitis versus cellulitis, in the case of cellulitis, the blood pool is more commonly increased secondary to venous congestion versus arterial activity that is usually seen in osteomyelitis.

When there are normal flow and blood pool imaging but increased activity on the delayed phases, the likely pathology has minimal to no soft tissue involvement and is confined to the bones. Some examples include shin splints, non-acute fractures, non-acute stress fractures, osteoblastic metastasis, and certain metabolic disorders.