Physicians must act quickly and determine whether a patient is stable or unstable when during their initial evaluation of WCT. It is critical to first evaluate both the patient’s ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation) and hemodynamic status because it will guide your management in the emergency setting. If the patient is unresponsive, not protecting their airway, or not breathing (but has a pulse) then they should be immediately intubated in order to secure their airway. If a patient has low oxygen saturation on the pulse ox, then supplemental oxygen should be initiated. If a patient does not have a pulse, immediately begin chest compressions and follow ACLS protocol guidelines. Intravenous access, EKG, cardiac rhythm monitoring, and blood pressure monitoring should be started immediately on all patients who complain of chest discomfort. Once a hemodynamically unstable patient is found to have a WCT, emergent cardioversion (or defibrillation) should be your next immediate step as it will reduce morbidity and mortality. It is critical to know how to cardiovert an unstable patient as these two methods of delivering electrical shocks are quite different. The presence or absence of an unstable patient’s pulse is what determines which type of cardioversion will be used. If the patient has a pulse, then synchronized cardioversion will be preferred as it will be coordinated with the heart’s electrical activity (QRS complex) to reduce the risk of inducing cardiac arrest. If the patient does not have a pulse, then this will be considered a cardiac arrest and requires immediate defibrillation.

In stable patients, pharmacologic treatment should be based on the most updated AHA ACLS guideline along with cardioversion. Below you will find a modified algorithm from AHA guidelines for the emergency management and resuscitation of hemodynamically unstable patients presenting with WCT. It is important to always consider reversible causes (i.e. acute ischemia, myocardial infarction, electrolyte abnormalities, drug toxicities) in unstable patients because some can be easily corrected. As mentioned previously, if uncertain regarding the etiology of WCT, it is better to err on the side of caution and treat arrhythmia as VT given that it is the most common cause and has more detrimental consequences if managed inappropriately. During the emergent setting, it is necessary to stabilize the patient, treat any reversible causes, and leave the process of refining the diagnosis once the patient is admitted and stable.

When considering a pharmacologic intervention, it is important to have some clinical suspicion about whether the origin of the WCT is coming from the atria or the ventricles.

- SVT will typically be managed with adenosine, Afib with WPWS will be treated with amiodarone, and Afib with aberrancy with either diltiazem or a beta-blocker.

- Typically, amiodarone will be the first-line drug of choice for all ventricular arrhythmias (VT, polymorphic VT, Vfib, etc.) Lidocaine can also be considered as a potential 2nd line medication but it should never be used for WCT of unknown origin.

- If the EKG shows evidence of Torsades de Pointes, then it is essential to give magnesium as this will be the most effective way to treat this ventricular arrhythmia. If Torsades is refractory to magnesium, one could perform overdrive pacing (heart rate of 90 to 130 bpm) which is generally successful in these circumstances.

If a patient is clinically stable and time permits, knowing the cause of their WCT will allow the physician to correctly treat/manage the etiology and further reduce the potential risk for morbidity and mortality. For example, VT (with pulses) is normally treated with either anti-arrhythmic medications or electrical cardioversion. If one were to mistake Afib for VT and treat with electrical cardioversion, this could have some serious consequences. When the atria beat irregularly/spastically, this increases the risk of clot formation on the atrial walls. A patient who is not anti-coagulated and was to receive cardioversion in the setting of Afib, their risk of possible stroke will be 1.5% due to clot dislodgement.

One of the most important factors to consider when administering pharmacologic treatment for WCT is the possibility that a patient may have an alternative conduction pathway that is atypical of normal cardiac anatomy. These alternative pathways can either be outside of the AV node or within the AV node. These alternative pathways are problematic due to their faster electrical conduction velocities compared to the AV node. When these pathways are used, they result in faster activation of the ventricular myocardium and can create a positive feedback loop and lead to very high ventricular rates. The complications of these pathways could be potentiated by AV nodal blockade medications (i.e. adenosine, calcium channel blockers, and beta-blockers).

Erroneously giving adenosine in irregular WCT (or when there is a concern for an aberrant pathway) can cause coronary ischemia or precipitate dangerous arrhythmias such as Afib with RVR (rapid ventricular response), Vfib, or torsades de pointes.

Patients with a known permanent pacemaker who presents with a WCT, the device should be considered as a potential cause of arrhythmia and would be managed differently. A magnet would be placed directly over the pacemaker and would likely terminate this arrhythmia. The magnet works by disabling the pacemaker’s atrial sensing capability and essentially reprograms it to an asynchronous form of pacing.