Treatment for Graves' disease depends on its presentation. Treatment consists of rapid symptoms control and reduction of thyroid hormone secretion.

A beta-adrenergic blocker should be started for symptomatic patients, specifically for patients with heart rate more than 90 beats/min, patients with a history of cardiovascular disease, and elderly patients. Atenolol 25 mg to 50 mg orally once daily may be considered the preferred beta blocker due to its convenience of daily dosing, and it is cardioselective (beta-1 selective). Some prescribers recommend Propranolol 10 mg to 40 mg orally every six to eight hours, due to its potential effect to block peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. If a beta blocker after that, calcium channel blockers like diltiazem and verapamil can be used to control heart rate.

There are three options to reduce thyroid hormone synthesis. These options are:

- Antithyroid drugs which block thyroid hormone synthesis and release

- Radioactive iodine (RAI) treatment of the thyroid gland

- Total or subtotal thyroidectomy.

All three options have pros and cons, and there is no consensus on which one is the best option. It is very important to discuss all three options in detail with the patients and make an individualized decision.

**Anti-thyroid Drugs (Thionamides)**

Methimazole (MMI) and propylthiouracil (PTU) are two anti-thyroid drugs available in the USA. Outside USA, carbimazole, a derivative of methimazole which is rapidly metabolized to methimazole, is also available. These thioamides inhibit Thyroid Peroxidase (TPO) mediated iodination of thyroglobulin in the thyroid gland, blocking the synthesis of T4 and T3. To some extent, Propylthiouracil also blocks peripheral conversion of T4 to T3.

In nonpregnant patients, methimazole is the drug of choice due to its less frequent side effects (especially hepatotoxicity), once-daily dosing, and more rapid achievement of normal thyroid function. During the first trimester of pregnancy, propylthiouracil must be used due to its less teratogenic side effects. We can start methimazole from the second trimester of pregnancy. American Thyroid Association (ATA) recommends propylthiouracil for patients with thyroid storm and for patients with minor reactions to methimazole therapy who refuses surgery or RAIA.

Before starting thionamide treatment, patients should be informed about possible side effects including allergic reactions, neutropenia, and hepatotoxicity. A complete blood count with differentials and liver function test should be obtained. Thionamide should not be started if baseline transaminase level is more than five times the upper limit of normal or if absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is less than 1000/ml.

Dosage: Initiate methimazole 5 mg to 10 mg oral daily if FT4 is 1 to 1.5 times the upper limit of normal (ULN), 10 mg to 20 mg oral daily if FT4 is 1.5 to 2 times ULN, 30 mg to 40 mg oral daily if FT4 is more than two to three times ULN.  Start PTU 50 mg t0 150 mg oral three times daily based on the severity of hyperthyroidism. Once thyroid function improves, the thioamide dose can be tapered and continued at maintenance doses once TFTs become euthyroid. Methimazole is usually maintained at 5 mg to 10 mg daily, and propylthiouracil is maintained at 50 mg two to three times a day.

Adverse effects: Minor side-effects include pruritus and rash (3% to 6%), and major side effects include hepatocellular injury (2.7% propylthiouracil, 0.4% Methimazole), agranulocytosis (0.7%, ANC  less than 500/ml) and vasculitis (rarely lupus and pANCA-positive small vessel vasculitis; more with propylthiouracil than methimazole). Rarely hypoglycemia has been reported with methimazole therapy.

Follow-up and monitoring: Monitor thyroid function tests (TFTs) every four to six weeks for the thionamide dose adjustment. Once TFTs improve, we can reduce the thionamide dose by 30% to 50% until a maintenance dose is achieved. Once on a maintenance dose, TFTs can be checked every three months for up to 18 months, thereafter every six months is acceptable. Monitor for adverse effects and perform blood tests as needed based on clinical information. Stop the thionamide if transaminase level is more than three times of ULN.  Routine monitoring of liver function tests and complete blood count is not necessary. Thionamides can be continued for minor cutaneous reactions with or without concurrent use of antihistamines, but if the problem persists, alternative treatment options including surgery or RAI therapy should be considered.

Duration of treatment: For patients on long-term, thionamide therapy who are on maintenance doses, we can consider stopping the therapy after 12 to 8 months, if TSH and TRAb levels normalize during follow-up. If patients remain clinically and biochemically euthyroid, we can repeat TFTs every two to three months during the first six months after stopping the treatment, then every four to six months for another six months, then every six to 12 months. If TSH remains normal for one year without treatment, annual monitoring with TSH is enough.

**RAI Therapy**

It is preferred for non-pregnant adult patients older than 21 years, patients not planning to get pregnant within the next six to 12 months after treatment, patients with risky comorbid conditions for surgery, and patients with contraindications for thioamides. It is contraindicated during pregnancy, lactation, coexisting thyroid cancer, in patients with moderate to severe Graves orbitopathy, and for individuals who cannot follow radiation safety guidelines.

Preparation: Beta-adrenergic blockade and pretreatment with methimazole (propylthiouracil pretreatment has a high failure rate for RAI treatment) should be considered for patients with an increased risk of complications from hyperthyroidism and patients with very high thyroid hormone levels. If methimazole is started, it should be stopped three to five days before RAI treatment. It can be restarted for high-risk patients three to seven days after treatment. A pregnancy test is required before RAI treatment.

Dosage: I-131 is administered as a capsule or liquid. The I-131 dose can be calculated or one may use a fixed dose. Calculated dose is based on thyroid volume, uptake of RAI and local factors. A fixed dose can be 10 to 25 mCi of I-131. The patient should be provided with a written radiation safety precautions after RAI treatment to avoid exposure to household members or community members, especially children, and pregnant women.

Follow-up and monitoring: TFTs should be monitored every four to six weeks for six months or until the patient becomes hypothyroid. Once the patient is on a stable levothyroxine dose, TFTs can be repeated every six to 12 months. If hyperthyroidism persists after six months of RAI therapy, it can be considered as treatment failure, and a repeat treatment with RAI may be needed.

**Thyroidectomy**

Thyroidectomy is preferred for patients with very large goiter (more than 80 grams), anterior neck compressive symptoms, co-existing suspicious thyroid cancer, large thyroid nodules (greater than 4 cm), cold nodules, co-existing parathyroid adenoma, very high TRAb, and moderate to severe Graves orbitopathy.

Preparation:

- Use thionamides to achieve near or complete euthyroid state before surgery

- Use Beta-blockers as needed

- Use potassium iodide, five to seven drops of Lugol’s solution or one to two drops of SSKI, mixed in water or juices three times a day, starting seven to ten days before surgery to reduce vascularity

- Assess calcium and Vitamin D levels and replace if needed

Post-op follow-up:

Thionamides should be stopped after surgery and beta-blocker should be weaned off. Levothyroxine is started at 1.6 micrograms per kg body weight, and the dose is adjusted based on TSH level every six to eight weeks.

**Other Adjunct Treatment for Graves Hyperthyroidism**

Iodinated contrast agents, sodium ipodate, and iopanoic acid inhibit peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. They are used with methimazole but not as a solo agent as they can cause resistant hyperthyroidism. They are not available in the United States. Iodide (SSKI drops) can be used for mild hyperthyroidism especially after RAI treatment. Glucocorticoid, cholestyramine, lithium, carnitine are other agents have also been tried. Rituximab may induce remission in patients with Graves disease, but it is costly.****

**Treatment of Graves Orbitopathy (GO)**

Rapid achievement of euthyroid level should be sought in patients with Graves orbitopathy. Patients should be advised to quit smoking if they do.  Treatment depends on the severity of orbitopathy. For patients with mild orbitopathy who undergo RAI treatment, prednisone 0.4 mg/kg/day to 0.5 mg/kg/day should be started one to three days after treatment and continued for one month. It should be tapered slowly over two months. Mild active Graves orbitopathy should be treated with artificial tears, and glucocorticoid therapy can be considered. Elevation of the head during sleep reduces orbital congestion. Selenium treatment has doubtful benefits. Prompt ophthalmology referral should be considered for all cases of Graves orbitopathy.

Treatment of moderate to severe active Graves orbitopathy requires up to 100 mg of oral prednisone daily for one to two weeks, then tapered over six to 12 weeks or intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone 500 mg/wk for six weeks followed by 250 mg/wk for six weeks. If glucocorticoids is in effective, tepretumumab is FDA approved for use in moderate to severe active graves orbitopathy.

Treatment of inactive Graves orbitopathy involves interval close clinical monitoring, elective orbital decompression, strabismus repair and eyelid repair depending upon severity.

**Treatment of Dermopathy and Acropachy**

Graves dermopathy usually does not need treatment. If treatment is considered, topical high potency glucocorticoid with occlusive dressing can be considered. Rituximab treatment to reduce B-cell may be beneficial, but it remains experimental. There is no treatment available for acropachy.