There are other common medical conditions that can mimic the presentation of chronic cholecystitis. A thorough analysis of the clinical presentation often can guide appropriate workup. Common clinical features of these disorders are as follows:

- Acute cholecystitis: A continuous, severe pain in the right side of the abdomen lasting for hours associated with fever, nausea, and vomiting in an ill-looking patient is suggestive of acute cholecystitis

- Gall bladder cancer: Chronic abdominal symptoms associated with weight loss or other constitutional symptoms should raise suspicion of this. Imaging and histology are helpful in making a definitive diagnosis.

- Peptic ulcer disease: The presence of epigastric abdominal pain and early satiety should alert the possibility of peptic ulcer disease. Alarm symptoms include weight loss, anemia, melena or dysphagia

- GERD: Burning sensation in the epigastrium or retrosternal region that may be associated with regurgitation of food material.

- Gastric cancer: the presence of alarm symptoms of peptic ulcer disease, persistent vomiting, evidence of malignancy or other risk factors should alert to the possibility of this

- Myocardial infarction: In cases of the inferior wall or right ventricular ischemia, the presenting symptoms may be epigastric pain with nausea and vomiting. Other cardiac symptoms like dizziness or SOB or risk factors for coronary ischemia should prompt a workup for the same

- Mesenteric ischemia: the acute variant presents with severe acute abdominal pain and the chronic variant typically with post-prandial pain. Old age, risk factors for atherosclerosis, blood in stools, and weight loss are concerning features of this condition

- Mesenteric vasculitis: presence of ongoing abdominal symptoms unexplained by regular workup and the presence of other features consistent with systemic vasculitis could be related to this relatively underrecognized but dangerous condition