# Definition/Introduction

Digestion in the gastrointestinal tract is a highly complex process involving both mechanical forces and chemical reactions to disintegrate and metabolize food material.

# Issues of Concern

The main issue of concern results from the lack of standardization of the actual composition of a low residue diet.

# Clinical Significance

A low residue diet is advocated for various clinical situations and illnesses. Until recently, a diet consisting of only liquids was recommended with bowel preparation before colonoscopies and colorectal surgeries. Numerous studies have shown either improved or equivalent bowel cleanliness in patients who consumed a low residue diet rather than a liquid diet with their bowel preparation. These same studies revealed enhanced overall patient satisfaction with a low residue diet and they were less likely to cancel their procedure.

Clinicians often advise a low residue diet for patients during a flare-up of their inflammatory bowel disease; however, a recent systemic review did not find support for a therapeutic benefit in such patients.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

In summary, a low residue diet is a restrictive diet that has both diagnostic and therapeutic roles. Regardless of the clinical indication, a low residue diet requires patient education to encourage compliance and to ensure that the patient is adequately following the diet as directed. The responsibilities of this education are deliverable by dietitians, nursing staff, and clinicians. Education is key to enhanced patient-centered care as it reinforces insight and understanding. It provides the patient with the complete opportunity to more likely obtain the desired outcomes of the diet.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

When a clinician prescribes a patient a low residue diet, they should also be encouraged to maintain daily records of which foods they consume. Documentation will allow the healthcare team to support and ensure that patients are adherent to the dietary changes. The primary responsibility belonging to the patient will enable them to contribute to their care. This integrated approach is essential to deliver the best possible care and to improve patient outcomes.