# Introduction

The vasculature of the foot is composed of arteries that originate from the anterior and posterior tibial arteries, the terminal branches of the popliteal artery.

This article will review both dorsal and plantar foot vasculature in detail, discuss its embryonic origin, and touch on its relevance to peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and the clinical physical exam. The intrinsic foot muscles supplied by these arteries will be briefly discussed as well.

# Structure and Function

**Vasculature of the Dorsal Foot**

The dorsal aspect of the foot receives supply from the arteries that arise from the anterior tibial artery.

The arcuate artery, as its name suggests, arcs medially-to-laterally over the dorsum of the foot, with branches the second, third, and fourth dorsal metatarsal arteries; these course between the metatarsal bones.

The first dorsal metatarsal artery, which arises from the dorsalis pedis artery before reaching the first metatarsal space, splits into two at the level of the first metatarsal bone.

It is important to note that the dorsal vasculature of the foot is in constant contact with the plantar vasculature in most cases.

**Vasculature of the Plantar Foot**

The posterior tibial artery supplies the plantar aspect of the foot.

The medial calcaneal arteries are a vascular network that supplies the medial portion of the calcaneus.

The lateral plantar artery courses diagonally toward the lateral aspect of the foot, and then splits into two vessels at the level of the proximal fifth metatarsal bone. These two vessels are the superficial branch of the lateral plantar artery and the plantar arch.

The first four of these plantar metatarsal arteries will travel distally through the metatarsal spaces, and each split into two dorsal digital arteries to create a total of eight.

The medial plantar artery travels distally through the medial aspect of the foot and splits into deep and superficial branches near the tarsal-metatarsal joint line.

# Embryology

The process of blood vessel formation is vasculogenesis.

The umbilical arteries and dorsal branches of the dorsal aorta join to form the common iliac arteries.

Part of the sciatic arteries will regress, and other parts will develop into the popliteal and peroneal (fibular) arteries.

# Muscles

**Muscles of the Dorsal Foot**

The intrinsic muscles of the dorsal foot are mainly supplied by the dorsalis pedis artery and include the extensor digitorum brevis, the dorsal interossei, and the extensor hallucis brevis.

**Muscles of the Plantar Foot**

The intrinsic muscles of the plantar aspect of the foot primarily receive vascular supply via the medial and lateral plantar arteries, the plantar arch, and the plantar metatarsal arteries.

# Physiologic Variants

The dorsalis pedis artery has been found to have multiple anatomic variants.

- Type A: The standard vascular pattern described in this article

- Type B: Absence of the dorsalis pedis artery

- Type C: Absence of the arcuate artery

- Type D: Absence of the arcuate artery and differences in the quantity of the lateral tarsal arteries

- Type E: Second dorsal metatarsal artery has a variable origin

- Type F: Presence of dorsalis pedis artery, but with variable branching patterns

- Type G: Dorsalis pedis and lateral tarsal arteries originate from different vessels

- Type H: Incomplete formation of the dorsalis pedis and lateral tarsal arteries

- Type I: Looping of the arcuate artery

# Clinical Significance

**Peripheral Arterial Disease**

Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a significant risk factor for cardiovascular disease and mortality.

Though using the ABI to screen for PAD could be helpful, assessment of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial artery pulses during the vascular physical exam may prove more efficient. One study found that in patients with the presence of both pedal pulses and the absence of femoral bruits on physical exam, the specificity of predicting a normal ABI (above 0.9) was 98.3%.

ABI = Dorsalis Pedis or Posterior Tibial Systolic Pressure/Brachial Systolic Pressure

**Physical Exam: Pedal Pulse Assessment**

During the physical exam, pulse palpation of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries is important for evaluating peripheral arterial disease (as mentioned above).