When a person suffers from submersion or immersion in a liquid medium, vital tissues may become hypoxic and acidotic which may result in cardiac dysrhythmias (progressing from tachycardia, bradycardia, pulseless electrical activity, and asystole). Aspirated fluid can lead to surfactant washout and dysfunction, increased permeability of the alveolar-capillary membrane, decreased lung compliance, and ventilation/perfusion ratio mismatching. This can result from minor to no respiratory complaints to fulminant non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema, with a clinical picture similar to adult or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). The highest morbidity and mortality are related to cerebral hypoxia, and management is aimed at reversing hypoxia as quickly as possible. Interestingly, hypothermic exposure with the incident may be tissue-protective, although may result in an increased occurrence of cardiac dysrhythmias.

Determination of the toxicity of the water that the victim was immersed in (eg saltwater versus freshwater) is of little importance in non-fatal drowning. Volume or serum (electrolyte) changes only occur when a significant volume of fluid is aspirated. It is more important to note if the fluid was obviously contaminated (sewage), as those patients are highly prone to pulmonary infection and prophylactic antibiotics may be warranted at presentation. Additionally, current recommendations state that routine use of cervical spine immobilization and imaging is not warranted unless the history or exam suggests that the patient suffered from a traumatic injury.

At least 20% of individuals develop tight laryngospasm that lasts even after cardiac arrest. These victims seldom aspirate any fluid and are said to have dry drowning.

The two major sequelae of drowning are to the CNS and cardiac system. Within 2 minutes most victims lose consciousness and within 4-6 minutes will develop irreversible brain injury. Global CNS hypoperfusion induces releases of excitotoxic neurotransmitters, free radicals, and lipid peroxidation. Cerebral edema followed by autonomic instability often results followed by ST-segment changes, indicating stress-related myocardial damage. The hypoxemia also induces ventricular arrhythmias and severe pulmonary hypertension.