Components of 24-hour urine exams vary by the laboratory. Components included in most standard 24-hour analyses include urine volume, the concentration of urine calcium, oxalate, citrate and uric acid, urine pH level, and supersaturation values. Supersaturation of calcium oxalate, calcium phosphate, and uric acid are commonly reported. Other analytes include urine potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, ammonium, chloride, sulfate, and nitrogen in the form of urea. Reports typically include reference range values that help stratify the risk of stone formation. Specialized testing is also available for pediatric patients and patients with cystinuria. These tests include cysteine excretion, supersaturation, and urine pH. The interpretation of urine chemistry requires reference ranges. Urine chemistry is a continuous variable making the strict cut-off points and abnormal values somewhat arbitrary. As urinary constituents reach outside of normal or optimal ranges, the lithogenic risk increases.

Below is a summary of the key components of the 24-hour urinalysis and their importance.

**Urine Volume and Creatinine**

Decreased urine volume is a major risk factor for stone disease as concentrated urine raises the supersaturation of all stone-forming salts. A prospective trial by Borghi et al. in 1999 helped define a goal urinary volume level of 2500 mL per day to reduce stone risk. Furthermore, urine volumes over this amount can decrease stone risk even further.

Urine creatinine excretion is used to determine the accuracy of a timed urine collection. As a byproduct of muscle metabolism, the excretion of creatinine is relatively stable based on muscle mass.  The average daily excretion of creatinine for males is 18 to 24 mg/kg and 15 to 20 mg/kg for females. Thus, a lower than expected creatinine excretion suggests an incomplete collection.

**pH**

Human urine has a pH typically between 4.5 and 8.0.  Urine pH is a critical data point as changes in urine pH can drive the crystallization of certain salts. Crystallization of calcium phosphate, calcium oxalate, uric acid, cystine, and struvite are all pH-dependent. Calcium oxalate precipitation is typically not as pH-dependent as the others. Uric acid stone risk is greatest in the acidic range below 5.5. Calcium phosphate crystals form in an alkaline environment of 6.5 and above. Average urine pH over a 24-hour period should fall between 5.7 to 6.3, which limits pH-dependent stone formation.

**Sodium and Potassium**

Urinary sodium excretion roughly equates to dietary sodium intake. As urinary sodium increases, urinary calcium excretion increases. Because of this relationship, control of dietary sodium is key to controlling hypercalciuria. Lower sodium diets typically allow for up to 1500 mg of dietary sodium per day. Urinary potassium concentration is most useful in monitoring compliance of treatments such as potassium citrate. Potassium citrate supplements should result in marked increases in urinary potassium secretion.

**Magnesium**

Magnesium is an inhibitor of urinary crystallization thus decreasing stone risk. Roughly half of the dietary magnesium is excreted in the urine. Low urine magnesium is typically dietary in origin.

**Calcium**

Elevated urinary calcium concentration can be found in nearly half of patients forming calcium stones. Urine calcium concentration is dependent on dietary calcium, sodium intake, and protein intake.  Moderate calcium intake is typically recommended to limit urinary excretion while maintaining bone health. Diets low in calcium can be lithogenic, due to increased oxalate absorption in a low calcium diet. Modulation of urine calcium is often accomplished with diet changes or medications depending on etiology.

**Citrate**

Citrate is a potent inhibitor of calcium salt crystallization. Hypocitraturia is a common risk factor for stone disease and can be found in up to a third of calcium stone formers. Low urinary citrate can be from a variety of factors including diet, metabolic acidosis, or hypokalemia. Hypocitraturia can also be idiopathic. Citrate can be found in foods such as citrus juice. Most patients with low urinary citrate require supplementation as dietary means alone is insufficient.

Concentrated citrate supplements such as potassium citrate are commonly available. Optimal urinary citrate levels are roughly 300 mg per 1000 mL of urine. Low urinary citrate levels in the setting of thiazide therapy may correlate with hypokalemia. A 24-hour urine study is used to monitor urinary citrate concentration and resultant urinary pH level. Over alkalinizing, the urine can predispose to calcium phosphate stones if the pH consistently exceeds 7.0.

**Oxalate**

High urine oxalate is another common abnormality in the urine of calcium stone formers. Roughly a third of calcium stone formers will have elevated urine oxalate. Oxalate is both endogenous and dietary. Dietary oxalate is absorbed in the colon and distal portions of the ileum. Normal oxalate excretion ranges from around 40 to 50 mg per day. Reductions in excretion can have goals as low as 25 mg per day. Dietary sources of oxalate include black tea, nuts, chocolate and green leafy vegetables like spinach. Excessive vitamin C supplements are also metabolized to oxalate in the urine. For this reason, vitamin C supplements should be limited to 1000 mg or less daily. Enteric hyperoxaluria can be a significant risk factor for patients with inflammatory bowel disease, cystic fibrosis, pancreatic insufficiency, or previous bariatric bowel surgery.

A more detailed review of 24-hour urine chemistry interpretation and treatment guide for kidney stone prevention can be found in our companion review article 24-Hour Urine Testing for Nephrolithiasis: Guide to Interpretation by Leslie and Bashir.