Obesity is increasingly recognized as a treatable complex chronic disease. The interplay of multiple physiological, psychological, and environmental mechanisms adds to the challenge of losing and maintaining weight. Therefore, healthcare practitioners must tailor their counseling to the individual and focus on specific preferences and needs. Several approaches have been studied and suggested to counsel patients about weight effectively.

**Transtheoretical Stages of Change Model**

The transtheoretical stages of change model has long been considered a practical approach in lifestyle modification. Still, its effects vary considerably in producing sustainable weight loss in overweight and obese individuals.. In the second stage, termed contemplation, the individual is aware that a problem exists but has yet to commit to action. At the preparation stage, people intend to and are preparing to make the change in the next month. Next, at the action stage, people begin to modify their behavior. In the last maintenance stage, the new behavior is continued for at least six months. Accurately determining the patient's stage of change is essential since different therapeutic processes and counseling techniques are more effective at different stages. Thus, providing stage-based individualized counseling can enhance a patient's progress through the stages. For example, discussing the health consequences of being overweight and obese is relevant in the pre-contemplative and contemplative stages of change but is less pertinent in the action and maintenance stages. In these stages, practitioners should focus the counseling on methods to achieve success toward an individual's goals by reviewing any existing barriers and encouraging exercise to aid in weight maintenance.

**5A's Model**

There is growing evidence in the literature for using the 5A model (ask, assess, advise, agree, assist/arrange) to aid in delivering meaningful consultations in weight management. The 5A model also effectively improves physician-patient communication, patient motivation, and healthcare practitioner confidence in counseling patients.

**Ask Permission**

- Individuals with excess weight experience weight stigma in multiple areas of their lives, including healthcare. When discussing this topic, it is vital to ask the patient's permission. It is best first to address the patient's primary reasons for the visit to help ensure they feel respected.

- It can be helpful to ask the patients about their health goals to initiate the discussion. Doing so will help to understand the patient's motivations and help to develop a realistic plan for change.

- Since obesity is a complex topic to discuss, being nonjudgmental and empathic will open the conversation and create a positive, safe space for patients. Not all counseling must be done in one visit. Instead, the topic should be revisited and reinforced at subsequent visits.

**Assess**

- Visual assessment is a poor way to diagnose excess weight. Use BMI and waist circumference, as described above, for screening tools in the clinical setting. While weight data is helpful to the healthcare practitioner, respect the patient's wishes if they feel uncomfortable or decline to be weighed.

- Review clinical and laboratory investigations for comorbidities, including sleep apnea, fatty liver disease, cardiovascular disease, and endocrine diseases. The health care practitioner should treat comorbidities and all present health risks.

- A key component in assessing a patient's weight is a thorough history of the patient's weight, dietary patterns, level of physical activity, sleep habits, and mental health. Make sure to ask the patient for the following information:

- 
              
- Dietary patterns using a 24-hour diet recall.
              
              
- The current level of physical activity, making sure to note the patient's employment, amount of time spent in sedentary activities, and physical limitations.
              
              
- The patient's readiness for change, and adjust counseling accordingly, as described above in the stages of change model.
              
              
- The patient's eligibility for pharmacotherapy, bariatric procedures, and surgery and their level of interest in these options.

**Advise**

- Modest weight loss (5-10% of total body weight) can reduce morbidity and mortality.

**Agree**

- The patient must set realistic and achievable short-term and long-term goals. Goals should be in the SMART format - specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and timely to increase the likelihood of self-accountability and success.

- Set clear expectations from the beginning on the expected rate of weight loss, usually 1-2 pounds weekly, with the caveat that this rate will vary by individual.

- The treatment plan should be agreed upon between the practitioner and the patient, considering the risks, benefits, and individual circumstances.

- When initiating pharmacotherapies, the practitioner should continue to stress the importance of behavioral changes with diet, exercise, sleep, and stress reduction.

**Assist/Arrange**

- The practitioner should help the patient overcome identified barriers, recommend self-monitoring, and provide written materials based on individual interests and needs. Using web-based applications and services may help patients achieve their individualized goals. A written plan for patients can help them remember the agreed-upon plan details.

- When appropriate, the practitioner may provide patients with a list of local community resources (e.g., local gyms, community exercise programs, walking groups, and sporting groups) based on the patient's interests and abilities.

- At follow-up visits, the practitioner should review food and physical activity diaries and reassess progress and barriers to the agreed-upon goals.

- Arrange frequent visits to ensure the weight management plan is effective and to help provide additional support and recommendations promptly. Visits every 1 to 3 months are preferred.

- Consider referrals to other support providers who may help the patients reach their goals. Such referrals may include, but are not limited to, dieticians, eating disorder specialists, psychologists, sleep specialists, physical therapists, and bariatric specialists.

**Motivational Interviewing Techniques for Weight Loss Counseling**

Motivational interviewing is a patient-centered counseling technique that facilitates patients' likelihood of behavioral change by exploring and resolving ambivalence.

During motivational interviewing, the principles may flow from one to the next or may recur or overlap. During the engaging process, the goal is to establish a supportive and collaborative relationship. The focusing process involves developing a specific direction for the conversation. Evoking allows patients to consider what and how to change without coercion or persuasion. Finally, the planning phase requires discussing how the change will occur.

Below are three different motivational interviewing skills highlighted in the obesity medicine literature.

**FRAMES (Feedback, Responsibility, Advice, Menu Options, Empathy, and Self-Efficacy)**is an effective technique for patients who are responsive to education about health risk behavior.

- Feedback about personal risk: the practitioner provides factual and objective data regarding the risks of excess weight or obesity-related comorbidities. For example, discussing lab and imaging results that suggest fatty liver disease and reviewing the importance of healthy weight and lifestyle in the management plan.

- Responsibility of patient: the practitioner emphasizes that the ability to change comes from the patient and that the health care practitioner can provide support. For example, "you have the ultimate control over your eating; there are steps you can take to ensure your success."

- Advice to change: the practitioner provides the patient with a written prescription for behavior change. For example, "After our review of your diet preferences and lifestyle, the healthier nutrition plan to help you lose weight would be a plant-based diet."

- Menu of options: the practitioner must again emphasize the patient's choice to change and provide individualized strategies to help the patient achieve healthcare goals. For example: reviewing options for anti-obesity medication therapy and referrals to bariatric procedures.

- Empathy: the practitioner provides emotional support for the patients while they consider their options and goals. For example, "changing your diet is very challenging. The beginning is always the hardest. Remember, you don't have to be perfect to succeed."

- Self-efficacy enhancement: the practitioner communicates confidence in the patient's ability to change and reminds the patient of the reasons for change. For example, "You have a solid plan to reduce night-time snacking. Your health and family are major drivers in accomplishing your goals."

**Evoking Change Talk**

Change talk is a consciously directed strategy in motivational interviewing to resolve ambivalence and promote behavioral change.

**OARS (Open-ended Questions, Affirmations, Reflections, and Summaries)**is a communication technique that aids the practitioner in evoking change talk.

- Open-ended questions: avoid asking "yes" or "no" questions. Broad questions allow patients to express their desires and concerns openly. For example, "What is new since we last met?" or "If you could change one habit to help reach your health goals, what would that be?"

- Affirmations: always express empathy during difficult conversations and celebrate accomplishments. When patients achieve a goal, rejoice in their success with them.

- Reflective listening: this step allows the practitioner to guide the patients to the answer. The practitioner asks the patients to express their thoughts and then reflects on these thoughts without advising the patients on the next steps. For example, "You mentioned that you dislike traveling due to difficulties fitting into the seat. That sounds very stressful since your family lives far away."

- Summarizing: this step involves recapping the conversation with the patients while focusing on change talk and allowing the patients to correct any misunderstandings. It is often practical to end the discussion with an open-ended statement, such as "I am wondering what you think your next step should be."

**Keys to Weight Loss Counseling**

- Identify a dietary pattern that is realistic and manageable for the patient to adhere to long-term. Provide specific dietary examples and resources to the patient, such as the low glycemic index diet for patients with type 2 diabetes, the DASH diet for patients with hypertension, or the whole foods plant-based diet for patients with cardiovascular disease. Focus on what the eating patterns have in common rather than what separates them.

- Advise the patient on limiting the intake of foods and beverages high in calories, fat, sugar, and sodium.

- Highlight the importance of reading food labels to help avoid ultra-processed foods and choose products containing fewer calories, fat, sugar, and sodium.

- Educate the patient on limiting meals at restaurants, selecting healthy options when dining out, consuming more fruits and vegetables, avoiding large portions, and eating foods with low energy density, such as fruits and vegetables.

- Plan a stepwise approach to increase physical activity for sedentary patients. For instance, advise short sessions of 5 to 10 min daily and increase weekly to the desired level of physical activity. Assess physical limitations and consider referrals to specialists, including physical therapy, occupational therapy, and orthopedics.

- If the patient is a candidate for pharmacotherapy or procedural interventions, gauge the patient's desire for these options and discuss the next steps.