Response to hazmat incidents requires an interdisciplinary team of professionals that include specialized hazmat teams, EMS personnel, police department, physicians, nurses, technicians, and specialists in toxicology. The moment a hazmat event is identified, every worker must be aware of their role and responsibility. The hazmat team is responsible for the approach to the area and the decontamination of victims. EMS plays an important role in providing life support and transporting decontaminated victims to the hospital. The police department also plays a vital role in containing the crowd and performing the pertinent investigations. Ultimately, physicians and nurses provide medical care to the victims and, along with toxicologists, determine the best medical management for the hazardous substance involved.

Outcomes of a hazmat event are not completely determined by the performance of the chain of responders, but public health preparedness for emergency response is critical. In 2008, knowledge gaps in the U.S. public health system preparedness were identified by the Institute of Medicine. In response to these knowledge and performance gaps, government agencies, including the Center for Disease Control (CDC), developed Preparedness and Emergency Response Centers (PERRCs) in schools of public health throughout the country. The PERRCs conduct research in aspects of public health preparedness and response to all hazards, including training, communication, creation and maintenance of response systems, and identification of metrics to improve the system. Research by PERRCs has generated a great number of publications, practice and policy tools, and recommendations to enhance the country’s health security.