In the United States, the most common clinical use of SCS therapy is failed back surgery syndrome. In Europe, the most common use of SCS therapy is peripheral ischemia.

Clinical recommendations can be divided based on diagnosis

- Failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS) - level A recommendation

- Established as causing long-term pain relief, decreased medication use, increased functional capacity, improved quality of life, increased likelihood of returning to work, and minimal side effects compared to other treatments.
- In a study by North et al., they looked at 27 patients with FBSS who were selected for a repeat laminectomy vs. SCC therapy. The study showed that 47% of the patients in the SCS group while only 12% of the repeat laminectomy group experienced over 50% pain relief. The study also showed that patients in the repeat laminectomy group used significantly more opioids than those in the SCS group.
- Another study by Kumar and colleagues followed FBSS patients treated with SCS therapy vs. FBSS patients treated with conventional medical management (CMM) for six months. The patients in this study mainly had neuropathic radicular lower extremity pain. The study showed that at six months, 24 SCS patients (48%) and only 4 CMM patients (9%) received over 50% pain relief from the treatment. The SCS therapy patients also reported relief of back and leg pain, improved quality of life, improved functional capacity, and more satisfaction from the treatment. The patients were also evaluated at 24 months, still showing increased satisfaction from SCS therapy.

- Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) - level B recommendation

- Established as increasing perceived effect, pain reduction, and quality of life. Even though some studies have suggested that the use of SCS therapy in patients with CRPS should be considered level A recommendation, the majority of the literature indicates that high-quality research is limited in this category.
- Kemler et al. conducted one of the studies available. It compared 24 patients with CRPS treated with combined permanent SCS therapy (after a successful trial) and physical therapy vs. 18 patients treated with physical therapy alone. After six months of follow-up, the patients in the SCS therapy group reported significant pain relief. They rated themselves as “much improved” when asked when compared to the physical therapy-only group. There were no differences in the reported improvements in functional status. The patients were re-evaluated after two years, showing the durability of these findings.

- Angina Pectoris - level A recommendation

- Established as decreasing anginal attacks, nitrate requirements, higher exercise capacity, cardiovascular outcomes equivalent to coronary bypass surgery

- Multiple studies have shown that SCS therapy can effectively treat intractable angina and decrease the incidence of anginal attacks. The primary mechanism posited to explain this is an increase in the skin temperature in the distal extremities during SCS therapy. The increased temperature improves the microcirculatory status of the extremity. As a result, there is an increase in the nutritional health of the skin and nerves in the area, leading to decreased anginal attacks.
- Numerous studies have concluded that SCS therapy can successfully treat refractory angina by increasing oxygen supply to the affected area, relieving the ischemia. In this procedure, the leads are placed at the level of T1-T2, left of the midline, and the leads are advanced to the level of the chest, where patients report anginal pain. Studies have shown that the SCS provides a similar benefit and efficacy to coronary bypass surgery, with decreased morbidity and mortality in the acute setting. Despite the multiple studies favoring this form of treatment, SCS therapy has not received support in the field of cardiology.

- Peripheral ischemia - level A recommendation

- Ubbink and Vermeulen performed the main meta-analysis study regarding the effect of SCS therapy in patients with peripheral ischemia in 2006. They evaluated nine different studies with a total of 444 patients. This study showed that patients who undergo SCS therapy have an 11% less risk of having a limb amputation than those who only undergo conservative treatment. Patients treated with SCS therapy had improved quality of life and decreased pain medication use. This study also concluded that TcPO2 measurements of less than 10 mmHg increase the risk of amputation, while TcPO2 greater than 30 mmHg leads to improved outcomes, regardless of the treatment approach. The authors reported a TcPO2 increase of 10 mmHg or more with SCS therapy. The study concluded that patients have an 83% limb salvage rate with SCS therapy instead of only 20% to 64% with conservative management