**Variable Bypass Vaporizers**

Variable bypass vaporizers can be divided into two categories: Draw over and plenum (with or without electronic control). In draw over vaporizers, the carrier gas is drawn into the vaporization chamber, where it passes over anesthetic liquid. Negative pressure (sub-atmospheric pressure) is provided directly from the patient breathing, which draws the anesthetic gas from the vaporizer to the patient. Plenum vaporizers are characterized by a pressurized vaporization chamber that generates an increased internal resistance (above atmospheric pressure) for fresh gas flow. This type of vaporizer is currently the most commonly used and is characterized by its accuracy in the mixture of gases provided to the patient.

**Mode of Operation**

Once the fresh gas leaves the flowmeter and enters the vaporizer, it is divided into two streams. One stream flows through the bypass circuit and the temperature compensating assembly. The other stream flows downward through the pressure compensating labyrinth into the vaporizing chamber, where it is mixed with the vapor of the liquid anesthetic drug. It then passes through the concentration cone, where it is mixed again with the fresh gas flow. The temperature compensating assembly adjusts the ratio of bypass flow to the vaporizing chamber, compensating for changes in anesthetic vapor pressure secondary to temperatures changes.

**Main Characteristics of Variable Bypass Vaporizers**

The dial release can be used to control the interlock mechanism, pressed inward toward the dial while the vaporizer lever is in the locked position. Using the interlock mechanism allows the port valves of the manifold to open and the vaporizer to operate. The interlock mechanism also prevents adjacent vaporizers from being switched on. These vaporizers are calibrated up to 8% concentration of sevoflurane and for other anesthetic drugs up to 5% concentration. These can be filled with 300 ml of dry wicks, of which 75 ml are retained as the minimum level of filling in the wicks system.

**Cassette Type Vaporizer**

This vaporizer can be used with certain models of anesthesia machines, with halothane, isoflurane, enflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane. The unit is composed of two parts. The first part is permanently housed in the anesthetic machine, and the second is an interchangeable cassette that contains the anesthetic liquid and acts as a vaporization chamber. It is important to note that this vaporizer is controlled by a microprocessor that receives information from the flowmeters about the composition of the gas, from temperature and pressure sensors inside the vaporization chamber, and from the output of the vaporization chamber, with the purpose of providing an accurate concentration of anesthetic gas. Additionally, this vaporizer has a unidirectional valve that prevents retrograde flow to the variable flow chamber. The cassette vaporizer also has electronic control of oxygen concentration, warranting that an oxygen concentration of less than 25%, independent of the anesthetic gas concentration, will never be delivered to the patient. In case the pressure inside the cassette exceeds 2.5 bars (1899 mmHg), this vaporizer has a pressure release valve that will open, preventing this pressure from being transmitted to the respiratory circuit. Finally, this vaporizer is unique, considering that tipping is not a problem for this device.

**Factors Affecting the Performance of Variable Bypass Vaporizers**

**Fresh Gas Flow Effect**

Extreme flows (more than 15 L/min or less than 250 ml/min) can decrease the final anesthetic gas concentration. When the flow is extremely low, enough air turbulence is not generated to move the anesthetic gas particles, delivering a lower anesthetic gas concentration than marked on the dial. When the fresh gas flow is too high, the anesthetic gas concentration also decreases compared with what is marked in the dial. The latter scenario could be multifactorial due to faster evaporation, incomplete saturation of the mixture of gases, or high resistance of the vaporizing chamber.

**Effect of Temperature Changes**

As mentioned above, temperature changes can increase or decrease the amount of vapor generated in the vaporization chamber. However, this concentration is stable in modern vaporizers within a big range of temperatures. This variable could be affected by an anesthetic liquid reaching its boiling point inside the vaporizer. In this situation, the temperature compensation system will not be enough to control the gas evaporation. Though this is an extreme and improbable scenario, halogenated drugs like isoflurane and halothane are susceptible to this problem at higher altitudes, where the boiling point is lower. In fact, the user’s manual of some vaporizers limits the use of halothane and isoflurane to altitudes of more than 1450 to 3000 meters above sea level. Most vaporizers are built to work under temperatures of 10°C to 40ºC, though this varies according to the manufacturer.

**Composition of the Carrier Gas**

Although this effect is not clinically significant, the viscosity of air and nitrous oxide is lower (more soluble) than that of oxygen. As nitrous oxide is diluted in anesthetic fluid, the production of anesthetic gas decreases. Furthermore, splitting of the carrier gas decreases flow through the vaporization chamber, so a reduction in output is expected, especially with nitrous oxide.

**Pumping Effects**

This describes the effect of the transmission of retrograde pressure from the patient circuit to the vaporizer during the inspiratory phase with positive pressure or during the use of an oxygen flush valve. Molecules of anesthetic gas will compress in the vaporization and variable flow chambers. When pressure is released during the expiratory phase, vapor will exit the chamber through the normal output track and additionally from the input track of the chamber. In this way, the final concentration of anesthetic gas will be higher. This effect is greater when the low flow of fresh gas is used, and the liquid levels of the anesthetic gas in the vaporizer are low. Modern anesthetic machines have unidirectional valves in the inspiratory and expiratory arms to prevent this effect.

**Measured Flow Vaporizers**

These vaporizers are characterized by a separated stream for anesthetic vapor carrying that is then mixed with the fresh flow gas. Some of these devices have been specially created for desflurane for two reasons. The first is that this halogenated anesthetic has a really high saturated vapor pressure (669 mmHg at 20ºC). A conventional vaporizer would need a flow of 73 L/min to deliver a concentration of 1% desflurane to the patient, in contrast to the 5 L/min or less that is needed for other halogenated drugs. Second, desflurane boils at almost room temperature (22.8ºC), losing heat in absence of temperature compensation. However, temperatures may vary in different operating rooms. Intermittent boiling will result in large fluctuations of anesthetic gas delivery due to unpredictable saturated vapor pressure.

**Mode of Operation**

Desflurane vaporizers work similarly to a blender of gases. These vaporizers have two independent gas circuits aligned in parallel. The fresh gas circuit passes through a fixed restrictor and leaves the vaporizer through the common gas outlet. The anesthetic gas circuit is originated in the sump, which works as a desflurane vapor reservoir. The sump is heated at 39ºC, a temperature that exceeds the boiling point of desflurane and generates up to 1300 mmHg of vapor pressure (2 atm). Downstream from the sump, there is a shut-off valve that opens once the vaporizer warms up, and the concentration dial is open. Downstream from the shut-off valve, there is a variable restrictor that can be controlled by the user and adjust the concentration of anesthetic gas. Both circuits finally join before leaving the vaporizer together form one flow to the patient. Despite the fact that these circuits are physically separated, they are interconnected electronically through a differential pressure transducer, a pressure-regulating valve, and a control electronic system. The backpressure generated by the pass of the fresh gas flow through the fix restrictor is proportional to the flow rate that is sensed by the differential pressure transducer. The difference of pressures between the fresh gas flow circuit and the desflurane circuit is calculated and transmitted to the control electronic system. This system tunes the pressure regulating valve equalizing the pressure of the two circuits. This equalized pressure is known as working pressure, which is constant at an FGF rate.

The mixture of anesthetic produced by the vaporizer is constant because the fresh gas flow and the anesthetic gas flow are always proportional; this is different from the variable bypass vaporizers.

**Factors Affecting the Performance of Desflurane Vaporizers**

**Barometric Pressure**

The desflurane vaporizer works more like a gas blender than a vaporizer. Despite this device is able to maintain a constant volume percent (V/V%) output, the partial pressure of anesthetic gas decreases in the same way as the barometric pressure decreases. This is an important fact to have in mind since the partial pressure of the anesthetic in the brain will determine the anesthetic depth.

**Carrier Gas Composition**

Nitrous oxide has a decreased viscosity that is not able to generate enough working pressure inside the desflurane vaporizer. Thus, at low flow rates of nitrous oxide, the concentration of anesthetic gas delivered to the patient will be decreased by up to 20% from the value marked in the dial.