**Identification of Serious Anaerobic Infections**

Timely identification is important to start empiric therapy. Life-threatening infections such as tetanus, gas gangrene, or infantile botulism are caused by the spore-forming anaerobes, Clostridium tetanus, Clostridium perfringens, or Clostridium botulism, respectively.

A history of injury, for example, penetrating nail injury or the presence of a devitalized tissue, should prompt evaluation for tetanus in an immunized child.

Gas gangrene is caused by Clostridium perfringens or Clostridium septicum. It is a medical emergency that requires surgical debridement in addition to antibiotic therapy with penicillin-containing antibiotics in combination with clindamycin.

Botulism manifests as descending paralysis, particularly in infants. History of consumption of damaged canned food, use of honey, or living or traveling to endemic regions (high clostridial spore counts) is frequent. Physical examination findings are of an afebrile infant with acute onset of feeding difficulty and bulbar involvement (absence of a gag reflex). For suspected cases, expert review is provided by the California Department of Health.  Stool should be sent to check for Clostridium botulism spores. The mainstay of management is supportive care with or without botulism immunoglobulin (BabyBIG).

In an adolescent with a sore throat, neck pain, and tachycardia out of proportion to fever, Lemierre syndrome should be considered. A neck Doppler ultrasound should be done to look for thrombophlebitis of internal jugular veins and chest x-ray to look for septic emboli.

**Local Infections Including Abscesses**

Abscesses can be limited to CNS, head, and neck region. The abdominal region can be diagnosed with appropriate anaerobic culture. The specimen should be collected from a sterile site, preferably bypassing the normal flora and with needle aspiration or surgical exploration. Tissue or fluid aspirate is preferred over a swab. After collection, the sample should be sent in an anaerobic transport medium, and it should be inoculated in an oxygen-free environment.