The differential diagnosis for pancreatic panniculitis includes other forms of panniculitis, and, additionally, it is essential to distinguish it from other skin finds associated with pancreatic diseases.

Panniculitides are a group of medical conditions that are characterized by inflammation of the subcutaneous fat. In some cases, panniculitides can be associated with lower extremity ulcers. Two other specific forms of panniculitis that are known to cause lower extremity ulcers are erythema induratum (also known as nodular vasculitis) and panniculitis caused by alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency.

Erythema induratum is a type of panniculitis typically seen in middle-aged women. Erythema induratum presents as tender nodules that develop on the lower legs and may ulcerate. An immune reaction to bacteria, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis or other mycobacteria, causes the condition. Panniculitis caused by alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency is a rare genetic disorder in which there is a deficiency in the alpha-1-antitrypsin protein, leading to a buildup of abnormal protein in the liver and lungs. This can also cause panniculitis, which presents as painful nodules on the lower legs that may ulcerate.

Erythema nodosum is the most common form of panniculitis and may be similar to pancreatic panniculitis in appearance but will not be associated with pancreatitis and is rarely associated with pancreatic malignancy. Erythema nodosum will not ulcerate nor secrete a viscous fluid. Necrolytic migratory erythema, a manifestation usually associated with neuroendocrine tumors such as glucagonoma, can also include central foci with crusting or necrosis. However, they are more so plaques instead of nodules.

Skin biopsy can differentiate pancreatic panniculitis from the conditions mentioned above. Still, it is also important to note the presence of pancreatic disease when diagnosing pancreatic panniculitis versus other similarly presenting skin manifestations.

Other conditions to keep on the differential list include migratory thrombophlebitis, cutaneous abscesses, lupus panniculitis Weber-Christian disease, or arthropod bites.