Nonoperative management is applied if a fixed flexion contracture of more than 45 degrees occurs at the PIP joint. A strenuous hand therapy program is utilized involving serial casting.

Exercises that strengthen the interosseous muscles and lumbricals are recommended. The individual should be taught to exercise each finger and thumb in abduction and adduction motion while the hand is pronated. In addition, the MCP and ICP joints should be exercised, and over time the interosseous and lumbricals will gain strength.

The majority of cases will need operative management in the form of contracture release and passive tenodesis versus active tendon transfer. This treatment is reserved for those patients with a progressive deformity that is affecting their quality of life. The goal is to prevent lasting MCP joint hyperextension.

- Surgery is usually in the form of tendon transfers. This addresses issues including the lack of thumb adduction and lateral pinch, the claw deformity of the fingers that impairs object acquisition, and the loss of ring and small finger flexion.

- The extensor carpi radialis brevis or the flexor digitorum superficialis is the most commonly used transfers to restore thumb adduction. The brachioradialis can be used if the extensor carpi radialis brevis is required for an intrinsic reconstruction of the fingers.

- To correct the claw deformity of the fingers, include static procedures or dynamic transfers. A dynamic transfer uses the flexor digitorum superficialis, extensor carpi radialis longus, extensor carpi radialis brevis, or flexor carpi radialis as a donor muscle.

- To restore the ring and small finger extrinsic muscle function, a transfer of flexor digitorum profundus ring and small to flexor digitorum profundus middle is performed.