Although the diagnosis of SD is usually clinical, clinicians should consider other skin conditions when the presentation is atypical or not responsive to treatment. SD can be challenging to distinguish from psoriasis. Cutaneous manifestations of psoriasis are typically more erythematous with prominent silvery scaling, and plaques are well demarcated. Psoriatic arthritis and nail changes may be present, and it is essential to determine a family history. Rosacea also causes facial erythema, but papules, pustules, and telangiectasis with no scaling occur on the nose and malar and perioral areas. Although atopic dermatitis should be a consideration when presumed SD is refractory to treatment, significant pruritis may be a distinguishing factor, and patch testing can confirm the diagnosis. Secondary syphilis, "the great imitator," may present as multiple psoriasiform lesions and should be tested for with serologic testing when the index of suspicion is high. The malar erythema seen in acute systemic lupus erythematosus may be mistaken for SD, although the former does not affect the nasolabial folds or cross the bridge of the nose. Pemphigus foliaceous presents with erythematous lesions on the head and scalp that extend to the trunk. Prominent features include scaling, crusting, erosions, and pain. Pathohistological and serologic testing secure the diagnosis. In children, tinea infections and diaper dermatitis merit consideration.

Several dermatologic disorders may mimic PV. SD may occur on the trunk as PV does, but lesions are more erythematous with thicker scaling, and other locations, including the scalp, are usually involved. Pityriasis rosea may be differentiated from PV by the appearance of a herald patch before the onset of symptoms, "Christmas tree" distribution, and erythematous, scaling macules and patches. Whereas PV causes hypopigmented skin lesions, those seen in vitiligo are depigmented. The eczematous lesions of pityriasis alba also may appear as hypopigmented macules and patches; however, the face is primarily affected, and affected children typically have a history of atopy. Secondary syphilis must be ruled out in a patient with generalized hyperpigmented macules involving the palms and soles. Mycosis fungoides may present as hypopigmented lesions on the trunk and extremities, but scaling, erythema, and plaques are more characteristic.

Folliculitis may result from other microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Vesicles on an erythematous base and umbilicated papules are characteristic of herpes simplex and papillomavirus folliculitis, respectively. Both bacterial and fungal folliculitis may present with painful, pruritic follicular papules and pustules, so taking a thorough history of risk factors and progression is critical. KOH preparation and cultures definitively confirm the diagnosis. The presence of open and closed comedones and the lack of pruritis suggests acne vulgaris over Malassezia folliculitis.