Amino acids are synthesized through different pathways. Cys is synthesized from Met, while Tyr synthesis can occur using Phe, considering that the amino acid precursors can be available in the body. The amino acid Arg, which arises from the urea cycle, is considered "semi-essential" because the synthetic capacity of the human body is limited. Non-essential amino acids need their precursors, which must be available in the organism. Specifically, Ala and Gly's amino acids need pyruvate to be synthesized, while aspartic acid and Asn rely on oxaloacetic acid (OAA). Thus, six essential amino acids and three non-essential are integrated from oxaloacetate and pyruvate.

The transamination from Glu is vital in forming Asp and Ala from OAA and pyruvate. Asp is crucial in synthesizing Asn, Met, Lys, and Thr. OAA is critical because no Asp would form without it. The alpha-ketoglutaric acid or 2-oxoglutaric acid is one of two ketone derivatives of glutaric acid. Its anion, alpha-ketoglutarate (alpha-KG), also known as 2-oxoglutarate, is a biological compound of paramount importance. It is the keto acid produced by the deamination of Glu and is an intermediate compound in the urea or Krebs cycle. The amino acids glutamic acid and Gln arise from alpha-KG.

Finally, the amino acid Pro derives from Glu, while Ser is from 3-phosphoglyceric acid (3PG). The 3PG is the conjugate acid of glycerate 3-phosphate. It is a biochemically significant metabolic intermediate in glycolysis and the Calvin cycle. In the Calvin cycle or photosynthetic carbon reduction (PCR) cycle of photosynthesis, 3PG is vital. It is the product of the spontaneous scission of an unstable 6-carbon intermediate formed upon CO fixation. Thus, glycerate 3-phosphate is a precursor for Ser, which, in turn, can create Cys and Gly through the homocysteine cycle. Therefore, Pro arises from Glu, while Ser is from 3PG. In the transamination reaction, an amino acid (Ala or Asp) exchanges its amine group for the oxy group in alpha-KG. The products are Glu and pyruvate or OAA (from Ala or Asp, accordingly).

Different proteases can degrade proteins into many small peptides or amino acids by hydrolyzing their peptide bonds. The unused amino acids may degrade further to join several metabolic processes. At first, the amino acids deaminate to their metabolic intermediates. This process is helpful for the excretion of an excessive amount of nitrogen. Subsequently, they can transform into the remaining carbon skeleton. In particular, this deamination process contains two steps. The first part uses deamination. In this step, the aminotransferase catalyzes the -NH2 group of the amino acid to alpha-KG. After that, it produces Glu and a novel alpha-keto acid of the specific amino acid. The Glu -NH2 group could then be transferred to OAA to form alpha-KG and Asp. This trans-amination series only degrade the primary amino acid, while the -NH2 group nitrogen does not exclude. There is an alternative pathway, using NADP or NAD+ as the oxidizing agent, and Glu dehydrogenase deaminates Glu. Then, it produces ammonia and alpha-KG.

In the evaluation of the biochemistry of the amino acids, seven metabolic intermediates of the aminoacidic degradation platform are paramount. They include acetyl-CoA, pyruvate, alpha-KG, acetoacetate, fumarate, succinyl-CoA, and OAA. In the most updated classification, Leu, Ile, Thr, and Lys degrade to acetyl-CoA, while Cys, Ala, Thr, Gly, Trp, and Ser degrade to pyruvate. Glu, Arg, His, Pro, and Gln degrade to alpha-KG, while Lys, Leu, Trp, Tyr, and Phe break down to acetoacetate. Finally, Tyr, Phe, and Asp degrade to fumarate, Val, Met, and Ile break down to succinyl-CoA, and Asp and, of course, Asn degrade to OAA. Isoleucine is an essential nutrient because it is unsynthesized in the body. This amino acid is both a glucogenic and ketogenic amino acid. In microorganisms and plants, it is synthesized via several steps beginning with pyruvate and alpha-ketobutyrate. The enzymes involved in this biosynthesis include acetolactate synthase, acetohydroxy acid isomeroreductase, dihydroxy acid dehydratase, and valine aminotransferase.