There is currently a lack of established treatment guidelines because of limited data. Management is controversial, ranging from conservative treatment to nephrectomy, and depends on symptom severity with interventions typically reserved for those who are symptomatic.

Prolonged conservative treatment in the pediatric population is highly recommended due to the possibility of spontaneous resolution following adipose tissue development, and multiple venous collateralizations. Medical treatments, including low dose aspirin and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, specifically, alacepril, have been assumed to improve orthostatic proteinuria.

Endovascular treatment or open surgery is indicated if symptoms persist following conservative treatment, or for those with significant hematuria, severe pain, or renal dysfunction.

A review of literature from October 1982 to July 2017 reported 47% of articles described the open surgical approach (most commonly LRV transposition followed by renal autotransplantation), 41.1% described endovascular stenting (EVS), and 11.7% described the minimally invasive extravascular stenting.

Endovascular stenting has been extrapolated from stenting experience that demonstrated good results in the treatment of other venous compression syndromes, including May-Thurner syndrome, and superior vena cava syndrome.

No perioperative complications occurred. Three out of five patients whose symptoms remained had previously undergone LRV transposition. Stent restenosis or symptom recurrence required stent reintervention in three patients at 5.8 months, 16.8 months, and 51.7 months. No stent migration occurred.

Anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy are recommended during stent endothelialization and include a regimen of 3 days on low molecular weight heparin, 30 days on clopidogrel, and 3 months on aspirin.