**Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)**

Personal protective equipment forms a cornerstone of protection against airborne diseases.

To use the respirator appropriately, one should do the following:

- Hand hygiene should be performed before putting on a respirator.

- Perform a seal check. This may be done by covering your respirator with both hands and exhaling sharply. If air blows out from the edges, sealing should be repeated.

- To avoid self-contamination after use, remove the respirator using the straps. Avoid touching any part the part which may have microorganisms on it.

- When the respirator is not in use, it should not be dangled in front of the neck or top of the head.

- If the respirator becomes soiled, wet, or is splashed with body fluids, it should be promptly removed.

- After use, the respirator should be removed, and one should thoroughly wash hands.

- The N95 respirator must be fit tested for all healthcare workers assigned to treat the particular patient.

- All N95 respirators must be cited by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and have an efficiency rating.

**Patient Movements**

In hospitals, patients admitted to the negative room often have to be transported to other departments like radiology, physical therapy, the pulmonary laboratory, or even another hospital. Before transferring a patient with an airborne infection, one must always communicate with the relevant department first. The guidelines for transportation are as follows:

- During transport, the patient should wear a surgical mask.

- There may be situations when during the transport, the patient may not wear a mask. In such scenarios, the transport should be performed in a way to limit the exposure to other patients or staff. This means the transport staff should not wait in the reception area or leave the patient in a holding area.

- The patient should preferably be transported in an empty elevator, and the personnel that is transporting the patient should be told to maintain infectious disease precautions throughout the transportation. These include appropriate N95 respirators and personal protective equipment.

- If the patient is intubated, call the respiratory therapist ahead of time to ensure that the transport is done according to respiratory guidelines.

**Patient and Family Education**

Patients who require isolation due to the risk of airborne transmission need to be counseled regarding their condition and infectivity. Their family members, caretakers, and visitors must also be educated so that they may abide by preventive guidelines to ensure that the disease is not transmitted. The patient should be educated on coughing etiquettes to ensure the minimum spread of aerosolized particles in the isolation room. Face tissues and handkerchiefs must be properly and appropriately disposed of to further decrease the chances of transmission. Furthermore, a sign recommending infectious precautions should be placed outside the isolation room so that all visitors may be apprised by the guidelines. Unnecessary visits should be avoided, and all immunocompromised individuals must refrain from entering the isolation room. All visitors must follow the use of N95 respirators and hand hygiene without lapses.

**Duration of Precautions**

In general, airborne precautions can be discontinued once the patient shows no signs or symptoms of an infection.

However, one also has to be aware of the period of incubation and, if unsure, always consult with an infectious disease expert.

- Anthrax is caused by exposure to aerosolized B. anthracis spores. It needs to be treated with at least 8 weeks of antimicrobial therapy. This is a serious infection with very high mortality if the diagnosis is missed. An infectious disease consult should be involved in the management of patients with anthrax. The patient usually remains infectious while symptoms remain. Since this is a potential agent for bioterrorism, it is important to seek advice from the CDC. Patient isolation is mandatory, and all traffic must be curtailed.

- Chickenpox is caused by the Varicella-zoster virus. Individuals remain infectious for 5 to 7 days after the rash develops. By this time, most of the vesicles have dried up, and the risk of transmission decreases.

- Influenza is a common cause of upper and lower respiratory tract infections. Patients with influenza are considered infectious even before the onset of symptoms. In most cases, viral shedding occurs at the time of the symptoms and continues for 5 to 10 days. Data indicates that younger children and infants may shed the virus for a week or two, thus placing other individuals at risk for acquiring the infection. In patients who are immunocompromised, the shedding may last for up to 12 weeks.

- Measles (rubeola) is the most contagious infectious disease, with a secondary infection rate in susceptible domestic contacts over 90 percent. The majority of patients are contagious 1 to 2 days before the onset of symptoms. Younger patients may remain contagious 4 to 5 days before and after the rash.

- Smallpox is not a concern in many parts of the world, but it is a contagious infection. However, unlike measles, influenza, and pertussis, the transmission rate of smallpox is low. Once smallpox is acquired, the patient remains contagious from the onset of the fever and rash. The highest viral shedding occurs during the first 2 weeks of the rash. Infection rates of anywhere from 40% to 80% have been reported.

- Cryptococcosis is being diagnosed more often now because of the widespread organ transplantation. The risk of acquiring or developing an infection, however, is very low in immunocompetent and healthy individuals. An infectious disease consult is necessary to determine the period of isolation.

- Tuberculosis is a common disease, but it is not considered as contagious as measles or influenza. Even when acquired, only 5% of the individuals develop clinical disease. The risk of disease transmission is most common in close living quarters. Data reveals that about 20% of household contacts do develop a positive skin test to purified protein derivative testing (PPD). The patient usually remains infectious while symptoms are present, which can be a few weeks.

**Managing Deceased Patients**

When a patient is deceased, airborne precautions remain necessary when handling and preparing the body during transfer to the morgue. Similarly, performing an autopsy also warrants proper personal protective equipment and the use of N95 respirators.

**Managing specimens and rooms of patients and with airborne infections**

When a patient with an airborne transmissible disease has been discharged, it is important to continue airborne precautions while decontaminating the room. The door must remain closed, and negative air flow must be maintained until all air in the room has been recirculated and replaced. This process usually requires 45 to 60 minutes, depending on the size of the room. Soiled linen should be handled with gloves with minimal agitation to prevent the dispersion of microorganisms into the air. The laundry hamper should be close to the location so that the linen can be placed inside rather than carried a long distance. If there is obvious contamination with body fluids, the linen should be placed in a plastic bag. Proper handling and transport of specimens: All body specimens should be considered infectious and handled safely.