Initial management of SBS involves maintaining good nutritional status, maximizing the absorptive surface area of the remaining intestine, and preventing complications. This involves early postoperative parenteral nutrition as well as enteral nutrition once the patient's ileus has resolved. This promotes intestinal adaptation which improves absorption of nutrients over time.

Those patients in whom intestinal failure is irreversible will require either lifelong home parenteral nutrition or intestinal transplantation if a life-threatening complication of either SBS or home parenteral nutrition arises. Treatment of SBS, therefore, largely consists of managing and preventing complications that arise as a direct result of SBS or secondarily to home parenteral nutrition. The management of SBS and the prevention of its complications share many of the same treatments.

- Intestinal failure-associated liver disease and liver cholestasis are treated with maintaining some oral feeding, promptly treating infection or inflammation, optimizing home parenteral nutrition, decreasing dependence on soy-based lipid emulsions or switching them to fish oil-based emulsions and non-transplant surgical procedures.

- SBS patients with less than 180 centimeters of small bowel or an absent ileocecal valve are at increased risk of developing gallstones, frequently composed of calcium bilirubinate. These gallstones can be prevented or reversed by maintaining enteral feeding and limiting periods of oral fasting and by limiting the use of narcotic and anticholinergic medications.

- Dehydration, hyponatremia, chronic renal failure, and nephrolithiasis secondary to SBS are managed with intravenous supplementation of fluids to maintain normal hydration and urinary flow. More specifically, the treatment of dehydration and hyponatremia in patients with SBS should maintain normal hydration with a urine output of 800 milliliters per day and urine sodium greater than 20 millimoles/liter.

- Hypomagnesemia can be caused by malabsorption of magnesium due to loss of the distal ileum and right colon as well as chelation with fatty acids. Treatment consists of appropriate hydration as delineated above and magnesium supplementation to a level greater than 1.5 milligrams/deciliter.

- D-lactic acidosis with an increased anion gap can occur in patients with SBS due to the fermentation of unabsorbed carbohydrates by colon microbiota. This can lead to a D-lactate encephalopathy that presents with slurred speech, ataxia, altered mental status, psychosis, and sometimes coma. D-lactic acidosis is primarily a clinical diagnosis. Treatment includes cessation of enteral feeds with carbohydrates, administration of an antibiotic active against D-lactate forming bacteria, appropriate hydration, and thiamine supplementation. Antibiotics include metronidazole, vancomycin, clindamycin, neomycin, and tetracyclines.

- Almost all patients on long-term home parenteral nutrition have metabolic bone disease that manifests as osteopenia, osteomalacia, or osteoporosis. Diagnosis and evaluation are done with mineral bone density, serum and urine mineral levels, vitamin D, PTH, and markers of bone turnover. Management includes lifestyle and dietary changes, treatment of underlying disease, optimization of vitamin D status and parenteral nutrition, and sometimes bisphosphonates.

Surgical management is another important treatment strategy available to patients with SBS. Patients on parenteral nutrition who suffer from rapid transit may benefit from reversing intestinal segments or interposing segments of colon into the small bowel. Those with less than 60 centimeters of small bowel and parenteral nutrition-related complications may be candidates for intestinal transplantation. Patients with dilated bowel secondary to obstruction can sometimes be treated with intestinal tapering or strictureplasty if they have a bowel remnant greater than 120 centimeters or tapering with lengthening if the remnant is less 90 centimeters in adults or less than 30 centimeters in children.