Oxygen is vital to sustaining life. However, breathing oxygen at higher than normal partial pressure leads to hyperoxia and can cause oxygen toxicity or oxygen poisoning. The clinical settings in which oxygen toxicity occurs is predominantly divided into two groups; one in which the patient is exposed to very high concentrations of oxygen for a short duration, and the second where the patient is exposed to lower concentrations of oxygen but for a longer duration. These two cases can result in acute and chronic oxygen toxicity, respectively. The acute toxicity manifests generally with central nervous system (CNS) effects, while chronic toxicity has mainly pulmonary effects. Severe cases of oxygen toxicity can lead to cell damage and death. Those at particular risk for oxygen toxicity include hyperbaric oxygen therapy patients, patients exposed to prolonged high levels of oxygen, premature infants, and underwater divers. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of oxygen toxicity and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the basic pathophysiology of oxygen toxicity in the human body.
- Identify the presentation of a patient with oxygen toxicity, and duscuss potential differential diagnoses.
- Describe the treatment and management strategies for addressing oxygen toxicity.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes with management and treatment of oxygen toxicity.