The semitendinosus and gracilis muscle tendons are commonly used as an alternative to the bone-patellar-tendon-bone graft (BPTB) for ACL reconstruction. When grafting for ACL reconstruction, the sartorius fascia is incised to expose the underlying semitendinosus and gracilis tendon. These two tendons are not adherent to the bone outside of the attachment sites, which allows differentiation of the tendons from the medial collateral ligament, which lies deep to the semitendinosus and gracilis muscles. Compared to the BPTB graft, the diameter of the hamstring graft is predetermined by the original diameter of the semitendinosus and gracilis tendons. In the BPTB graft, the diameter of the graft can be determined by the surgeon during the harvesting of the graft. Unlike the hamstring autograft, the BPTB graft includes bone which is believed to improve graft incorporation.

The BPTB graft is the most common autograft used in the United States and has originally been considered the gold-standard graft for ACL reconstruction. However, there is a debate about which autograft is superior. Hamstring autografts have the benefits of decreased anterior knee pain, osteoarthritis, and donor site morbidity. The benefits of the BPTB autograft include faster graft incorporation, reduced risk of rupture, and a larger proportion of patients returning to preinjury activity levels. Despite BTBP having a lower failure rate, both graft choices have low failure rates. Therefore, utilizing the semitendinosus and gracilis tendons as an autograft remains a reasonable option for reconstruction, and its use should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

MRI studies have also shown that the semitendinosus tendon has also been found to regenerate in 75% of patients after harvesting, with the remaining 25% of patients having an increase in the size of the semimembranosus muscle as compensation. Outside the common use of the semitendinosus and gracilis tendon grafts in ACL reconstruction, these tendons have also found use in repairing massive rotator cuff tears that have already undergone retraction and degeneration and muscle atrophy.