The primary purpose of a sports participation evaluation is to assess for underlying medical pathology while also ensuring that the athlete is in optimal health. Athletes are asked about symptoms they are experiencing during times of physical exertion and at rest.

**Key Symptoms and Medical History In Athletes**

**Cardiac**

- Syncope

- Presyncope

- Dizziness

- Dyspnea

- Chest pain

- Shortness of breath

- Seizures

**Respiratory**

- Dyspnea

- Pain with breathing

- History of Asthma

**Neurological**

- Headaches

- Seizures

**Musculoskeletal**

- Excessive joint pain

- Limited range of motion in extremities

- Hypermobility

- Chronic low back pain

- History of fractures or past injuries

- History of muscular tears

- Back or neck pain

**Hematologic**

- Excessive bleeding

- Clotting disorder(s)

- Immunosuppression

**Psychiatric**

- Depression

- History of suicidal ideation

- History of manic phases

- Eating disorders and nutritional status

**General**

- Previous exclusion from sports

- Previous injuries

- Complications and sequelae from past events

**Family Medical History**

- Sudden unexpected death

- History of undiagnosed syncope

- History of unexpected drowning

- Familial heart diseases

- Muscular dystrophies

Cardiac-related symptoms that occur during rest and/or exertion are of particular concern due to the risk of sudden cardiac death. However, other probable etiologies should also be considered.

**Physical Examination**

The physical examination focuses on the cardiovascular, respiratory, musculoskeletal, and neurological systems. The patient is checked for a regular heart rhythm, the possible presence of murmurs, and the existence of an S3 or S4 sound upon auscultation. The presence of heaves, lifts, or thrills is also evaluated. The respiratory exam is used to ensure that the athlete does not have asthma or, if they do, that it is well controlled. Furthermore, the musculoskeletal examination serves the purpose of assessing connective tissue health. Certain conditions, such as Ehlers Danlos, may also be suspected.

It is essential for athletes who engage in contact sports, given the potential risk of damage to their connective tissues. Contact sports are also a concern in those with histories of neurological disease. Lastly, a focused psychiatric assessment is an important aspect of examining an athlete. Psychiatric illnesses might interfere with the dynamics of teamwork and participation. Some psychiatric conditions may be exacerbated by the mental and physical stress of competitive sports. Also, the athlete's performance may not be optimal if mental illness is present.

**Supplement and Drug Use**

A thorough medical examination of an athlete must include an assessment of any supplements and drugs the athlete uses. Health and nutritional supplements are commonly used within the athletic communities. Certain supplements may contain ingredients that pose a health risk to the athlete and are banned for use by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA). Also, certain supplements, such as specific stimulants, may be legal for use but pose a long-term cumulative health risk when used in repetitive high doses. Beyond the use of supplements, performance-enhancing drugs (PEDs) and recreational drugs are both cause for concern in athletes. PEDs are highly sport-specific, with the most commonly used ones categorized as anabolic agents and stimulants. Anabolic drugs are further classified as anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS), peptide hormones, and other newer drugs.

An example of a new class of drugs that have become popular is selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMs), which are potentially harmful and banned by the WADA. Conversely, some common anabolic agents include testosterone, trenbolone, methandrostenolone, stanozolol, oxandrolone, oxymetholone, nandrolone, and many other anabolic steroids. Recreational drug use is also of concern in athletes, given their health risks and interference with their function and drug testing during sporting activities. Lastly, prescribed medications should always be evaluated, given their potential for causing an athlete to fail a drug test or to affect their performance.

**Electrocardiogram**

There are a variety of written opinions regarding the use of the ECG to screen athletes for cardiac defects. The decision to undergo testing may be shared between the physician and the patient. It is critical to distinguish between abnormal ECG findings within the general population and normal findings in athletes. ECGs in athletes should be assessed for accessory pathways, short PR intervals, long or short QT intervals, epsilon waves, T wave inversions, excessive premature ventricular contractions, and any significant pathologic signs. Normal ECG findings in athletes include bradycardia, sinus arrhythmia, ventricular enlargement, and first-degree atrioventricular block. Additional diagnostic testing and unnecessary treatments can be reduced significantly by distinguishing between benign and pathologic findings.