The clinical features of pneumonia in immunocompromised patients depend on the infective organism. Pneumonia due to common bacterial pathogens, such as S. pneumoniae, has typical features of pneumonia similar to what is seen in immunocompetent individuals. The presentation is usually acute, and patients have a cough that can be productive of purulent, mucoid, or blood-tinged sputum. Along with this, fever, shortness of breath, and fatigue are also common symptoms.

Opportunistic infections may have a more subacute to chronic course. The presenting symptoms again depend on the infective organism.

In HIV-infected patients, Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) has a sub-acute onset, associated with low-grade fever, dry cough, and progressive dyspnea. However, in HIV-uninfected immunocompromised patients, PCP has a more acute presentation. In these patients, a high-grade fever, along with fulminant respiratory failure is seen.

Pulmonary tuberculosis has a chronic course. There is low-grade fever, which can increase as the disease progresses. Patients usually have weight loss, and also complain of malaise, and night sweats. The cough, which is mild and non-productive initially, can progress to become more frequent and productive of yellow-green or blood-streaked sputum. As the disease progresses, there may be frank hemoptysis along with dyspnea.

Cytomegalovirus pulmonary infection, especially in lung transplant patients, can cause a low-grade fever, non-productive cough, and dyspnea.

The physical examination findings of pneumonia are not specific for any organism or disease. Some of them are:

- Fever

- Increased respiratory rate

- Dullness of percussion notes

- Crepitation, rhonchi, and bronchial breath sound on auscultation

- Altered mental status, especially in the elderly

- Hypotension, especially in patients with sepsis