The general functions of amino acids include the involvement in protein synthesis, biosynthetic products, and metabolic energy. Essentially, there is a crucial difference between positive and negative nitrogen balance, which is critical for understanding amino acid metabolism. In a positive balance, the nitrogen consumed is more considerable than the nitrogen excreted, while in a negative balance, the nitrogen consumed is less than the nitrogen excreted. A positive balance denotes net protein synthesis. It occurs when the organism is recovering from starvation, growth, and pregnancy. In contrast, a negative balance entails mobilization of the amino acids, tissue necrosis, or a poor-quality condition of the human body as a consequence of 3rd-degree burns or significant surgical operations.

The amino acids subdivide into essential and non-essential. There are amino acids that need to be obtained directly (diet) and amino acids that can be synthesized by the organism. The amino acids the human body cannot produce are called essential amino acids, which contain His, Ile, Leu, Lys, Met, Val, Phe, Thr, and Trp. The human body gets these nine essential amino acids from food or nutritional supplement. In specific medical conditions or at different ages, the other amino acids may be conditionally essential for the human body.

Glutamate is a non-essential amino acid that can be synthesized from alpha-ketoglutaric acid in the Krebs or citric acid cycle. In the brain and spinal cord, glutamate is synthesized from glutamine as part of the glutamate-glutamine cycle by the enzyme glutaminase. Glutamate cannot cross the blood-brain barrier unaided and serves as a metabolic precursor for the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) via the action of glutamate decarboxylase.

Methionine is converted to S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) by methionine adenosyltransferase. Loss of methionine has correlated with an accumulation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in hair follicles, a decrease in tyrosinase effectiveness, and a gradual loss of the natural hair color.

Glycine is considered to be not essential to the human diet. The body can synthesize this amino acid from the amino acid serine. However, the metabolic capacity for glycine biosynthesis does not satisfy the need for collagen synthesis in several organisms. In the liver of some of them at the vertebrate level, glycine synthesis is catalyzed by glycine synthase, which is also known as glycine cleavage enzyme. Glycine is integral to the creation of alpha-helices in secondary protein structure, and, mainly, it is the most copious amino acid in collagen harboring triple-helices. Glycine is also an inhibitory neurotransmitter. The interference of its release within the central nervous system (spinal cord) can induce spastic paralysis due to uninhibited muscle contraction.