**Objective Determination of Fitzpatrick Skin Types**

Given the relative ease of implementation of Fitzpatrick skin typing, it is understandable why this classification system has been so widely applied. However, numerous studies have criticized this system scientifically, and validated objective alternatives have been sought, to achieve a similar outcome of predicting ultraviolet (UV) sensitivity.

Currently, spectrophotometers are the primary tool in which melanin density in the epidermis can be estimated and implemented in evaluating the accuracy of self-reported skin types.

**Inconsistencies with Self-Reporting and Ethnic Skin**

It is important to highlight that the Fitzpatrick skin type is a classification intended to reflect sun sensitivity and not a proxy for racial or phenotypic features. The description of the skin by color – white, brown, black – was meant to denote complexion rather than a self-identification of ethnic origin.

The difficulty in assessing ethnic skin with the current Fitzpatrick skin type system can be traced to the origin skin types V and VI. When these additional types were created in 1988, the initial intention was to place all black individuals into the type VI category. However, people with mixed heritage or races who identify as black often self-report in a variety of categories, ranging from type IV to type VI.

**Laser Therapy in Ethnic Skin**

Structural and functional differences between darkly pigmented and lightly pigmented skin are important considerations when performing laser or light-based procedures. In general, darker skin types possess increased epidermal melanin, larger and more widely distributed melanosomes, and reactive fibroblasts.

There are a number of factors to consider when treating individuals with Fitzpatrick skin types IV through VI. Melanin in the epidermis acts as a chromophore, absorbing more laser energy and increasing the risk of adverse events from epidermal injury in those with darkly pigmented skin. To circumvent this risk, longer wavelength lasers are recommended. Deeper penetration of the laser allows for an increased ratio of the temperature of the hair bulb to the temperature of the epidermis, leading to follicular destruction with little epidermal damage.

With regards to laser or light procedures, the risk of post-procedural hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation is greater in patients with Fitzpatrick skin types IV through VI. In general, dyschromia is one of the most common reasons why individuals with skin of color visit dermatologists, stemming from their tendency for injury or inflammation to alter pigment production.