First and foremost, HRS involves establishing euvolemia while stopping all nephrotoxic agents. The active medical treatment of HRS is directed at splanchnic vasoconstriction which results in increased systemic vascular resistance and mean arterial pressure. This via counter-regulatory mechanism suppresses the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and the SNS. In turn, this reduces renal vasoconstriction and improves renal blood flow. This is achieved with several different combinations of medical therapy. In Europe, a combination of terlipressin and albumin improves renal perfusion in patients with HRS Type 1 and can work in some patients with HRS Type 2.

When medical management fails, surgical/interventional management involves placement of a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS). This type of surgical treatment is established with the insertion of an intrahepatic stent to connect the portal vein to the hepatic vein. The shunt redirects portal blood into the systemic circulation, reducing portal pressure and increasing systemic venous return. This reduces the arterial hypoperfusion and thereby downregulates stimulation of the RAAS and SNS.

Definitive treatment for HRS is established through liver transplantation and provides the best long-term survival benefit.

Other experimental techniques such as molecular adsorbent recirculating system, a modified dialysis technique aimed at removing substances causing vasodilation like nitric oxide, tumor necrosis factor, and cytokines have not been shown to improve overall survival. Renal replacement therapy has been tried in patients that do not respond to the vasoconstrictors above or are poor candidates for TIPS. However, both these therapies may be considered more appropriate as a bridge to transplant.

Patients with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis should be treated promptly and remain on long-term antibiotic therapy to prevent the development of HRS. Those with sepsis from other sources should also be treated promptly to limit the release of sepsis-related vasoactive mediators.