Medical management of biliary strictures is largely restricted to addressing complications from biliary obstructions and sometimes treatment of the causative agent. Therefore, analgesics, empiric antibiotics, plus hemodynamic support with intravenous fluids with or without vasopressors and inotropes are often instituted where applicable.

The goal of the interventions for biliary strictures includes reestablishing patency and avoiding additional procedures.

In general endoscopic treatment is the first-line treatment of biliary strictures.

**Common Interventions for Biliary Strictures**

**Dilatation**

- The preferred approach for the management of benign biliary stricture

- Balloon dilatation used extensively for strictures resulting from primary sclerosing cholangitis

- Commonly performed endoscopically

- Tracts resulting from percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage can be used for access during dilatation

******Stenting**

- Commonly performed endoscopically

- Useful in the management of both benign and malignant common bile duct (CBD) strictures

- Used to reduce hyperbilirubinemia or cholangitis in patients before definitive surgery

- Useful for palliation in inoperable malignant strictures

**Resection and Anastomosis**

- The decision depends on whether it’s a malignant or benign stricture and whether the desired outcome is palliative or curative

- Associated with significant morbidity and cost

**Bypass**

- Hepaticojejunostomy may make it difficult in the future to perform ERCP

- Bypass may involve choledochoduodenostomy in certain cases

Image-guided percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage catheter may be placed for palliation of hyperbilirubinemia in patients with either inoperable disease or until completion of neoadjuvant therapy.

A biliary sphincterotomy involves the division of the biliary sphincter of Oddi and the intraduodenal segment of the common bile duct. It enables removal of stones, placement of stents, and assists endoscopic access for future ERCP. It also facilitates balloon dilatation.

Novel techniques for the management of biliary strictures include magnetic compression anastomosis (MCA), intraductal radiofrequency ablation, and biodegradable stents.