The differential diagnosis of NVG includes diseases with similar clinical presentations and diseases that can be ascribed to the etiologies of retinal ischemia.

Acute angle-closure glaucoma is a close mimicker of NVG where corneal edema, anterior segment inflammation, and minimally engorged iris vessels can be associated with raised IOP. Gonioscopy of the other eye assists in the diagnosis by the findings of a shallow anterior chamber and occludable angle. Fundus examination may be difficult in the presence of hazy cornea. Retinal ischemia should be ruled by fundoscopy or, if needed, by fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA).

Eyes with acute or chronic uveitis may mimic NVG. The presence of keratic precipitates (KPs) lining the endothelium and engorged blood vessels (rather than fine, lacy vessels) over the iris can suggest uveitis as the underlying etiology.

Eyes in the post-operative period of anterior segment ophthalmic surgeries may present with engorged iris vessels. However, these vessels can be differentiated from neovascularization of the iris. These engorged blood vessels are radial, present over the iris stroma, do not cross the scleral spur, unlike the arborizing superficial placed NVI, which cross the scleral spur.

Eyes with posterior segment tumors may present with engorged iris vessels. These tumors should be diagnosed promptly with the help of fundoscopy, B-scan ultrasound, UBM, gonioscopy, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan.

A carotid-cavernous fistula can present with new blood vessels over the iris. Gonioscopy in these eyes can find blood in the Schlemm’s canal. Radiology of the brain and orbits will aid in the diagnosis.

The ocular ischemic syndrome presents with anterior segment neovascularization, which may be associated with normal or low IOP. Carotid doppler study or magnetic resonance angiography helps to identify the stenosis of the carotid vessels.

Neovascularization of the anterior segment of the eye can also be seen in anterior segment dysgenesis (especially essential iris atrophy). Corectopia and iris atrophy can be helpful in the diagnosis of these eyes. Other conditions such as pseudoexfoliation syndrome and Fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis can also present with new vessels over the anterior segment of the eyes with raised IOP.