# Continuing Education Activity

Neonatal jaundice or neonatal hyperbilirubinemia results from elevated total serum bilirubin (TSB) and clinically manifests as yellowish discoloration of the skin, sclera, and mucous membrane. In most cases, it is a mild, transient, and self-limiting condition and is referred to as "physiological Jaundice." However, it is imperative to distinguish this from a more severe form called "pathological Jaundice." Failure to identify and treat this entity may result in bilirubin encephalopathy and associated neurological sequelae. This activity reviews the etiology, pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of neonatal jaundice and the role of the interprofessional team in the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify pathological jaundice and differentiate it from physiological jaundice.
- Describe various causes of neonatal jaundice.
- Review evidence-based management options for neonatal jaundice.
- Explain how the interprofessional team can work collaboratively to prevent the potentially profound complications of neonatal jaundice by applying knowledge about the presentation, evaluation, and management of this condition.

# Introduction

Neonatal jaundice or neonatal hyperbilirubinemia results from elevated total serum bilirubin (TSB) and clinically manifests as yellowish discoloration of the skin, sclera, and mucous membrane. The term jaundice derives from the French word "jaune," which means yellow. It is the most commonly encountered medical problem in the first two weeks of life and a common cause of readmission to the hospital after birth.

Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (UHB) is the cause of clinical jaundice in most neonates, but some infants with jaundice have conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (CHB), which is always pathological and signifies an underlying medical or surgical cause. The etiology of pathological UHB and CHB is vast and varied. Preterm infants and those born with congenital enzyme deficiencies are particularly prone to the harmful effects of unconjugated bilirubin on the central nervous system.

# Etiology

There are two distinct types of Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.

**Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia(UHB) or Indirect Hyperbilirubinemia**

Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is the more common type and is either physiological or pathological. Physiological jaundice accounts for 75% of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and results from a physiological alteration in neonatal bilirubin metabolism. Healthy adults have a normal TSB level of less than 1mg/dl in contrast to neonates, where TSB levels are physiologically higher. Even in healthy full-term newborns, there is an increased bilirubin load owing to increased red blood cells (RBC) mass and a decreased RBC lifespan. Clearance of bilirubin is also compromised due to impaired activity of uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT), the enzyme needed for bilirubin conjugation. The UGT enzyme in a newborn has an activity of about 1% of the adult level.

Jaundice is considered pathological if it presents on the first day of life, TSB is more than the 95th centile for age based on age-specific bilirubin nomograms, levels rise by more than 5 mg/dL/day or more than 0.2 mg/dL/hour, or jaundice persists beyond 2 to 3 weeks in full-term infants.

Based on the mechanism of bilirubin elevation, the etiology of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be subdivided into the following three categories:

**Increased Bilirubin Production**

Immune-mediated hemolysis -   Includes blood group incompatibilities such as ABO and Rhesus incompatibility.

Non-immune mediated hemolysis - includes RBC membrane defects like hereditary spherocytosis and elliptocytosis; RBC enzyme defects like glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency; pyruvate kinase deficiency; sequestration like cephalohematoma, subgaleal hemorrhage, Intracranial hemorrhage; polycythemia, and sepsis.

**Decreased Bilirubin Clearance**

Crigler-Najjar type I & II, and Gilbert syndrome.

**Miscellaneous Causes**

Other miscellaneous etiologies include the infant of a mother with diabetes, congenital hypothyroidism, drugs like sulfa drugs, ceftriaxone, and penicillins, Intestinal obstruction, pyloric stenosis, breast milk jaundice, breastfeeding jaundice.

Exaggerated hemolysis, either immune or non-immune mediated, is the most common cause of pathological hyperbilirubinemia in newborns. Immune-mediated hemolysis is seen with blood group incompatibility such as  ABO/RH incompatibility and leads to hemolytic disease of newborns (HDN). In HDN, due to ABO incompatibility, preformed maternal anti-A and anti-B antibodies of immunoglobulin (Ig) G subclass cross the placenta and cause hemolysis and UHB in newborns with blood type A, B, or AB. Although the direct Coombs test is used to aid diagnosis, the sensitivity and positive predictive value for predicting severe UHB are low.

In Rhesus (Rh) incompatibility, an Rh-negative mother who has been previously exposed to Rh-positive RBCs usually from a previous pregnancy or miscarriage, becomes sensitized and develops antibodies against Rh antigen. Initially, sensitization produces IgM antibodies that can not cross the placenta. However, during subsequent pregnancies, the antibody class switch produces IgG antibodies which can cross the placenta, causing RBC hemolysis in the fetus with Rh-positive blood. The Rh antigen is very immunogenic, and the resultant HDN is usually severe, often leading to hydrops in fetuses or severe UHB in newborns. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) has recommended that all Rh-negative pregnant women receive anti-D immune globulin at 28 weeks of gestation and again following delivery if the infant is Rh-positive/unknown.

Non-immune causes of UHB include RBC enzyme defects, RBC membrane defects, hemoglobinopathies, sepsis, sequestration, and polycythemia. The glucose-6 phosphatase dehydrogenase (G6PD) enzyme deficiency is the most common RBC enzyme defect and is transmitted as an X-linked recessive trait. G6PD protects RBCs against oxidative damage by generating NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate hydrogenase) from NADP (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate). When exposed to oxidant stressors like illness, certain medications, dyes, and foods like fava beans, G6PD deficient RBCs are hemolyzed, causing anemia and hyperbilirubinemia. More than 200 different types of mutations are known to cause G6PD deficiency.

UHB due to RBC membrane defects includes hereditary spherocytosis (HS) and hereditary elliptocytosis (HE). HS, also known as Minkowski Chauffard disease, is the most common RBC membrane defect caused by mutations in RBC membrane proteins.

RBC sequestrations from cephalohematoma, subgaleal hemorrhage, and Intracranial hemorrhage are also important causes or risk factors for UHB in the neonatal period due to increased bilirubin load. Polycythemia is another entity associated with an increased risk of UHB in newborns. Clinical conditions associated with polycythemia are intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), infant of diabetic mothers (IDM), large for gestational age (LGA), maternal smoking, high altitude, twin to twin transfusion, and placental transfusion (delayed cord clamping/umbilical cord milking). Studies have shown that placental transfusion reduces the incidence of postnatal anemia and leads to improved neurodevelopmental outcomes among term and preterm infants.

Indirect hyperbilirubinemia due to decreased bilirubin clearance usually results from quantitative or qualitative defects in the uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzyme. Gilbert syndrome, Crigler–Najjar syndrome type 1, and Crigler–Najjar syndrome type 2 are three prototype disorders resulting from an abnormality in the UGT enzyme. Gilbert syndrome is the most common of these and results from a mutation in the UGT1A1 gene resulting in decreased UGT production leading to unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

Breast milk jaundice and breastfeeding jaundice are two other common etiologies of UHB in newborns. Breastfeeding jaundice, also known as breastfeeding failure jaundice, occurs in the first week of life and is due to inadequate intake of breast milk leading to dehydration and sometimes hypernatremia.

Other miscellaneous causes of UHB include IDM, gastrointestinal obstruction, congenital hypothyroidism, certain medications. IDMs often have polycythemia which is mainly responsible for the increased incidence of jaundice in these infants.

The majority of infants with clinical UHB have a combination of two or more factors discussed earlier. Furthermore, certain recognized risk factors predispose an infant to jaundice. These risk factors comprise prematurity, a history of jaundice in previous siblings requiring phototherapy, Asian ethnicity, male gender, and exclusive breastfeeding.

**Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia(CHB) or Direct Hyperbilirubinemia**

Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, also referred to as neonatal cholestasis, is characterized by elevation of serum conjugated/direct) bilirubin (> 1.0 mg/dL) and is due to impaired hepatobiliary function. Distinguishing CHB from UHB is critical because cholestatic jaundice/CHB is almost always pathologic and warrants prompt evaluation and treatment.

The causes of neonatal cholestasis/CHB are extensive and can be classified into the following categories:

**Obstruction of biliary flow:**Biliary atresia, choledochal cysts, neonatal sclerosing cholangitis, neonatal cholelithiasis

**Infections:**CMV, HIV, rubella, herpes virus, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, urinary tract infection (UTI), septicemia

**Genetic causes**: Alagille syndrome, alpha-1 anti-trypsin deficiency, galactosemia, fructosemia, Tyrosinemia type 1, cystic fibrosis, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC), Aagenaes syndrome, Dubin-Johnson syndrome, Bile acid synthesis disorders(BSAD)

**Miscellaneous:**Idiopathic neonatal hepatitis, parenteral nutrition induced cholestasis, gestational alloimmune liver disease/neonatal hemochromatosis, hypotension,

Biliary atresia (BA) is the most common cause of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in infants.

Choledochal cysts involve dilation of the intrahepatic and extra-hepatic bile duct. Ultrasonography can detect cysts with normal or dilated intrahepatic bile ducts as opposed to sclerosed ducts in biliary atresia. However, cystic biliary atresia may resemble choledochal cysts.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common congenital infection that manifests in various ways. Most infected newborns are asymptomatic, but hepatomegaly and CHB are the most prominent feature of hepatic involvement.

Alagille syndrome (ALGS) is an AD disorder caused by mutations in JAG1 or NOTCH2 genes leading to a lack of interlobular bile ducts.

Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency is the most common genetic cause of cholestatic and may mimic biliary atresia in early infancy. Accumulation of anti-trypsin polymers in the endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes of a patient with the PiZZ genotype leads to apoptosis of hepatocytes, ultimately resulting in cholestasis and cirrhosis later in childhood.Escherichia coli sepsis after the ingestion of galactose from milk.

Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) is a heterogeneous group of three genetic disorders that present with cholestasis. They are related to mutations in one of the genes involved in canalicular hepatobiliary transport.

Parenteral nutrition-associated cholestasis (PNAC) is an important iatrogenic cause of cholestasis recognized most commonly in preterm infants managed with parenteral nutrition (PN). PNAC is present in about 20% of neonates who have received PN for more than two weeks.

In GALD, maternal IgG immunoglobulin against fetal hepatocytes crosses the placenta causing complement-mediated damage to fetal hepatocytes. Patients present with signs of liver failure in the form of hypoglycemic, coagulopathy, hypoalbuminemia, cholestatic jaundice, edema, and elevated liver enzymes. The risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies is almost 90%, and GALD can result in fetal or neonatal deaths.

# Epidemiology

Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is a commonly encountered problem in the neonatal period. It is estimated that about 60% of term and 80% of preterm newborns will present with clinical jaundice with TSB >5 mg/dl.

Only a minority of infants with neonatal jaundice have a pathological cause of jaundice. The incidence of severe hyperbilirubinemia, defined as TSB>25 mg/dl, is about 1 in 2500 live birth. Among these, ABO incompatibility followed by G6PD deficiency is the most frequently identified cause identified.

The incidence of acute bilirubin encephalopathy is seen at a rate of approximately 1 in 10,000 live births, whereas the incidence of chronic bilirubin encephalopathy is lower, with an estimated incidence of 1 in  50,000 to 100,000 live births.

Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is much less common compared to UCH, with a frequency of around 1 in  2500 term infants.

# Pathophysiology

Bilirubin is produced from the catabolism of heme, a breakdown product of hemoglobin, in the reticuloendothelial system (RES). First, heme is converted to biliverdin, releasing iron and carbon monoxide via the action of enzyme heme oxygenase.

Newborn infants have higher TSB levels than adults owing to higher hemoglobin levels at birth, along with a shorter RBC life span and limited conjugating ability of the newborn liver.

In severe hyperbilirubinemia, unbound and unconjugated bilirubin crosses the blood-brain barrier and binds to the brainstem, hippocampus, cerebellum, globus pallidus, and subthalamic nuclei.

Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia results from abnormalities in the uptake, metabolism, transport, and/or excretion of bile salts and bilirubin.

# Histopathology

The term Kernicterus denotes yellow staining of deeper brain nuclei seen on autopsy specimens on infants with severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. The histopathologic features seen on these autopsies include nuclei that have undergone pyknosis, the presence of vacuolation in the cytoplasm, and fading of the Nissl substance.

A liver biopsy is often needed for making a definitive diagnosis of cholestasis. It may help differentiate Biliary atresia from idiopathic neonatal hepatitis. Histopathological features of BA  include the expansion of the hepatic portal tracts with edema, fibro-dysplasia, bile ductular proliferation, and bile plugs in the ductal lumen. Multinucleate giant cells and hemopoiesis are other features often seen on histopathologic exams of cholestatic liver samples.

Among familial causes of cholestasis, canalicular cholestasis with a marked absence of ductular proliferation and isolated periportal biliary metaplasia of the hepatocytes is commonly seen in PFIC1 patients. In PFIC2 patients, the histopathology is similar except that altered liver architecture and extensive lobular and portal fibrosis with inflammation are more common.

# History and Physical

The evaluation of the neonate with jaundice starts with a detailed history, including birth history, family history, the onset of jaundice, and maternal serologies. Color of stool and urine presence of pruritis should be assessed for infants evaluated for jaundice and may provide a clue to the type of jaundice. The American Academy recommends universal screening of all newborns for jaundice and identifying risk factors for developing severe hyperbilirubinemia.

To assess for jaundice, newborns should ideally be examined in daylight. However, the clinical assessment may be unreliable, especially if a newborn has received phototherapy or has dark skin.

# Evaluation

**Diagnosis of Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

Bilirubin levels can be assessed using a transcutaneous measurement device or blood samples for total serum bilirubin. Transcutaneous estimation of bilirubin reduces the frequency of blood tests, but its utility is limited in infants with dark skin and following phototherapy use.

Recommended workup for identifying a hemolytic disease as the cause of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia include maternal/neonatal blood type, Coombs test, complete blood cell (CBC), reticulocyte count, blood smear, and G6PD. Serum albumin should always be checked, especially if TSB level approaches near the exchange transfusion levels, as it is considered a surrogate marker for free bilirubin. Free bilirubin is the fraction responsible for bilirubin-induced toxicity.

Radiographic imaging is usually not required for most cases of UCH. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings have high sensitivity for bilirubin encephalopathy, with posteromedial borders of the globus pallidus being the most sensitive brain region for detecting signal changes. Infants with bilirubin encephalopathy demonstrate hyperintense signals on T1-weighted sequences in the acute stage that eventually becomes hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences as the disease evolves. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy(MRS) shows increased levels of glutamate and decreased levels of  N-acetyl-aspartate and choline.

**Diagnosis of Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

In patients with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, the serum aminotransferases should be ordered for evidence of hepatocellular injury, alkaline phosphatase, and GGT levels for evidence of obstruction in biliary channels,  prothrombin time/INR, and serum albumin to evaluate for hepatic synthetic function. Additional tests like TORCH titers, urine cultures, viral cultures, serologic titers, Newborn screening results, specific tests for inborn errors of metabolism,  alpha-1 antitrypsin phenotype, and specific genetics tests may be needed depending on the scenario.

Radiology is often necessary as part of the workup of neonatal cholestasis. Hepatic ultrasonography may help identify sludging in the biliary tree, gallstones, inspissated bile, and choledochal cysts. Triangular cord sign seen on hepatic ultrasound has high sensitivity and almost 100% specificity for biliary atresia.

# Treatment / Management

**Treatment of Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

Phototherapy and exchange transfusion are the mainstay of treatment for patients with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

**Phototherapy**

Phototherapy (PT) remains the first-line treatment for managing pathological unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. PT is very effective in reducing TSB to safe levels and reduces the risk of bilirubin toxicity and the need for exchange transfusion. Phototherapy is started based on risk factors and the TSB levels on the bilirubin nomogram.

Bilirubin absorbs light optimally in the blue-green range (460 to 490 nm). PT works by inducing bilirubin photoisomerization and converting bilirubin into lumirubin, which is the rate-limiting step for bilirubin excretion.

Few studies have also reported an increased incidence of solid organ tumors and non-lymphocytic leukemias in children treated with phototherapy.

**Exchange Transfusion**

Exchange transfusion (ET), the first successful treatment ever used for jaundice, is currently the second-line treatment for severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

**Intravenous Immunoglobulin (IVIG)**

IVIG is used when immune-mediated hemolysis is the cause of UHB jaundice and prevents RBC hemolysis by coating Fc receptors on RBCs.The AAP recommends IVIG infusion in immune-mediated hemolysis if TSB remains within 2 to 3 mg/dl of exchange level despite intensive phototherapy.

**Treatment of Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

Treatment of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is tailored to the specific etiology. Patients diagnosed with biliary atresia require a Kasai operation (hepatic portoenterostomy) preferably within two months of life for best outcomes.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for neonatal jaundice is quite limited as it can easily be diagnosed by a physical exam in a newborn. In a rare situation, high carotene levels may cause yellowish discoloration of the skin and may be mistaken to be hyperbilirubinemia.

# Staging

Bilirubin encephalopathy in patients with severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia has different manifestations depending on the time of presentation. The level at which unconjugated bilirubin becomes neurotoxic is unclear, and kernicterus has been reported in infants in the absence of markedly elevated levels of bilirubin on autopsy.

**Acute bilirubin encephalopathy:**has been described to evolve through three stages:

**Phase 1:**The symptoms of phase 1 are seen during the first one-two days of illness and are marked by poor feeding, lethargy, hypotonia, or frank seizures.

**Phase 2:**If the infants continue to deteriorate, they may progress to phase 2, characterized by increased tone, especially of the extensor group of muscles leading to opisthotonus and retrocollis. These signs are typically seen during the middle of the first week of illness.

**Phase 3:**This phase, seen after the first week, is mainly dominated by increased tone.

**Chronic Bilirubin encephalopathy:**This condition is present in two forms depending on the timing of symptoms.

**Chronic Bilirubin encephalopathy in the First year:**These patients present with hypotonia, exaggerated deep tendon reflexes, obligatory tonic neck reflexes, delayed motor milestones

**Chronic Bilirubin encephalopathy beyond the First year:**Highlights of this phase include movement disorders (most commonly choreoathetosis), choreo-athetoid type of cerebral palsy, dental enamel hypoplasia, upward gaze abnormality, and sensorineural hearing loss.

# Prognosis

With treatment, the prognosis for most types of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is excellent. In those with delayed or inadequate treatment, bilirubin encephalopathy may ensue. The burden of bilirubin encephalopathy is significantly higher in developing and resource-limited nations.

The prognosis for conjugated hyperbilirubinemia depends on the etiology. The outcome and prognosis of patients with biliary atresia are significantly improved by early diagnosis and surgery within 60 days of life. Similarly, patients with bile acid synthesis disorder (BASD) have an excellent prognosis as they respond very well to medical treatment. Historically, the prognosis for gestational alloimmune liver disease (GALD) was poor, with up to 80% mortality without liver transplantation. However, with the advent of IVIG use and double volume exchange transfusion, the prognosis for this disease has greatly improved in recent years.

# Complications

Newborns with severe hyperbilirubinemia are at risk for bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction (BIND). Bilirubin binds to globus pallidus, hippocampus, cerebellum, and subthalamic nuclear bodies, causing neurotoxicity.

# Consultations

A pediatric or neonatal provider can manage most patients with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. However, patients suspected of genetic causes of hyperbilirubinemia may need consultations and follow-ups with a pediatric gastroenterologist, hematologist, and medical geneticist.

Patients suspected of neonatal cholestasis should be referred to a pediatric gastroenterologist at the earliest. Most of these patients will need a battery of investigation, and once a cause of cholestasis is identified, more referrals would be warranted. Infants diagnosed with biliary atresia also need a referral to a pediatric gastrointestinal surgeon for corrective surgery. Likewise, patients with inborn errors of metabolism would need a consultation with a metabolic specialist as well as a medical geneticist and a Dietician experienced in metabolic disorders.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Detailed counseling, depending on the etiology of neonatal jaundice, is vital to improving the long-term outcome. Most patients with the common causes of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia have an excellent prognosis, and parents need to be educated to alleviate fear and anxiety. Jaundice from etiologies that carry poor prognosis often requires multidisciplinary interventions, and parents should be adequately counseled and educated. Genetic counseling and referrals to medical geneticists should also be offered to parents whenever a child is diagnosed with hereditary hyperbilirubinemias.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Neonatal jaundice is a common condition with varied etiologies. Most cases are benign with an excellent prognosis and resolve with or without treatment. However, bilirubin encephalopathy can complicate clinical course in a few. Health care professionals taking care of newborn needs to be aware of this. While many conditions that cause jaundice cannot be diagnosed right away, education about the disease is critical. Nurses and parents are often the first to notice jaundice in a newborn. After discharge from the birth hospital, parents need to be educated by the nurses, pediatricians, obstetricians, and the family practice providers to monitor for jaundice and seek medical care if it worsens.

The availability of a  2-color icterometer can help parents identify jaundice earlier for prompt medical intervention. Nurses can also train mothers on how to examine the skin and eyes of neonates for jaundice. In addition, a smartphone app can also help parents assess jaundice. An interprofessional team approach including nurses, lab-technician, providers from various sub-specialties, and nutritionists is necessary for the best outcome. Every health care provider involved in the care of a jaundiced newborn needs to be updated on current evidence-based management approaches. Nurses play a vital role by monitoring treatments, educating parents, and keeping the team apprised about changes in the patient's condition. [Level 5]  As per the American Academy of Pediatrics, every newborn must have a predischarge bilirubin check and should also be assessed for risk factors associated with the development of severe hyperbilirubinemia to improve patient outcomes.