MFS is mainly treated with adequate supportive care, pain control, respiratory support as needed, and immunotherapy. Although used in the past, oral or intravenous (IV) steroids are no longer recommended in the treatment of GBS or MFS because they are ineffective. Corticosteroids may slow recovery from GBS they are recommended only in the setting of neuropathic or radicular pain. IV immunoglobulin (IVIg) and plasma exchange are both effective treatments for GBS and severe cases of MFS. No difference exists between the primary outcomes of mortality, disability, and length of intubation between IVIG and plasmapheresis. Patients with MFS usually do not require immunotherapy, presumably because they have a good prognosis and spontaneous recovery. IVIG should be considered in patients with severe Miller Fisher syndrome who have swallowing and respiratory difficulties, despite lack of supporting evidence of benefit. Overall, IVIG is preferred over exchange due to convenience, availability, and minimal adverse effects, however; the cost can be prohibitive for some low income or underinsured patients.

Before IV immunoglobulin therapy, clinicians should check serum IgA levels because patients with IgA deficiency are at higher risk of anaphylaxis. The usual IVIg dose is 2 g/kg divided over 2 to 5 days.  A second treatment course may be necessary for some patients. In children and adolescents, a dose of 1 g/kg per dose IV daily for 2 days is given. Alternatively, 400 mg/kg per dose IV daily for 5 days has been used. For patients with renal impairment, clinicians should use approximately 50% of the usual dose. Plasma exchange is effective when given within 2 weeks of illness onset in patients who are unable to walk, reaching highest effectiveness within seven days of weakness onset. Plasma exchange sessions (2 to 3 L of plasma/body weight) over 2 weeks is the standard course for patients who are unable to walk without assistance. Mildly affected patients with low disability score still benefit from 2 plasma exchanges of 1.5 plasma volumes. Contraindications for plasma exchange include the recent prior use of IV immunoglobulin infusion therapy, hemodynamic instability, pregnancy, sepsis, and hypocalcemia.

Pain relief is an important consideration and a barrier to rehabilitation in the hospital. In a study of pain intervention in patients with GBS, 75% of patients required oral or parenteral opioids for pain management and 30% of patients required IV opiates. Therefore, an optimal pain regimen early in the course of the disease is important to accelerate recovery. A combination of medications is often needed as because of the mixed nature of the pain. Indicated medications include gabapentin, pregabalin, carbamazepine, and amitriptyline. Corticosteroids can be used to address neuropathic or radicular pain. Oral or intravenous opioids, for example, IV morphine 1 to 7 mg per hour, should be used with extreme care due to the suppressing effect on respiratory drive, and autonomic system side effects like urinary retention.

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylactic therapy should be started promptly to reduce the risk of pulmonary embolism. Administration of prophylactic doses of subcutaneous heparin or enoxaparin is appropiate. Alternatively, mechanical compression stockings can be used in adult patients unable to walk. If autonomic dysfunction is present, additional supportive treatment may be necessary. If the patient is moderate to severely bradycardic and at risk of asystole, the patient may require a cardiac pacemaker. If dysphagia is present, a nasogastric tube may be necessary for feeding and nutrition. Bladder catheterization can relieve patients with urinary retention. A bowel regimen will be indicated to help with constipation. Early physical therapy during the illness and early rehabilitation is pivotal once patient clinically improves.

Inpatient and intensive care unit (ICU) disposition is an important consideration for a patient with acute GBS and its variant MFS. This is based on symptoms severity, and, most importantly, respiratory status. Mechanical ventilation is required for the 20% to 30% of patients who develop respiratory failure; endotracheal intubation and even a tracheostomy may be necessary. Signs of respiratory muscle fatigue include tachycardia, tachypnea, asynchronous chest/abdomen movement, and evident use of accessory muscles. All patients with acute debilitating symptoms, as mentioned, are admitted inpatient for supportive care. ICU admission and mechanical ventilation are recommended in patients with at least 1 major criterion or 2 minor criteria. Major criteria include hypercapnia PaCO2 greater than 48 mm Hg, hypoxemia PaO2 less than 56 mm Hg at room air, vital capacity less than 15 mL/kg of body weight, and negative inspiratory force less than -30 cm H2O. Minor criteria include an inefficient/weak cough, dysphagia, and atelectasis as evidenced in a chest x-ray.