Dumping syndrome is likely caused by the rapid movement of chyme. In patients without gastric surgery, digestion is initiated in the stomach, and the transition to the duodenum occurs progressively. Acid and proteases initiate the breakdown of food, promoting smaller food particles to be digested in the duodenum. This physiological process is weakened when there is surgical manipulation of this pathway. The pylorus bypass or alteration of the gastric innervation can produce effects of decreased stomach reserve or rapid transit of hyperosmolar food material into the duodenum.

In addition, the enteric nervous system plays a major role in the regulation of gastric emptying, involving several gastrointestinal (GI) hormones and the extrinsic innervation.

There are two types of problems that can arise from gastric surgery- early and late dumping syndromes.

**Early Dumping**

In early dumping, the symptoms usually occur within 10 to 30 minutes after a meal. The rapid transit of hyperosmolar chyme from the stomach into the duodenum causes fluid to shift from the vasculature to the intestinal lumen, leading to increased volume in the small bowel. This is believed to be the cause of abdominal cramps, tachycardia, nausea, and diarrhea.

GI hormones such as enteroglucagon, pancreatic polypeptide, peptide YY, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, glucagon-like peptide, and neurotensin have been evident with higher values after meals. Hormonal imbalances may cause delayed motility, decreased gastric and intestinal secretions, which delays the digestion and transit of food that arrives at the small bowel.

**Late Dumping**

Late dumping, also known as postprandial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, usually occurs 1 to 3 hours after a high-carbohydrate meal. There is an association with hypoglycemia, but the exact mechanism is unknown. It is proposed that the rapid absorption of carbohydrates exaggerates the glucose-mediated insulin response.