- Superior oblique myokymia presents with episodic unilateral low-amplitude and high-frequency torsional and vertical movements of the eye with associated binocular vertical double vision and unilateral oscillopsia.

- The clinical findings may be subtle, so it is not uncommon for patients to have been seen by several physicians before a correct diagnosis of SOM is made.

- SOM should be suspected when examining any patient with a history of intermittent unilateral oscillopsia or binocular double vision.

- Interval examinations may be necessary because of the episodic nature of SOM.

- The diagnosis may be missed if the patient is not examined carefully on the slit lamp.

- It is thought that SOM occurs because of altered membrane thresholds of the trochlear nerve, resulting in the ephaptic transmission of impulses. Compression of the trochlear nerve by an artery is seen in some patients.

- Patients who do not respond to medical treatment should be investigated with contrast-enhanced MRI studies.

- A substantial number of patients with SOM will require no treatment.

- Response to topical beta-blockers and other systemic medications is excellent in most patients.

- Surgical intervention with surgery to the superior oblique tendon should be undertaken by experienced strabismologists who have experience operating on the superior and inferior oblique muscles.

- Specialized teams should only take neurosurgical intervention with experience in the rare neurovascular surgical decompression procedure.