Steroids have been studied in the prophylactic administration to prevent post-extubation stridor by various randomized trials and reviews, with most of them suggesting positive results.

Evidence for clinical benefits of adrenaline nebulization in the management of post-extubation stridor or laryngeal edema lacks in adults though adrenaline nebulization is used in pediatric populations to relieve upper airway edema in acute severe croup.

The combined use of intravenous steroids and adrenaline nebulization did not mitigate the progression of airway obstruction secondary to laryngeal edema in a randomized study in neonates and children.

Heliox (helium and oxygen mixture) has been shown to decrease the post-extubation stridor scores in pediatric trauma patients.

For practical purposes, all patients at high risk for post-extubation laryngeal edema and/or stridor (as mentioned above in the 2017 ATS/ACCP guidelines) should undergo a bedside CLT, and all negative CLT patients (i.e., the negative value from normal cut off with reduced or absent leak) should receive IV methylprednisolone 40 mg at least 4 hours before extubation. The extubation in such cases needs to be monitored closely. An airway exchanger could be kept up to an hour or so in the larynx (after extubation), anticipating the need to thread the endotracheal tube in case of any unexpected difficulty in reintubation. If the patient continues to be asymptomatic after an hour, the active monitoring could be reduced, and routine plans are carried out appropriately.

Symptomatic patients not getting better with anti-edema measures (IV steroids/adrenaline nebulizations) are monitored up to an hour before reintubation. If the patient is significantly symptomatic in the post-extubation period but slowly getting better clinically within this one hour period, IV steroids and adrenaline nebulization are continued for 24 to 48 hours. Reintubated patients are also continued on IV steroids and adrenaline nebulizations for 24 to 48 hours before reassessing for extubation versus tracheostomy. Head end elevation has been ensured to reduce the venous congestion, which is expected to mitigate the edema.

A multicentre randomized study on the trial of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) in 221 patients with post-extubation respiratory failure observed increased mortality in patients who were assigned to the NIV group likely due to delay in reintubation. The authors concluded that NIV neither reduces reintubation rate or mortality in post-extubation respiratory failure.