The physiology of stress response has two components; a slow response, mediated by the HPA axis,  and a fast response, mediated by the SAM axis. The fast response due to activation of SAM results in increased secretion of norepinephrine(NE) and epinephrine(E) from the adrenal medulla into the circulation and increased secretion of NE from the sympathetic nerves and thus result in elevated levels of NE in the brain. The released E and NE interact with α- adrenergic and β-adrenergic receptors, present in the central nervous system and on the cell membrane of smooth muscles, and other organs throughout the body. The norepinephrine(NE) and epinephrine(E), once released, bind to specific membrane-bound G-protein receptors to initiate an intracellular cAMP signaling pathway that rapidly activates cellular responses. Activation of these receptors results in, contraction of smooth and cardiac muscles cells leading to vasoconstriction, increased blood pressure, heart rate, cardiac output, skeletal muscle blood flow,  increased sodium retention,  increased glucose levels (due to glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis), lipolysis, increased oxygen consumption, and thermogenesis. It also leads to reduced intestinal motility, cutaneous vasoconstriction, bronchiolar dilatation. In addition, SAM activation cases behavioral activation (enhanced arousal, alertness, vigilance, cognition, focused attention, and analgesia).

The slow response is due to activation of the HPA axis resulting in the release of Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus into the circulation. The CRH released from the hypothalamus acts on two receptors; CRH-R1 and CRH-R2.CRH-R1 is widely expressed in the brain in mammals. It is the key receptor for the stress-induced ACTH release from the anterior pituitary. CRH-R2 is expressed primarily in peripheral tissues including skeletal muscles, gastrointestinal tract, and heart, as well as in subcortical structures of the brain. Cortisol releasing hormone binding protein CRH-BP binds with CRH with a higher affinity than CRH to its receptors. CRH-BP gets expressed in the liver, pituitary gland, brain, and placenta.

The released CRH then stimulates the anterior pituitary gland to release adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) into the bloodstream. ACTH stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete glucocorticoid hormones, such as cortisol, into the circulation. Cortisol's inactive form, cortisone, is catalyzed to its active form, cortisol, by 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases.

The HPA axis is regulated by pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP). PACAP may play a role in the production of CRH and have a modulatory role in multiple levels of the HPA axis.

Once CRH is released, it binds with cortisol releasing hormone binding protein (CRH-BP) because CRH has a higher affinity for CRH-BP than for its receptors. CRH-BP gets expressed in the liver, pituitary gland, brain, and placenta.

In exposure to stress, the expression of CRH-BP increases in a time-dependent fashion, which is thought to be a negative feedback mechanism to decrease the interaction of CRH with CRH-R1.