The primary adverse effects of latanoprost include eyelid edema, blurred vision, dry eyes, itching, redness, the growth of eyelashes, change in eyelid pigmentation (may become darker), iris, and eyelash.

- **Conjunctival Hyperemia**: Conjunctival hyperemia is one of the most common side effects noted in 5% to 15% of patients, more than in timolol-treated eyes. Latanoprost with preservative (benzalkonium chloride) may reduce the goblet cell density.

- **Hypertrichosis**: Hypertrichosis is an increase in the thickness, length, and number of eyelashes. Although this is preferred from a cosmetic point of view in some patients, the unilateral occurrence can be undesirable. The changes in the eyelashes are usually reversible after discontinuation of the drug; this is due to the stimulation of the growth phase of the hair cycle.

- **Pigmentation**: The pigmentation is due to increased melanin in the melanocytes, but the number of melanocytes does not increase. There is an upregulation of the tyrosinase activity in the melanocytes.

- **Intraocular Inflammation**: Latanoprost may worsen intraocular inflammation (uveitis) and should be avoided in the actively inflamed eye.

- **Macular Edema**: Latanoprost may induce or aggravate macular edema, including cystoid macular edema. Patients with aphakia and pseudophakia with open posterior capsules are at higher risk of developing cystoid macular edema(CME).

- **Reactivation of herpetic keratitis**: may occur with latanoprost, and patients with active herpetic keratitis should avoid latanoprost.

- **Superficial punctate keratopathy**: Damage to the ocular surface, including reduced tear break-up time, superficial punctate keratopathy may occur due to the preservative in latanoprost (benzalkonium), and the ocular surface toxicity has been noted to be less with preservative-free tafluprost.

- Other side effects of latanoprost include contact dermatitis/allergic conjunctivitis and iris cyst.