**Nonopioid analgesic agents**

- **Acetaminophen (paracetamol)**: Hypersensitivity to acetaminophen or any of its excipients, severe hepatic impairment, or severe active hepatic disease. Currently, experts are discussing whether hepatic impairment should be considered a contraindication since it would produce lower levels of the toxic metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI).

- **Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)**: Hypersensitivity is the only major contraindication for NSAID use. However, multiple conditions demand avoidance, temporary suspension, or extremely cautious use, as follows:
- Age > 50 years and family history of gastrointestinal (GI) disease/bleeding.
- Previous GI problems associated with NSAID use (eg., gastritis)
- Peptic ulcer
- History of personal GI bleeding 
- Uncontrolled hypertension
- Renal disease
- Irritable bowel syndrome
- Inflammatory bowel disease
- Coronary artery bypass surgery
- Gastric bypass surgery
- Pregnancy (third trimester)
-  Stroke (excluding aspirin)
- Transient ischemic attack (excluding aspirin)
- Myocardial infarction (excluding aspirin)
- Congestive heart failure (excluding aspirin)

- **Antidepressant medications**:
- Amitriptyline: Hypersensitivity, coadministration with or within 14 days of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), coadministration with cisapride, recent myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, acute heart failure, severe liver impairment.
- Duloxetine: Hypersensitivity, liver impairment, severe renal failure (e.g., CrCl <30 mL/minute) or end-stage renal disease (ESRD), coadministration with or within 14 days of MAOIs, concomitant use of linezolid, thioridazine, methylene blue, or potent CYP1A2 inhibitors, uncontrolled narrow-angle glaucoma. Precaution in patients with hypertension or cardiac disease.

- **Antiepileptic medications**: The only established contraindication for gabapentin and pregabalin is hypersensitivity to the respective drug or any of its excipients. However, dose adjustment is necessary for patients with compromised renal function.

- **Local anesthetics**: Lidocaine is contraindicated in patients with a previous history of sensitivity to any local anesthetic of the amide-type or any of its excipients. Additionally, the application of lidocaine patches should only be to intact skin.

**Opioid agents**

- Severe respiratory instability

- Acute mental instability or high suicidal risk

- QTc interval over 500 milliseconds (methadone)

- Family and/or personal history of substance abuse

- Intolerance, serious adverse effects or lack of efficacy to other structurally similar opioids

- Renal or hepatic impairment (depending on the specific drug metabolism and excretion)