The olfactory mucosa and olfactory neurons located in the posterosuperior portion of the nasal cavity receive blood from an abundant vascular supply formed by branches of the external and internal carotid arteries, the sphenopalatine artery and the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries respectively. The sphenopalatine artery emerges from the pterygopalatine segment of the maxillary artery, a branch of the external carotid artery. From the pterygopalatine fossa, the sphenopalatine artery courses through the sphenopalatine foramen where it reaches the upper nasal cavity posterosuperior to the middle nasal conchae. At this point, major branches called the posterior lateral nasal and nasal septal arteries form extensive networks and anastomosis.

The anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries originate from the ophthalmic artery, a branch of the internal carotid artery. The posterior ethmoidal artery arises from a proximal segment of the ophthalmic artery and passes through the posterior ethmoidal foramen located near the optic canal. The anterior ethmoidal artery originates from a more distal portion of the ophthalmic artery and courses toward the medial wall of the orbit. The anterior ethmoidal artery eventually enters the anterior ethmoidal foramen located behind the orbital margin. In conjunction with the sphenopalatine artery, the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries form extensive anastomotic networks supplying the olfactory mucosa.

Intracranially, the olfactory nerve receives its blood supply from a branch of the anterior cerebral artery called the olfactory artery. The olfactory artery arises from the lateral aspect of the A2 segment of the anterior cerebral artery—the anterior cerebral artery is divided into five segments, A1-A5. The A2 segment extends from the anterior communicating artery to the bifurcation forming the pericallosal and callosomarginal arteries. Four branches arise from the A2 segment, and these include the recurrent artery of Heubner, the orbitofrontal artery, the frontopolar artery, and the olfactory artery. The olfactory artery typically arises immediately beyond the origin of the anterior communicating artery and between the origins of the orbitofrontal artery and the recurrent artery of Heubner.

From its branch point, the olfactory artery runs above the optic nerve, where it reaches the olfactory sulcus and adheres to the ventral surface of the olfactory tract by arachnoid. The olfactory artery has three terminal branches, and along its course within the olfactory sulcus supplies the entire olfactory tract and olfactory bulb.