Respiratory failure is one of the most important and common causes of patient admissions to the intensive care unit. It has a plethora of causes and, depending on the duration of the condition; can be broadly categorized as either acute or chronic respiratory failure. Treatment of the underlying cause and supportive measures, involving the utilization of ventilatory support, form the fundamental principles in the management of respiratory failure.

In the last few years, non-invasive ventilation has gained increased prominence in the management of a variety of conditions causing acute as well as chronic respiratory failure. As studies demonstrating its benefits have materialized, its usage has become more widespread and widely accepted. Contrary to invasive ventilation, which uses an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube, non-invasive ventilation makes use of nasal masks, oronasal masks, total face masks, mouthpiece, or the helmet for respiratory assistance. Without causing any of the complications of invasive ventilation, non-invasive ventilation, ultimately, achieves adequate gaseous exchange correcting hypoxemia and/or hypercapnia. Different modalities of non-invasive ventilation exist, with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) being the most commonly used modes. Average volume-assured pressure support (AVAPS) is a relatively newer modality of non-invasive ventilation that integrates the characteristics of both volume and pressure-controlled non-invasive ventilation.

This review article focuses on AVAPS, its functioning, clinical significance, complications, and interprofessional communication to enhance health care outcomes.