**History**

- General

- Pelvic pain/pressure.

- Urologic

- Urinary hesitancy/frequency/urgency, dysuria, bladder pain, incontinence- urge, and stress.

- Gynecologic

- dyspareunia (during/after intercourse), sexual arousal, orgasm, bulging from the vagina.

- Colorectal

- Difficult/straining/incomplete evacuation of stool, bloating, constipation, fecal incontinence/leaking, prolapse/protrusion from anus.

- Splinting- pressure within the vagina or on the perineum to provide support and assist with voiding or defecation.

- Voiding, defecation, pain, and dietary diaries are beneficial to assist with the evaluation.

**Physical Exam**

- Visual inspection, including bulging with pelvic organ prolapse.

- Pelvic floor contraction (to avoid urination), should lift the perineum.

- Cotton swab test for localizing vulvodynia.

- Speculum exam for atrophy or inflammation of the vaginal mucosa and visualization of the cervix.

- Digital palpation of pelvic floor muscles for contraction, relaxation (after attempted voluntary contraction), and pain.

- Palpation of the urogenital triangle includes ischiocavernosus, bulbospongiosus, and transverse perineal muscles and perineal body- is especially important in assessing dyspareunia.

- Bimanual exam of the pelvic organs.

- Rectal digital exam to evaluate sphincter tone and pelvic floor muscles; coccyx; exclude neoplasm; to identify sources of pain, hemorrhoids, anal fissure, or anorectal abscess.****

- Anal sensation., response to touch, and pinprick.

- Examination on the toilet, inspection for prolapse with straining.