Heparin use's typical adverse effects include bleeding, thrombocytopenia, injection site reactions, and other adverse effects only seen with chronic heparin administration. Bleeding is a major complication associated with heparin use. Patients should undergo monitoring for new bleeding that may present in the urine or stool. Bleeding may also present as bruising, petechial rash, and nosebleeds.

Thrombocytopenia typically occurs in up to 30% of patients who receive heparin. Most often, this is not significant; however, there is a form of thrombocytopenia that is more serious, known as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). Thrombocytopenia can be classified as Type I or Type II. Type I is a non-immunogenic interaction with platelets that typically occurs within the first 48 to 72 hours of initiation of heparin. The drop in platelet count is usually temporary and will recover upon cessation of heparin. Type II thrombocytopenia is more commonly known as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; this is immune-related thrombocytopenia that occurs when heparin binds to the protein platelet factor 4 (PF4). This complex alerts the immune system and causes an immune-mediated reaction with platelets. Platelets are activated and consumed by clot formation providing a pro-thrombotic environment with a low platelet count. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia usually occurs about five days into heparin therapy. Thrombosis can form and cause severe HITT (heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis). Serious events seen with thrombosis include pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, stroke, myocardial infarction, and thrombosis in main arteries to organs that could lead to severe complications, including limb amputation or death.

Other adverse effects that occur with the use of heparin include injection site reactions, hyperkalemia, alopecia, and osteoporosis. Osteopenia and osteoporosis have correlations with chronic heparin use, but not with acute use of heparin.