Diagnosis of hemiplegic migraine is primarily clinical and can be challenging at times. The characteristic feature for diagnosis is an episodic, reversible, unilateral motor weakness as migraine aura manifestation, along with at least one other kind of aura. It is essential to rule out other common pathologies that could potentially cause a headache and neurological deficits. A good history of symptoms, potential triggers, family history, and other associated symptoms is essential for diagnosis.

The mean frequency of attacks is three per year. However, they may reach up to 250 per year in some cases. The attacks may occur with or with triggers. The triggers include acute stress, exertion, intense emotions, too little or too much sleep, bright light, and mild head trauma.

A neurologic exam during an attack may show unilateral hyperreflexia and positive Babinski sign. Motor and sensory symptoms are typically more prominent in the upper extremities than lower.

Two or more auras are almost always evident, each evolving over 20 to 30 minutes and taking hours to resolve. Auras typically manifest in this order: visual, sensory, motor, aphasic, and brainstem symptoms.

The headache can be mild to excruciating in intensity, can be bilateral or unilateral, irrespective of the side of aura symptoms, and may manifest either before or during the development of visual symptoms.

Signs and symptoms specific to severe attacks include delusions, somnolence, cerebral edema, seizures, fever, meningismus, cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis, confusion, agitation, delusions, somnolence, cerebral edema, and cerebral infarction.