The goal of surgery is to improve the genital appearance, prevent splaying of the urinary flow, and enabling the individual to urinate in the standing position, avoid sexual difficulties associated with curvature, and enable deposition of the semen into the vagina during sexual intercourse. However, isolated glandular hypospadias often does not need surgical correction.

If presented in the early part of life, commonly hypospadias is surgically corrected by 6 to 18 months of age, depending on the severity.

Surgical repair:

The basic requirements are the use of magnification, atraumatic tissue handling, using fine instruments and suture materials, and adequate hemostasis.

- Penile degloving:****This is essential to assess the degree of chordee. All penoscrotal tethering bands should be released.

- Orthoplasty:****This is done for the correction of the ventral curvature to achieve a straight penis while maintaining penile length and erection.

- Urethroplasty: Urethral reconstruction is done in various ways, often guided by the experience and skill of the surgeons. These include urethral plate (UP) tubularization, UP augmentation, and UP replacement. In UP tubularization, the UP distal to the meatus is tubularized in various ways, including the glandular approximation procedure (GAP), tubularized incised plate repair (TIP), and urethral mobilization.

- Glansplasty:****This is the reconstruction of the glans penis, where extensive dissection of the glans is done to create a midline, anterior-based flap. The tubularized urethra is brought out through the incision made on the glans. Finally, cosmetic skin coverage is done to give the appearance of a circumcised penis.

Approved surgical techniques for hypospadias repair might differ based on the meatal location as follows. The meatal advancement and glanuloplasty incorporated (MAGPI) operation for the distal meatus is highly recommended, as it might result in satisfactory outcomes. Moreover, the low complication rate and acceptable aesthetic and cosmetic results are among the advantages. The specific demand for a meticulous technique under the supervision of an expert surgeon to obtain the optimal results is among the limitations. A precise patient selection for this outpatient procedure has a critical role in the optimization of the surgical outcome. The patients not suitable for a MAGPI procedure are those with thin or stiff skin around the meatus and a meatus, which is located excessively proximal or wide.

Repairing the non-coronal distal hypospadias might be performed via either the Mathieu technique or the tubularized incised plate urethroplasty (TIP). Patient selection for these techniques should also be precise, which means those patients with even distal but thin meatus extending to the penoscrotal junction are not appropriate choices for the technique. Another exclusion criteria for utilizing the TIP or Mathieu technique would be a high grade of ventral curvature of more than 30 degrees, which should be characterized following complete degloving. These patients with excessive chordee should be approached via proximal hypospadias repair techniques. Also, previously considered as a contraindication for TIP repair, the narrow urethral plates equivalent to an average of 6 mm prior to incision are now candidates for distal TIP repair.

Methods to correct persistent chordee after degloving:

Curvatures of less than 30 degrees might be preferably addressed with a dorsal plication procedure only, while children with greater than 30 degrees of chordee usually require ventral corporotomy. A significant increase in the rates of recurrent curvature, recurrent fistula, and dehiscence at the site of urethroplasty was noticed when dorsal plication and not ventral corporotomy is used to address the greater degrees of ventral curvatures. Ventral corporotomy might be optimally undertaken through a single semi-circumferential incision at the maximal point of bending, or three 4 to 8 o'clock incisions at the maximal point of bending and 4 mm distally and proximally. The resultant defect in a single corporotomy, which is more versatile than the multiple ones, might be covered with several options, including the small intestine submucosa, etc. Following ventral corporotomy and grafting, a one or two-stage flap technique might be undertaken for urethroplasty. To avoid recurrent chordee, urethral plate transection is recommended when ventral curvature is persisting after corporotomy. However, a urethroplasty can be performed safely when no curvature is present following ventral corporotomy.