The majority of cases of CSCR resolve spontaneously, so observation is done for 3-6 months.

Indications for early intervention include

- Visual demand of profession (pilot) or the patient for early recovery

- Recurrent disease

- Severe decline of vision in the other eye due to chronic CSCR

Laser photocoagulation:

The RPE leakage sites, as seen on angiography, can be treated with laser photocoagulation. Such therapy seals the leakage point and hastens the resolution of subretinal fluid.****The laser does not reduce the chances of recurrence. To overcome these problems, a micropulse laser can be used.****

Photodynamic therapy (PDT)

CSCR with a subfoveal leak, juxtafoveal leak, multiple leaks, and chronic cases with diffuse decompensation of RPE are better managed with PDT. PDT causes vascular remodeling of the choroid and choroidal hypoperfusion.

Anti-vascular growth factor (VEGF):

Anti VEGF therapy has been proposed to reduce choroidal hyperpermeability. They upregulate the tight junctions between endothelial cells and the reduction of vascular fenestrations.

Anti-corticosteroids

Patients with CSCR commonly have endogenous hypercortisolism, thus drugs targeting cortisol pathways might be effective.

Mifepristone (RU-486) is an abortifacient agent. Its mechanism of action is mediated through its glucocorticoid and progesterone receptor antagonistic effects. It has been used in chronic CSCR patients with varied responses.

Finasteride is a weak anti-androgen that works through inhibiting type II 5 alpha-reductase that is necessary for converting testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a potent androgen. It has been investigated in CSCR, but more trials are needed to evaluate the effect.

Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone-receptor antagonist and potassium-sparing diuretic, was originally approved in 2002 by the FDA for the treatment of hypertension. The medication is generally well-tolerated, but drug interactions must be ruled out prior to initiation, and serum potassium and blood pressure must be monitored during treatment. Studies have shown it to improve visual acuity and decrease central macular thickness in a small series of patients with chronic CSCR.

Rifampicin is an anti-tuberculous medication that facilitates the catabolism of endogenous steroids. It increases the cytochrome P-450 content in the liver, thus affecting the metabolism and bioavailability of endogenous corticosteroids, consequently aiding in the resolution of CSCR and improving its symptomatology.

Adrenergic blockers

As CSCR is closely associated with type A personality, which is characterized by high adrenergic activity, it was proposed that blocking adrenergic receptors might have a positive effect on CSCR.

Anti-Helicobacter pylori treatment

The therapy of Helicobacter pylori-related peptic ulcer disease has shown variable results in CSCR.