The perineal body (PB) is the central fibrous skeleton of the perineum and has a pyramid shape in the male and a wedge-shaped in the female; laterally is formed by the perineal smooth muscle, the anterior continuity of the longitudinal anal muscle. The perineum is the region below the pelvic diaphragm; it consists of muscle-fascial formations arranged to close the pelvis inferiorly. The perineal musculature would have a different embryological origin than the musculature of the pelvic diaphragm and receives innervation by a group of motoneurons, grouped in the nucleus of Onuf, through the pudendal nerve branches. It extends from the skin to the inferior fascial surface of the pelvic floor and occupies a median position between the buttocks and the medial surface of the thighs. The perineum is bounded anteriorly by the pubic arch, laterally, in a posterior direction from the lower branch of the pubis and the ischium, to the ischial tuberosity and the sacrotuberous ligament, and posteriorly ends at the apex of the coccyx. It has a rhomboid shape, with a major axis directed anteroposteriorly; a transverse line passing through the ischial tuberosities divides it into two triangular regions:

- The posterior or anal triangle: structure with anterior base and apex in correspondence of the coccyx; contains the terminal segment of the anal canal, the anal sphincters, the ischiorectal fossae, the rectovaginal/prostate septum.

- The anterior or urogenital triangle: characterized by a posterior base and apex in correspondence of the pubic symphysis; it contains external urogenital organs, the superficial perineal fascia, the perineal anterior muscles, and sphincters.

The anterior and posterior triangle do not lie on the same plane: the urogenital triangle is tilted down and back, the anal triangle down and forward.  The line that divides the two triangles are externally formed by the transverse muscles of the perineum: it fits on the ischial tuberosities laterally and mixed the fibers in the middle contributing, to create the perineal body (the central tendon of the perineum). The posterior border of the superficial perineal fascia joins the PB. Superiorly it is attached the rectovaginal/rectoprostatic septum continuing up to the arcus tendineus of the endopelvic fascia.

Studies confirm the variability in describing the PB components and acknowledge the difficulties in dissecting. The studies utilized thin-slice MRI and reported that the PB consisted of the bulbospongiosus muscle, the superficial transverse perineal muscle, the internal and external anal sphincters, the puboperinealis, and puboanalis portions of the puborectalis muscle.

The perineal body is the space in which the connective tissue of muscles and septa join. It is the meeting point of the superficial and deep layers of the pelvis contributing the balance of biomechanical forces. It integrates the excretory functions of the urogenital and anorectal organs absorbing the posterior visceral movements. Continence is maintained by the integrity of this system related to the respiratory function of the diaphragm and the postural and locomotor functions of the trunk and the inferior limbs.