Analysis by Stokes et al. of confirmed cases reported to the CDC found that older individuals (≥65 years old) with underlying comorbidities have a much higher risk of hospitalizations than those without (45.4% vs. 7.6%). In the same patient population, mortality was also greatly increased compared to younger healthy individuals (19.5% vs. 1.6%).

Individuals were identified as high risk if they had advanced age and/or underlying medical conditions that increase the risk of severe disease. According to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), conditions that have conclusive evidence demonstrating a higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness when acutely infected include:

- Asthma

- Cancer

- Cerebrovascular disease

- Chronic kidney disease

- Bronchiectasis

- COPD (Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)

- Interstitial lung disease

- Pulmonary embolism

- Pulmonary hypertension

- Cirrhosis

- Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

- Alcoholic liver disease

- Autoimmune hepatitis

- Cystic fibrosis

- Diabetes mellitus, type 1 and 2

- Heart conditions (such as heart failure, coronary artery disease, or cardiomyopathies)

- HIV (Human immunodeficiency virus)

- Mental health conditions such as mood disorders and Schizophrenia spectrum disorders

- Obesity (defined as body mass index (BMI) of greater than 30 kg/m2 or greater than 95th percentile in children)

- Pregnancy and recent pregnancy

- Smoking, current and former

- Solid organ or blood stem cell transplantation

- Tuberculosis

- Use of corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive medications

However, as stated above, the most recent NIH treatment guidelines for the management of COVID-19 illness (accessed on January 3rd, 2023) do not recommend any monoclonal antibodies for the treatment of acute COVID-19 illness due to the dominant circulating variants and subvariants that are resistant to these agents.[

In the absence of mAb options for nonhospitalized adults with mild to moderate COVID-19 illness (who are not on supplemental oxygen), the following therapeutic options are advised by the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH):[

- Ritonavir-boosted nirmatrelvir. This is an oral medication that consists of protease inhibitors. It has been shown to reduce hospitalization and death when given to high-risk, unvaccinated, non-hospitalized patients. It must be given within 5 days of symptoms onset. Of note, this medication has strong cytochrome P450 inhibition and therefore has many drug-drug interactions that need to be carefully assessed.

- Remdesivir. This is a nucleotide analog that inhibits the SARS-CoV-2 RNA polymerase. The recommended duration of therapy in this setting is 3 days.

- Molnupiravir. This is a mutagenic ribonucleoside antiviral agent. Due to the risk of genotoxicity with this agent, it is not recommended in pregnant patients. This agent should only be used if both of the above therapies are unavailable or cannot be given.