Scaphoid fractures most commonly cause pain and swelling at the base of the thumb in the anatomic snuffbox.

Patients will typically present with wrist pain after a recent history of trauma. Often the patients present late as the injury gets missed on plain radiographs. Pain is often centered on the radial side of the wrist and is worse with movement. There may be associated swelling and a reduced range of wrist motion. It is important to ascertain if the patient is a smoker as this increases the risk of non-union by approximately 20%.

Examination of the wrist should follow the “look, feel, move” pattern. The deformity is unlikely unless there is associated carpus dislocation, for example, perilunate dislocations. It is important to palpate over the distal radius and ulna and metacarpals to assess for any associated injury. Classically, there is tenderness in the anatomic snuffbox dorsally, especially with wrist fractures. The snuffbox is the area between the first and third extensor compartments with abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis tendons lying radially, and the extensor pollicis longus tendon lying on the ulnar side. There may also be tenderness over the scaphoid tubercle on the volar aspect, which can be felt as the bony prominence radial to flexor carpi radialis at the level of the distal palmar crease. Tenderness usually presents in one of three locations:

- The volar prominence at the distal wrist for distal pole fractures

- Anatomic snuffbox for waist or mid-body fractures

- Distal to Lister's tubercle for proximal pole fractures

The scaphoid compression test is a more sensitive test and involves placing the examining index finger and thumb over each pole of the scaphoid and compressing. This maneuver is likely to elicit pain in the presence of a fracture. Pain in the anatomic snuffbox on ulnar deviation of the wrist also suggests scaphoid fracture.