Renal transplant rejection, as stated earlier, is an immunological response that leads to inflammation with specific pathological changes in the allograft due to the recipient’s immune system recognizing the non-self (foreign) antigen in the allograft. There are different mechanisms postulated depending on the type of rejection, as follows:

- Hyperacute rejection: It is related to preexisting circulating antibodies in the recipient’s blood against the donor antigen (usually ABO blood group or HLA antigen), which is present at the time of transplantation. These antibodies attack and destroy the transplanted organ as soon as or within a few hours after the allograft is revascularized.

- Acute T cell-mediated rejection: In which the recipient’s lymphocytes become activated by recognition of foreign (non-self) donor antigens in the transplanted organ by antigen-presenting cells (APC) through direct, semi-direct or indirect pathways, which leads to activation and infiltration of the T cells and damage to the allograft.

- ABMR: It is related to antibodies against foreign (non-self) donor antigens, mainly HLA antigen, which leads to damage to the allograft through activation of the complement-dependent pathway as well as independent mechanisms recruiting natural killer cells (NK) cells, polymorphonuclear cells, platelets, and macrophages to attack the allograft. These antibodies can be either preexisting at a low level before the transplant or synthesized de novo post-transplant.

- Chronic rejection: It is related to both immune and nonimmune mediated factors. The primary risk factor for chronic rejection is non-compliance with immunosuppressive medication. It can be either chronic antibody-mediated rejection, which is mainly related to the presence of donor HLA-antigens donor-specific antibody (DSA), or chronic cellular rejection, which is uncommon.