The best way to thoroughly observe the microarchitecture of bone is to perform undecalcified bone histology, which can reveal the mineralized and cellular components of the bone as well as patterns regarding the physiological processes of bone formation and resorption. This process, in turn, allows for histological techniques such as fluorochrome analysis and histomorphometry to further probe and observe the specimens.

Performing undecalcified bone histology varies from the techniques utilized in conventional paraffin embedded methods; this is because of density and lower permeability of the tissue, demanding more time-consuming fixation and processing times. The tissue is first placed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin solution. Using a band saw, the specimen is cut to size and then placed in an opaque container, submerged in ascending concentrations of ethanol from 70 to 100% for one week at a time, increasing in ten percent increments. Afterward, the specimen is cleared in butanol for one week. It is imperative that the densities of the tissue and resin be similar., which can be done by using a test specimen beforehand and then modifying it the resin density afterward. Generally, a 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate based preparation solution is the choice when assessing through light microscopy while methyl methacrylate is for immunohistochemistry.

Ground sectioning is prone to yield larger sections, ranging from 20 to 50 microns in thickness which makes it advantageous if intending to use fluorochrome analysis. The sledge microtome, on the other hand, tends to produce thin sections, more ideal for light microscopy.