Early recognition of CNS and cardiac toxicity in LAST can drastically change the clinical course. Following a single local anesthetic injection, LAST presented within 50 seconds in 50% of cases studied, and within 5 minutes in 75% of cases. If potentially toxic doses are administered, then it is recommended that patients be observed for at least 30 minutes.

LAST most commonly presents with CNS changes. Initial signs and symptoms include agitation, confusion, dizziness, drowsiness, dysphoria, auditory changes, tinnitus, perioral numbness, metallic taste, and dysarthria. Without adequate recognition and treatment, these signs as symptoms can progress to seizures, respiratory arrest, and/or coma. While CNS toxicity often presents with the above initial features, the most common consequence is seizures. Additionally, in the setting of intravascular injection seizures can be the initial presentation.

Historically, local anesthetic literature suggested that cardiac toxicity often presented after antecedent CNS toxicity. However, with more potent local anesthetics, cardiac toxicity has been found to arise concurrently with seizures or even precede them. Hypotension and bradycardia are often the first signs of cardiac toxicity. However, arrhythmias are responsible for most reported cases, with bradyarrhythmias being the most common. Additional signs of cardiac toxicity include hypertension, dyspnea, pain, wide complex, ST-segment changes, asystole, tachycardia, and ventricular ectopy/tachycardia/fibrillation.