**Anatomic, Physiologic, and Hemodynamic Effects of IABP**

The IABP assists the heart indirectly by decreasing the afterload and augments diastolic aortic pressure with subsequent enhancement in diastolic blood flow resulting in better perfusion of the peripheral organ as well as a possible improvement in the coronary blood flow. The intra-aortic balloon inflates during diastole synchronously with aortic valve closure and the appearance of a dicrotic notch resulting in the displacement of blood from the thoracic aorta into the peripheral circulation that is followed by rapid deflation before the onset of systole phase of the cardiac cycle. Theoretically, this results in improved diastolic pressure and reduced systolic aortic pressure by reducing the afterload, which subsequently results in decreased left ventricle wall stress reducing the myocardial oxygen demand. These hemodynamic changes improve the cardiac output by increasing stroke volume, particularly in patients with reduced left ventricular function.

Stefanadis et al. demonstrated a 30% increase in aortic distensibility with IABP, thereby reducing the aortic stiffness constant, resulting in a 24% increase in cardiac index and a 31% reduction in myocardial oxygen demand.

IABP use may also help patients with acute right ventricular failure by reducing the right ventricular afterload by decreasing pulmonary artery pressure and left ventricular end-systolic and end-diastolic pressures and, as a result, improves the cardiac output.

Various studies performed in the past studying effect of IABP on coronary blood flow provided contradictory results.

Pfluecke et al. demonstrated a positive hemodynamic effect of intra-aortic balloon pump on cerebral blood flow in patients with acute heart failure exacerbation. They studied the impact of IABP on middle cerebral artery transcranial Doppler flow (TCD) velocity change and velocity time integral changes in 2 groups of patients; patients with acute heart failure with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 30% (group 1) and the other group of patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 30% (group 2), and compared the effect on blood flow velocity with the baseline measurements taken without an IABP. Although both groups of patients showed an increased cerebral blood flow with IABP, a significantly higher increase in middle cerebral artery blood flow was observed in patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 30% as compared with patients with an ejection fraction of more than 30% [the velocity time integral changes (VTI change) of 20.9% +- 3.9% in LVEF <30% VS 10.5% +- 2.2% in LVEF >30%, P <0.05]. However, researchers noted a minimal increase in the mean arterial pressure in both groups with IABP augmentation.