Pieces of evidence on the functioning of memory (centers, networks, mechanisms) have been obtained from the study of clinical cases in which anatomical alterations due to trauma or surgery have led to deficits of varying degrees of memory. The most famous clinical case was the American Henry Gustav Molaison, better known as the patient H.M., the most studied person in the history of neuroscience and protagonist as a 'living experiment' of at least a hundred scientific publications. HM's amnesia was a consequence of an intervention, performed to treat drug-resistant epilepsy, which consisted of a bilateral lobotomy of the medial temporal cortex extended several centimeters towards the inside of the brain and including part of the amygdala, the entorhinal cortex and a good part of the hippocampus. After the intervention, the patient showed signs of a very serious form of amnesia. His memory, in fact, was intact as regards the events preceding the surgery but was no longer able to form new LTMs. Many other cognitive faculties, however, remained intact. The procedural memory was also not impaired as H.M. was able to learn how to perform new tasks, even if he could not verbalize what he had learned. The unfortunate case of H.M., who preserved the severe memory deficit for life, allowed for the first time to highlight that non-declarative memory is based on neuronal circuits other than those of the medial temporal lobe and above all does not require conscious memory processes.

**Semantic memory**

A semantic control network is a system of connection between different areas in the brain that works eventually to store, retrieve, or assign meaning to the words, events, ETC.

**Episodic memory**

Episodic memory is the ability to consciously recall or experience a specific event that occurred through the person's life, and it's different from the semantic memories in that you can remember the exact time and place in which the event occurred, or you gained that information.