Pelvic ultrasound in the postmenopausal female is the imaging study of choice to evaluate the uterus, endometrium, cervix, and adnexa. It is important to recognize when a pelvic ultrasound should be performed in a postmenopausal patient. Knowing the indications for a pelvic ultrasound and how to interpret the imaging findings can improve patient outcomes. For the sonographer performing the ultrasound, it is important to have the proper technique to evaluate possible pathologies fully.

If a standard transvaginal ultrasound is inconclusive or suboptimal, knowing how to perform saline-infused sonohysterography may add diagnostic information. The ordering or interpreting physician needs to know when an ultrasound is indicated for a postmenopausal patient to decrease the need for potentially unnecessary further testing. Additionally, it is important to know how to interpret the ultrasound findings in a postmenopausal patient. In particular, knowing the appropriate endometrial thickness in a postmenopausal patient with bleeding and concerning ultrasound features of an adnexal mass can help determine the need for further workup and guide management in these patients.

With open communication and collaboration between the healthcare team members (including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, specialists, and nurses), a properly performed and interpreted pelvic ultrasound in the postmenopausal woman can have important diagnostic consequences and lead to improved outcomes in patients.