**Complications**

Neuropraxia: This occurs because of nerve injury. It resolves in three to four months. Nerve injury occurs in 11% of supracondylar fractures. Most commonly injured is the interosseous nerve, followed by the radial, median, and ulnar nerves.

- The anterior interosseous nerve (arising from the median nerve) and may be involved either due to traction or contusion.

- The radial nerve may be involved with posteromedial displacement

- Median nerve involvement may occur with posterolateral displacement

- Ulnar nerve involvement may occur with a flexion type supracondylar fracture. The ulnar nerve is most commonly involved due to posterior displacement of the proximal fragment.

- Beware that motor testing can only identify anterior interosseous nerve injury. This testing can be done by flexing at the index finger distal interphalangeal and thumb interphalangeal joints and making the "okay" sign. Inability to do so represents a lack of sensory component in the anterior interosseous nerve.

Vascular injury: Brachial artery injury should always be suspected, particularly if the radial pulse is absent. However, the vascular injury may occur even if the hand is pink and well perfused. This may be due to partial transection of a vessel.

Compartment syndrome: this may occur after a supracondylar fracture. Evaluate for the early or impending signs by determining if a radial pulse is absent. This injury results from prolonged ischemia of the forearm. It should be suspected if the following are present:

- Inability to open the hand in children

- Pain on passive extension of the fingers

- Tenderness over the forearm

- Absence of a radial pulse

- A careful neurovascular examination is therefore important to promptly recognize this serious complication.

Malunion: Fracture malunion can lead to cubitus valgus or cubitus varus deformity (common in supracondylar fracture). A common complication is a loss of the carrying angle, which results in a cubitus varus, or “Gunstock,” deformity.

Nonunion: Lateral condylar fractures are more prone to nonunion. These, therefore, require revision surgery.