**Basilar Artery Aneurysms**

Basilar artery aneurysms account for about 5% of intracranial aneurysms. Symptoms vary with the size of an aneurysm. These include headaches, visual disturbances, nausea, vomiting, and loss of consciousness. Aneurysms of less than 15 mm may be asymptomatic. A basilar artery aneurysm may rupture, causing a subarachnoid hemorrhage; this may be heralded by a sudden and severe headache described as "thunderclap." The patient may describe it as the "worse headache of my life."

**Basilar Artery Thrombosis**

Basilar artery thrombosis refers to a cerebrovascular accident or stroke due to occlusion of the basilar artery by a thrombus. The risk factors are similar to those in other occlusive cerebrovascular accidents. Implicated risks include atherosclerosis promoting factors like hypertension, hyperlipidemia, smoking, obesity, diabetes, and coronary artery disease. Clinical manifestations often correspond to the level and degree of occlusion. Symptoms can include hemiparesis, quadriparesis, ataxia, dysphonia, dysarthria, oculomotor palsy, and abducens palsy. These may present as groups of signs and symptoms recognized as distinct clinical syndromes:

- "Top-of-the-basilar" syndrome involves occlusion in the rostral part of the basilar artery, resulting in ischemia affecting the upper brainstem and the thalamus. Clinical manifestations include behavioral changes, hallucinations, somnolence, visual changes, and oculomotor disturbances.

- Locked-in syndrome involves occlusion at the proximal and middle part of the basilar artery, sparing the tegmentum of the pons. The patient is thus conscious and oculomotor function is preserved, but other voluntary muscles of the body are affected. These patients cannot move or talk, but consciousness is evident because of vertical eye movement, which is an oculomotor nerve function.

- Pontine warning syndrome is a basilar artery atherosclerotic disease characterized by motor and speech disturbances that occur in a waxing and waning manner. These patients typically experience recurrent on-and-off attacks of hemiparesis and dysarthria. This syndrome is indicative of an imminent basilar artery branch occlusion with infarction of the supplied region.

**Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency**

Vertebrobasilar insufficiency refers to a state of transient occlusion of the vertebrobasilar system. The resultant reversible ischemia manifests as temporary cerebellar or brainstem dysfunctions.  Common symptoms include vertigo, diplopia, dysarthria, ataxia, confusion, and sudden fall due to knee weakness called a "drop attack." Vertebrobasilar insufficiency has the name "beauty parlor syndrome" after the early 1990s incidence of the syndrome increased in people who had hyperextended their necks at the washbasin for a prolonged time at the salon. The underlying pathology is chiefly an atherosclerotic pathology of the vertebrobasilar system, made only worse by hyperextension of the neck or a sudden change in position, especially from prolonged sitting to an erect position. This condition should not be confused with positional change associated with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV).