**ALCAPA**

An anomalous left main coronary artery with its origin from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA) is one of the few clinically significant coronary anomalies.  While most congenital coronary artery abnormalities involve various origins of the vessels from the aorta and are usually benign, ALCAPA can be fatal either during infancy or result in sudden death in adulthood. The incidence of ALCAPA is between 1 in 30,000 and 1 in 300,000 infants and accounts for 0.25 to 0.5% of congenital cardiac defects.  Albeit rare, it is the most common cause of myocardial infarction in pediatric patients.

Approximately 15% of patients will have an associated anomaly. The literature describes ALCAPA in combination with ventricular septal defects (VSD), patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), pulmonary valvular stenosis, coarctation of the great vessels, and one case of hypoplastic left heart syndrome.

**ALCA-R**

When a coronary artery arises from the opposite sinus of Valsalva, it is the anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery (AAOCA). The anomalous left coronary artery origin from the right coronary sinus (ALCA-R) involves the aberrant origin of the LCA from the right coronary sinus, which is the opposite of the classically described anatomy. After this takeoff, there is a large amount of variability in the path of the anomalous vessel. Three of these pathways are generally benign: The ALCA-R may track anterior to the RV outflow tract, retro-aortic, or directly into the myocardium through the conal septum. The final reported pathway is a significant cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD). This pathway is known as intramural, wherein the anomalous vessel travels in the wall of the aorta just above the commissure. A study of 17 cases of SCD due to an anomalous coronary artery arising from the incorrect ostium found that 10 cases were ARCA-L and 7 were ARCA-R. All cases of SCD due to an AAOCA resulted from an intramural (AKA intra-arterial) path of the anomalous vessel.

**LCA arising from the RCA**

A third anomaly has been reported wherein the LCA arises from the main stem of the RCA. Unfortunately, this anomaly has not been as well described in the literature, and the overall impact of this anomaly is not well elucidated at this time. Further research could identify the sequelae of such a condition and outline its’ best management.