The use of standardized patients for teaching and evaluation of clinical skills and use of the Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE), while challenging, is achievable and has been shown to enhance the assessment of learners and support their training outcomes.

There are evolving practical and conceptual considerations for the use of standardized patients in high-stakes OSCE assessments for certification and licensure in medical education. For this reason, it is the role and responsibility of the standardized patient program director to enforce the standards of best practice to ensure consistency, provide a safe work environment, partake in case development, deliver SP training, and oversee program management

The use of OSCE’s can assist in evaluating clinical skills in a variety of brief task-based stations. Applying an OSCE allows teaching and assessing learners to accomplish course or instructional objectives. The utilization of standardized patients using case material in a simulated safe environment can help a student practice taking a focused history and demonstrating a physical examination, interpreting radiographs or lab results, counseling and/or educating patients, and discussing their findings.

After an SP encounter, learners can document their findings similar to a medical record note they would compose after seeing a patient in an office, clinic, or emergency department. This opportunity of summative and formative teaching can be measured, observed, and analyzed. Feedback to the student can include self-assessment checklists, score reports, global ratings, and written or verbal comments. Direct observation of such encounters can provide invaluable feedback on student performance.