The mechanisms responsible for the pathogenesis of VH include retinal vascular disorders with or without associated ischemia, breakthrough VH, or rupture of blood vessels. Various causes include:

**Proliferative Vascular Retinopathy**

- The bleeding occurs from neovascularization due to retinal ischemia causing elevated angiogenic factors. Causes include proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), retinal vein occlusion (RVO), vasculitis (Eales disease, and others), pars planitis, sickle cell retinopathy, and retinopathy of prematurity. Proliferative diabetic retinopathy is the most common cause of bilateral VH.

**Neovascular Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)**

**Idiopathic Polypoidal Choroidal Vasculopathy (IPCV)**

In these cases, usually, the blood remains subretinal, but when it becomes massive, breakthrough VH can be seen breaking through the full thickness retina.

**Trauma**

It is the most common cause of VH in patients less than 40 years of age, more so in males. Associated serous or hemorrhagic choroidal detachments can be there.

- Blunt trauma: It can often lead to occult globe rupture, at the site of which vitreous incarceration may be noted. VH, in such cases, can be associated with retinal dialysis, choroidal rupture, Berlin’s edema, optic nerve avulsion, and vitreous base avulsion.

- Penetrating, perforating trauma, and retained intraocular foreign body (RIOFB): Vitreous incarceration can be seen at the site of entry/exit over the sclera.

**Intracranial Hemorrhage (Terson Syndrome)**

Litten defined it as any intraocular hemorrhage occurring with subarachnoid hemorrhage (usually associated with an aneurysm), which later was found to be associated with any form of intracranial hemorrhage by Terson.

- It can be unilateral or bilateral. The intraocular hemorrhage can be in the form of VH, subhyaloid hemorrhage, intraretinal, and sub-ILM bleed. Dome-shaped hemorrhages, also known as a hemorrhagic macular cyst, can be seen over the macula. The macular double ring sign may be seen, which is formed by subhyaloid membrane on outside and sub-ILM bleed inside.

- The pathogenesis of the intraocular hemorrhage is controversial. Some suggest it is the sub-arachnoid blood that comes into vitreous via optic nerve sheath.

**Retinal Arterial Macroaneurysm (RAM)**

Bleeding can be subretinal, intra-retinal, sub ILM, and intra-vitreal.

**Posterior Vitreous Detachment (PVD)**

VH can occur due to the avulsion of superficial or peripapillary retinal vessels or from the rupture of vessel/s bridging a tear. In cases with acute symptomatic PVD, if simultaneous VH is present, the risk of retinal tear increases by up to 70%.

**Tumors**

Rarely tumors may present with VH. Choroidal melanoma (after undergoing necrosis), vasoproliferative tumor, retinal cavernous hemangioma, and rarely choroidal metastasis may all present with VH. Careful ultrasonography may be helpful in such cases.

**Blood dyscrasias**

Leukemia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, hemophilia may all present with VH. Fever or other diseases associated with very low hemoglobin and thrombocyte counts may also be associated with multiple intraretinal, preretinal hemorrhages, and vitreous hemorrhages.

**Valsalva retinopathy**

Sudden elevation in intrathoracic or intraabdominal pressure against a closed glottis is known as the Valsalva maneuver.

**Complications of Surgeries**

These include peripheral iridectomy, buckle intrusion, high-intensity retinal laser burn, trabeculectomy, secondary intraocular lens implantation, and others.

**Shaken Baby Syndrome**

Most commonly noted lesions are retinal hemorrhages, cotton wool spots, premacular retinal folds, and VH. Retinal hemorrhages are whiplash induced.

- Wang et al. found out that of all the cases of VH, 43.3% were due to PDR, 11.4 % due to retinal detachment, 3.06% due to retinal vein occlusion, and 2.44% were due to AMD.

- The role of anticoagulants in VH has been controversial, however various studies have shown that the risk of VH is not high in patients on anticoagulants. The landmark trial of Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study, found that use of aspirin did not increase the risk of VH in diabetic retinopathy cases.