Technique:

A surgeon can perform an orchiopexy in several different manners. If the testis is not palpable, a laparoscopic approach is taken; this can be a one-stage or two-stage operation, depending on the laxity of the spermatic cord and testicular vasculature. If the testis is in the inguinal canal, an inguinal orchiopexy is performed. If the testis is retractile or at the top of the scrotum, a scrotal approach is the procedure of choice. Commonly, only one testis is fixated and then allowed to heal, so if blood supply is lost or infection develops, the patient has a remaining viable testis.

Scrotal Approach

- Make an incision in the ipsilateral hemiscrotum down to Dartos' fascia.

- Dissect up through the soft tissue toward the internal inguinal ring until identifying the testis.

- 
              
- If the ilioinguinal nerve is encountered, it must be isolated and protected.

- Bring the testis down into the operative field with gentle retraction.

- Perform detorsion of the spermatic cord, if necessary.

- Dissect out the gubernaculum and cremasteric muscles separate from the spermatic cord and tack to Dartos' fascia medially and laterally, allowing sufficient length of the spermatic cord for the testis to sit comfortably in the scrotum.

- 
              
- If there is a hernia sac or patent processus vaginalis, it requires dissection out, with high ligation.

- Place a tacking suture in the proximal Buck's fascia, such as a 4-0 vicryl, then run it in a pleating fashion toward the end of the fascia, then turn and bring suture back to the tacked suture in the same manner. Ensure that your bites do not go into the spermatic cord.

OR

- Pexy the testicle in place by placing four cardinal prolene sutures in Dartos' fascia and then into the testicular capsule.

- Place the testicle in the pouch and reapproximate the scrotum with interrupted chromic sutures. This process should leave about 0.5 cm between bites. Cover the incision with collodian.

Inguinal Approach - most common approach:

- Make an incision over the inguinal canal, much like an open inguinal hernia repair. Dissect through the subcutaneous tissue to expose the inguinal canal and external ring.

- Open the external oblique fascia. If the ilioinguinal nerve is identified, isolate the nerve and preserve it.

- Identify the undescended testis and spermatic cord.

- Identify and dissect the processus vaginalis off of the spermatic cord, which is generally on the anteromedial aspect of the spermatic cord, perform high suture ligation of the sac to provide adequate length so that the testis will reach the scrotum without tension.

- Ensure that the spermatic vessels lay anterior to the vas deferens.

- Develop the Dartos' pouch by making an incision in the ipsilateral hemiscrotum, pass a nontraumatic grasper through the incision up into the inguinal canal and gently pull the testis down into the pouch.

- Tack the testis down to Dartos' fascia using absorbable suture. Close the dartos' muscle and incision in the scrotum.

- Close the inguinal incision in multiple layers, including the inguinal canal and Scarpa's fascia, before closing the skin.

Laparoscopic Approach

- Enter the abdomen in a controlled manner, place two additional ports under direct supervision, triangulating with the appropriate inguinal canal.

- Identify the testicle location, viability, and vasculature.

- Release gubernacular attachments carefully and mobilize the cord structure from the abdominal wall.

- Mobilize the blood vessels by dissecting proximally.

- Develop Dartos' pouch in the scrotum by making an incision in the ipsilateral hemiscrotum, placing a port under direct supervision, and then passing an instrument through the inguinal canal into the peritoneal cavity, grasping the testicle and pulling it down into Dartos' pouch.

- Fix the testis to the Dartos' fascia using absorbable sutures as described above.

If the testis cannot be mobilized sufficiently to pass through the inguinal canal into the scrotum without tension, a two-stage Fowler-Stephens approach is an option. There are several considerations when deciding between a one-stage and two-stage procedure; these include the distance from the testis to the internal ring (two-stage if > 2.5 cm), mobility of the vasculature (two-stage if excessive tension), and age of the patient (> 5 years old, consider two-stage).

In the first step, the testis is identified laparoscopically; then, the vascular supply is ligated with minimal dissection of the spermatic cord. After several months, the patient undergoes a second laparoscopic surgery, the testis is identified, and viability assessed. If viable, the peritoneal attachments are taken down, providing sufficient length for the testis to sit in the scrotal pouch without tension.