**Hyperparathyroidism**

Hyperparathyroidism is defined as the elevation of PTH due to overactivity of the parathyroid gland and leads to hypercalcemia in many cases. Hyperparathyroidism can be broken down into subsequent subgroups.

Primary: Primary hyperparathyroidism is due to direct gland alterations. This is most commonly due to a parathyroid gland adenoma, but can also be due to diffuse four-gland hyperplasia, malignancy, or multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types 1 or 2. Excess secretion of PTH will present with hyperparathyroidism and may also present as hypercalcemia, hypoglycemia, osteoporosis, osteitis fibrosa cystica, and hypertension (particularly diastolic hypertension).

Secondary: This is a physiological increase of PTH due to reduced calcium levels in the blood. The most common cause is chronic kidney disease, but can also be due to vitamin D deficiency or malnutrition.

Tertiary: This occurs after prolonged secondary hyperparathyroidism.  Due to the continuous chronic increase secretion of PTH, there are structural changes in the parathyroid glands causing them to lose the negative-feedback regulatory mechanisms and hyper-secrete PTH even if the underlying cause of secondary hyperparathyroidism has been corrected.

Malignant: Various tumors (bronchial squamous cell carcinomas) can produce a parathyroid-like protein that can mimic PTH function. Though the protein mimics PTH, reduction of actual PTH levels occurs due to the negative feedback to the parathyroid gland. This can be determined by measuring serum levels of both intact PTH and parathyroid-related hormone (which is produced by the tumor).

**Hypercalcemia**

Hypercalcemia can be the result of an overactive parathyroid gland. Symptoms can range from being non-existent to severe.

General

- headache

- fatigue

Kidneys

- kidney stones- leading to back and flank pain

- excessive urination

- excessive thirst

Abdomen

- 
vomiting

- 
constipation

- 
nausea

- 
decreased appetite

- 
abdominal pain

Heart

abnormal electrical rhythms

Muscle

- 
twitches

- 
cramps

- 
weakness

Skeletal system

- 
fractures

- 
bone pain

- 
osteoporosis

Neurological symptoms

- 
memory loss

- 
irritability

- 
depression

- 
confusion

- 
coma

**Hypoparathyroidism**

Hypoparathyroidism is due to reduced activity of the gland.  This condition has primary and secondary classifications.

Primary: There is a gland failure which results in a decrease in PTH secretion.  Patients who suffer from this disorder will often need calcium supplementation

Secondary: This occurs when there is surgical removal/injury of the parathyroids. This can often be accidental during neck surgery or expected after more extensive neck surgery, such as a total laryngectomy with total thyroidectomy. Radiation therapy for various neck malignancies can also lead to the destruction of the parathyroids and subsequent hypoparathyroidism.