# Continuing Education Activity

Niacin (vitamin B3) deficiency results in a condition known as pellagra. Pellagra includes the triad of dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea and can result in death. In addition, niacin deficiency can occur through genetic disorders, malabsorptive conditions, and interaction with certain medications. Today, niacin deficiencies are uncommon in industrialized nations primarily due to sufficient dietary intake; however, specific populations remain at risk of this mostly eradicated condition. Today, niacin deficiencies are uncommon in industrialized nations primarily due to sufficient dietary intake; however, specific populations remain at risk of this mostly eradicated condition. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of niacin deficiency and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of niacin deficiency.
- Review the risk factors for developing niacin deficiency.
- Explain the common physical exam findings associated with niacin deficiency.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients with niacin deficiency.

# Introduction

Niacin or vitamin B3 are generic terms for nicotinic acid and nicotinamide (niacinamide). Niacin was initially referred to as the anti-black tongue factor due to niacin's effect on dogs.

Previously nutritional deficiency was the commonest cause of pellagra in the world. However, this is no longer true in developed countries, where it has been nearly eradicated as a manifestation of primary nutritional deficiency. Instead, it now presents a consequence of chronic alcoholism, malabsorption syndrome, adverse drug effects, and anorexia nervosa.

# Etiology

Niacin deficiency can occur from a lack of consuming dietary sources containing niacin.

Drugs, alcoholism, gastrointestinal tract diseases, and malignancies are the common causes of secondary pellagra.

Also, some medications, such as isoniazid, may cause an increase in the risk of niacin deficiency. Isoniazid binds with vitamin B6 and reduces PLP-dependent kynureninase activity, a required substance for niacin synthesis.

There have been reports of the development of pellagra in patients taking second-line anti-TB drugs, such as ethionamide.

In patients with carcinoid tumors, there is excessive serotonin production. Increased serotonin production utilizes more tryptophan resulting in the deficiency of substrate left for niacin synthesis.

# Epidemiology

Niacin deficiency results in the condition of pellagra, which, although uncommon in industrialized nations, may be seen in individuals living in poverty or those with extremely low niacin and protein-deficient diets.

Corn was the staple food in China, India, Africa, and Latin America, yet pellagra was common in African nations.

In the United States, pellagra is rare due to the enrichment of processed flour with B vitamins. In the past, native people in North, Central, and South America consumed maize treated with lime or wood ashes, which increased the bioavailability of niacin in maize.

Within the United States and industrialized nations, pellagra is rarely seen with the enrichment of foods and an overall decrease in nutritional deficiency-related diseases.

# Pathophysiology

Niacin is important for the metabolism of macronutrients (carbohydrate, protein, and fat) due to its being part of the NAD and NADP coenzymes.

Additionally, other mechanisms contribute to niacin deficiency. Altered metabolism of tryptophan presents in carcinoid syndrome, impaired absorption of tryptophan is seen in the autosomal recessive condition Hartnup disease, and prolonged use of certain medications may decrease the production of tryptophan (isoniazid) or inhibit the conversion of tryptophan to niacin (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, or 5-fluorouracil).

# Histopathology

Dermatitis in pellagra characteristically demonstrates erythematous bullous changes secondary to mild acute inflammation, which leads to degeneration of the stratum corneum, followed by increased cellularity and fibroblasts, capillary dilation, and increased proliferation and thickening of the epidermis. Inflammatory cells include lymphoid cells and a few plasma cells. Hyperpigmentation is also seen.

# History and Physical

Pellagra is a condition caused by low levels of niacin or its precursor, tryptophan. Niacin deficiency results in pellagra, which includes the triad or "three Ds," dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea, and can result in death. Similar to a sunburn, brown discoloration and skin lesions on the skin typically exposed to the sun, such as hands, elbows, knees, and feet, are present. Initially, neurological changes such as anxiety, poor concentration, fatigue, and depression can manifest, but dementia and delirium may occur as pellagra advances.

Symptoms of niacin deficiency can be divided into the following categories:

**Gastrointestinal Findings**

- Poor appetite, nausea, epigastric discomfort, increased salivation, and abdominal pain

- Gastritis and achlorhydria

- Glossitis, soreness of the mouth, and dysphagia

- The tongue becomes beefy red and appears raw due to atrophy of the papillae

- Diarrhea is typically watery but is occasionally bloody and mucoid

**Skin Findings**

- Erythematous skin with a burning sensation

- The distribution is typically symmetrical and bilateral sun-exposed areas of the body. In addition, there can be bullae named wet pellagra.

- Malar rash, dorsum of the hands and feet, and neck area common areas

- The skin findings of niacin deficiency, which responded to niacin treatment, have been described as an initial manifestation of Crohn disease

**Neuropsychiatric Findings**

- Lethargy, apathy, depression, anxiety, poor concentration, and irritability

- Disorientation, confusion, and delirium

- Eventually, the patient may become stuporous and comatose

- Muscle weakness and paresthesias may be evident on clinical examination

**Death**

- Death occurs due to a deficiency of coenzymes necessary to generate adequate energy to support critical body functions

# Evaluation

Laboratory testing should be completed to confirm the results and includes testing for tryptophan, NAD, NADP, and niacin levels.

High-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) of niacin metabolites in urine appears to be a sensitive investigation in identifying niacin deficiency.

Therapeutic response to niacin administration in a patient with the typical features consistent with pellagra establishes the diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

The basic principle of treating niacin deficiency is the correction of underlying causes of niacin deficiency, but replacement of niacin is a must. For susceptible persons, preventive measures reduce the risk of developing the disease. One of these steps is supplementation.

A niacin deficiency may indicate multiple nutritional deficiencies; therefore, a balanced diet is a strong recommendation. Nicotinamide doses of 250 to 500 mg/day orally should be given. Despite nicotinic acid being the more common form of niacin, nicotinamide is used for niacin deficiencies as it does not cause symptoms such as tingling sensation, itching, or flushing.

For patients who receive isoniazid for TB prophylaxis, B complex multivitamin or nicotinamide supplementation should be considered to prevent niacin deficiency.

Treating patients with excess alcohol use who have multiple vitamin B deficiencies with a B complex with insufficient amounts of niacin or with pyridoxine and thiamine therapy without niacin could aggravate the neurological clinical state or trigger the appearance of alcoholic pellagra encephalopathy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Pellagra is a condition that requires differentiation from generalized dermatitides, such as skin lesions due to sun exposure. Also, niacin deficiency should be distinguished from malnourishment, such as anorexia nervosa and kwashiorkor, or severe protein malnutrition typically characterized by an enlarged liver and edema seen during a famine.

The following is the list of differentials one must consider when dealing with a patient with features indicative of niacin deficiency:

- Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus

- Crohn disease

- Discoid lupus erythematosus

- Drug eruptions

- Drug-induced lupus erythematosus

- Drug-induced photosensitivity

- Drug-induced pemphigus

- Porphyria cutanea tarda

- Ulcerative colitis

# Toxicity and Adverse Effect Management

Although there is no evidence of toxic levels for consuming niacin through foods, niacin consumption in heavily fortified foods, pharmacological or supplemental levels can result in adverse events. High levels of niacin (3000 mg/day) may cause flushing, jaundice, impaired vision, and abdominal discomfort, and a sustained high level can cause hepatotoxicity.

# Prognosis

If left untreated, pellagra will progress and eventually lead to death. Death can result as a complication of continued severe malnutrition due to a lack of dietary intake or continual diarrhea, infections, or neurological factors. Death may occur within 4 to 5 years of continued non-treatment.

Pellagra was a significant widespread cause of death till the early 20 century; however, fortifying flour with niacin practically led to eradicating niacin deficiency in developed countries. However, many recent reports indicate that pellagra may even be underdiagnosed.

# Complications

Complications of niacin deficiency include the condition of pellagra (associated symptoms include mental confusion, glossitis, alopecia, dermatitis, sensitivity to sunlight, enlarged heart, peripheral neuritis, and dementia). The following is a concise list of complications that can occur secondary to niacin deficiency:

- Malnutrition and cachexia

- Secondary infection of the skin rashes

- Neuropsychiatric symptoms

- Coma

- Death

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Niacin deficiency is preventable with an adequate diet rich in protein; therefore, nutritional education and food access are crucial to prevention. In individuals with malabsorptive conditions or those taking medications that reduce the availability of niacin, supplementation may be desirable.

Adding milk, meats, peanuts, whole or enriched grains, green leafy vegetables, and brewers' dry yeast leads to better niacin intake. A semisolid or liquid diet may be needed for patients with oral dysphagia due to glossitis. Long-term inclusion of meat, milk, and eggs in the diet leads to dietary adequacy of proteins critical for recovery.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pellagra is a condition of niacin deficiency, which is rare in industrialized nations. In individuals with malabsorption, lack of access to food, the use of certain medications, or alcoholism that may impair the absorption or synthesis of niacin, it may lead to a presentation of pellagra. After diagnosis and treatment, the prognosis of patients is excellent. Healthcare professionals working as an interprofessional team should use nutritional education to inform the patients and continue to monitor the patient throughout recovery. This interprofessional team, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nursing staff, pharmacists, and nutritionists/dieticians, can best guide patient treatment to an optimal recovery. All team members must maintain accurate records of all interventions and interactions with these patients and exercise open communication channels with other caregivers to ensure optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]