# Continuing Education Activity

Treacher Collins syndrome is a congenital disorder of craniofacial development that has variable phenotypic expression. It can be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern (less than 50% of cases) or can be a sporadic mutation. The hallmarks of this disease are downward-slanting palpebral fissures, mandibular hypoplasia, malar hypoplasia, coloboma of the lower eyelids, malformation of the auricular pinna, middle ear deformities, and associated conductive hearing loss. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of patients with Treacher Collins syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology and epidemiology of Treacher Collins syndrome.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of patients with Treacher Collins syndrome.
- Describe the management options available for patients with Treacher Collins syndrome.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of patients with Treacher Collins syndrome to improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Treacher Collins syndrome (also called mandibulofacial dysostosis) is a rare congenital disorder of craniofacial development that has variable phenotypic expression.

The most common clinical manifestations include downward-slanting palpebral fissures, mandibular hypoplasia, and malar hypoplasia (and can manifest as Tessier clefts 6, 7, 8), coloboma of the lower eyelids, malformation of the auricular pinna (microtia), and middle ear deformities and associated conductive hearing loss.

The syndrome was described by Berry (1889), Treacher Collins (1900), and Franceschetti and Klein (1949) ergo the names Berry’s syndrome and Franceschetti-Zwahlen-Klein syndrome are also used in older literature.

The craniofacial anomalies in these patients can lead to airway obstruction, speech impairment, hearing loss, and feeding difficulties. These patients are best treated via an interprofessional team to coordinate the many facets of their care.

# Etiology

Treacher Collins syndrome is genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous.

Inter- and intrafamilial clinical variability is quite common in TCS.

Once a pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, it is possible to offer prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of Treacher Collins syndrome is estimated between 1 in 25,000 to 1 in 70,000 live births (most commonly cited as 1 in 50,000).

# History and Physical

The most common clinical manifestations are downward-slanting palpebral fissures (89%-100%), malar hypoplasia or hypoplasia of the zygomatic complex (81% to 97%), mandibular hypoplasia or micrognathia (a small lower jaw) (78% to 91%), auricular pinna malformations (77%), lower eyelid colobomas (54% to 69%), and dental anomalies (60%; most commonly hypoplastic, but also heterotopic or hyperplastic).

Eye manifestations of Treacher Collins syndrome include downward-slanting palpebral fissures, colobomas, and hypoplasia of the lower lids and lateral canthi, hypertelorism (a large distance between the eyes), and partial absence of eyelid cilia (or eyelashes).

Facial bone malformation manifestations include malar and mandibular hypoplasia. The malar and mandibular hypoplasia can lead to respiratory distress via obstructive sleep apnea (46%).

Ear manifestations of Treacher Collins syndrome most commonly involve abnormalities of the auricular pinna (or microtia) and are variably (though often) associated with atresia of the external auditory canals (EAC) and anomalies of the middle ear ossicles. Bilateral conductive hearing loss is a common result (83% to 96%).

There are other less common manifestations of Treacher Collins syndrome as well. Salivary gland abnormalities and subsequent dry mucosa can be seen in up 48% of patients with TCS.

# Evaluation

Every case of Treacher Collins syndrome is unique and needs unique, individual assessment ideally by an interprofessional team.

- Visual examination: eyelid as well as visual acuity exams

- Comprehensive hearing testing, as conductive hearing loss is very prevalent, and early intervention can facilitate normal language development and auditory rehabilitation.

- Upper airway examination, as micro and retrognathia, can predispose to obstructive sleep apnea.

Postnatal diagnosis is usually made via a blood sample for DNA isolation from the individual and family members based upon either family history or characteristic facies. Once a pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected individual, it is possible to offer prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing.

The diagnosis of TCS in about 96% of patients is made through molecular genetic testing and detection of a heterozygous (in an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance) pathogenic variant in TCOF1 or POLR1D or biallelic (in an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance) pathogenic variants in POLR1C or POLR1D.

A full craniofacial computed tomography (CT) scan is usually conducted during the first six months of life to determine the extent of dysmorphology. Hypoplasia or aplasia of the zygomatic arch can be detected by a waters’ view radiograph, and mandibular retrognathia can be seen on an orthopantomogram, though in the era of widespread CT availability, these plain-film X-rays are rarely relied upon.

If there is a concern for obstructive sleep apnea, polysomnography, and a thorough ear, nose, and throat examination are in order to decipher the level of upper airway obstruction.

# Treatment / Management

There is no cure for Treacher Collins syndrome, and treatment is aimed at meeting the specific manifestations and needs of each individual patient.

**Obstructive Sleep Apnea**

At birth, the airway may be compromised secondary to maxillary hypoplasia (which can narrow the nasal passages into choanal stenosis or atresia) or, more commonly, due to mandibular hypoplasia with secondary retro-positioned tongue and obstruction of hypopharyngeal spaces.

**Feeding Difficulties**

Feeding support via a gastric tube may be necessary for patients with mandibular hypoplasia (because of persistent airway obstruction and frequent hypoxic episodes) or choanal atresia.

**Speech Delay or Impairment**

Tracheostomies can interfere with speech and can result in subglottic scar tissue and subsequent stenosis.

**Ear Malformations and Hearing Impairment**

Early evaluation by a pediatric otolaryngologist and formal audiological testing coupled with the early fitting of hearing aids will help in the acquisition of communication skills.

Not all patients with TCS receive middle ear reconstruction for this reason and are therefore individually selected based on their specific presentation and personal motivation.

**Eye Anomalies and Visual Impairment**

Orbital dystopia correction and lateral canthopexies are rarely required and are rarely aesthetically normalizing and have low patient satisfaction. The overall appearance of the eye position is a function of the craniofacial skeleton and is usually asymptomatic. Despite the malposition, the visual function is usually normal or near-normal.

**Malar and Mandibular Hypoplasia**

Craniofacial reconstruction is occasionally required, and the age of maxillomandibular reconstruction is dictated by severity, but the most aesthetic results are seen in patients who receive these surgeries near the time of early skeletal maturity (15-17 years old in females and 17 to 21 years old in males).

**Cleft Palate**

Cleft palate repair occurs around one year of age.

**Psychological Concerns**

It is important to pay attention to the psychological needs of the patient with TCS in order for them to build confidence and lead a normal life.

# Differential Diagnosis

There exist a few conditions that may be on the differential diagnosis list with Treacher Collins syndrome. The hearing loss in Treacher Collins syndrome is often symmetric and bilateral, which can help differentiate it from some other syndromes, again emphasizing the importance of comprehensive audiological evaluation in any patient undergoing a syndromic workup.

Goldenhar syndrome (vertebral oculo-auricular dysplasia) shares some craniofacial abnormalities with Treacher Collins syndrome.

Nager syndrome (acrofacial dysostosis) also shares facial features with Treacher Collins syndrome.

Miller syndrome again shares similar facial features with Treacher Collins syndrome, but in Miller syndrome, the limb defects are postaxial, whereas Treacher Collins syndrome has no associated limb anomalies.

Nonsyndromic congenital mandibular hypoplasia is a rare subgroup of all patients with mandibular hypoplasia at large.

# Prognosis

With proper management, individuals with Treacher Collins syndrome have a normal life expectancy.

# Complications

There are multiple medical complications possible in patients with Treacher Collins syndrome, including but not limited to obstructive sleep apnea, speech delay, hearing impairment, feeding difficulties, visual impairment, and psychological sequelae.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Given the genetically and phenotypically heterogeneity of Treacher Collins syndrome, genetic counseling is important.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The current approach to Treacher Collins syndrome involves functional and aesthetic corrections as well as psychosocial support. Anticipatory care is important, as is early hearing and speech intervention. As there can be a familial inheritance, family planning and genetic counseling are invaluable for patients in their reproductive years. The management of a patient with Treacher Collins syndrome can be enhanced by utilizing an interprofessional team approach. It should involve a craniofacial or plastic surgeon, pediatric otolaryngologist, ophthalmologist, audiologist, geneticist, speech therapist, dental surgeon, dietician, psychologist, and other healthcare professionals.

It is recommended that patients with Treacher Collins syndrome receive their care from a singular craniofacial center to provide easy collaboration and access to expertise and to also create more possibilities for research in this rare syndrome.