Investigations for plasma cell neoplasms include the following tests to identify the disease entity. Initial laboratory work set for plasma cell neoplasms include complete blood count (CBC), peripheral blood smear (PB), serum calcium and creatinine, serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and immunofixation, urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP) and immunofixation, serum free light chain (FLC) assay and quantitative immunoglobulins. If the tests yield a high suspicion for PCM, the following laboratory tests are then added: Bone marrow biopsy/bone marrow aspirate, routine urine analysis and 24-hr urine collection for electrophoresis and immunofixation, serum albumin, Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), beta-2-microglobulin and C-reactive protein (CRP). In PCM, the PB smear may show anemia, plasmacytosis, Rouleaux formation or leucoerythroblastic reaction. Bone marrow biopsy/bone marrow aspirate is a crucial test in the diagnosis of PCN. Plasma cell identification, enumeration, and clonality are all assessed on the biopsy specimen. Immunohistochemical staining for CD38, CD138, Ig kappa and lambda light chains are used to identify plasma cells in the bone marrow. Staining for the aberrant CD56 and KIT may also be useful. However they are not used routinely in clinical practice. Clonal plasma cells greater than 10% is considered positive for PCM; while less than 10% clonal bone marrow plasma cells is considered positive for non-Ig M MGUS. Morphologically the plasma cells can be immature, pleomorphic or mature. In AL bone marrow biopsy/bone marrow aspirate is extremely variable and can show no pathological findings, extensive amyloid deposition, PCM findings, or lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Immunohistochemical techniques using anti-amyloid fibril antibodies to kappa and lambda are useful in distinguishing primary and secondary amyloidosis (AA) in some cases

Immunophenotyping utilizing flow cytometry is another useful diagnostic tool that usually complements and confirms the morphological assessment on the biopsy. The plasma cells are CD38 +ve, CD138 (bright) +ve, CD45 –ve, and CD19 –ve. Aberrant antigens such as CD56, CD200, KIT, CD28, CD52, and others are commonly identified. It is important to note that no association between immunophenotyping and prognosis has been found. An M protein is measured in urine and serum and is one of the diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of PCM (greater than 30g/L) and aids in differentiating this entity from non-Ig M MGUS. Lytic bone lesions on imaging are estimated to be present in about 70% of cases of PCM patients and are considered one of the diagnostic criteria of diagnosis. Imaging modalities that are used include XR, PET-CT, and MRI