**External Snapping Hip Syndrome**

External snapping hip syndrome, or externa coxa saltans has the potential to cause chronic pain in the lateral aspect of the hip located over the greater trochanter of the femur. Pathophysiology comprises thickening of the posterior aspect of the ITB or anterior tendon fibers of the gluteus maximus muscle near its insertion. This portion of the band remains posterior to the greater trochanter in hip extension, however, moves anteriorly when flexed, adducted, or internally rotated causing a "snapping" mechanism. This snapping is the tense fascial structure catching on the greater trochanter as it moves in the before mentioned motions.

**Iliotibial Band Syndrome (ITBS)**

ITB syndrome and contracture is a condition secondary to increased tension throughout the structure most commonly causing symptoms near the distal insertion site. This condition can be seen in individuals with cerebral palsy and polio, however, more commonly in individuals who have increased their physical activity (particular lower extremity performance).

Common presentations are usually runners or cyclists that have increased their mileage during recent training intervals. This condition seems to be secondary to overuse and repetitive motion. However, there are some conflicting thoughts as to the exact mechanism eliciting the pain experienced. Several etiologies have been suggested, including the friction induced by the band catching the lateral epicondyle of the femur, compression of the underlying connective tissue and fat, and chronic inflammation of the ITB bursa. Other predisposing structural risk factors are gait abnormalities (i.e., overpronation), leg length discrepancies, and varus deformity of both knees. Symptoms are also most pronounced when the arc of motion reaches 30-40 degrees of knee flexion and occurs along the lateral aspect of the knee.

Clinical examination testing for ITB dysfunction is best elicited utilizing the Ober Test.

To perform the Ober test, have the patient lie on his or her uninvolved side in the lateral decubitus position.  The symptomatic side should be facing upward (i.e., closest to the ceiling).  Next, the examiner passively flexes the knee to about 90 degrees.  The hip is then brought passively into a flexed and abducted position.  Next, the examiner assesses the passive flexibility over the ITB with the hip brought into increasing levels of extension and adduction.  A positive test entails pain, tightness, or clicking over the ITB.