First and foremost, it is essential to identify, if possible, the cause and type of seizure. Benign focal epilepsy typically self-resolves and does not require further intervention. Simple partial epilepsy can be treated with an array of medications. There is no drug of choice, and the patient should be informed that a period of trial and error may ensue. Commonly used first-line medications for partial epilepsy include carbamazepine and lamotrigine. If seizures are not controlled, a second medication can be utilized including valproate, topiramate, oxcarbazepine, or gabapentin.

Lamotrigine is the treatment of choice in the case of partial seizures associated with secondary generalization. Lamotrigine acts by blocking voltage-gated sodium channels. Lamotrigine is used in patients who do not tolerate, do not respond to, or have contraindications to valproate. Apart from partial seizures, lamotrigine is also specifically used for Lennaux Gestaut syndrome. Lamotrigine is also used in treating bipolar disorder. A severe adverse reaction associated with lamotrigine use is Stevens-Johnson syndrome, mainly when used with carbamazepine. Stevens-Johnson syndrome presents with a generalized rash, widespread bullae, and mucosal involvement. These bullae rapidly progress to denude the surface epithelium, potentially leading to severe dehydration and sepsis, among other complications. Treatment involves immediate cessation of the drug and supportive care. It can also cause toxic epidermal necrolysis.

Refractory (intractable) epilepsy has seizures that cannot be controlled with two antiepileptic medications after titrating to the highest dose and attaining therapeutic levels in the blood. In patients discontinuing medicines due to side effects, the seizures are not considered refractory.

- Neurostimulation treatments for intractable partial epilepsy are proven to reduce seizure activity. These treatments are well tolerated by patients and considered safe.

- Surgical intervention is reserved for MTLE seizures secondary to sclerosis or seizures caused by structural lesions such as surgically excisable tumors.

Adjunct therapy with diets high in protein, such as Atkins and ketogenic diets, has reported benefits in patients experiencing refractory seizures.

Personalized, experimental treatment through reprogramming and reinsertion of patient-derived stem cells had shown promising results.