Scintigraphic evaluation of the ankle is not indicated in the acute setting. The utility of nuclear medicine techniques lies in the evaluation of subacute or chronic ankle pain, for which the radiographic examination was negative. For the sake of brevity, we will defer extensive discussion of the technique of the examination, which has already been presented.

A small degree of uniform, symmetric osseous radiotracer activity within the foot and ankle is normal. Increased radiotracer activity in the delayed phase(s) is nonspecific. It may be due to numerous pathologies, including degenerative changes, fractures, infection, avascular necrosis, malignancies, and non-malignant osseous diseases such as Paget disease, fibrous dysplasia, osteoid osteoma, and complex regional pain syndrome. A similarly large differential for focal soft tissue uptake includes several acute and chronic diagnoses. It is the combination of the imaging findings, the distribution, and the clinical history, which leads to an appropriately narrowed differential diagnosis.

The conventional bone scan is a collection of planar scintigraphic images that present a two-dimensional picture of the imaged region, analogous to radiograph. Alternatively, the scintigraphic data can be obtained using single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) with the imaging cameras in a gantry that rotates about the patient, analogous to a CT, providing a three-dimensional image of the radiotracer activity. This can be performed concomitantly with a CT (SPECT-CT). The data co-registered so that the metabolic activity of the radiotracer can be overlaid with the anatomic information from the CT to improve specificity and localization. Newer nuclear medicine techniques for the evaluation of osseous lesions include positron emission tomography (PET) combined with CT (PET-CT) using F18-NaF. These studies have the advantage of a better target to background signal ratio but have increased radiation dose and cost.

Two additional important scintigraphic studies that may be utilized to evaluate osteomyelitis are the tagged white blood cell (WBC) scan and sulfur colloid bone scan. WBC’s (primarily neutrophils) taken from the patient are tagged with In-111 and injected into the patient. The patient is then imaged 24 hours later. As with any infectious or inflammatory process, WBC’s will localize to a site of inflammation. If an area of increased activity is identified, this may then be followed by the sulfur colloid study. Tc-99m labeled sulfur colloid will localize to the marrow in a normal patient due to reticuloendothelial activity of the marrow. In the setting of osteomyelitis (or any other marrow replacing process), sulfur colloid will not accumulate in the marrow. Therefore, a spatially incongruent combination of images that have increased activity in the bone on the WBC study and decreased or no activity on the sulfur colloid study is consistent with osteomyelitis.