Stress is an everyday part of an EMS worker's career. It can be categorized in 2 ways: eustress and distress. Eustress is known as “positive stress.” This can be found in such things as getting a raise at work, becoming married, finding out of an expecting child, or having family members visit. Distress is the opposite. It is "negative stress" such as a family member's death, monetary debt, divorce, having a patient die, or difficulties with fellow employees at work. This stress, along with poor sleeping patterns and inadequate eating habits, have been some of the causes of the high number of EMS job-related burnouts. These high-intensity stressors can lead to acute stress reactions, delayed stress reactions, and cumulative stress reactions. It can also lead to anxiety, depression, substance abuse disorder, PTSD, and suicide.

Due to the unknown nature of when emergency responses are needed, EMS crews rarely have set schedules at which they can eat. This uncertainty leads to eating food that they can purchase quickly and inexpensively (fast food). This was reflected in a study published in a 2009 Obesity journal article that found 75% of the fire department and EMS recruits to be either overweight or obese.

In the last 25 years, sleep disorders have become a great concern for public health. Conditions such as sleep apnea, insomnia, and circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders how shown to have grave health effects on the patients. Of these, the circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders play a big role in EMS workers' health. This is due to the 24-hour shift work and the constant waking to respond to emergency calls.

According to the US Department of Labor, EMS providers suffer more work-related injuries than the average public. More specifically, in 2009 a study on the comparison of public safety provider injury rates found EMS practitioners are more likely to miss work because of injury than those in either the Fire or Police services. Additionally, in 2016 one study found that two-thirds of EMS providers reported they experienced at least one form of violence in the previous 12 months.