While generally tolerated well, adverse effects of antiseptic agents should be carefully weighed before selection to avoid unwanted complications.

Chlorhexidine can cause permanent keratitis, conjunctivitis, and permanent sensorineural deafness (entrance to the middle ear via hole/tear of the tympanic membrane). Chronic use can cause irritant contact dermatitis, and it is reportedly a rare contact allergen.

Povidone-iodine can stain the skin, hair, and clothing. Severe irritant contact dermatitis can be invoked when left on the skin for prolonged periods. It is a known contact allergen that can cross-react with iodides in medications and radiopaque iodine. Microbicidal activity is lost when povidone-iodine comes into contact with blood or sputum. There are also reports of neonatal hypothyroidism with chronic maternal use via percutaneous absorption of the iodides, causing a Wolff-Chaikoff effect in newborns.

Isopropyl alcohol can induce irritant contact dermatitis and is inflammable in the setting of electrocautery.

Hexachlorophene was largely removed from the market after it was linked to the deaths of multiple people via neurotoxicity and brain damage. Additionally, percutaneous absorption can also cause teratogenic effects in the fetuses of pregnant women.

Benzalkonium chloride can cause ocular toxicity and allergic contact dermatitis. While generally considered less irritating to tissues, it has also been shown to cause irritant contact dermatitis with prolonged skin exposure. Anionic compounds such as soap rapidly inactivate benzalkonium chloride.

Contact allergy to chloroxylenol is increasingly becoming a recognized problem with its increased prevalence as a product preservative, in addition to its known irritant effects.

Hydrogen peroxide is cytotoxic to keratinocytes in culture and presumably can impede the reepithelialization of wounds. In addition, it has a bleaching action that can whiten skin, hair, nails, and clothes.