The stomach is comprised of the four anatomical regions described below:

- **Cardia:**The superior region of the stomach found immediately inferior to the gastro-oesophageal junction.

- **Fundus:**Dome-shaped portion found adjacent and lateral to the cardia.

- **Body:**Forms the main bulk of the stomach below the cardia and fundus.

- **Pylorus:**It starts at the angular notch between the body and pylorus. Comprised of the antrum, canal, and sphincter, this structure appears at the L1 vertebral level. It links the stomach and small bowel.

**Lesser and greater curvatures:**

- **Greater curvature**– starts at the cardiac notch; passes in a long curve, forming the lateral border of the fundus, body, and pyloric antrum. Arterial supply is via the short gastric and the gastroepiploic (right and left) arteries.

- **Lesser curvature**– starts at the gastroesophageal junction and runs along the medial surface of the stomach to the angular notch. The lesser curvature receives its supply from the left gastric artery (arising from the celiac trunk) and the right gastric artery (arising from the hepatic artery).

**Anatomical Relations:**

- **Superior:**Superiorly the stomach is related to the esophagus and left hemidiaphragm

- **Anterior:**Anterior to the stomach (from superficial to deep) lies the abdominal wall, diaphragm, left lobe of the liver, and greater omentum

- **Posterior:**Posterior to the stomach is the lesser sac. Retroperitoneal structures include the pancreas, left kidney, and suprarenal gland, and intraperitoneal structures include the spleen and splenic artery

**Peritoneal attachments:**

**Greater omentum**– A double layer of peritoneum originating from the greater curvature of the stomach that traverses the peritoneal cavity. The greater omentum folds around and attaches to the transverse colon. The function of the greater omentum is to adhere to inflamed tissues and prevent the spread of infection across the peritoneal cavity.

**Lesser omentum –**The role of the lesser omentum is to attach the stomach to the liver. It arises from the lesser curvature of the stomach and travels to the liver.

The two omenta divide the peritoneal cavity into the greater and lesser sacs that communicate via the epiploic foramen of Winslow. The lesser sac lies posterior to the stomach and anterior to the pancreas. The greater sac contains the small and larger bowel.

**Blood supply:**

The arterial supply to the stomach is via a rich anastomotic network that arises from the celiac trunk and its branches.

Right gastric artery – The celiac trunk branches into the common hepatic artery, which then gives rise to the right gastric artery.

Left gastric artery – One of three branches the celiac trunk

Right gastroepiploic artery – The celiac trunk branches into the common hepatic artery, which then branches into the gastroduodenal artery, which gives rise to the right gastroepiploic artery.

Left gastroepiploic artery – The celiac trunk branches into the splenic artery, then giving rise to the left gastroepiploic artery.

**Venous Drainage**

The veins of the stomach share names with the arteries. The right and left gastric veins to drain directly into the hepatic portal vein, whereas the short gastric veins and the gastroepiploic veins drain into the superior mesenteric vein.

**Innervation:**

The vagus nerve (10th cranial nerve) supplies the parasympathetic nerve supply to the stomach.

The greater splanchnic nerve arises from the T6-T9 spinal cord segment and supplies sympathetic nerve supply to the stomach.