Miliaria is a disorder involving vesicles, papules, and pustules of the skin. It is crucial to examine the skin closely for rash characteristics and location in order to arrive at an accurate diagnosis.

Miliaria crystallina appears as 1 to 2 mm superficial vesicles, affecting both adults and neonates usually younger than 2 weeks old. Since the pathophysiology involves the most superficial layer of the epidermis, the stratum corneum, the vesicles have a thin superficial layer. This results in the vesicles resembling water droplets on the skin that easily rupture.

Miliaria rubra is the most prevalent form of miliaria. The obstruction of eccrine ducts occurs in the deeper layers of the skin and involves an inflammatory response. This results in larger, erythematous papules and vesicles. A critical clinical diagnostic feature that helps differentiate miliaria rubra from folliculitis is minimal follicular involvement. If pustules are present, then miliaria rubra is called miliaria pustulosa and may indicate a bacterial infection. Because an inflammatory response is involved, patients may experience pruritic and painful symptoms. These symptoms may worsen during perspiration, causing more irritation. In neonates usually between the ages of 1 to 3 weeks, the groin, axilla, and neck are the most commonly affected areas. In adults, miliaria rubra is most likely seen in places where clothes rub on the skin such as the trunk and extremities. The face is usually spared. Superinfection with staphylococci may occur, and when impetigo or multiple abscesses are involved, the condition is called periporitis staphylogenes.

Miliaria profunda, due to a deeper involvement of the skin at the dermal-epidermal junction, results in firm, large, flesh-colored papules that are also not centered around the follicles. The eruption may vary with symptoms from extremely pruritic to asymptomatic. Miliaria profunda is usually seen in patients with numerous previous episodes of miliaria rubra. The rash distribution in adults mainly involves the trunk, but the arms and legs may also be involved. The skin rash usually appears within minutes to hours of perspiration and resolves within an hour of sweating cessation.

In both miliaria rubra and miliaria profunda, anhidrosis may occur in affected areas due to obstructed sweat glands. As such, heat exhaustion may occur due to ineffective thermoregulation in patients with largely affected areas and should be considered in the setting of a skin rash accompanied by hyperthermia.