The primary functional role of the PMCA pump is to transport calcium against its concentration gradient out from the cytoplasm out of the cell through the plasma membrane.

The main functional role of SERCA is to pump calcium from the cytoplasm back into the lumen of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is essentially the endoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells.

The Na+/Ca+ exchanger also is responsible for keeping cytosolic calcium levels low. Unlike PMCA and SERCA, it has a low affinity for calcium but a high transport capacity.

Voltage-gated calcium channels play a crucial role in various cellular processes. In particular, they act as key signal transducers by influencing the electrical excitability of multiple cell types such as neurons and endocrine cells. They convert electrical signals in the form of action potentials or depolarization into the form of a calcium transient inside the cell by generating rapid calcium fluxes into the cell. These rapid fluxes of calcium are important for mediating fast cellular processes such as muscle contraction, initiation of neurotransmission, and secretion in muscle cells, neurons, and endocrine cells, respectively. In other cell types, the influx of calcium into the cytosol via VGCCs regulates various biochemical processes, such as enzyme activity and gene expression.

Different subtypes of  VGCCs have different electrophysical properties in terms of current and voltages of activation. As such, these channels mediate the activation of various signal transduction pathways and are involved in diverse cellular processes. For example, in cardiac and smooth muscle cells, large influxes of calcium into the cytoplasm by voltage-gated calcium provide the calcium required to initiate the process of calcium-induced calcium-release (CICR) in ryanodine receptors of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is essential for initiating muscle contraction. In skeletal muscle cells, VGCCs are mechanically linked to ryanodine receptors and controls their activation directly via conformational changes.

The Cav1 family of VGCCs plays an important role in the nervous system by contributing to the integration of synaptic input and transmission at sensory synapses. Furthermore, they play important regulatory roles in gene expression, secretion, and muscle contraction in skeletal and cardiac muscles.

P/Q-type calcium channels (Cav2.1) play a crucial role in neurotransmission. They are involved in linking neuronal excitation in pre-synaptic neurons to the secretion of neurotransmitters by mediating the increase in local calcium concentration in the pre-synaptic cell.

IP3 receptors have a diverse variety of functions in the cell. It is a component of one of the many calcium signaling pathways in the cell, which is highly versatile.

P3 receptors function as a hub for cell signaling activity by forming macromolecular complexes with various other molecules to create signaling cascades and activate cellular pathways.

IP3 receptor channels also play a critical role in various processes during development. In neurons, they play a role in synaptic plasticity and neuronal growth. For example,  IP3 receptors are necessary for calcium release in dendritic spines during long-term potentiation. Furthermore, the guidance of axons to neuronal targets and the formation of neuronal growth cones are dependent on IP3 receptors. They are also necessary to regulate cell proliferation.

Ryanodine receptors play a crucial role in the normal functioning of muscle cells. In muscle cells, the cytoplasmic domain of RyRs is coupled to L-type voltage-gated calcium channels on the cell membrane. Electromechanical coupling between these two receptors allows depolarizations in the cell membrane to directly control the gating of the ryanodine receptor.

Critical for excitation-contraction coupling in both skeletal and cardiac muscle.

One of the most important functions of ryanodine receptors is to play a critical role in excitation-contraction coupling, which links electrical signals to calcium release during the initiation of muscle contraction.

Store-operated calcium channels are located on the membrane of the endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum. They play an essential role in maintaining a constant store of calcium when required by the cell. Calcium continually leaks out of the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol during normal cellular processes. To avoid depletion of the cell's calcium stores, the cell utilizes store-operated calcium channels. Although the SERCA pump provides the initial storage of calcium, upon generation of cellular response and the utilization of second messengers of which calcium is an important such messenger, calcium gets used by the cell for such processes and, eventually, the calcium store becomes depleted. As such, store-operated channels function to avoid the complete emptying of calcium. Essentially, store-operated calcium channels act as mediators of communication for the cell between the endoplasmic reticulum and the plasma membrane and provide vital information regarding the status of calcium homeostasis at any given time.