A detailed history is necessary, and a thorough physical examination should be performed whenever a patient with a fever is encountered in the ICU. Infectious and non-infectious causes need to be considered, with the former being a more crucial diagnosis resulting in a change of ongoing management.

Vascular access sites, urinary catheters, drain sites, and surgical incision sites should be examined. Heart sounds should be carefully auscultated to rule out a clue for infective endocarditis. Tracheal secretions should be assessed for color, odor, purulence, and quantity. The skin and soft tissue evaluation for cellulitis, furunculosis, and paronychia are routinely performed in all patients. The subtle or silent sources of infection commonly encountered are sinusitis, decubitus ulcers, dental or tonsillar infections, perineal wounds, and abscesses, all of which often need a high degree of clinical suspicion. Drug history should be reviewed, and drug fever is almost always a diagnosis of exclusion.

One also needs to be aware that in immunocompromised or neutropenic patients, the clinical symptoms and signs of infection or inflammation would be scanty or absent. Only a high degree of suspicion gives a clue to the site of infection causing the fever. Skin findings such as ulcers, nodules, vesicles, pilonidal sinus, and lesions such as erythema multiforme & ecthyma gangrenosum might be the subtle sign of infectious etiology and need to look for in neutropenic or immunosuppressed patients specifically. Perianal infections are often missed in neutropenic patients.

**Measurement of Body Temperature**

Core body temperature should be measured in ICU. The thermistor of a pulmonary artery catheter is considered the gold standard for measuring core body temperature but is not commonly used as it is invasive. Nasopharyngeal, esophageal, and bladder thermistors are preferred, followed by rectal and tympanic membrane measurements.

Based on these assumptions, a temperature between 38.3 degrees C and 38.8 degrees C can result from infectious and non-infectious etiologies, encompassing a huge list of differentials. Fevers above 38.9 C (102 F) and below 41 C are mostly infectious, and a fever ≥ 41.1 C (105.8 F) is considered non-infectious.