The differential diagnosis of chronic arthritis is broad, depending on the clinical presentation and the JIA subtypes. Since JIA is a diagnosis of exclusion, any patients with a positive review of the system should be considered for possible diseases.

The following differential diagnosis should be considered:

A) Oligoarthritis need to exclude post-streptococcal reactive arthritis, Lyme arthritis, acute rheumatic fever, reactive arthritis, toxic synovitis, septic arthritis, pyomyositis, steroid-induced osteonecrosis, sickle cell disease, hemophilia, scurvy, osteomyelitis, chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis (CNO), sports injury, non-accidental injury, pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS), osteoid osteoma, bone tumors, neuroblastoma, leukemia, and lymphoma.

B) Polyarthritis need to exclude post-streptococcal reactive arthritis, Lyme arthritis, acute rheumatic fever, reactive arthritis, scurvy, chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis (CNO) or chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis, non-accidental injury, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), Sjögren syndrome, scleroderma, sarcoidosis, Blau syndrome, arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel diseases, Farber disease, benign hypermobility joint syndrome and amplified musculoskeletal pain syndrome

C) Systemic arthritis need to exclude infections (mycoplasma, cat scratch disease, bacterial endocarditis, Lyme disease), acute rheumatic fever, syndrome of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and cervical adenitis (PFAPA syndrome), autoinflammatory syndromes, systemic vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa, Kawasaki disease), inflammatory bowel disease, malignancy (leukemia, lymphoma, neuroblastoma), Castleman disease

D) Enthesitis-related arthritis. Apophysitis (especially Osgood-Schlatter, Sever disease), inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO), amplified musculoskeletal pain syndrome.

Arthralgias are common early in the course of sJIA, but arthritis is not always prominent. Any number of joints may be involved when arthritis becomes apparent. Disease in the wrists, knees, and ankles is most typical. Hands, hips, cervical spine, and temporomandibular joints are also sometimes affected, unlike the oligoarticular and polyarticular subtypes of JIA

Arthralgias are common early in the course of sJIA, but arthritis is not always prominent. Any number of joints may be involved when arthritis becomes apparent. Disease in the wrists, knees, and ankles is most typical, but the hands, hips, cervical spine, and temporomandibular joints are also sometimes affected. Unlike the oligoarticular and polyarticular subtypes of JIA

MSK complaints in children with joint pain are common in general practice and increase significantly after ten years of age in general practice.

The most common presentation of musculoskeletal complaints is joint pain and soft tissue pain (65%), and the most common cause of all ages of children is trauma (45%).