Preparation for performing a nasoseptal flap begins with detailed patient history and physical exam, including an endoscopic nasal exam in the office setting before surgery. A focused history should be performed, including a discussion of the reasons for surgery, including the history of present illness. Prior surgeries, including any endonasal procedures, should be discussed.

A full head and neck physical exam should be performed, followed by an endoscopic endonasal examination. Rigid nasal endoscopic examination is preferred over flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy. The septum should be evaluated bilaterally for any evidence of prior surgery and deviation, perforation, or mucosal abnormalities. It is important to assess the involvement of the septum with the tumor as this may affect reconstructive options.

As with any neurosurgical or sinus procedure, appropriate imaging is critical for surgical preparation and imaging-based intraoperative navigation. CT is the imaging modality of choice for otolaryngologists performing sinus surgery, but MRI is often used for intracranial and skull base lesions and therefore used preferentially by neurosurgeons. Combining the two modalities is often preferred for appropriate skull base surgery preparation. Pre-operative imaging, thorough pre-operative medical and surgical history, and a pre-operative nasal endoscopic exam are critical for identifying possible challenges and contraindications to using the nasoseptal flap for reconstruction. Patients should be counseled to cease the use of all intranasal medications and substances pre-operatively as these can affect the integrity of the septal mucosa. Any potential sources of trauma, including new piercings, should be avoided.

Because the case is clean-contaminated, as with all sinonasal surgery, no cleansing of the nasal cavity or external nose is warranted. The vibrissae of the nasal vestibule should be trimmed to avoid the collection of blood or secretions, which can dirty the endoscope and ultimately delay or complicate the procedure. The patient should be draped as appropriate for the ablative portion of the procedure and navigation registered after that.