Lumbar spine spondylolisthesis can be either dysplastic, isthmic, degenerative, traumatic, or pathologic. Of these subtypes, the traumatic spondylolisthesis remains unusual as the lumbar spine is located deep beneath the thick muscular layers. A high-energy trauma is necessary to achieve this injury type. A lumbar transverse process fracture is a hint for the clinician to look for a possible traumatic spondylolisthesis. The mechanism advocated in the literature for spondylolisthesis with bilateral facet dislocation is a hyperflexion associated with varying degrees of distraction. The inferior articular facet of the superior vertebra is displaced and “locked “anterior to the superior articular facet of the vertebra below.

Hyperflexion alone can produce either pure dislocation or fracture-dislocation in the lumbar spine. However, facet joint disruption also can be unilateral. When it occurs, a rotational component is added to the flexion-distraction mechanism. The superior and inferior articular processes of the joint are displaced relative to each other due to injuries of the above-mentioned ligaments. This injury type tends to occur at the junction of rigid and mobile parts of the spine such as the thoracolumbar or lombo-sacral junction. The “seatbelt injury” is the classical example which occurs with improper use of a three-point seat belt. The lap belt holds the lower part of the spine immobile while the upper segment is hyper-flexed and moves anteriorly, resulting in facet joint disruption. It has been evoked particularly in L4, L5, and L5 S1 listhesis.