Intestinal NETs are rare and slow-growing tumors. They infrequently pose a diagnostic challenge to physicians. A high index of suspicion should be maintained for intestinal symptoms that are not well explained otherwise. Once the tumor is suspected, work should be completed to verify and characterize the tumor. On occasions, tumors are found incidentally during work or surgery for other reasons. Once suspected the following  tests may aid the diagnosis:

**Laboratory Testing**

A useful initial diagnostic test for carcinoid syndrome is 24 hours urinary excretion of 5-Hydroxy Indole Acetic Acid (5-HIAA). It has 90% sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of intestinal carcinoid. This may be falsely positive as a result of ingestion of certain drugs or serotonin rich foods. Other less commonly used tests include chromogranin **A**concentration and measuring urinary excretion of serotonin.

**Imaging**

Once the biochemical assessment of carcinoid disease is completed, imaging studies in combined modalities facilitate tumor localization.

Triple phase contrast-enhanced CT scan is most commonly used as it is widely available. CT scan sensitivity is low (50%). Some of the disadvantages of a CT scan are difficulty in detecting small tumors less than 1 cm in size and difficulty in distinguishing colorectal adenocarcinoma from colorectal carcinoid tumors due to their similarity in appearance. CT scan increases significantly with large or locally advanced tumors with mesenteric involvement with characteristic radiating dense soft tissue strands caused by thickened neurovascular bundles. Likewise, abdominal CT is thought to be helpful in identifying liver metastases. MRI modality is the most sensitive technique to detect liver metastasis and can be used as an alternative to a CT scan.

Octreotide scan has the advantage of detecting metastasis beyond the abdominal region. It is currently in use in conjunction with Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning to increase sensitivity to detect pathologic uptake in the abdominal region. Octreoscan diagnostic sensitivity in asymptomatic patients with gastrointestinal NE tumors has been estimated to be in the range of 80% to 90%.