Nisoldipine is contraindicated in individuals with hypersensitivity to the drug or other dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers. Caution is necessary for the elderly population due to higher drug plasma concentrations; recommendations are to start at a lower dose for safety.

Breastfeeding women should avoid this drug due to the risk of excretion into breast milk. Due to the lack of well-controlled studies, pregnant women should avoid drug use to prevent any teratogenicity. Avoid concurrent use with cytochrome P450 inducers and inhibitors.

**Warnings/Precautions**

**Hypotension/syncope:**Hypotension with or without syncope is rarely reported, and target blood pressure should be attained at a rate appropriate for the patient's clinical condition. Clinicians should closely monitor patients during initial dosing and at dosage titrations.

**Peripheral Edema:**The most common adverse reaction of nisoldipine is peripheral edema, which occurs within two to three weeks of therapy initiation.

**Angina/ Myocardial Infarction:**Extreme caution is necessary for patients with aortic stenosis, myocardial infarction, or hypotension due to the risk of reflex tachycardia resulting in the possible exacerbation of angina or worsening of myocardial infarction (MI), especially in the absence of concomitant beta-blockade. Though rare, patients with coronary artery disease may have increased frequency or severity of angina when starting nisoldipine. Safety measures are advised in patients with heart failure or left ventricular dysfunction and severe bradycardia due to the drug's hypotensive effect.

**Heart failure (HF):**According to ACC/AHA heart failure guidelines, calcium channel blockers, in general, should be avoided in patients with heart failure due to lack of benefit and/or worsening of outcomes.

**Hepatic impairment**: Use with caution in patients with severe hepatic impairment.