Healthcare professionals, including those in the MICU and CCU who administer esmolol, should be familiar with its adverse effects. Esmolol is an ultra-fast-acting medication that can quickly control heart rate and pressure. Therefore, while the patient is on esmolol, it is recommended that nursing staff continuously monitor patients for blood pressure, heart rate, mean arterial pressure, and, if possible, EKG. An arterial line will provide the best method of continuous blood pressure monitoring, which is beneficial in use with esmolol. When given peripherally, the intravenous (IV) site should be checked regularly to ensure that it did not infiltrate and extravasate. As mentioned above, in patients with comorbidities, appropriate blood levels should be monitored, such as glucose (diabetes), thyroid levels (hyperthyroid), potassium (renal insufficiency), and peripheral pulses (peripheral vascular disease). The pharmacist should perform medication reconciliation and inform the prescriber of any concerns.

Given the pharmacodynamics of esmolol, it is advisable to use an interprofessional team approach to using the drug. This interprofessional team will include clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), specialists including EP consult service, nurses, and pharmacists, all coordinating their activities and communicating openly so all team members are operating from the same information and can intervene or report the need for intervention and achieve optimal patient outcomes related to esmolol therapy.****According to the 2016 ESC (European Society of Cardiology), managing patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) requires coordination from an interprofessional team consisting of specialists, stroke physicians, cardiologists, clinicians, AF surgeons, allied healthcare professionals, patients, and family members and integrated care has the potential to enhance patient outcomes.