**Pathophysiology of blindness:**

The ability to recognize visually presented objects depends on the integrity of the following:

1. Visual pathways

2. The primary visual area of the cerebral cortex (Brodmann area 17)

3. The secondary visual cortex, lying just anterior to area 17 (Brodmann areas 18 and 19) of the occipital lobe

4. The angular gyrus of the dominant hemisphere (Brodmann area 39) -  visual association area.

**Patterns of visual deficits in ABS:**

1. Blindness: Although the anterior visual tracts are intact, bilateral occipital brain damage results in blindness.

2. Gunbarrel vision: Tiny islands of vision sometimes persist, and in such cases, the patient may report that vision fluctuates as images are captured in the preserved portions; in rare instances, only peripheral vision is lost, and central vision is spared, resulting in gun-barrel vision

3. Perception of movements alone: Movement of objects may be perceived, either consciously (Riddoch syndrome) or unconsciously (blindsight)

4. Motion blindness: Patients will be able to see objects but will not be able to appreciate their motion. This may be explained by the presence of projections from the lateral geniculate nucleus, to both the primary visual cortex via the optic radiations and the motion-selective middle temporal area (MT or V5)

5. Charles Bonnet syndrome: In this condition, the patient will have a loss of vision (due to any reason), but insight will be preserved. Such patients may experience visual hallucinations containing images of unfamiliar objects and people.

**Pathophysiology of anosognosia**

Theories to explain the unawareness of deficit on the Anton-Babinsky syndrome:

1. Disconnection phenomena:

a. Conscious awareness system (CAS): This function of this system is to monitor the inputs from all the sensory organs and is located in the bilateral parietal lobes. Another system integrating the inputs is located within the bilateral frontal lobes, and this is connected with the former system. This interconnected system helps in performing complex cognitive tasks. In Anton-Babinski syndrome, damage of association pathways between the visual cortex and CAS would be responsible for the lack of awareness of the visual deficit.

b. Disconnection of the visual area from language area: This makes the patient fabulate answers as he/she will be not able to describe the visual stimulus.

c. Overaction of the secondary visual pathway: A secondary visual system is located in the superior colliculus, pulvinar, and temporoparietal regions. This system will usually send impulses to the visual association cortex (visual monitor). If there is no transmission of impulse in the geniculo-calcarine pathway, the secondary visual pathway will gain predominance and results in fabulation in blind patients.

2. Neuropsychological mechanisms:

a. Defective visual monitor: This leads to incorrect interpretation of images.

b. The presence of false-positive feedback from visual monitor: This leads to a perception of false images, which in turn leads the speech areas to come out with an abnormal response.

**Pathophysiology of confabulatio**n

Patients start to confabulate to fill in the missing sensory input. Anton suggested that functioning speech and language areas will be disconnected from the damaged visual pathways. If there are no proper sensory visual inputs, the functioning speech areas may confabulate a response. In this, patients adamantly claim that they are capable of seeing and/ or experiencing strange visual hallucinatory episodes, consequently resulting in confabulation.

**In short, ABS can be caused by lesions along the following structures:**

- Visual cortices

- Bilateral lateral geniculate bodies

- Posterior limbs of the internal capsules

- Optic radiations

- Corpus callosum