- Classic paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis belongs to a group of neurological syndromes associated with antibodies against intracellular neuronal proteins that are invariably cancer-related.

- Non-classical paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis is directly produced by surface epitope or intracellular neuromuscular junction epitope-targeted antibodies, similar to those producing primary autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

- PEM can be seen with multiple cancers (i.e. - small cell lung cancer, thymoma, testicular cancer) as well as with the use of immune checkpoint inhibitors (i.e. - pembrolizumab).

- For all PEM types, the underlying trigger is thought to be ectopically presented neural antigens on tumor cells causing either a cell-mediated or antibody-mediated immune attack of the central nervous system.

- Common presentations of PEM include limbic encephalitis, brainstem encephalitis, cerebellar degeneration, myelitis, stiff-person syndrome, NMOSD, and autonomic dysfunction.

- Recommended workup includes antibody panel testing of serum and CSF, MRI/FDG-PET CT scan, EEG, and cancer screening.

- PEM is a diagnosis of exclusion and extensive evaluations are often needed to exclude other causes of encephalomyelitis.

- Treatment involves prompt tumor removal, and use of T cell-directed therapies like cyclophosphamide, steroids, and tacrolimus for classic PEM, and IVIg, plasmapheresis, or steroids for non-classic PEM.

- The overall prognosis varies, depending on the cancer type, paraneoplastic marker antibody, and type of immune response produced in the paraneoplastic disease.