The transformation of the normal colonic epithelium to a precancerous lesion (adenoma) and ultimately to invasive carcinoma requires an accumulation of genetic mutations either somatic (acquired) and/or germline (inherited). The theory of colonic carcinogenesis features a clonal mutation evolution that gives a cell survival-immortality advantage and allows to develop more mutations providing other cancer hallmarks as proliferation, invasion, metastasis, and others.MLH1 or MSH2, accumulate errors within the genome that further will be repeated causing high levels of microsatellite instability (MSI-H), a hallmark of Lynch syndrome. CpG hypermethylation of DNA could activate or silence the expression of certain genes, BRAF and MLH1 respectively. Sporadic oncogenes somatic mutations (RAS, SRC, MYC) have been implicated in CRC, being RAS the most clinical relevance. RAS mutations variants (HRAS, KRAS, NRAS) are found in 50% of CRC sporadic cases, currently being exploited on CRC screening by stool-DNA testing, the absence of epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) targeted therapy response and potential direct targeted agents. In the other hand, tumor suppressors genes require bi-allelic loss (“two-hit model”) and are described in loss of APC 5q21 gene (80% sporadic), TP53 17p gene (50-70% sporadic), and DCC/SMAD2-4 18q gene (73% sporadic). Specific MMR gene mutations could occur in hMSH2, hMLH1, hPMS1 and hPMS2, hMSH6, and hMLH3; each one of them that interact with MLH1 and approximately found in 15% of all sporadic CRC causing a Lynch-like syndrome with MSI-H calling for universal testing. MUTYH defects have a recessive inheritance pattern at a time requiring bi-allelic second hit or in conjunction with APC gene mutation. Cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and peroxisome proliferator–activating receptor (PPAR) genes have been implicated in CRC tumorigenesis currently under investigation for chemo-protection.