**Infection by penicillinase-producing organisms**

- Ampicillin is contraindicated in the treatment of infections caused by penicillinase-producing organisms. The rationale behind it is penicillinase (beta-lactamase) will inactivate ampicillin.

**Hypersensitivity**

- Severe and life-threatening anaphylactoid reactions can occur with penicillin therapy. Although anaphylaxis more commonly occurs following parenteral therapy, it can also present after oral administration. It is more likely in patients with a previous history of penicillin hypersensitivity and reaction to multiple allergens. Before initiating therapy, the clinician should carefully inquire about hypersensitivity reactions to cephalosporins, allergens, or penicillin.

- If a hypersensitivity reaction occurs, the clinician should discontinue ampicillin therapy and initiate alternative antimicrobial therapy. Anaphylactoid reactions require immediate emergency treatment with oxygen, epinephrine, steroids, and airway management, including intubation(if clinically indicated).

**Clostridium Difficile Infection **

- Antibacterial treatment alters the intestine's natural flora, leading to the overgrowth of C. difficile. Clostridioides difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD) can occur with nearly all antibacterial agents, especially ampicillin. The resulting severity may range from mild diarrhea to fulminant colitis. Hypertoxin-producing C. difficile strains cause increased morbidity and mortality, as these strains are refractory to the recommended antimicrobial therapy and may require colectomy. Therefore, CDAD is a consideration for all patients who present with diarrhea after antibacterial use. Since it is reported to occur over two months after administering antibacterial agents, a careful medical history is necessary in these cases.

- If CDAD is confirmed, ongoing antimicrobial use not directed against the organism might require cessation of therapy. Adequate fluid and electrolyte management, protein supplementation, and the antimicrobial regimen of C. difficile and surgical evaluation should be an option if indicated.

**Concomitant Infectious Mononucleosis Infection**

- A high proportion (43%) of patients with infectious mononucleosis started on ampicillin can develop a rash. Ideally, the rash appears 7 to 10 days following the initiation of ampicillin therapy and remains for a few days to one week after discontinuation of the drug. In most cases, the rash is maculopapular, generalized, and pruritic. Therefore, ampicillin administration is not a recommendation for these patients. Whether these patients are truly allergic to penicillin remains unknown.

**Absence of Strong Indication**

- Ampicillin administration without a specific indication or proof of a bacterial infection or a prophylactic indication is not likely to benefit the patient. Instead, it increases the risk of the growth of drug-resistant bacteria.