Given the significantly increased risk of developing malignant tumors, patients and their caretakers should have regular education and reinforcement of the many steps that are necessary to minimize the development of malignant tumors and shorten the time between clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment of malignant tumors as they develop.

The most effective method of decreasing the number of malignant tumors in patients with XP is strict sun avoidance and protection. Patients and their caregivers should be educated on all strategies to keep UV radiation exposure to a minimum. Patients should avoid going outside of their homes during daytime hours. If they must go outside during the day, patients should be covered head to toe with sunscreen. Broad-spectrum sunscreen requires application every two hours. Patients should also use a lip balm with sunscreen. Patients should wear sun-protective clothing with long sleeves and pants. They should also wear a hat and sunglasses with side shields. All windows of the home, car, and school should have a covering with a UV-blocking film. Patients should also avoid exposure to fluorescent, metal halide, and halogen lighting, which can emit UV radiation.

Regular total body skin exams should be performed by a dermatologist as well as by caregivers. Patients should visit a dermatologist at least every three months throughout the patient’s life. Caregivers should perform daily skin exams at home and receive educated on changes that require the attention of the patient’s dermatologist.

Patients with XP that smoke cigarettes are also at increased risk of developing lung cancer compared to the general population and, therefore, should be educated on strict smoking avoidance or cessation.

Patients and their caretakers should also receive information for xeroderma pigmentosum support groups.