Lupus-like symptoms with the exclusion of other autoimmune disorders and the resolution of symptoms with the withdrawal of medications suggest the diagnosis of DIL.

Laboratory evaluation is crucial but may not always be able to differentiate DIL from SLE. Cytopenias are less common, and if present, are mild. Methyldopa has been associated with hemolytic anemia while a positive coombs test has been reported with methyldopa, procainamide, and carbamazepine.

Autoantibody evaluation reveals a positive ANA, usually in a homogenous pattern, although the speckled pattern has been reported. Anti-histone antibodies are present in 75% of cases of DIL, although their utility in differentiating DIL from SLE is limited given their positivity in up to 75% of cases of SLE as well. Positive anti-histone antibodies are seen in DIL secondary to several drugs including hydralazine, procainamide, hydrochlorothiazide, chlorpromazine, isoniazid, quinidine, penicillamine, anti-TNF agents, although they are less frequently seen in DIL secondary to minocycline or propylthiouracil.

Anti-dsDNA antibodies are seen in more than 50% of cases of SLE and less than 5% cases of DIL, especially secondary to anti-TNF agents and interferon-alpha. Rare cases of positive Anti-dsDNA have been reported in DIL secondary to minocycline and isoniazid. Anti-Ro/SSA antibodies may be positive in SCLE, either idiopathic or secondary to hydrochlorothiazide.

Antiphospholipid antibodies including anticardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant have been reported in DIL secondary to chlorpromazine, procainamide, quinidine, and interferon-alpha. These are rarely associated with thrombotic events.

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) especially P-ANCA or atypical-ANCA have been reported in DIL secondary to minocycline, hydralazine, propylthiouracil, methimazole, and anti-TNF agents. Notably, up to 20% of patients with SLE can also have a positive ANCA.

Other autoantibodies against antigens including smith, ribonuclear protein (RNP), SCL70, centromere, Jo-1 are rare in DIL and may help differentiate DIL from other autoimmune disorders.

Laboratory evaluation shall also include evaluation of complements (C3 and C4), renal function including urine to evaluate for proteinuria, liver function. Skin biopsy for DIL is indistinguishable from SLE although it should be pursued in suspicious skin lesions to rule out other etiologies.