According to the 2015 CDC STI treatment guidelines, there are three recommended strategies for the treatment of trichomoniasis. These include a single 2-gram dose of metronidazole, a single 2-gram dose of tinidazole, or a seven-day course of 500 mg metronidazole twice daily.

In patients with known HIV infection, the recommended treatment regimen is a seven-day course of 500 mg metronidazole twice daily.

According to a study, the percent of women positive for trichomoniasis on their test of cure was 19% when given a single dose of metronidazole versus 11% when patients completed a seven-day course of metronidazole.

If left untreated, trichomoniasis may remain subclinical or may resolve with host immunity.

Pregnant women must be treated otherwise it can result in adverse outcomes. The drug of choice is metronidazole. Women should stop breastfeeding during treatment.

The CDC also recommends performing a test of cure for all women treated for trichomoniasis within three months of treatment. Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) can be completed as soon as two weeks following treatment. NAAT is the recommended method for a test of cure due to the sensitivity of the test.

Many states allow expedited partner therapy (EPT). EPT laws typically enable providers to prescribe treatment to a third party sexual partner without performing a medical examination or establishing a provider/patient relationship with the third party sexual partner of a patient diagnosed with trichomoniasis or other STIs. A list of states and the laws surrounding EPT can be found on the CDC website.

The CDC does not recommend for or against treating for chlamydia and gonorrhea when treating for trichomonas. This is a provider and patient-specific decision. Things to consider when deciding on treatment for chlamydia and gonorrhea is the patient's reliability for follow-up and the risks and benefits of treatment.

When metronidazole fails, the other drug is tinidazole. Patients should be advised not to consume alcohol when these drugs are prescribed. Topical medications have high failure rates and should not be used.