The two most frequently reported causes of death include hyperthermia and hyponatremia. While toxicity can be severe, a literature review reveals deaths related to MDMA toxicity to be rare. Confounding factors in some reports are that other drugs were co-ingested, thus making it difficult to find MDMA as the sole cause of death. One study found that in the 10 years to 2006, ecstasy-related deaths numbered approximately 50 per year though they were not purely ecstasy-related. When it was the sole drug implicated, this number dropped to 10 per year. A retrospective case review of ED admissions related to ecstasy revealed a death rate of 0 to 2%.

Though deaths are rare, the potential for long-term side effects has been demonstrated through animal and radiological studies. Serotonin plays a role in emotion, memory, and high-order cognitive processes. Previous animal studies revealed a loss of serotonin axon terminal markers. These losses were found to be extremely long-lasting in MDMA-treated monkeys. PET scans in baboons showed significant decreases in radioactivity levels in various areas of the brain. Human volunteers with a history of MDMA use underwent PET scanning and were found to have a global dose-related reduction in a structural element of serotonin. Further studies of PET scans in volunteers with a history of MDMA abuse yielded similar findings, however, with additional alterations to the amygdala and areas of the neocortex. Deficits in short-term memory,  visual memory, and verbal memory and reasoning seem to be associated. Cerebrovascular systems may also be affected, manifesting down the line as a decline in cognitive potential akin to dementia.