The treatment of Wells syndrome is not codified. Apart from the etiological treatment of a triggering or associated disease, corticosteroids and dapsone are the two main treatments for Wells syndrome.

**Therapeutic Agents**

- **Corticosteroids:** It is the reference treatment for all reactional dermatoses whether neutrophilic or eosinophilic. General corticotherapy reduces the duration and importance of relapses in 10% of cases.

- **Dapsone:** Dapsone is an interesting therapeutic alternative to corticosteroids, with doses ranging from 50 to 200 mg daily. It would reduce the duration of relapses. The optimal duration of treatment is not clearly defined but can be several months in the absence of adverse effects requiring discontinuation of treatment. It can be used alone or in combination with other treatments, including corticosteroids. It can also serve as a relay for general corticosteroids, especially in cases of corticosteroid dependence.

- **Antihistamines:** Antihistamines, especially hydroxyzine if pruritus, is important and maybe tried as a first intention, because of their excellent tolerance even if their effectiveness does not seem to exceed 25% of the cases.

- **Other treatments:** These are all anecdotal, with their interest being reported in only a few clinical cases.

**Therapeutic Strategy**

In most cases, general corticosteroids (10 to 80 mg daily) allow rapid healing. Tapering the dose over one month is generally well tolerated. Continued low-dose therapy with corticosteroids allows preventing recurrences. Dapsone may be prescribed as first-line treatment in low inflammatory forms. It also seems to give good results in case of corticosteroids resistance