In Crigler-Najjar type I, the newborn may present with jaundice, but the absence of it does not rule out the disease as asymptomatic cases are evident. In healthy born children, persistent jaundice due to unconjugated bilirubin develop shortly within a few days and progress rapidly by the second week. Family history of consanguinity, severe jaundice without evidence of hemolysis, relatives, or family members with exchange transfusion therapy, and liver diseases support the diagnosis. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia usually ranges from 20 to 25 mg/dL in type I Crigler-Najjar syndrome. However, significantly elevated unconjugated bilirubin levels up to 50 mg/dL have been reported. Severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (TB >30) can lead to bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction (BIND).

On examination, physical findings of jaundice are evident, i.e., yellowish skin and sclera. The stool color is normal. However, there is decreased excretion of fecal urobilinogen due to significantly reduced bilirubin conjugation. Apart from jaundice, other findings are normal in both types with no signs of liver disease. Older children can have scratch marks in the body due to pruritus. In some cases, progressive liver dysfunction and various superimposed toxicities cause hepatosplenomegaly.

BIND results from the toxic effects of bilirubin on the basal ganglia and the brainstem nuclei for oculomotor and auditory function. BIND can be acute or chronic. Acute bilirubin encephalopathy (ABE) initially presents with sleepiness, mild to moderate hypotonia, and a high pitched cry. Persistence of elevated bilirubin levels leads to the progression of ABE that can manifest as fever, lethargy, poor suck, irritability, hypertonia leading to retrocollis, and opisthotonus. Advanced ABE can present with seizures, apnea, and a semi-comatose or comatose state. Death may result from respiratory failure or seizures. Brainstem auditory-evoked responses (BAER) can also help detect acute neurological dysfunction.

Chronic bilirubin encephalopathy (CBE, previously called kernicterus) manifests during the first year of life. CBE presents with choreoathetoid cerebral palsy, sensorineural hearing loss, gaze abnormalities, and enamel hypoplasia. Cognitive function is usually not affected. Brain MRI in these cases demonstrates changes in the cerebellum, hippocampus, and brainstem.

Crigler-Najjar type II is the less severe form with less manifestation of clinical symptoms. However, reports exist of bilirubin induced encephalopathy.