**False-positive Reaction**

Falsely positive test results occur when the test result is positive in the absence of M. tuberculosis infection. Since the PPD test has low specificity, low-risk individuals with a positive test may be false positives. A false-positive reaction may be seen in the following cases:

- Previous vaccination with Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG)

- Infections with non-tuberculous mycobacteria

- Improper administration of the test

- Incorrect reading or misinterpretation of the test

The IGRA test may be considered in individuals with prior BCG vaccination since childhood BCG immunization will not affect IGRA results.

**False-negative Reaction**

Falsely negative test results occur when there is an inadequate or absent response to tuberculin protein in the presence of M. tuberculosis infection. A false-negative reaction may be seen in the following cases:

- Inadequate T-cell response or cutaneous anergy secondary to immunosuppression or waning natural immunity

- Immunosuppressive medications

- Comorbid conditions (chronic renal disease, recent surgery, severe burns, severe malnutrition, lymphoma, sarcoidosis)

- M. tuberculosis infection within eight weeks of testing

- Old mycobacteria infection, i.e., many years prior, may not be detected

- Children less than six months old

- Older adults

- Recent viral, bacterial, or fungal infection

- HIV infection

- Recent live-virus vaccination (measles, mumps, polio) within 4 to 6 weeks of the test

- Improper administration of the test

- Incorrect reading or misinterpretation of the test

- Defective tuberculin material

**Two-step Testing and Boosted Reaction**

Two-step testing involves administering a subsequent test after an initial false-negative test. The second test should be administered between one and four weeks after the first test.

In some individuals, the reaction to tuberculin antigen wanes over time, which results in a false-negative reaction. In individuals with a prior TB infection from years earlier, sensitization to tuberculin may be weak, and there may be a false-negative PPD test. However, if a subsequent test is administered, the tuberculin PPD may stimulate the immune system. A boosted reaction is seen on subsequent testing due to "recalling" of the immune response.