The most important step in the management of acute pancreatitis is aggressive fluid resuscitation. Current guidelines define this as IV hydration preferably with Lactate Ringer's(LR) at 20ml/kg bolus followed by 3ml/kg per hour.

In regards to nutrition in acute pancreatitis, oral feedings can be started immediately if the patient can tolerate them. In severe pancreatitis, enteral feedings are preferred over parenteral feedings as there is decreased risk of infections, surgical interventions, and lower mortality. Analgesia is also an important aspect of the management of pancreatitis and can include the use of intravenous (IV) opioids.

For patients with acute pancreatitis and acute cholangitis, a gastroenterology consult should be placed, and an urgent ERCP (within 24 hours) is recommended. For patients who have gallstones within the gallbladder, a cholecystectomy can be performed during the same admission. However, if there is a concern of necrotizing AP, surgery can be delayed until the surrounding inflammation has decreased.

For patients with acute pancreatitis caused by hypertriglyceridemia, current standard therapy involves placing the patient on an insulin drip (this activates lipoprotein lipase). Fibrates can also be prescribed for the patient and consideration for apheresis can be made. It is important to state, that there is no role for antibiotics in acute pancreatitis in the absence of infectious complications.

The treatment for chronic pancreatitis involves pain control, counseling regarding smoking, alcohol cessation, and pancreatic enzyme replacement. Most importantly, patients should be encouraged to eat a low-fat diet in small meals. If patients fail medical therapy, celiac plexus block, surgery, and extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) for duct stones can be recommended.