Treatment and further management are only indicated in patients with the following:

- Hemodynamically significant left to right shunt

- Congestive heart failure with either left ventricular volume overload or left ventricular dysfunction

- Myocardial ischemia

Although surgical repair was once considered to be a treatment for coronary artery fistulas, recently catheterized closure has become the treatment of choice. During the process of catheterized closure, the objective is to embolize the artery at the most distal aspect at the fistula, closest to the site of termination. The rationale behind this is to ensure that tissues supplied by the aberrant artery are still perfused, and in addition, to decrease the shunting of blood through the fistula. Some mechanisms by which embolization can be achieved are through the use of detachable balloons, or steel/platinum microcoils. After embolization, the next step is to perform a post-procedure coronary angiography to ensure successful embolization as well as to possibly visualize smaller fistulas or branches from the fistula.

In the past, surgical repair was used to treat coronary artery fistulas, whereby internal closure was the goal in the receiving artery/heart chamber. However, surgery was noted to be associated with a higher level of fistula recurrence. As a result, catheterized closure is preferred.

Patients are then placed on antiplatelet therapy and, in some cases, anticoagulants, for the first six months after cardiac catheterization.