Ilioinguinal neuralgia is a frequent cause of pain in the lower abdomen and the upper thigh. The ilioinguinal nerve is a mixed nerve originating from the anterior rami of T12 and L1 nerve roots. It emerges near the lateral border of the psoas major muscle and goes inferior through the anterior abdominal wall, being sub-peritoneal and anterior to the quadratus lumborum muscle until it reaches the iliac crest. Then the ilioinguinal nerve goes through the transverse abdominis and the internal oblique muscles. It becomes superficial by passing through the superficial inguinal ring anterior to the spermatic cord. It gives motor innervation to the transverse abdominis and the internal oblique muscles. Also, it carries sensory information from the anterior surface of the scrotum and root of the penis in males or labia majora and mons pubis in females, and a small area of the upper anteromedial thigh. Because of its long course, entrapment or injury of the nerve after lower abdomen surgeries is common. Male or female patients can complain of pain, paresthesia, and abnormal sensation in the area supplied by the nerve.

Diagnosis of ilioinguinal neuralgia requires a careful history, physical examination, electrophysiologic studies, and ultrasound examination. Treatment of the ilioinguinal neuralgia includes conservative measures as oral analgesics, anticonvulsants, rehabilitation as electro-analgesic currents, and myofascial release. If conservative measures do not control symptoms, ultrasound-guided block, hydro-dissection, or radio-frequency ablation of the nerve can provide satisfactory symptomatic relief. Resistant cases may require neurectomy.