The source of blood in tears may be:

- Bleeding from the conjunctiva - Conjunctiva is a vascular tissue with limbal, bulbar, forniceal, and palpebral parts. The conjunctival vessels lie at the ocular surface and may bleed spontaneously or after eye-rubbing, usually causing subconjunctival hemorrhage. Subconjunctival hemorrhage without a breach in the conjunctiva is often not associated with frank blood in tears, though red blood corpuscles may be seen on microscopic examination of tears.
- Trauma - Conjunctival laceration or rupture of conjunctival vessels may cause hemolacria. Surgery involving incision or excision of the conjunctiva may also cause hemolacria. The surgeries include small incision cataract surgery, pterygium surgery, squint surgery, scleral buckling, trabeculectomy, pars plana vitrectomy, and other ocular surgeries. After manipulation of the conjunctival follicle in trachoma, there may be haemolacria.
- Inflammation - Severe conjunctivitis including hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, membranous or pseudomembranous conjunctivitis, follicular conjunctivitis with congested semilunar fold and caruncle, severe viral or bacterial conjunctivitis cause blood-stained tears. Conjunctival ulcers or granulation due to various reasons may cause haemolacria. Postoperative sclera buckle infection can also cause bloody tears.
- Vascular lesions - Hemangioma, lymphangioma, inflammatory papilloma of the conjunctival sac, telangiectasia of conjunctival vessels, pyogenic granuloma,
- Vicarious menstruation - The conjunctiva may periodically/cyclically bleed (vicarious menstruation) during menstruation or hormonal disturbances. This phenomenon is usually seen around menarche or rarely around the menopause. Sir Duke-Elder proposed that 'instability of the nervous system' and not hormonal disturbance is the cause of vicarious menstruation from the conjunctiva.
- Normal conjunctiva stimulated by hormonal or other factors.
- Estrogenic premenstrual light blood hypertension.


- Foreign body - Foreign body at the upper fornix can cause chronic irritation, erosion of the conjunctiva, and hemolacria. Subconjunctival metallic splinter after trauma may cause bleeding into the tear.
- Chemical injury - Application of silver nitrate over the conjunctiva is another cause of bloody tears.

- Bleeding from the lid margin - Inflammed lid margin due to blepharitis may cause erosion of the surface of the eyelid and lead to bleeding. Trauma causing laceration of the lid margin may lead to haemolacria. An infestation of the lid with Phthirus pubis may also cause mild staining of blood in the tear.

- Bleeding from the lacrimal puncta - The source of the bleeding in tears may be the puncta. There is one lacrimal punctum, each at the medial side of the upper and lower lid, respectively. These are situated at the inner margin of the lid. Punctum connects medially to a lacrimal canaliculus on both the upper and lower lid. Both of these canaliculi may meet to form a common canaliculus and then connect to the lacrimal sac, or they may open into the lacrimal sac separately. The lacrimal sac connects to the lower nasal cavity below the inferior nasal concha via the nasolacrimal duct. Thus, the lacrimal puncta drain tear to the nasal cavity normally. If the nasal cavity fills with any fluid under pressure, that fluid may get released through the puncta; this happens when profuse epistaxis is managed with nasal packing. Sometimes, bleeding through the puncta may occur in epistaxis without nasal packing also. When the pressure within the nasal cavity increases, the blood can pass retrogradely through the nasolacrimal duct, lacrimal sac, and canaliculi to the puncta. Rarely, the blood may come to the puncta from connected body cavities, including the upper digestive tract or trachea.
- Trauma
- Infection
- Tumor- angioma, meningioma of the lacrimal sac
- Vascular lesions including varices

- Tear glands - In some rare cases, the source of bleeding remains undetermined. In such cases, some authors have hypothesized that the hemorrhage may come from the lacrimal gland or accessory lacrimal gland. Other hypothesized origins of hemolacria include meibomian glands or conjunctival goblet cells.

- Orbit - orbital varix at the junction of the angular vein and superior ophthalmic has been reported to be associated with bloody tears due to bleeding from the medial conjunctiva and overlying skin after jugular compression.

- Hematologic diseases that cause increased bleeding diathesis may lead to hemorrhages at multiple organs, including haemolacria. The disorders include hemophilia, thrombocytopenic purpura, deficiency of clotting factors, including factor VII deficiency.

- Other systemic diseases that have correlations with bloody tears include anemia, jaundice, exanthematous fever (may also cause epistaxis, and bleeding through the mouth), and severe disturbances of the autonomic nervous system.

- Vascular disorders may play an important role in the pathogenesis of hemolacria. Hypertension is an important factor that has been reported to cause epistaxis and retrograde haemolacria through the leak of hemorrhage via the lacrimal puncta. Causes of haemolacria include Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia or Osler Weber Rendu disease, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, Gardner Diamond syndrome (autoerythrocyte sensitization or psychogenic purpura, or painful bruising syndrome), and conjunctival varicose vessels. Osler Weber Rendu disease or hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by mucocutaneous telangiectasia and visceral involvement leading to hemorrhage, which may be life-threatening.

- Medications:

- The mecholyl test uses subcutaneous methacholine to evaluate the autonomic nervous system in psychiatric patients. This test has also been used for the diagnosis of achalasia cardia. Mecholyl tests may cause haemolacria.
- Systemic drugs like aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, and warfarin can rarely cause haemolacria.
- Acetylcholine may cause bloody tears.

- Psychiatric disorders - Attention seeking behavior or other psychiatric disorders may lead to bloody tears. A case report of an 11-year-old girl with recurrent hemolacria has been reported. Her ocular exam was otherwise normal.

- Bloody sweats or hemathydrosis - A prepubertal 9-year-old female has been reported to have bloody sweats at the skin between the lacrimal sac and medial canthus, and haemolacria. The symptoms resolved eight days after the application of iron perchloride over the affected skin {Sous G. [Observation of bloody sweat]. Crón Oftalmol Cádiz 1871;1:86-9. Cited by Murube}.

- Other causes of haemolacria include
- Cranial trauma
- Post-traumatic epilepsy
- In otherwise normal individuals after stooping, or muscular effort
- In children after 'copious weeping.'
- Coughing
- Hypertensive crisis
- Acute hemorrhagic edema of infancy

- Unknown cause/idiopathic - In some cases, despite a thorough search for ocular, systemic, or psychiatric causes, no obvious etiology or source is found.