**Prerequisites prior to surgery:**

Detailed history taking and thorough neurological examination:

L5 disc cause step page with pelvic glissading while walking in L5 radiculopathy.S1 causes dragging of the foot along the ground while walking. Detailed dermatomal mapping must be obtained.

Correlation with pertinent radio-imagings:

Radio-imagings include plain and dynamic X-ray; CT, CT myelography or CT discography, MRI, and a spinal teleradiograph. This help to ascertain the presence of LDH, and confirm the level, position, and pattern of the herniated disc (posterolateral/ foraminal/extra-foraminal and extruded vs. sequestrated).

A protrusion is when the height of the hernia is less than the length of the base. Extrusion is when the length of the base is less than the height of the hernia. Sequestration is when there is no continuity between the herniated material and the intervertebral disc.

**Patient counseling should encompass:**

- Natural history of the disease process-There is a rapid relief of symptoms over a mean period of four to six weeks, with a recurrence of 5 to 10%, regardless of the type of management strategies.**.**

- Different management strategies.

- Different surgical strategies.

- Risk and benefits of surgical management.

**The cornerstone of the surgical management of LDH includes:**

- Detailed history and neurological examination.

- Good patient selection.

- Proper surgical techniques.

**Indication for surgery for LDH includes:**

- Cauda equina syndrome

- Refractory and disabling pain despite 6-8 weeks of analgesics

- Progressive or new onset neurological deficits.