Researchers believe that neuropeptides influence feeding, satiety, energy homeostasis, and other parameters associated with weight control.

Inhalational exposures can precipitate an inflammatory reaction within the airways and alveoli, leading to activated neutrophils, and other inflammatory cells release proteases as part of the inflammatory process. Neutrophil-induced oxidative damage stimulates the release of profibrotic neuropeptide bombesin in the normal process of tissue repair. This mechanism appears to contribute to the pulmonary neuroendocrine cells' promotion of bombesin-like peptide immunoreactivity.

Studies have correlated bombesin-like immunoreactivity with the abnormal inflammatory response seen in bronchopulmonary dysplasia.

Eosinophilic granuloma is a fibrotic lung disease almost always seen in adult cigarette smokers. One study showed that the number of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells with bombesin-like immunoreactivity increases in patients with eosinophilic granuloma.

Inhibition of Ca ++ influx inhibits the release of neurotransmitters like bombesin, acetylcholine, norepinephrine, serotonin, somatostatin, and substance P. These neurotransmitters mediate pain perception in the spinal cord. Inhibition of release into the synaptic cleft leads to decreased postsynaptic neuronal firing and transmission of nociception.

Tumors of neuronal origin such as medulloblastoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumors, neuroblastoma, pineoblastoma are bombesin positive. Recently it has been suggested that bombesin-related peptides are involved in the autocrine stimulation of human small-cell lung carcinomas The growth and metastatic potential of neuroendocrine tumors. The molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways that are responsible for bombesin-like peptide-induced cell migration and invasion remain unclear.

Bombesin exerts a stimulatory effect on the growth of human prostatic cancer cells in vitro.