The incidence and prevalence of CBS are still under investigation and require further research. However, various studies and surveys indicate that the condition is not as uncommon as one might think. CBS prevalence has been found to differ widely depending on different sample sizes, with estimates ranging from 1% to nearly 10%.

One large study aimed at investigating CBS found the overall prevalence to be 0.5% (5/1000), with 0.8% (1/120) of their sample being in those with low visual acuity, 0.6% (2/346) being in the elderly, and 0.8% (1/120) being in both the elderly and those with low visual acuity.

Further highlighting the predominance in those with a higher degree of visual impairment or even more in those with complete vision loss, a study comparing visual hallucinations in people with macular disease versus people with glaucoma involved in a visual rehabilitation found the prevalence of CBS to be 39% and 20% respectively.

Regarding age, CBS can affect all ages; however, it tends to be more prevalent in older individuals. Data on CBS shows the mean age of the condition to be 70 to 85 years old, the expected range where pathological processes leading to visual impairment or vision loss naturally occur.

However, literature has suggested that CBS is vastly under-reported, mainly due to patients fearing being diagnosed with a psychiatric illness.

CBS is more common in elder patients. Previous reports have revealed the mean age of incidence ranging from 74 to 84 years. CBS has also been reported in children having a high incidence of rapid visual loss. The incidence of profound visual loss is also reported more commonly in the elderly. De Morsier noted a male preponderance; some studies showed a female preponderance, while some showed no sex bias.