Adrenocortical carcinoma is necessarily managed by an interprofessional team that includes an internist, radiation oncologist, surgeons, oncologist, and endocrinologist. With early diagnosis combined with prompt treatment, the prognosis for most patients is excellent. However, the late-stage disease has a much poorer prognosis. Therefore, given the rarity of ACC and the chance of not catching the disease early, all members of the interprofessional healthcare team need to be ready to communicate and work as a unit. This is why an experienced oncology specialist should be brought in on the case as soon ass possible.

Nursing will play a vital role in the case, whether management is surgical or medical. Nursing will be the ones to monitor the patient daily, and special-trained oncology nurses should be able to notice signs of medication side effects, as well as the effectiveness of treatment. They are the first line of contact for the patient in most cases and must communicate with the rest of the team when concerns arise.  When ACC is medically managed, the pharmacist should have specialized training in oncology so they can most effectively verify dosing and treatment combinations. As with any illness, they should perform thorough medication reconciliation and report to the oncologist any issues with the medication regimen. In advanced stages, they will also have a role in palliative care settings. Only with a collaborative interprofessional team approach can adrenal cancer be managed most effectively to achieve optimal outcomes. [Level V]