Before each procedure, inform the patient on the actions they will be performing and the proper technique. Answer any questions and concerns they may have. Place the patient on the cardiac monitor so that their rhythm may be observed throughout the procedure.

Carotid Sinus Massage – Place the patient in a supine position with their neck extended and rotated to the opposite side of the carotid sinus that the provider intends to massage. The carotid sinus is at the arterial impulse just inferior to the angle of the mandible, anterior to the sternocleidomastoid, and the upper level of the thyroid cartilage. The provider uses the fingertips of their index and middle finger to apply pressure in the posteromedial direction for 5 to 10 seconds.  If unsuccessful, the procedure is repeatable after 1 minute. If still unsuccessful, the clinician may attempt the maneuver on the opposite side.  Adjunct to the CSM includes placing the patient in Trendelenburg, leg raise, concomitant VM, or simultaneously applying pressure to the patient's upper abdomen. Possible responses to the CSM include slowing of the patient's heart rate, termination of arrhythmia, or no response.

Valsalva maneuver – Various techniques are available, but all have their basis in the concept of voluntarily increasing the intrathoracic pressure. In the standard VM, the patient is placed in the supine position

Modified Valsalva Maneuver – The modified VM has been found to be more efficacious than the standard VM. In at least one study, success rate (conversion to sinus rhythm) for the modified VM was upwards of 40%, more than double the success rate of the standard VM.

Diving Reflex - The adult patient should be in a comfortable seated position for 1 to 3 minutes. They should take multiple deep breaths, then hold their breath in inspiration. Immediately, the patient immerses their face into the basin of water. The physician should speak to them throughout this time in a calming voice, informing them about the progress of the procedure. The patient may stay immersed as long as tolerated but should resurface if they become air hungry.