When a patient is diagnosed with Gilbert syndrome, they  should be informed of the condition’s benign nature. Treatment is not required for Gilbert syndrome. However, if the patient’s jaundice becomes severe enough, microsomal enzyme inducers such as phenobarbital can be prescribed. The patient should also be educated about the cautious use of drugs metabolized by glucuronidation such as statins, protease inhibitors, and especially Irinotecan. Irinotecan can cause severe symptoms such as diarrhea and myelosuppression because of impaired clearance in patients with Gilbert syndrome. Accordingly, patient education and careful monitoring can potentially prevent these sorts of severe drug side effects.

Treatment and management of Crigler Najjar syndrome type 1 revolve around controlling serum bilirubin levels below the threshold for kernicterus, 10 mg/dl. This is accomplished through exchange transfusions and phototherapy for 8 to 12 hours a day. Phototherapy, though its effectiveness decreases over time, converts bilirubin into water-soluble forms that can be secreted into bile and excreted in the urine without conjugation. Moreover, liver transplantation is the most effective and definitive form of treatment. Earlier intervention through transplantation decreases the risk and magnitude of brain damage. In fact, successful transplantation can reverse brain damage if it is not too severe. Gene therapy could be the most prominent therapy given the recent succes with other severe genetic disorders. Because Crigler Najjar syndrome type 2 is much less severe, lifelong phenobarbital therapy is sufficient. Phenobarbital, by inducing UGT1A1, can reduce the bilirubin concentration by more than 25%.