The hypothalamus releases GnRH in a pulsatile manner, which then stimulates the release of FSH and LH from the anterior pituitary gland. Prior to puberty, FSH and LH levels in the body are low. Approximately one year before the onset of puberty, CNS inhibition of GnRH subsides, leading to a rise in the release of FSH and LH.

FSH and LH act on the gonads (ovaries and testicles) to stimulate the synthesis and release of sex steroid hormones (estrogen/progesterone and testosterone) and support gametogenesis (formation and development of oocytes/sperm). Sex steroids exert negative feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary gland to ensure circulating levels remain stable. A rise in FSH stimulates an increase in estrogen synthesis and oogenesis in females and the onset of sperm production in males. A rise in LH stimulates an increase in progesterone production in females and an increase in testosterone production in males. Hormonal changes caused by rises in FSH and LH allow for the physical changes of puberty to begin. The first hormonal change showing puberty may be imminent is the appearance of pulsatile LH release during sleep. At the end of puberty, a difference between sleep and wake LH secretory patterns is not seen.

Growth hormone (GH) stimulates FSH-induced differentiation of granulosa cells, increases ovarian levels of IGF-1, and amplifies the ovarian response to gonadotropins. The puberty of patients with isolated GH deficiency is frequently delayed, Leydig cell function is diminished, and the response to chorionic gonadotropins decreases. GH administration can restore testicular responsiveness to LH and Leydig cell steroidogenesis.

Serum prolactin concentration increases during female puberty but remains relatively stable throughout male puberty. Insulin is essential for normal growth, and levels rise noticeably during puberty, with a strong positive correlation with IGF-1.