**Contraindications**

Like other vaccines, the contraindications to the meningococcal vaccine include individuals with severe allergic reactions to any component of the vaccine. Vaccines containing diphtheria or tetanus toxoids are contraindicated in patients known to have severe allergic reactions to vaccines containing these toxoids (ex. MenACWY-TT conjugated to tetanus toxoid, MenACWY-DT conjugated to diphtheria toxoid, and MenACWY-CRM conjugated to the nontoxic mutant of diphtheria toxin).

Currently, available licensed vaccines have an inactivated antigen, making them safe in patients with immune deficiency, but the response to the meningococcal vaccine will be suboptimal so that additional doses may be necessary.

The Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) system in the U.S. does not report any significant safety concerns in the mother and the fetus. Although if there are no available extensive studies or trials to show the safety and reactogenicity in this specific group of community, vaccine administration in pregnant and lactating mothers is not a contraindication.

**Other Prevention Strategies Including Antibiotic Prophylaxis**

Recommendations strongly advocate administering prophylactic antibiotics for people in close contact with patients who have invasive diseases like meningococcal meningitis. Individuals including household members, college dormitories, or those at direct exposure to the patient's oral secretions (by kissing, sharing food, or drinking utensils) should receive prophylaxis within 7-days before symptoms appear. Antibiotic prophylaxis should be initiated instantly, optimally within 24 hours of exposure identification. Prophylactic antibiotic regimens may include oral ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone, rifampin, or azithromycin. In which effectiveness is estimated as 90% to 95%.