The digestive system begins at the mouth. Saliva is released in response to autonomic stimulation from olfactory and gustatory input, as well as mastication, and facilitates several functions, including swallowing. Swallowing clear liquids occurs by voluntarily moving the liquid to the back of the mouth but requiring less oral mechanical coordination from the tongue and cheeks when compared to swallowing solids. The soft palate closes reflexively to separate the oropharynx from the nasopharynx, and the larynx elevates with simultaneous coverage of the laryngeal inlet by the epiglottis, protecting the lower airway.

The upper esophageal sphincter relaxes to allow entry of the bolus, and involuntary peristalsis moves the liquid down the esophagus with coordinated, wave-like contractions into the stomach. In the stomach, digestive enzymes break down proteins into amino acids, fats into fatty acids and glycerol, and carbohydrates into simple sugars. This process is stimulated by the presence of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates in the stomach. Clear liquids are the easiest for the body to break down because they have very few proteins and fats and are predominantly made up of easily digestible carbohydrates, causing less gastric stimulation. This digestive mix is called chyme, and it moves into the small intestine, where the walls of the small intestine (via lumenal projections called villi) absorb nutrients and water. Next, it progresses to the large intestine, which absorbs water and condenses the chyme into a stool, and then moves to the rectum, where it is excreted through the anus.