**Anterior Lenticonus**

Type 4 collagen is commonly found in the glomerular basement membrane of the glomerulus, lenticular capsule, stria vascularis of the cochlea, internal limiting membrane, Bruch's membrane of the retina, Bowman's and Descemet membrane of the cornea.

This weakened membrane has structural stability and is more prone to biomechanical strain. The basement membrane of the kidney is also affected in Alport, which results in improper blood filtration, leading to haematuria and proteinuria. They cause progressive kidney damage and result in kidney failure. Collagen type 4 is an essential constituent of inner ear structure, and patients with Alport syndrome develop sensorineural hearing loss due to damage to the Organ of Corti. This causes abnormal transmission of sound waves and defective conversion to electric signals in the brain.

Defective collagen in the cornea can cause changes in the Bowmans and Descemet's, whose primary function is to combine three main corneal layers: epithelium, stroma, and endothelium.

The capsule of the lens also has the same problem as the cornea and results in partial tears that may rupture. This can also manifest as a conical protrusion in the thinnest part of the lens capsule. The lens can be tight as well as elastic, as per various reports.

**Posterior Lenticonus**

The pathogenesis of the posterior lenticonus is still an area of active research. The main proposed mechanisms are the tractional effect on the posterior lens capsule by the remnants of the hyaloid artery system as well as a disturbance in the tunica vasculosa lentis has been suggested.

The other proposed mechanism includes the presence of vitritis and overgrowth of posterior lenticular fibers, which produce a phakoma of the lens. But none of the theories is proven yet. As per the previous hypothesis, it can also be a congenital weakness of the posterior lens capsule, which is genetically determined. The other proposed mechanism is secondary to trauma and aberrant hyperplasia of the subcapsular epithelium overlying the cone. As per Franceschetti and Rickii, posterior lenticonus is due to aberrant hypertrophy of the posterior lens cortex.