**Medical Abortion**

Mifepristone/Misoprostol protocol

Mifepristone - one 200mg tablet is swallowed on day 1 in the clinic or at home. Misoprostol can be administered in the following routes

- Buccally: Four 200mcg tablets are placed between gum and cheek for 30 minutes and swallowed thereafter, 24 to 48 hours after mifepristone administration.

- Vaginal: Four 200mcg tablets of misoprostol can also be placed in the vagina 6 to 48 hours after the mifepristone

- Sublingual: Two to four 200mcg tablets of misoprostol under the tongue for 30 minutes

According to the NAF 2020 guidelines, if a patient is > 63 days from LMP, a second dose of 800mcg misoprostol can be administered 4 hours after the first dose. If the patient more than 70 days from LMP, a second dose of 800mcg misoprostol is recommended 4 hours after mifepristone.

NSAIDs help pain management for the patient while at home

The patient is instructed to contact the provider if

- Bleeding heavily, soaking 2 or more pads in 2 or more consecutive hours

- Severe pain that is not responding to the medication prescribed

- Fever of more than 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 C) for more than 24 hours after misoprostol

- No bleeding within 24 hours of misoprostol

- Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain more than 24 hours after misoprostol

According to the NAF 2020 guidelines, an ultrasound is not needed to confirm the completion of a successful abortion if using clinical history and home pregnancy tests

According to the NAF 2020 guidelines, when methotrexate and misoprostol are used, an evidence-based regimen of oral or intramuscular methotrexate followed in three to five days with vaginal misoprostol is recommended for gestations up to 63 days

**Surgical/Aspiration Abortion**

Aspiration abortion is performed up to 16 weeks.

Technique: Don gloves, perform a bimanual examination, and confirm the uterine position and size. Confirm you have all the equipment you need. Adjust table and light, insert the speculum, and evaluate and collect samples for infection screening and testing. Apply the antiseptic solution to the cervix. Administer a paracervical block if the patient is awake. Place the tenaculum on the cervix. Dilate the cervix to the size of the cannula you will be using ( gestational age in weeks + or - 1 to 2 mm). The cervix is dilated using tapered dilators like Pratt or Denniston dilators

Dilatation and evacuation are performed beyond 16 weeks by experienced clinicians in appropriate clinical settings. Intravenous access should be established prior to the procedure. If induced fetal demise is used, appropriate evidence-based protocols must be followed. Osmotic dilators including Dilapan and laminaria, misoprostol, mifepristone, and or other cervical agents are used to achieve adequate dilation. Osmotic dilators may be placed in the cervix prior to the procedure. All instruments entering the uterine cavity must be sterile. Ultrasound should be used during the procedure to locate fetal parts, visualize instruments, and verify the completion of the procedure, thus reducing the risk of uterine perforation and shortening the procedure