Numerous healthcare providers may participate in the care of a patient with Bertolotti syndrome. The first person to whom a patient speaks about chronic low back pain should keep the possibility of a lumbosacral transitional vertebra in mind when conducting a workup. This duty may fall on a primary care physician, a nurse practitioner, a physician’s assistant, or a chiropractor. Their work-up should include conservative but diagnostic measures, such as radiographic imaging, pharmacotherapy to relieve their pain, and the option to be referred to a pain management specialist if the condition persists.

If the patient does meet with a pain management physician, the pain management physician must maintain an open line of communication with the patient’s primary care provider so that there is a seamless transfer of diagnoses, test results, and treatment options. The pain management physician may conduct fluoroscopic guided injections for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes and prescribe a greater diversity of pain medications with close follow-up in mind.

The patient may not see a pain management clinician but may instead see a surgeon to have definitive removal of their aberrant vertebral connection. The surgeon may suggest continued conservative treatment but may also recommend a surgical procedure to relieve the patient’s pain and future risk for sequelae of the LSTV. The most important aspect of a patient's care with Bertolotti syndrome is communication between all members of the interprofessional healthcare team to ensure accurate diagnosis and optimal treatment.