Small intestinal bleeding is a rare cause of gastrointestinal bleeding. The diagnosis is challenging for the physician and involves much time and financial burden. The initial step in evaluation is endoscopy. However, with the advancement in novel endoscopic and radiological techniques, diagnosis and treatment have evolved. The latest diagnostic modalities including, capsule endoscopy and deep enteroscopy, have made it possible to go farther into the small bowel, helping to visualize and treat the lesions.

**Endoscopy**

Endoscopy is the first diagnostic study. A regular endoscope helps evaluate the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum. It is capable of providing a good view up to the first part of the small bowel. It has the advantage of being diagnostic and therapeutic at the same time. The endoscopist would be able to perform an intervention if any lesion is found.

**Imaging Studies**

CT enterography involves the use of oral contrast solution. It allows for the detailed inspection of the small bowel lining and looks for any lesions.

**Capsule Endoscopy**

Capsule endoscopy is used when the endoscopy studies have failed to find any bleeding source. The camera is attached to a device that is about the size of a pill. It helps visualize the entire GI tract as it takes images until it is finally eliminated in the stool.

The capsule study is generally safe. It has the advantage of visualizing the entire GI tract and localize the bleeding source. The disadvantages include the inability to take biopsies and do any intervention. In patients with prior history of abdominal surgeries, the capsule can rarely get stuck inside the GI tract. It may require surgery if the capsule gets stuck. Despite these limitations, capsule endoscopy is the second line if the standard endoscope fails to diagnose any bleeding source.

**Push Enteroscopy**

Push enteroscopy or double-balloon enteroscopy is a new advancement to standard endoscopes. They have been used when the lesion is farther down in the small bowel and not seen with the standard endoscopes. It uses two balloons, which can help the scope be pushed farther into the small bowel.

**Intraoperative Enteroscopy**

Surgery may be required in cases when no diagnosis could be found. Intraoperative enteroscopy is done under general anesthesia by a team comprising of gastroenterologists and surgeons. The scope is advanced through the incision in the small bowel. The advantage is that it allows to treat the cause of bleeding, AVMs, or to remove masses or polyps. It has been shown to treat about 70% of the patients effectively.