The purpose of vision screening is to identify patients with ocular abnormalities that may require urgent referral to an ophthalmologist for potential sight and sometimes life-saving treatment. Vision system screening in neonates, infants, and children includes several components and should occur during each well-child visit. Vision screening should begin with the detection of risk factors requiring a thorough review of family and personal ocular history. Premature birth, cerebral palsy, down syndrome as well as a family history of strabismus, retinoblastoma, congenital cataracts, or genetic diseases are critical risk factors to consider.

The eye examination should evaluate the following: external structures of the eyes, including the eyelids, motility, eye muscle balance, pupils, and red reflex. The red reflex test can be performed relatively quickly as well as noninvasively, which is useful for evaluating an apprehensive child. This test has shown to have high sensitivity for testing abnormalities in both the anterior segment and posterior segments of the eye, and a normal red reflex can rule out intraocular pathology. In contrast, an abnormal reflex indicates the need for an ophthalmologic referral for comprehensive evaluation.

To be considered normal, a red reflex should be seen in both eyes symmetrically and equivalent in color, intensity, and clarity. An absent or black reflex may indicate an obstruction that is preventing light from reflecting back to the examiner. An absent red reflex can result from cataracts, corneal scars, or vitreous hemorrhage.

Abnormalities associated with abnormal red reflex can be grouped into two categories;

The first one is leukokoria ( white reflex), which can result from the following:

- Retinoblastoma: a neuroblastic tumor arising from immature cells of the retina and occurs in one of 20000 children, making it one of the most common malignancies of childhood.

- Pediatric cataracts may have a genetic disposition or may occur spontaneously.

- Glaucoma

- Retinal detachment

- Retinopathy of prematurity

- Posterior coloboma,

- Other optic nerve abnormalities.

The second group includes conditions that result in an abnormal pattern of red reflexes, such as:

- Refractive errors ( hyperopia, myopia, or astigmatism): can alter the red reflex, creating an abnormally asymmetric and nonhomogeneous red reflex. The shade of reflected asymmetry that is visible through the aperture of the ophthalmoscope can help to identify the problem.

- Abnormally sized, shaped, or positioned red reflex can result from aniridia (a condition in which there is no iris), coloboma (a hole in the iris or other structures of the eye), dilating drops, and trauma.