The first two, lateral lumbricals are unipennate muscles. The first lumbrical originates on the lateral side of the first tendon of the flexor digitorum profundus and inserts into the extensor hood of the second digit. The second lumbrical originates on the lateral side of the second tendon of the flexor digitorum profundus and inserts into the extensor hood of the third digit.

The third and fourth, medial lumbricals are bipennate muscles. One head of the third lumbrical originates on the medial portion of the second tendon of the flexor digitorum profundus while the other head originates at the lateral portion of the third tendon of the flexor digitorum profundus. The third lumbrical inserts into the extensor hood of the fourth digit. The lateral head of the fourth lumbrical originates at the lateral surface of the fourth tendon of the flexor digitorum profundus while the medial head of the fourth lumbrical originates at the lateral portion of the fourth tendon of the flexor digitorum profundus. The insertion site for the fourth lumbrical is the extensor hood of the fifth digit.

Functions of the lumbricals include flexion at the respective metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint and extension at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints. Interestingly, the lumbricals arise from their partial antagonist, the flexor digitorum profundus. Besides providing flexion at the wrist and MCP joint, the flexor digitorum profundus flexes the PIP and DIP joints, whereas the lumbricals are extenders of the PIP and DIP joints. The tendons of all lumbricals pass anteriorly to the deep transverse metacarpal ligaments.