Aflibercept is a humanized recombinant fusion protein designed for intraocular use. Intravitreal injection is indicated for the treatment of neovascular (wet) age-related macular degeneration (NVAMD), macular edema associated with retinal vein occlusion (RVO), diabetic macular edema (DME), myopic choroidal neovascularization (mCNV), and diabetic retinopathy.

Proper diagnosis and management of ocular diseases can significantly impact a patient's quality of life. Managing the treatment of ocular disease with abnormal angiogenesis such as NVAMD and DR requires an interprofessional team of providers (physicians, including specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists) to ensure effective treatment.

To ensure patient safety, specific roles of healthcare team members should be well-defined, and medical personnel should be well trained in their specific roles. The team members include healthcare practitioners, specialists, technicians, surgical assistants, and optometrists. Clinical ophthalmic technicians update patient history and test visual acuity and pressure before the patient sees the retinal specialist.

Clinical technicians also obtain imaging studies, including optical coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus photography. OCT produces cross-sectional images of the retina to see different layers and evaluate disease progression and the effect of prior treatments. When therapy is indicated, ophthalmic technicians counsel patients on risks and benefits before obtaining consent for the procedure.

At the time of the procedure, nurses review the timeout sheet, which should include the correct eye, procedure, and drug to be administered. Surgical assistants prepare the procedure tray, gown and drape the patient, clean and disinfect the injection site, and assist the clinician during administration. Specialists follow standardized protocol guidelines to ensure safe intravitreal aflibercept administration.

Technicians may administer post-injection antibiotics, remove the patient's drape and wash the eye with a basic saline solution. Technicians provide post-injection care instructions and schedule return visits. Optometrists are crucial in closely monitoring response to aflibercept therapy at follow-up visits.

The patient should be educated and monitored for signs of elevated intraocular pressure. Patients should also be advised to call or return to the clinic if they begin to experience severe eye pain after receiving an injection. All team members must continue to monitor the patient as they have interactions with them, documenting their observations in the patient's medical record. If they note any concerns, including therapeutic failure or adverse events, they must immediately communicate these to the appropriate team members so additional evaluation can occur, potentially leading to corrective action.

Patient self-monitoring is crucial to detect signs of infection and decreased visual acuity. An interprofessional team-based approach involving clinicians, specialists, optometrists, ophthalmic technicians, and patients leads to desired therapeutic outcomes, minimizes the risk of disease progression, and improves the quality of life.