The workup of a patient with symptoms of a renal/retroperitoneal mass should include laboratory evaluation, imaging, and biopsy for accurate staging.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

Serum creatinine, hemoglobin, total and differential leucocyte counts, total platelet count, neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio, lactate dehydrogenase, C-reactive protein, and corrected calcium should be evaluated.

**Radiological Investigations- Role of Imaging**

Ultrasonography can be used to make a presumptive diagnosis of a renal mass. Imaging can characterize the mass, presence of abdominal metastases, invasion of the great vessels, and local spread of the tumor. Renal function, vascularity, and retroperitoneal involvement also need to be assessed in patients planned for surgical resection.

Typical radiological features of clear cell RCC include an exophytic growth pattern, heterogeneity linked to the presence of intra-tumoral heterogeneity or hemorrhage, and presence of enhancement with contrast intake.

Additional imaging, including Computed tomography scanning of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis, MRI Brain, and bone scan, may be required for performing a complete metastatic workup. Though a CT scan of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis is considered mandatory for accurate staging, the use of a CT brain or bone scan is not recommended routinely. A Noncontrast CT scan with a plain MRI abdomen is indicated in those with an allergy to intravenous contrast agent or renal insufficiency. MRI techniques such as diffusion-weighted imaging and perfusion imaging are being explored for further characterization of the lesion.

Clear cell tumors have also been to have a significantly higher tumor to nontissue uptake and standardized uptake on 18FDG PET scanning. However, the utility of FDG-PET is limited due to false-negative results due to normal physiological excretion by the kidneys. It has shown a greater role in the recurrent setting and re-staging in advanced disease. Dynamic imaging has been shown to predict disease progression and survival in the recurrent setting (post-surgery).

**Renal Biopsy**

Renal biopsy is indicated to establish the diagnosis of radiologically indeterminate renal masses, histological examination of incidentally detected masses in whom active surveillance is indicated, before treatment with renal ablative therapies, and help in selecting the most suitable targeted therapy in metastatic lesions.

Though the histological subtype and the Fuhrmann grade can be correctly determined upon a renal biopsy, complications associated with the procedure (infection, bleeding, the formation of arteriovenous fistula) has been shown to occur in a frequency of 0.3-5.3 percent cases. Complications related to the seeding of the biopsy tract have been minimized using modern biopsy techniques; there is an emerging consensus that the biopsy remains substantially underutilized. The argument in favor of such an observation states that while complications such as bleeding and seeding of the tumor tract are rare, the diagnostic accuracy remains high.

**Liquid Biopsy**

The circulating tumor cells and tumor DNA study has been shown to have a role in the noninvasive assessment of tumor burden with a fair degree of precision. Other cytological methods that have postulated to have clinical utility in the setting of RCC include exosomal protein profiling, screening of noncoding ribonucleic acid particles in the serum. Circulating tumor DNA has shown the potential to predict response to immune checkpoint inhibitors. These techniques have also been used to study the functional heterogeneity in tumor tissue, by using a combination of genetic and transcriptomic analysis of a single circulating tumor cell or by parallel single-cell epigenetic and transcriptome analysis. Clear cell cancer has also been proposed as a model to understand the cytomorphological and genetic features of malignancy in the circulating cancer cell and the single-cell level.