**History**

- Common presenting symptoms, usually non-specific, include fatigue, headache, dizziness, transient blurry vision, amaurosis fugax, and other symptoms suggestive of transient ischemic attacks (TIAs).

- Infrequently, patients may complain of pruritus after a warm water shower, particularly over the back.

- A history of epistaxis, gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, or easy bruising may be forthcoming.

- Peptic ulcer disease commonly coexists, and patients may present with non-specific abdominal pain. Left hypochondrial pain and early satiety should raise the suspicion of splenomegaly.

- Rarely, patients may present with a history of unexplained thrombotic complications, such as Budd-Chiari syndrome or digital infarcts.

- It is vital to try and elicit etiology-specific history, such as a history of smoking, an extended stay at high altitudes, and congenital cardiac disease, among others. Significant family history may be noted in patients with hemoglobinopathies.

**Physical Examination**

- Abnormal facial ruddiness may be prominent.

- Cyanosis and clubbing, along with the presence of a murmur on auscultation, provide strong evidence favoring a congenital cyanotic heart disease.

- Nicotine staining of the nails and teeth provides presumptive evidence of smoking, even in a non-forthcoming patient.

- Morbid obesity could raise the possibility of Pickwickian syndrome, whereas a barrel chest could suggest obstructive lung disease.

- Examining the abdomen may lead to finding a palpable spleen or eliciting the bruit of renal arterial stenosis in a thin-built individual.