Allopurinol administration can be in two forms: oral or intravenous (IV). While oral administration is the standard route for gout and uric acid or calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis, IV allopurinol is for the prevention of tumor lysis syndrome and management of cancer therapy-induced hyperuricemia in patients who cannot tolerate oral therapy.

For long-term gout treatment, the recommended starting dose of allopurinol is 100 mg daily, to be escalated by 100 mg every 2 to 5 weeks until the target serum uric acid is achieved. American College of Rheumatology recommends target uric acid of less than 6.0 mg/dL for all patients with gout and less than 5.0 mg/dL in patients with tophaceous gout. The maximum daily allopurinol dose is 800 mg. Following the patient reaching the target serum uric acid concentration, the required dose of allopurinol to achieve the target serum uric acid concentration should continue indefinitely.

In patients with renal insufficiency (chronic kidney disease stage 4 and greater), allopurinol should start at a 50 mg daily dose, and the dose shall be escalated by 50 mg every 2 to 5 weeks until reaching the target serum uric acid.

To prevent tumor lysis syndrome, allopurinol shall be initiated 2 to 3 days before starting chemotherapy and continued until 3 to 7 days after chemotherapy. Doses for oral allopurinol are 300 mg/m^2/day in three divided doses every 8 hours, a maximum of 800 mg daily, and IV allopurinol is 200 to 400 mg/m2 daily single doses or 2 to 3 divided doses.

Allopurinol dosing is 300 mg oral daily for the prevention of recurrent uric acid or calcium nephrolithiasis.