The release of GI hormones is in response to input from G-protein-coupled receptors that detect changes in luminal contents. Some of these receptors only respond to selective luminal substances and subsequently release GI hormones from their respective enteroendocrine cells through unknown mechanisms. Overall, gastrointestinal hormones manage a diverse set of actions in the body including:

- Contraction and relaxation of smooth muscle wall and sphincters

- Secretion of enzymes for digestion

- Secretion of fluid and electrolytes

- Trophic (growth) effects on tissues of GI tract

- Regulating secretion of other GI peptides (i.e., somatostatin inhibits secretion of all GI hormones)

To better understand how these actions are carried out by GI hormones, it is best to use gastrin’s functions as an example. Gastrin is an interesting hormone because it acts through two mechanisms that ultimately increase the secretion of gastric acid (hydrogen ions) into the stomach. The first mechanism involves gastrin binding to CCK-2 receptors on parietal cells, causing increased expression of K/H ATPase enzymes that are directly responsible for increased hydrogen ion secretion into the stomach. The second mechanism is mediated by enterochromaffin-like cells, which secrete histamine in response to activation by gastrin. Histamine then binds H2 receptors on nearby parietal cells, which further stimulates secretion of hydrogen ions. In addition to stimulating ECL cells to produce acid, gastrin also stimulates these parietal cells and ECL cells to proliferate.