After assessing the patient’s extremity, multiplanar radiographs of the affected hand or foot are indicated. X-rays evaluate for osseous fusion of the phalanges and/or metacarpals. It is also valuable in assessing for possible supernumerary digits that may have not been noticed on physical examination. After the physical exam and imaging have been performed, the deformity can be classified. Classification can be descriptive, including terms such as incomplete or complete (involvement of the entire length of the digit), simple or complex (presence of bony fusion), and/or complicated (presence of accessory phalanges or abnormal bones).

- Type I: Most common with involvement of the long and ring fingers in the upper extremity or second and third toe in the lower extremity. Follows an autosomal dominant pattern with incomplete penetrance

- Type II: Synpolydactyly with the involvement of the long and ring fingers in the upper extremity and/or fourth and fifth toes in the lower extremity with an accessory digit in the syndactyly web.

- Type III: Syndactyly involving in the ring and small finger.

- Type IV: Complete syndactyly of all fingers

- Type V: Metacarpal or metatarsal fusions of the ring and small finger in the upper extremity and third and fourth toes in the lower extremity.

Advanced imaging is usually not necessary in cases of simple syndactyly. However, in cases of complex and/or complicated syndactyly, MRI imaging may be useful to assess the location of flexor tendons and neurovascular structures prior to planned surgery.