When evaluating a diplopic patient, one has first to determine whether diplopia is monocular or binocular. While this has already been mentioned above, it is of paramount importance as skipping this step will lead to unnecessary investigations and anxiety for the patient.

The next most important step is to search for accompanying “brainstem” symptoms. While isolated brainstem strokes are uncommon, diplopia can be the main complaint in patients with strokes involving diencephalon or brainstem, which involve either the nuclei or fascicles of the IIIrd, IVth, or VIth cranial nerves, medial longitudinal fasciculus, or vertibulo-ocular pathways producing the so-called skew deviation

Any patient with an acute onset of binocular diplopia who has any accompanying symptoms that can be caused by brainstem dysfunction (vertigo, dizziness, dysarthria, crossed motor or sensory symptoms, ataxia, imbalance, etc.) should be immediately referred to an emergency department for in order have an urgent MRI of the brain with attention to the brainstem performed. MRI should include diffusion-weighted as well as susceptibility-weighted images in order to detect subtle ischemic and/or hemorrhagic lesions.

All diplopic patients should be asked about the fatiguability and variability of their symptoms as well as the presence of symptoms of increased intracranial pressure, and all patients over the age of 50 should be asked about the symptoms of giant cell arteritis.

Next, a careful examination should be performed, first testing ocular motility in order to try to identify obvious deficits and determine whether they map out to the dysfunction of the 3rd or 6th cranial nerves. Motility testing should be performed by slowly moving a target in all directions of gaze and should be checked in each eye separately. After motility testing, ocular alignment should be checked by performing alternate cover testing. If a vertical deviation is uncovered, testing of misalignment in ipsi- and contralateral gaze as well as ipsi- and contralateral head tilt positions should be performed to determine if the deviation fits the pattern of the so-called 3-step test where the hypertropia increases in contralateral gaze and ipsilateral head tilt. A positive 3-step test indicates 4th nerve paresis

If ocular motility is full and eye misalignment remains the same in all positions of gaze, it is termed comitant and is almost always secondary to decompensated congenital strabismus. It does not require further investigations or testing other than a referral for ophthalmological evaluation. After ocular motility and alignment have been examined and recorded (we prefer recording ocular motility in percentages, i.e., "there was only 70% of expected supraduction"), pupillary examination, the position of the lids, and movement of the lid during the motility testing, presence of proptosis, and orbicularis strength should all be examined and recorded. Dilated fundus examination looking for the presence of optic nerve head edema and any signs of venous stasis retinopathy should be performed in all diplopic patients as well.