An example of primary (carrier-mediated) active transport, the sodium-potassium pump directly utilizes ATP to bring three sodium ions out of cells and two potassium ions into them via a cycle of changes to the shape of the protein pump, i.e.:

- The protein is initially open to the cell interior, allowing sodium ions to adhere to the high-affinity pump.

- Binding of sodium induces the phosphorylation of the pump via ATP hydrolysis.

- This chemical modification to the pump causes it to undergo a conformational change so that it is instead open to the cell exterior. In this new conformation, the pump now has a low affinity towards sodium, causing those ions to get released into the extracellular space.

- The shape change also creates a high-affinity environment for potassium ions on the pump, so potassium ions can thus bind, causing the release of the attached phosphate group.

- Removal of that phosphate group returns the pump to its starting conformation, i.e., facing the cell's inside.

- Again, the pump reverses its affinity from potassium to sodium, so the potassium ions detach as the sodium ions did on the outside. Now, the pump can bind to sodium as before and repeat the process.

The establishment of an electrochemical gradient following this process mostly occurs via potassium efflux channels that allow the diffusion of potassium along its concentration gradient. Such electrochemical gradients can then serve to power secondary active transport. Secondary active transport employs cotransporters to transport multiple solutes, and they can be divided based on whether the transporters used are symporters or antiporters, i.e., transporting solutes in the same or different directions. The antiporter utilizes the energetically favorable movement of one solute down its gradient to allow the otherwise energetically unfavorable movement of another solute against its gradient. The sodium-calcium exchanger, for example, transports three sodium ions into the cell in exchange for one calcium out, accomplished because of the previously established sodium concentration gradient.