Oxygen, being a bi-radical, is reactive with various metal ions and biological molecules called oxidation. However, the very process of respiration (mitochondrial respiration) produces many forms of reactive oxygen species, such as superoxide anion radical (O2·−), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (·OH). All biological molecules, including DNA, are susceptible to this oxidation. However, the body utilizes various antioxidant mechanisms such as superoxide dismutases, peroxidases, peroxiredoxins, and glutathione and glutaredoxins to manage and reduce the amount of oxidation induces stress. DNA undergoes constant damage through its cellular milieu and cellular metabolites, in addition to external mutagens, which may subject DNA to strand breakage during replication. Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) that are inherent to the regulation of the cell cycle also play an important role in DNA repair.

Based on the external stimuli or environmental demands, the cells undergo several changes within themselves. These changes are physiological as well as pathological, leading to progression towards disease. These changes are generally of the following five types, termed as cellular adaptations:

Hypertrophy: It is a condition in which the muscle cells/fibers gain the muscle mass much excessive to their capacity, with no increase in the number of fibers, an overall increase in the size of the structure. It is best seen in the pregnant uterus and muscles of the bodybuilders. This increase in muscle mass has been attributed to a protein growth factor called insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1).

Hyperplasia: It is a condition where the cells divide rapidly in number leading to an overall increase in the size of the structure. It can be physiological or pathological. The best example of a physiological type is the pregnant uterus. Pathologically it can be benign or malignant. Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the best example of benign hyperplasia. The endometrial hyperplasia in the endometrial carcinoma is not infrequent.

Atrophy: It is just the opposite of hypertrophy, wherein the cells start to shrink in size leading to an overall decrease in the size of a tissue or organ. The thymus atrophy after mid-adulthood is a classic example of physiological atrophy. Disuse atrophy is a term used for conditions where atrophy takes place in a specific tissue/organs after prolonged disuse of that particular structure. The atrophy of cells/tissues is due to an overall loss of cell organelles, proteins, and cytoplasm.

Metaplasia: It is a condition of change in cellular identity by a replacement of one type of healthy cells with other healthy cells type in a tissue/organ. An abnormal stimulus induces it.

Dysplasia: It is a condition where an abnormal arrangement of cells takes place due to a change in their usual growth behavior.