The paramedical team and the emergency department play a major role in the diagnosis and management of these patients. The key to successfully managing ammonia exposure and reducing long-term sequelae is timely interventions. The EMS team can obtain valuable insights into the exposure environment and may provide the first clue to ammonia poisoning. They can initiate decontamination before arriving in the emergency department. The emergency clinician, after primary and secondary surveys, should initiate early consultation for ophthalmology, gastroenterology, a burn nurse, and plastic surgery depending on the need. Early specialist intervention improves patient outcomes.

Based on the portal of exposure, the patient may need long-term follow-up care. Follow-up with a pulmonologist may be necessary for patients with severe acute inhalation, as the development of chronic lung disease is common. Long-term follow-up with a gastroenterologist may be necessary for patients with ingestion to screen for the development of stricture. In patients with intentional or suicidal exposure, psychiatric consultation may be advisable early in the management of such cases. Nursing will provide inpatient care and monitoring, evaluate the patient progress on follow-up outpatient visits, and report their findings to the treating clinician.

Ammonia toxicity requires an interprofessional team approach, including primary clinicians, specialists (based on exposure type), and specialty-trained nurses all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]

Most of the evidence available in ammonia poisoning are case studies, case series, and systematic reviews.