**Complications From Distraction Osteogenesis**

**Relapse:**Some degree of relapse is likely to occur with any distraction osteogenesis, especially that of the mandible. However, overcorrection of 10 to 30% depending on the anatomic site will often account for the expected degree of relapse and yield a good clinical result.

**Device Failure:**This is defined as occurring when the device itself breaks and is relatively uncommon. There are different rates published in the literature, and they are slightly different according to the location of distraction. The highest rates of device failure ar in mandibular distraction, but even then, they are near 1%.

**Device Extrusion:**This is a rare complication where the device extrudes through the skin, migrating through the bone rather than moving the bone itself. This is a manifestation of orthodontic, rather than the desired orthopedic forces. The root cause is the impingement of the bony segments or other reasons that the bones cannot move freely in the desired vector. It is essential to test the mobility of the segments in relation to the osteotomy under direct, intraoperative, visualization to ensure they are free to move in the desired vector.

**Injury to Tooth Buds**: This is principally encountered in mandibular distraction osteogenesis, though it can occur in the maxilla as well. This can be avoided with careful preoperative planning based on preoperative planning, careful placement of osteotomies as far (dentally) distally as possible, and avoidance can potentially be enhanced via 3D imaging and virtual surgical planning, allowing for optimization of the osteotomy site.

**Nerve Injury:**The inferior alveolar nerve, branches of the facial nerve, as well as the supraorbital and infraorbital nerves, are at risk of injury depending on the approach used and the bone to be distracted. Care with the plane of dissection, as well as the location of the osteotomy, will help to avoid nerve injury. The technique described above will minimize the risk of inferior alveolar nerve injury during mandibular distraction. Permanent or severe injuries to the facial nerve are very rare, accounting for <1% of complications of all craniofacial distraction procedures.

**Malocclusion:**Manipulation of the dentition-bearing bones inherently carries the risk of malocclusion. Even with the use of dental splints, the rate of symptomatic malocclusion is very high in patients undergoing maxillary advancement. Similarly, the future need for orthodontics is very high in patients who have undergone neonatal mandibular distraction. If the patient is to undergo either of these procedures, regardless of age, they should be counseled; they will very likely require orthodontia in the future. Additionally, occlusal complications such as open-bite deformity and temporomandibular joint symptoms may result from suboptimal distraction vectors. Serial radiographs during the active distraction phase help to identify this problem early, when combined with preoperative cephalometric planning. If the occlusal cant is disrupted, this can potentially be corrected if multi-vector, external distractor devices are used.

**Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Leak**: This is rare, though it can occur with either anterior or posterior cranial vault expansion. Often the leaks are small and can be managed conservatively, either by observation or with the placement of a lumbar drain. The risk of CSF leak is highest in anterior craniofacial (LeFort 2, 3, and monobloc) distraction, though it is reportedly lower than the 10% from standard, open, monobloc advancements. This carries the risk of meningitis also, which is as high as 10% in standard open techniques, and slightly lower when employing distraction techniques.

**Scarring:**The use of an irregular (sine-wave) or irregularly irregular (random) incision can minimize scar prominence. Incisions should be closed in layers, and electrocautery should be minimized at the scalp surface to avoid the death of hair follicles. Similarly, Rainey clips should be avoided to avoid pressure necrosis of the follicles at the incision edges. There may be some degree of tension present after the cranial vault is reconstructed, which can precipitate hypertrophic scarring. All techniques available should be employed to allow for tension-free closure of the scalp. If scar hypertrophy does occur, this can be treated later with serial excision of the scar. Additionally, particularly with the use of external devices in mandibular distraction, tension-related scars can be problematic between the proximal and distal percutaneous pins. The skin is often the least-forgiving tissue in such cases, and tension-related scars can develop towards the end of mandibular distraction that can be unsightly.

**Infection:**This is minimized by the use of systemic antibiotics peri-operatively, and topical antibiotics to the incisions postoperatively. In high-risk operations such as LeFort 2, 3, or monobloc advancements, prophylactic postoperative antibiosis is indicated as the untreated meningitis rate approaches 10%. Ceftriaxone is commonly employed, as are other antibiotics that cover skin and hair flora but have good CSF penetration profiles.