**Masticatory Muscle Disorders**

The most common symptoms observed include pain in the masticatory muscles when swallowing, speaking, and chewing. Pain increases with palpation or with manipulation of muscles. It is associated with restricted mandibular movements.

**Temporomandibular Joint Disorders**

**Derangement of the Condyle-Disc Complex**

The derangement of the condyle disc complex arises due to a breakdown in the rotational function of the disc. This condition can result from the lengthening of ligaments (discal collateral and inferior retro-discal ligaments) or thinning of the posterior disc border. The contributing factors can be micro or macro trauma.

**Disc Dislocation with Reduction**

Disc displacement can lead to partial or complete disarticulation of the disc from discal space in condyle–disc assembly. When the mouth is closed, the articular disc is displaced anterior to the condyle head; when the mouth opens, the disc repositions on the condyle head similarly to normal.

The disc can sometimes fail to reduce with consequent mouth opening limitation. This is known as disc displacement with reduction with intermittent locking.

**Disc Dislocation without Reduction**

When the articular disc fails to reduce repeatedly, causing a limited mouth opening, the diagnosis of disc displacement without reduction is given.

**Structural Incompatibility with Articular Surfaces**

The disorder results from changes in the smooth sliding surfaces of the TMJ. The alteration causes friction stickiness and inhibits joint function. Structural incompatibility classifies as a deviation in form, adhesions, subluxation, and spontaneous dislocation.

**Deviation in the Form**

The physiological aging or minor degeneration of the condyle, disc, and fossa can cause deviations and dysfunction, significantly affecting mandibular movements.

**Adherences and Adhesions**

An adherence represents a brief hold of the articular surfaces. Adhesion can happen between the condyle and disc or the disc and fossa. Adhesions result from a fibrous connective tissue or loss of lubrication between the structures. It is characterized by restriction in the normal translation of the condyle movement with no pain. In chronic situations, the patient senses an inability to get the teeth back to occlusion during the closure.

**Subluxation**

It is a non-pathologic condition, a repeatable clinical phenomenon characterized by a sudden forward movement of the condyle past the crest of the articular eminence during the final stages of mouth opening. The steep, short posterior slope of the articular eminence and the longer anterior slope - more superior to the crest - cause the condyle to subluxate. The examiner can witness it by requesting the patient to open wide, creating a small void or depression behind the condyle.

**Luxation (dislocation)**

A dislocation happens when the condyle moves in front of the articular eminence and cannot descend back to the normal position.

**Inflammatory Disorders of the TMJ**

The joint disease of inflammatory origin characteristically presents with deep continuous pain commonly accentuated on functional movement. This constant pain can trigger secondary excitatory effects. It expresses as referred pain, sensitivity to touch, protective contraction, or a combination of these problems.

Inflammatory joints are classified according to the structures involved into synovitis, capsulitis, retro-discitis, and arthritis.

**Synovitis/Capsulitis**

Trauma can cause inflammation of the synovial tissues (synovitis) and the capsular ligament (capsulitis). It presents as continuous pain, tenderness on palpation, and limited mandibular movement. However, it isn't easy to differentiate between these two entities clinically, and arthroscopy is helpful for diagnosis.

**Retrodiscitis**

It is caused by trauma or progressive disc displacement and dislocation. The patient complains of pain, which increases with clenching. Limited jaw movement, swelling of retro discal tissues, and acute malocclusion are associated with the disease.

**Arthralgia**

The pain originates in the jaw and is affected by jaw movement, function, or para-function. The pain can be replicated with provocative testing of the TMJ.

**Arthritis**

Pain originates in the joint, and features of inflammation or infection over the affected joint are usually seen, such as edema, erythema, or increased temperature. Further symptoms include dental occlusal changes, e.g., ipsilateral posterior open bite if intraarticular with unilateral swelling or effusion. This disorder is also known as synovitis or capsulitis, although these terms limit the sites of nociception. TMD is a localized condition; there should be no history of systemic inflammatory disease.

**Osteoarthritis**

It is an inflammatory disorder that arises due to an increased joint overload. The increased forces soften the articular surfaces and resorb the subarticular surface. The progressive loading and the subsequent regeneration cause loss of the subchondral layer, bone erosion, and osteoarthritis. The condition characterizes by joint pain that increases with movement. It is also associated with disc dislocation and perforation.

**Osteoarthrosis**

Arthrosis is the adaptive unaltered arthritic changes of the bone due to decreased bone loading. It occurs after the overloading of the joint, mainly due to parafunctional activity, and is often associated with disc dislocation.

**Systemic Arthritis**

Several arthritides can affect the TMJ, including traumatic arthritis, infectious arthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis.

**Chronic Mandibular Hypomobility**

It is a long-term painless restriction of the mandible. Pain only occurs when using force to attempt opening beyond limitations. Hypomobility can be caused by ankylosis, muscle contracture, or coronoid process impedance.

**Growth Disorders**

Growth disturbances can affect the TMJ bones or muscles. Common growth disturbances of the bones are agenesis (no growth), hypoplasia (insufficient growth), hyperplasia (excessive growth), or neoplasia (uncontrolled, destructive growth). Common growth disturbances of the muscles are hypotrophy (weakened muscle), hypertrophy (increased size and strength of the muscle), and neoplasia (uncontrolled, destructive growth). The growth alterations typically result from trauma.