Patients usually complain of progressive decline in functional ability in the right hand caused by decreased hand strength and compromised dexterity. Such limitations may manifest as difficulty in carrying out activities of daily living requiring fine motor functions such as eating, dressing, and grooming. Patients report that cold temperatures worsen symptoms.

Based on the rate of progression, the initial complaint may be of the deformity related to muscular atrophy. Sensory changes are rarely reported, and patients do not complain of pain until the atrophy involves the upper arm and shoulder girdle, as evident in more severe cases.

The patient may also report increased fatigue and may have associated atopy or allergies.

This constellation of symptoms compels them to quit or have diminished participation in sports and other leisure activities, making them socially aloof.

**Appearance**

Common presentation is unilateral atrophy in the distal upper limb. Most atrophy occurs in the thenar, intrinsic hand muscles, hypothenar, and forearms. Depending on its severity, patients may also have limb length discrepancies. There is characteristic oblique atrophy due to sparing of the brachioradialis.

**Strength**

Weakness is most often noted in flexors and extensors of the wrist and digits owing to the involvement of the C7-T1 nerve roots. Fine motor actions and grasp are limited, and patients may be unable to perform pinch or key grasp. The contralateral hand and digits will exhibit full strength and dexterity. Typically, elbow flexion, extension, pronation, and supination are unaffected. Proximal muscle groups are also mostly spared.

**Neurologic Exam**

The sensory exam is intact for vibration, temperature, sharp, dull, and light touch modalities on all extremities. Muscle stretch reflexes are generally normal and symmetric. Hoffman and Holman are noncontributory.

**Cardiovascular**

Pulses are normal. The limbs are warm, and there is a good capillary refill.

**The clinical diagnostic criteria for the HD**include the following:

- Distal upper limb muscle weakness and atrophy

- Onset at between 10-20 years of age

- Unilateral or predominantly asymmetric pattern

- Insidious onset, gradual progression followed by an arrest

- Lack of pyramidal signs or sensory disturbance, and

- Exclusion of other mimics.