Any suspicion of congenital glaucoma warrants an evaluation under anesthesia for detailed examination and planning of further management.

- Cornea – Detailed corneal evaluation as explained above should be done along with measuring corneal diameter with eth help of calipers. In addition, a hand help slit lamp can be used to evaluate the cornea and anterior segment details.

- Ophthalmoscopy – Detailed dilated fundus evaluation should be done. The size of the optic disc, cupping should be represented diagrammatically for future reference. Any abnormal vessels or other significant findings should be well documented.

- Intraocular pressure (IOP) – IOP can be measured using a Schiotz or handheld Perkin’s applanation tonometer, or a pneumotonometer/tonopen can also be used. The effect of the anesthesia used on IOP should be kept in mind. These children usually have IOP within the range of 30 to 40 mmHg, resulting in corneal epithelial edema.

- Gonioscopy – Gonioscopic examination can be done with the help of Koeppe’s lens; this may reveal trabeculodysgenesis with a flat or concave iris insertion.

- Pachymetry – Corneal thickness should be measured in patients as this can affect the intraocular pressure readings. The corneal thickness will be increased in patients with central corneal edema.

- Axial length – This can be measured using an ultrasound A. At birth, the axial length is around 18 mm, increasing to 22 mm around two years of age. In patients with primary congenital glaucoma, an increased axial length can be secondary to stretch due to increased intraocular pressure.

- Cycloplegic retinoscopy – An increased axial length might lead to axial myopia. Thus it is important to evaluate for any underlying refractive errors in these patients.

In children around the age of 7 to 8 years, with reasonably good visual acuity, good fixation, and no nystagmus, perimetry can be tried to assess for peripheral visual field loss. SITA-FAST algorithm is preferred in these children.

When the child becomes cooperative and eligible for slit lamp examination, optical coherence tomography (OCT) can be attempted in these children to evaluate the retinal nerve and ganglion cell layer. Handheld and spectral-domain OCT are upcoming modalities for retinal nerve fiber and ganglion cell layer assessment while performing an evaluation under anesthesia.

Genetic screening, analysis, and pedigree chart evaluation can be performed in these cases.