Pediculosis is a major public health problem affecting millions of people and is best managed with an interprofessional team approach. The problem is encountered in many schools, and unfortunately, many children often present late, and the cycle of infestation continues in the home. While lice are managed by clinicians in the emergency department and in primary care, the nurse and pharmacist play a critical role in lice management and prevention outside the hospital, as part of the interprofessional healthcare team. The key is the education of patients and parents who need to know that all individuals in the family need to be examined and treated. Even family members who have no lice but share personal care products or even share a bed need prophylactic treatment. There is solid evidence that education can lower lice infestation in schools. Education is far more important than having "no nit" school policies. The pharmacist should emphasize the importance of treatment compliance and provide the parents with detailed information about how and when to use the medication. Nurses should perform monitoring and follow-up on subsequent visits, verify compliance, and answer questions, reporting any concerns that arise to the prescriber. To minimize head lice infestations, the child and parent must be told not to share combs, brushes, hats, or scarves. While shaving of the hair is an effective treatment, it is not acceptable today. Further, if pubic lice are found, then both partners need treatment, and they should be investigated for other sexually transmitted infections. Finally, parents should be educated on how to wash clothing, linens, and other garments. All these steps are best enacted by a cohesive interprofessional team approach. [Level 5]