The RTSA preoperative preparation includes obtaining a complete history, perform a full clinical assessment, arrange the appropriate imaging modalities, and medical optimization for the surgery.

**Patient History**

Detailed history, including the personal, medical, and social history, is mandatory to identify all medical comorbidities, social circumstances, and the patient’s functional baseline. For example, patients who live on their own or usually use a mobility aid will need extra support postoperatively.

**Clinical Assessment**

Full preoperative clinical assessment should be performed, including:

- The current shoulder active and passive range of movement

- Rotator cuff examination,

- Axillary nerve function,

- Deltoid muscle function,

- Skin condition over the involved shoulder,

- The entire upper limb neurovascular status.

**Imaging Modalities**

**Shoulder X-rays******

Anteroposterior, Y-scapular, and axillary views are usually obtained prior to RTSA. X-rays are useful for preparative templating, identify bony lesions and assess bone quality.

**Computed Tomography (CT) Scan**

CT scan is beneficial in assessing the humerus and glenoid bony stock and glenoid version for preoperative planning**.**A preoperative three-dimensional (3D) CT scan can determine the proximal humeral retroversion.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan**

MRI could be used to assess the integrity of the rotator cuff before the surgery.

**Medical Optimization**

Patients with medical comorbidities, e.g., diabetes, anemia, cardiac or renal diseases, require medical assessment, medication review, and optimization prior to the surgery.