Since the studies regarding CGRP and its receptor, its physiology, and pharmacology were conducted relatively recently, there is much unknown about it. The new drugs acting on the CGRP receptor have greater efficacy and have advantages over the drugs currently used for the treatment of migraines, which may lead to the widespread use of these new drugs. However, professionals within the field of internal medicine and neurology have to take care while prescribing these drugs and properly inform patients about the potential side effects of these medications. Watching for adverse effects reported in previous studies and preparing for those that have not yet been described is also vital.

Drug interactions and comorbidities also affect the dosage of gepants, so they should also undergo periodic assessment; this requires proper coordination between professionals in different specialties. In the case of mAbs such as erenumab, patient education by health providers is necessary for patient compliance as these medications need a prolonged time before any significant relief can be appreciated. The pharmacist will also need to perform medication reconciliation to address drug interactions and verify all dosing is appropriate.

Finally, due to the debilitating nature of migraines, counselors, psychiatrists, neurologists, and other healthcare staff should all work together to ensure proper patient care. This interprofessional team support can help ensure appropriate medication usage, provide proper instructions to patients and/or caregivers, monitor treatment response as well as take care of the mental welfare of the patient and their family members. [Level 5]