Chemically, linaclotide is a small, synthetic, and heterodetic cyclic peptide made of 14-amino acids with interlinking three disulfide bonds. In this molecule, from right to left, the sequence of amino acids is L-cysteinyl-L-cysteinyl-L-glutamyl-L-tyrosyl-L- cysteinyl-L-cysteinyl-L-asparaginyl-L-prolyl-L-alanyl-L-cysteinyl-L-threonyl-glycyl-L-cysteinyl-L- tyrosine with cyclic between amino acids (1-6), (2-10), and (5-13)-tris (disulfide).

Linaclotide's molecular formula is C59H79N15O21S6 and has a molecular weight of 1526.8. Linaclotide is an amorphous substance, white to off-white colored powder. It is sparingly soluble in water and aqueous 0.9% sodium chloride.

**Mechanism of Action**

Linaclotide, a promising drug, is structurally similar to human endogenous hormones guanylin and uroguanylin and functionally analogous to heat-stable enterotoxin of pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli organisms. Linaclotide acts as a potent and highly selective agonist of guanylate cyclase-2C (GC-2C).

The activation of GC-C causes elevated intracellular and extracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) levels. Increased concentration of intracellular cGMP stimulates the secretion of electrolytes, chloride, and bicarbonate, into the lumen of the intestine, mainly via activation of the ion channel called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and inhibits the absorption of sodium, resulting in increased intestinal fluid content and accelerated transit.

Linaclotide has a novel dual mode of action. Increased levels of extracellular cGMP in submucosa inhibit colonic nociceptors and relieve abdominal pain.

In an animal model of visceral pain, linaclotide also reduces the contraction of abdominal muscles.

As per the results of animal studies and clinical trials, linaclotide improves constipation and various abdominal symptoms and the quality of life (QOL) in patients suffering from irritable bowel syndrome with predominant constipation and chronic idiopathic constipation.

Linaclotide can be effectively combined with other therapeutic agents to treat refractory constipation.

**Pharmacodynamics**

**Food Effects**

In clinical trials, linaclotide was taken on an empty stomach, at least half an hour before the breakfast. Administering the linaclotide immediately after the breakfast rich in fat resulted in stool with looser consistency and a higher frequency of stool compared to taking it in the fasted state.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption**

Linaclotide is minimally absorbed with negligible bioavailability after oral administration. Plasma concentrations of linaclotide and its active metabolites are below the measurable level following oral ingestion of 145 mcg and 290 mcg doses. Therefore, calculation of standard pharmacokinetic parameters such as AUC (area under the curve), Cmax (maximum concentration), and t½ (half-life) cannot be performed.

**Food Effect**

In a clinical trial, neither linaclotide nor its active metabolite MM-419447 was detected in plasma after oral intake of 290 mcg once a day dosage for seven days in both fed and non-fed states in healthy volunteers.

**Distribution**

Given that the concentration of linaclotide in the plasma following oral administration of the recommended doses is not quantifiable, the distribution of linaclotide to tissues in organ systems to any clinically relevant extent is not expected.

**Elimination**

**Metabolism**

Linaclotide is metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract (GI). It is stable in the acidic (low pH) environment of the stomach. By loss of terminal tyrosine moiety in the small intestine, linaclotide is metabolized to its principal and active metabolite MM-419447 (CCEYCCNPACTGC), which contributes to pharmacological effects of the parent drug linaclotide. The systemic exposure to active peptides is minimal. In addition, low systemic and portal vein concentration of both linaclotide and metabolites confirms poor bioavailability when administered orally. The reduction of disulfide bonds of both peptides takes place in the small intestine, where subsequently, they are proteolyzed and degraded into smaller peptides and naturally occurring amino acids.

Following oral administration, linaclotide metabolizes within one hour in the gastrointestinal tract. Due to its high susceptibility to proteolytic degradation, linaclotide or its active metabolite has limited therapeutic application. The linaclotide analogs, the next generation of potent peptides with enhanced stability in the gut, might improve the therapeutic utility.

**Excretion**

In fed and fasted healthy subjects, following oral administration of linaclotide 290 mcg once a day dosage for a week, a mean of 3% (fed) and 5% (fasted) of the dose was excreted as an active peptide in the feces and an active metabolite MM-419447 was the predominant peptide recovered.

In vitro studies, MM-419447 binds to T84 cells with high affinity, which results in remarkable concentration-dependent intracellular accumulation of cyclic guanosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP). In animal studies, orally dosed MM-419447 increased intraluminal cGMP, significantly increased fluid secretion into the loops of the small bowel, and caused a dose-dependent acceleration of GI transit. These results demonstrate that the active metabolite plays an important role in contributing to linaclotide's pharmacology.

**Drug Interaction Studies**

Clinical studies for drug-to-drug interactions have not been conducted with linaclotide. In addition, systemic absorption of the linaclotide and its active metabolite is minimal after orally administered drug dosages.

According to the results of in vitro studies, linaclotide does not interact with the cytochrome P450 enzyme system. Also, linaclotide does not interact with the uptake and efflux (including the P-glycoprotein(P-gp)) transporters. As per these in vitro data, no interactions of linaclotide with other drugs are anticipated by modulation of CYP enzymes or common transporters.

**Use and Risk Summary in Specific Populations**

**Renal and Hepatic Impairment**

Renal and hepatic dysfunction is not expected to affect the elimination of linaclotide or its active metabolite as linaclotide metabolism takes place within the gastrointestinal tract and linaclotide concentrations in plasma are below the quantitation limit following oral administration of the recommended dosage.

**Pregnancy**

In animal developmental studies, no effects were observed on developing embryos and fetuses following oral administration of linaclotide during the organogenesis phase in rats and rabbits at much higher doses than the maximum recommended dosage for the human species. The association between severe maternal toxicity and effects on fetal morphology existed in mice. The estimated background risk for major congenital defects and miscarriage is unknown for the indicated patient population.

Systemic absorption of linaclotide and its active metabolite MM-419447 is negligible after dosing orally. Therefore, use by gravid mothers is not anticipated to cause any drug exposure to embryos and fetuses. However, the available data on linaclotide use in pregnant females is inadequate to draw a conclusion regarding the drug-related risk of fetal malformation and abortion.

**Lactation**

Linaclotide and its metabolite were not discovered in human milk. In adults, the plasma concentration of both linaclotide and its active metabolite are below the measurable limit following administration of the multiple doses by oral route. The therapy of lactating mothers is not expected to expose breastfed infants to linaclotide or MM-419447 metabolite.

No information is available regarding the effects of linaclotide and its metabolite on breast milk production. While prescribing the linaclotide to the lactating mother, advantages of breastfeeding on infant's overall health and development should be taken into consideration along with the maternal need of the linaclotide for the medical condition and any potential harmful effects on the infants on mother's milk from linaclotide or poorly managed underlying maternal disease.

**Pediatrics**

Due to the risk of serious dehydration, linaclotide use is not recommended in patients less than two years of age. In preclinical studies, because of age-dependent enhanced agonism of GC-C receptors in neonatal mice (equivalent human age is 0 to 28 days), linaclotide, after oral administration, induced elevated fluid secretion, which was associated with higher mortality rates within the first 24 hours from rapid and severe dehydration.

A GC-C ontogeny study was conducted in children of age six months to less than 18 years to measure levels of GC-C mRNA expression in samples of mucosal tissue of the duodenum and colon with the aim of assessing the risk of diarrhea and severe dehydration as a result of GC-C agonism in this population. According to the results, the age-dependent trend in the expression of intestinal GC-C does not exist in children aged 2 to below 18 years. However, sufficient data about intestinal CG-C expression are not available in children less than two years of age, and therefore, the risk of developing adverse event diarrhea and its potentially dangerous consequences are not evaluated.

**Geriatrics**

Clinical trials revealed that linaclotide is safe and effective in the geriatric group. The incidence of diarrhea might increase when linaclotide is taken alone or in combination with other medications that cause constipation.