# Continuing Education Activity

Sumatriptan is FDA approved as an abortive treatment for migraine attacks with or without aura in adults. Acute treatment of cluster headache episodes can be relieved by the administration of subcutaneous therapy. According to clinical studies, sumatriptan is an effective and well-tolerated treatment for migraines when given intravenously, subcutaneously, or orally. It relieves photophobia, nausea, headache, and functional disability. Non-FDA-approved indications of sumatriptan include treatment of migraine in children and adolescents. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of administration, important adverse effects, contraindications, and monitoring, of sumatriptan, so providers can direct patient therapy in treating indicated disorders as part of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the mechanism of action of sumatriptan.
- Summarize the indicated headache types for initiating therapy with sumatriptan.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of sumatriptan.
- Identify interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the use of sumatriptan where it is indicated and improve patient outcomes.

# Indications

Sumatriptan succinate is FDA approved as an abortive treatment for migraine attacks with or without aura in adults. Acute treatment of cluster headache episodes can be relieved by administering sumatriptan subcutaneously.

# Mechanism of Action

Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) has a central role in the pathophysiology of a migraine. Its metabolism is abnormal in patients with migraines, and intravenous administration of 5-hydroxytryptamine can alleviate migraine attacks. Antimigraine drugs share the ability to activate 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors. Headaches, a prominent feature of a migraine, are believed to result from the following: excessive dilatation of extracerebral cranial (dural or meningeal) arteries, arteriovenous shunts, or both; neurogenic dural plasma extravasation; or a combination of these mechanisms. Sumatriptan (3-[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl]-N-methylindole-5-methanesulfonamide) is a selective agonist of 5-hydroxytryptamine1-like receptors that block plasma leakage from the dura and venous sinuses, stimulated by perivascular trigeminal fibers that release substance P, calcitonin G-related peptide, and neurokinin A. This pain mechanism may provide the final common pathway for other cephalgias and migraines, explaining the overlap and similarities between different headache syndromes—subcutaneous administration of sumatriptan results in the rapid attainment of peak plasma levels.

Sumatriptan is a 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonist and leads to vasoconstriction in the basilar artery and the blood vessels of the dura mater. It decreases peripheral nociception either by selective cranial vasoconstriction or an effect on trigeminovascular nerves. The blocking effect of sumatriptan indicated a peripheral effect on trigeminal vascular nerves in neurogenically mediated plasma extravasation. Sumatriptan inhibits the presynaptic terminal of the trigeminal nucleus caudalis, which leads to the reversal of facial allodynia. Triptans decrease transmission of the pain impulses to the trigeminal nucleus caudalis and reduce inflammatory mediators from trigeminal nerves, therefore reducing calcitonin gene-related peptide-mediated vasodilation. Migraine pain is associated with middle cerebral artery dilatation, which leads to a lower velocity of regional cerebral blood flow. Sumatriptan reverses the dilatation of MCA, which suggests that the 5-HT receptor system has a role in the pathogenesis of a migraine.

An acute dose of sumatriptan (100 micrograms/kg) decreases the 5-HT synthesis rate in many brain regions, including the dorsal raphe nucleus. Chronically, sumatriptan (300 micrograms/kg per day) induced significant increases in the 5-HT synthesis rate in many projection areas but did not affect the dorsal raphe nucleus.

# Administration

Sumatriptan can be administered orally, intranasally, via subcutaneous injection, and rectally.

- Sumatriptan is available as 5 mg per actuation, 10 mg per actuation, 20 mg per actuation nasal solution, and 11 mg nasal powder per actuation. The sumatriptan nasal powder system has faster improvement in migraine-related disability and migraine pain intensity at early time points than the oral sumatriptan.

- Sumatriptan succinate (25 mg) administered rectally is an effective treatment for acute migraine attacks and significantly reduces symptoms within two hours.

- Sumatriptan succinate oral tablets are available in  25 mg, 50 mg, or 100 mg. Doses of 50 mg and 100 mg may provide better relief of migraines than the 25 mg dose.

- It is available in 3 mg / 0.5 ml, 4 mg / 0.5 ml, and 6 mg /0.5 ml subcutaneous injections. Subcutaneous administration has also been considered the most efficacious treatment in the acute phase, both on pain and associated autonomic symptoms. If migraine returns after an initial treatment with sumatriptan injection, sumatriptan succinate tablets (up to 100 mg/day) may be used 2 hours after the injection.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Oral sumatriptan has demonstrated effectiveness in treating a single acute migraine attack. The absorption of sumatriptan is rapid after oral and subcutaneous administration. However, the bioavailability of oral sumatriptan is just 14% compared to subcutaneous administration, which is nearly 100%. The plasma half-life for sumatriptan is approximately 2 hours. The elimination of sumatriptan is primarily by metabolism to a nonactive indoleacetic acid analog. The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variables of sumatriptan are not altered by the presence of alcohol, food, prophylactic migraine treatments, or dihydroergotamine.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

- Sumatriptan dose should not exceed 50 mg/day orally in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. Sumatriptan is contraindicated in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

- There is no information available on sumatriptan use in patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Consideration**

- In clinical trials, the effectiveness and safety in pregnant or pediatric patients have not been performed.

**Pediatric Patients**

- Sumatriptan is not recommended for use in patients younger than 18 years of age.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

- Sumatriptan gets excreted in human milk, so lactating women should avoid breastfeeding for 12 hours after treatment to minimize infant exposure.

# Adverse Effects

The safety of treating more than four headaches in a month has not been studied. Sumatriptan adverse reactions are dose-dependent. Individuals with nausea and vomiting can receive a subcutaneous injection compared to oral; however, subcutaneous administration correlates with increased adverse events.

Sumatriptan oral tablets might cause non-coronary vasospastic reactions, such as gastrointestinal vascular ischemia and infarction (presenting with abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea), peripheral vascular ischemia, splenic infarction, renal infarction, and Raynaud's syndrome. Sumatriptan can cause adverse central nervous system events outside migraine attacks. It can cause mild sedative effects such as sleepiness or fatigue. It also causes a significant increase in the EEG alpha power compared with the placebo. In a study measured by the Yale-Brown Scale, sumatriptan worsened patients' symptoms with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Sumatriptan can also cause a transient rise in blood pressure, but the increase in blood pressure is the same as anticipated during moderate exercise.

Subcutaneous injection administered by the physician results in transient stinging at the injection site in most subjects; however, toleration is better when the subjects use the auto-injector. Sumatriptan can induce angle-closure glaucoma, but this is a rare event and should receive correct and prompt treatment to prevent visual loss. A common adverse drug reaction of subcutaneous sumatriptan includes injection site reaction (bleeding, bruising, erythema). In addition, intranasal sumatriptan leads to dysgeusia and nasal discomfort.

Sumatriptan works earlier and more completely compared to a combination of caffeine and ergotamine, but sumatriptan is associated with a higher rate of recurrent headaches. Rothner et al. reported a case of facial nerve palsy in a teenager using sumatriptan nasal spray. Hossein et al. described a recurrent paresis of the superior division of the oculomotor nerve occurring after subcutaneous administration of the drug. A thorough evaluation is necessary for patients with acute onset of a severe headache, and sumatriptan requires careful administration since it could precipitate RCVS (reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome) or aggravate cerebral vasoconstriction. Vascular imaging should be performed after several days if sumatriptan-induced reversible vasoconstriction syndrome is suspected. Sumatriptan can also cause sensations of tightness, pain, pressure, and heaviness in the precordium, throat, neck, and jaw of non-cardiac origin.

# Contraindications

- Oral, intranasal, and subcutaneous routes of sumatriptan administration are contraindicated in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

- It is contraindicated in patients receiving concurrent MAO type A inhibitors or within two weeks of discontinuing an MAO type A inhibitor.

- Patients with signs and symptoms of ischemic heart disease are relatively contraindicated to use sumatriptan. Ischemic heart diseases include coronary artery vasospasm, myocardial infarction, prinzmetal angina, and angina pectoris.

- Sumatriptan also is contraindicated in patients who use ergotamine and another 5-HT1 agonist concurrently.

- Patients with peripheral vascular disease (also, ischemic bowel disease), cerebrovascular syndromes, or uncontrolled hypertension have a contraindication to sumatriptan.

# Monitoring

The elimination half-life of sumatriptan is 1 to 4 hours, and the therapeutic plasma drug concentrations range from 0.013 to 0.095 mg/L. Sumatriptan daily doses in adults should not exceed 300 mg orally, 40 mg intranasally, 12 mg parenterally, and 13 mg transdermally (two patches). The risk of serotonin syndrome increases if patients use drugs that increase serotonin (e.g., ecstasy, St. Johns wort, paroxetine, fluoxetine, venlafaxine, duloxetine). Explain to patients to watch for signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome if those medicines are added or increased in dose.

# Toxicity

Limited data is available on sumatriptan overdose and toxicity. A 36-year-old male patient reported overuse of sumatriptan with 66 injections of 6 mg sumatriptan subcutaneously within four weeks. No adverse reactions were observed clinically or in laboratory parameters.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with migraines are usually managed by an interprofessional team that consists of a neurologist, nurse practitioner, primary care provider, physician assistant, pharmacist, and emergency department physician. When patients present with an acute migraine attack, one of the drugs to abort the attack is sumatriptan. The drug is an effective and well-tolerated treatment for migraines and is given intranasally, subcutaneously, or orally.