In humans, the incubation period of scrub typhus can range between 10 to 12 days, although it can vary between 6 and 21 days.Leptotrombidium mite, patients can present with nonspecific flu-like symptoms that include fever and rash.

Patients may also present with an eschar at the site of the bite, which usually produces no pain or itch at the time of the bite (Fig 1).

- The bite mark ‘eschar’ is a pathognomonic clinical feature of scrub typhus that occurs at the site of the chigger feeding. It appears as an ulcer that enlarges and undergoes central necrosis to finally turn into a black crust. This particular skin lesion may appear similar to a skin burn from a cigarette.

- Common sites of eschar include the neck, axillary, and infraaxillary regions. In both sexes, it is usually seen below the umbilicus in the front of the body, while in women, the prominent sites were the mammary and inframammary regions.

There can be nonspecific symptoms in the form of headaches and fever, which are the most common features. Infected individuals may also develop generalized lymphadenopathy, nausea, and vomiting, along with abdominal pain and myalgia.

Towards the beginning of the second week, especially those individuals with untreated disease, systemic manifestations of the disease may start to develop. This can range from the central nervous system manifestations such as acute diffuse encephalomyelitis, encephalopathy, meningitis, and sometimes hearing loss, cranial nerve palsies, and several ocular manifestations.

Cardiovascular manifestations may range from non-fatal rhythm abnormalities to features of congestive heart failure.