The most common adverse events reported in clinical trials are dry mouth, constipation, and paresthesia.

Phentermine/topiramate may cause an increased resting heart rate of up to 20 bpm. Any patient with a history of the cardiac or cerebrovascular disease should use caution. Therefore, it is important to monitor heart rate in all patients taking phentermine/topiramate.

Phentermine/topiramate can lead to psychiatric and cognitive disturbances. Mood disorders, including anxiety, depression, or insomnia, may occur with use. Clinicians should monitor patients for suicidal ideations and behaviors, depressed mood, and increased anxiety. It has also been associated with insomnia. Any history of a mood disorder may increase the risk of recurrence with the use of this drug. Phentermine/topiramate has been associated with cognitive impairment causing lapses in memory and judgment. In addition, the patient's ability to concentrate may also be affected.

Acute myopia associated with secondary angle-closure glaucoma may occur with use. Monitoring for increased intraocular pressure will help prevent permanent vision loss if an event occurs.

Elevated serum creatinine may occur. As a result, there is an increased risk of hypokalemia. Obtain periodic blood chemistry panels to monitor for changes. Topiramate is a weak carbonic anhydrase inhibitor; therefore, it can lead to metabolic acidosis, hypokalemia and may lead to the development of nephrolithiasis.

Due to decreased appetite, hypoglycemia may occur, especially in patients with type-2 diabetes mellitus.

Central nervous system (CNS) depression has been noted, and it is advised to avoid other CNS depressants such as alcohol to avoid adverse effects such as dizziness and impaired coordination. Abrupt withdrawal of phentermine/topiramate combination may trigger seizures. Therefore, therapy should be withdrawn gradually to minimize the potential of increased seizure frequency.

Clinically apparent liver injury due to this combination has not been reported, but several instances of acute liver injury have been linked to topiramate monotherapy of other conditions. Case reports of liver injury attributed to topiramate have occurred largely in patients with seizure disorders receiving other anticonvulsants with known hepatotoxic potential.