The prognosis of adrenocortical carcinoma was previously quite poor. In the past, an average overall survival in patients with adrenocortical carcinoma was 14.5 months with a 5-year mortality rate of about 75 to 90%.

Metastases of ACC has been detected in the liver (48 to 85%), lungs (30 to 60%), lymph nodes (7 to 20%), and bones (7 to 13%) of cases.

More recently, different studies have shown that adrenocortical carcinoma clinical presentation, survival, and prognosis is quite heterogeneous, ranging from short term survival to more long-term survival. Two separate organizations: The Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) and the European Network Staging Study for Adrenal Tumors (ENSAT) have developed newer staging systems which are now used to determine disease-free survival in stage I-III ACC cases and overall survival in stage IV ACC, as follows

- Staging

- Resection status

- Grading of the tumor based on Ki67% proliferation index and mitotic count.

Based on the ENSAT staging system, the 5-year survival rates for ACC are as follows

- 66 to 82% in patients with stage I

- 58 to 64% in patients with stage II

- 24 to 50% in patients with stage III

- 0 to 17% in patients with stage IV

In these latest studies, resection status and tumor grade have been shown to play a key role in the disease-free survival of localized ACC cases. Patients who had completely resected (R0) localized tumors, and incomplete microscopic resection were less likely to have a recurrence, compared to those with advanced tumors and macroscopically positive margins.

European studies of ACC patients have shown that the proliferation index, Ki67, has been the single most important factor in determining the recurrence of ACC in patients following complete resection of a localized ACC tumor (R0) for stage I-III ACC patients. Further research suggests that stage I through III, younger age, and low Ki67 are positive predictors of recurrence-free survival.

Moreover, older age older than 45 years old, distant metastasis, and incomplete resection have shown to associate with poor survival.

Recently, transcriptome analysis revealed unraveled two distinct groups of adrenocortical carcinoma, reflecting tumor proliferation (measured by mitotic counts and cell cycle genes): one group of aggressive proliferating tumors (C1A), associated with a poor prognosis and one group of less aggressive tumors (C1B), associated with a better outcome. Multivariate analysis, including tumor stage and mitotic rate as variables, showed that transcriptome data contained independent prognosis information. One of these studies also used the transcriptome data to define a genes predictor of malignancy and identified three different subgroups in the group of ACC of poor prognosis: one was enriched in TP53 mutations (C1A/p53), the second in beta-catenin cytoplasmic and nuclear accumulation (C1A/beta-catenin) and/or mutations and the third presented neither of these two alterations (C1A/x).

Similarly, the miRNA sequence, miR-195, and miR483-5p have been shown in serum to serve as a biomarker of aggressive ACC, associated with poor prognosis.