Based on available data, most users do not experience significant adverse drug reactions. The primary adverse effects reported are gastrointestinal, but other side effects have also been infrequently reported. Decreased appetite is frequently reported, though this is a potential contributory etiology of intentional weight loss. Below are the adverse drug reactions reported by System Organ Class (SOC).

**Gastrointestinal:**Decreased appetite is often reported. Nausea and diarrhea may occur in up to 10% of patients, in addition to some infrequent reports of vomiting and acid reflux. Constipation has also been reported in some users.

Delayed gastric emptying hinders the absorption of other oral medications. This is particularly significant in those with preexisting delayed gastric emptying as it can exacerbate their symptoms. It is important to note that the efficacy of oral hormonal contraceptives is decreased, so patients should be advised to use non-oral contraceptive methods.

**Cardiovascular:**Sinus tachycardia has been reported but may be blunted by concurrent medication use.

**Renal:**Infrequent cases of acute kidney injury have been reported, likely secondary to dehydration from gastrointestinal losses. These may occur in healthy and preexisting chronic renal disease patients. Monitoring for signs of dehydration is likely to prevent renal injury.

**Dermatologic:**Hypersensitivity reactions have been infrequently reported at the injection site. The prevalence is not higher than those reported by patients using GLP-1 agonists. Such events should be discussed with a physician and may warrant medication discontinuation.

**Pancreatitis:**GLP-1 medications are a known risk factor for acute pancreatitis. The risk level for tirzepatide is similar to GLP-1 agonist medications. Patients should be advised to seek care at the local emergency department if they develop severe abdominal pain while on tirzepatide therapy. Asymptomatic elevation of lipase and amylase may also be seen in some patients.

**Hepatobiliary:**There have been reports of cholelithiasis and cholecystitis occurring in patients on tirzepatide therapy.

**Ocular:**Patients with preexisting diabetic retinopathy should be advised that those symptoms may temporarily worsen if their glycemic control quickly improves. Any vision changes while using tirzepatide(GLP-1 receptor agonist) should be immediately discussed with a physician.

**Endocrine:**There is a small risk of hypoglycemia and dose-dependent. This risk is more significant for those on insulin therapy and/or those utilizing sulfonylureas. Patients should be advised on the potential symptoms of hypoglycemia.