After administering mifepristone, several adverse reactions require monitoring, one of which being severe bacterial infections post medical abortion or post dilatation and curettage procedure where the use of mifepristone was indicated. There is no causal relationship between the drug and developing an infection, but they can occur. Before prescribing mifepristone, the patient should understand the risks, signs to look for, and a plan of action in the event they need to seek help. Signs to look out for include sustained fever, severe abdominal pain, heavy bleeding: syncope, or general malaise lasting more than 24 hours after taking the medication. If a bacterial infection occurs, there is a high possibility that Clostridium sordellii, which can present atypically.

Prolonged, heavy bleeding after taking mifepristone is a possibility based on the mechanism of action of the drug. Mifepristone promotes endometrial proliferation, leading to endometrial thickening and heavier vaginal bleeding. Bleeding is expected on average for 9-16 days post-pregnancy termination. The manufacturer describes excessive bleeding as soaking through 2 thick pads every hour. If excessive bleeding occurs, it could point to an incomplete abortion or other complications. In these instances, monitoring for hypovolemic shock becomes important.

When using mifepristone in the management of Cushing syndrome patients, it is crucial to consider the effects on the HPA axis. This treatment can lead to adrenal insufficiency as a result of persistently elevated cortisol levels. Due to this, the cortisol levels should not serve as a monitoring parameter. Clinically, watch for signs of fatigue, hypoglycemia, hypotension, nausea, or weakness. If the clinician observes these, discontinue mifepristone and administer high-dose steroids. Once resolved, mifepristone may be started back at a lower dose. Hypokalemia needs to be monitored in these patients as well. Of note, patients receiving treatment for Cushing syndrome are at higher risk for developing opportunistic infections such as Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia.

In general, mifepristone can prolong the QTc interval, and its use merits caution in combination with other drugs that also prolong the QT interval.