Placebo effects play a vital role in several areas. Placebo interventions primarily serve as control treatments in experimental studies, enabling researchers to determine the specific effects of a particular treatment. Clinical investigators use randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trials as a gold standard to validate treatments. Non-blinded trials may result in a disproportionately large placebo effect. In placebo-controlled trials, the placebo effect observed may be greater for psychological and self-rated measures relative to other more objective measures that are objective. Using a placebo in psychological and medical studies is advantageous as it helps minimize the influence of patient expectations on the outcome. Additionally, studying the placebo effect at its core can help clinicians and researchers understand the context of how beliefs can shape various sensory and emotional perceptions. Identifying a physiological basis for the placebo effect may open doors to modulating processes that can improve mental and physical health. A clear understanding of the underlying mechanisms of placebo response with scientific work may enable clinicians to harness the placebo effect and improve patient care.

It is challenging for medical professionals to sidestep the placebo effect and only measure the intrinsic activity of the treatment being tested. Therefore, therapeutic evaluations become difficult in medical conditions that are sensitive to the placebo effect. Interindividual differences also complicate the studies of the placebo effect. Physicians must separate the placebo effect from the treatment. Placebo research is challenging because of a certain degree of deception.