Due to a lack of randomized controlled studies, current treatment options are primarily based on retrospective studies and expert opinions. The treatment goal- suppression of the EEG abnormalities, improvement of the seizure control, amelioration of the behavioral abnormalities, and reversal of cognitive regression- needs to be established at the time of the diagnosis.  The existing treatment paradigm has its basis on uncontrolled studies and case series and primarily focused use of traditional antiepileptic drugs(AEDs), including benzodiazepines, corticosteroids, epilepsy surgery, and other non-pharmacologic therapies(IVIG, the ketogenic diet, etc.).

The most common AEDs used for ESES include valproate, ethosuximide, and levetiracetam.

Benzodiazepines, particularly diazepam and clobazam, have been extensively used as one of the most commonly used AEDs for ESES. A group of researchers treated 29 children with ESES with oral high dose diazepam (1 mg/kg, maximum of 40 mg) and noted a reduction of the spike-wave index from 76.7% to 40.8% within 24 hours. These patients received 0.5 mg/kg of diazepam for three weeks after the initial high dose before gradual tapering. Reversible side effects- sedation, dizziness, respiratory depression, hypotonia, paradoxical aggravation- occurred in approximately one-quarter of patients.

Few specific AEDs such as phenytoin, phenobarbital, and carbamazepine can worsen seizure control in ESES and requires withdrawal in the presence of worsening drop or absence seizures.

Corticosteroids (methylprednisolone, prednisolone, ACTH) have been utilized in different regimens, both long term continuous therapy lasting for months or intermittent monthly high dose therapy. Buzatu et al. retrospectively reviewed the efficacy and safety of a 21-month regimen of hydrocortisone (5 mg/kg/day during the first month, 4 mg/kg/day during the second month, 3 mg/kg/day during the third month, 2 mg/kg/day for next nine months, and slow taper during remaining of the treatment period) in 44 patients with positive response in 34 patients during the first three months of the treatment, with normalization of EEG in 21 patients. However, among 34 responders,  14 patients had a subsequent relapse. Higher IQ/DQ and shorter duration of the disease before the initiation of the treatment were associated with a positive outcome. Due to side effects, seven patients discontinued treatment early.

The ketogenic diet and intravenous immunoglobulin infusions have been the target of study in small numbers of patients, and no specific recommendation are possible regarding their efficacy.