The hallmark histologic feature of autoimmune hepatitis is interface hepatitis. However, it is nondiagnostic as it is present in most cases of viral hepatitis. Various histological findings are associated with autoimmune hepatitis, but all of them are nonspecific.

The specimen of liver biopsy should include 6 portal triads for autoimmune hepatitis diagnosis. Typical autoimmune hepatitis biopsy includes mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate mostly plasma cells, located primarily in the portal tracts. This inflammation leads to piecemeal necrosis of hepatocytes leading to the destruction of limiting plate (interface hepatitis), bridging fibrosis (connecting portal and central area of hepatocytes), regenerating nodules, and finally cirrhosis. Twenty-five percent of cases show changes in bile ducts such as ductopenia, cholangitis.

These histologic findings are nonspecific for autoimmune hepatitis. Thus, a scoring system was developed for the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis. In 1993, the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group (IAIHG) initially proposed criteria that classified patients as “probable” or “definite” for autoimmune hepatitis based on multiple factors: gender, the presence of transaminitis, the presence of autoantibodies, and a history of autoimmune disease in first-degree relatives. These criteria also took into account whether or not other causes such as viral or alcohol-induced hepatitis had been excluded. In 1999, the scoring system was updated to include response to treatment. Since that time, a simplified scoring system has been introduced and is more conducive to everyday use by clinicians. Using the new scoring system, the sensitivity and specificity for probable autoimmune hepatitis are 91% and 94%, respectively; the sensitivity and specificity of definite autoimmune hepatitis are 75.5% and 100%, respectively.