Many studies demonstrated peripheral magnetic stimulation to be advantageous in many medical conditions. However, more evidence is needed for proving the effectiveness of peripheral magnetic stimulation in certain clinical settings. The following are possible indications for the use of peripheral magnetic stimulation:

**Myofascial Pain Syndrome**

Smania et al. reported significantly better long-term (follow up after 3 months) outcomes in both subjective and objective clinical evaluations of peripheral magnetic stimulation in treating upper trapezius myofascial pain compared to TENS and sham ultrasound therapy.

**Traumatic Brachial Plexopathy**

A study conducted by Khedr et al. showed significant improvement of electrophysiologic parameters, handgrip strength, and pain scores by applying both suprathreshold and subthreshold peripheral magnetic stimulation over upper trapezius muscle in comparison with sham treatments.

**Post-traumatic Peripheral Neuropathic Pain**

A case series reporting four patients with neuromas and one patient with inguinal nerve entrapment was treated with a course of low frequency (0.5 Hz) peripheral magnetic stimulation. Allodynia was resolved after treatment. A reduction of 60% to 100% of pain scores was observed after treatment.

**Acute Low Back Pain**

A pilot study was carried out by Lim et al. Immediate pain relief after peripheral magnetic stimulation application on patients' most tender points was reported. The study also showed better results of functional questionnaires after ten sessions of peripheral magnetic stimulation compared to sham.

**Chronic Low Back Pain**

Several studies were conducted to investigate the effects of peripheral magnetic stimulation in patients with chronic low back pain. The investigators successfully showed relations between the use of peripheral magnetic stimulation and reactivation of short-interval intracortical inhibition of the primary motor cortex, which is usually absent in patients with chronic pain. They also emphasize that a combination of peripheral magnetic stimulation and motor training has a positive outcome in pain, function, and lumbopelvic spine motor control.

**Spasticity Reduction**

Many studies with varying protocols aimed to identify the antispastic effect of peripheral magnetic stimulation. Some studies applied peripheral magnetic stimulation over spinal nerve roots, while others applied over spastic muscles. All studies reported consistent results that spasticity decreased after each peripheral magnetic stimulation session. Nevertheless, understanding how peripheral magnetic stimulation could reduce spasticity needs further investigation.

**Increase Muscle Strength**

A recently published study investigated the effect of peripheral magnetic stimulation over vastus lateralis muscles in patients after hip replacement surgery. After 15 sessions of peripheral magnetic stimulation, muscle strength improved but without a significant difference compared with the sham treatment. However, other functional outcomes seemed to be better in the peripheral magnetic stimulation group. The author explained that it might be related to the proprioceptive effect of peripheral magnetic stimulation on the brain.

**Dysphagia**

Eight patients with stroke and dysphagia (7 out of 8 patients had subcortical strokes) were reported to have some reduction in penetration-aspiration episodes after applying additional peripheral magnetic stimulation to swallowing exercises for a week. Although, no single patient could change their mode of nutritional intake.