The most common mistake is distinguishing between the mean, median, and mode. The mean is the topic of this article.

The median is the middle value of a data set.  If the elements of a data set are organized from low to high, the middle value would be the median.  If there an even number of elements populate the data set, then the average of the two middle values would be the median.  As an example, if a data set has the values (5, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12), then the median would be 7 or the middle value.  If the data set has the values (5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12), then the median would be the average of the two middle values (average of 7 and 9), which is 8.

The mode is the most common element in the set or the value that happens the most often. In the first data set (4, 5, 6, 8, 8, 9, 23), the number 8 occurs twice, which is more common than any of the other numbers, so the mode of the data set is 8. One can have more than one mode as well as no mode for a dataset. In the data set (2, 3, 3, 5, 5, 7, 7), there are three modes as 3, 5, and 7 all appear twice, which is more than two, which only appears once. This dataset would be said to be trimodal. If there were two modes, the dataset would be bimodal, and if there were more than three modes to the dataset, then the dataset would be multimodal. In a different dataset of (6, 7, 8, 9), no number appears more frequently than the others, so there is no mode to the data set.

The second issue of concern is the sensitivity of the mean to outlier values.  One very large or very small outlier (compared to the rest of the data set) can move or skew the mean of the dataset higher or lower, respectively.  An outlier is usually defined:

< Q1 - (1.5)IQR

OR

> Q3 + (1.5)IQR

The first quartile (Q1) is the 25th percentile of the data set.

The third quartile (Q3) is the 75th percentile of the data set.The interquartile range (IQR) is Q3 - Q1.

For example, say there was a study of how many baskets in basketball your classmates could make in 2 minutes.  Your data for the number of baskets is as follows:

The Q1 for this data 5.5The Q2 for this data is 7The IQR is 1.5Outliers are <4.25 or >9.25

There was one classmate who played varsity basketball and was able to make 40 baskets in 2 minutes. With this data, your mean is 10.25 baskets, which is higher than all but one of the data points you collected—the varsity basketball player's score of 40 skewed the mean.  If we were to exclude outliers in this data, one would exclude the '40' value, and your new mean would be 6. The mean of 6 baskets is a better representation of the average number of baskets your classmates can make in 2 minutes.

As shown in the above example, datasets with significant outliers can be affected or skewed by the mean. A very large outlier will drag the mean higher, and a very low outlier will drag the mean lower. Thus the mean is said to be sensitive to outliers.

As another example, consider the average temperature for a given spring day.  For the past five years, the average temperatures have been 42, 46, 10, 40, 48 Fahrenheit. The mean is 37.2 Fahrenheit, which including the low value and 44 Fahrenheit if not including the low value.

The median is typically less affected by outliers then the mean and thus may represent a better estimator of the central value of the data set.