Physical examination should include inspecting the entire lower extremity, with particular attention to the hip/femur, the knee/tibia, and the feet. The patient's gait should be assessed while walking and while running, as age and developmentally appropriate.

Metatarsus adductus is the adduction of the forefoot, with varying degrees of flexibility. Classifications of metatarsus adductus are based on the degree of foot flexibility. Based on this they are classified as flexible, semi-flexible and rigid

In patients with tibial torsion, the tibia is found to be internally rotated (medial rotation of the shin)**.**Internal tibial torsion is most frequently bilateral, and may at times present with metatarsus adductus, femoral anteversion, or physiologic bow legging. Pertinent clinical findings on examination include a forward or outward-facing patella, or in a seated position, there may be a posterior rotation of the medial malleolus (in comparison to the lateral malleolus). The last notable clinical finding on examination is the thigh-foot angle (TFA). With the patient in a prone position and the knees flexed, the TFA can be assessed by the degree of angulation of the foot towards or away from the midline. Expected variation is an angle between 10 to 15 degrees. Another method to evaluate tibial torsion is to quantify the difference between the knee axis and the transmalleolar axis. The child is made to lie supine and the hip and knees are flexed by 90 degrees. When the femur is perpendicular to the couch the knee axis is parallel to the couch. Evaluating the transmalleolar axis to the knee axis can be performed with a gravity goniometer

On the physical examination of femoral anteversion, the patella is midline when walking or standing but point inward when running. The characteristic appearance during running is described as a “windmill” or “egg-beater” pattern, in which the patient’s lower leg pushes off and swings laterally when coming off the ground. While seated, the patient tends to prefer sitting in the “W” position, appearing to mount the floor with knees forward, and feet facing posteriorly. The discomfort and distaste these patients have for lateral rotation improve with time, evident by them showing improved comfort in being able to sit cross-legged.