**The Aortic Sac**

The aortic sac is the first portion of the aorta to form, appearing as a dilated structure superior to the truncus arteriosus. The aortic sac then develops two horns, inevitably leading to important aortic structures. The right horn gives rise to the brachiocephalic artery, while the left horn combines with the stem of the aortic sac to form the portion of the aortic arch proximal to the brachiocephalic trunk. The aortic arches develop from the aortic sac and proceed to course into the pharyngeal arches.

**The Aortic Arches**

The aortic arches or pharyngeal arch arteries or branchial arches develop from the aortic sac, with a pair of branches (right and left) traveling within each pharyngeal arch and ending in the dorsal aorta. Initially, the arches arise in symmetrical pairs, but after remodeling, the arches become asymmetric, and several of the arches regress. All six pairs are not present simultaneously; they develop and regress at different stages.

- First aortic arch - regresses early, but a remnant forms a portion of the maxillary artery.

- Second aortic arch - regresses early, but a remnant forms portions of the hyoid and stapedial arteries.

- Third aortic arch - contributes to the formation of the common carotid arteries bilaterally and the proximal internal carotid arteries bilaterally.

- Fourth aortic arch - The right arch contributes to the R proximal subclavian artery. The left arch gives rise to the medial portion of the aortic arch.

- Fifth aortic arch - never forms or incompletely forms and regresses.

- Sixth aortic arch - The right and left arches separate into ventral and dorsal segments. The ventral segments are responsible for the formation of the pulmonary arteries bilaterally. The left ventral arch also contributes to the formation of the pulmonary trunk. The right dorsal arch regresses. The left dorsal arch forms the ductus arteriosus, which later closes and is termed the ligamentum arteriosum.

**The Dorsal Aorta**

The right and left dorsal aortae arise from the aortic sac and receive the aortic arches bilaterally. At the level of the aortic arches, the dorsal aortae remain paired but inferior fuse inferiorly (below T4) to form the descending aorta. The dorsal aortae give off seven cervical intersegmental arteries bilaterally. The upper six contribute to developing the vertebral, superior intercostal, and deep cervical arteries. The seventh intersegmental arteries contribute to the formation of the subclavian arteries bilaterally. The right dorsal aorta typically regresses between the origin of the seventh intersegmental artery and the site of fusion with the left dorsal aorta. The splanchnic or visceral arteries eventually give rise to ventral branches (the celiac, superior mesenteric artery, and inferior mesenteric artery) and lateral branches (suprarenal, renal, and gonadal arteries).