Argatroban is a direct thrombin inhibitor (DTI) first introduced in Japan in 1990 for the treatment of peripheral vascular diseases.

- In 2000 it received approval for prophylaxis and treatment of thrombosis in patients with HIT (heparin-induced thrombocytopenia) and HITTS (heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis syndrome). Two large prospective, historical controlled studies ARG-911 and ARG-915, have demonstrated the efficacy of argatroban in patients with HIT. Argatroban produces an effective and predictable anticoagulant effect, is non-immune, and increases the platelet count.

- In 2002 as an anticoagulant in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) who have HIT or are at risk of it.

Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is an uncommon but potentially life-threatening condition that occurs during or following recent heparin therapy (unfractionated heparin (UFH) and low molecular weight heparin), characterized by a drop in platelet count and paradoxical prothrombotic state. In patients under UFH therapy for more than five days, the incidence of HIT has been found up to 3%.

**Non-FDA Uses**

1. As an anticoagulant during cardiopulmonary bypass in HIT.

2. As an anticoagulant during renal replacement therapy with or without HIT

3. As an alternative anticoagulant in cases of heparin resistance, especially in critically ill patients

4. Argatroban has approval in Japan for

a. Improvement of neurological symptoms in acute cerebral thrombosis within 48 hours of onset (excluding lacunar type).

b. Improvement of ulcers and rest pain in chronic arterial occlusion.

c. Anticoagulation in the extracorporeal circuit (during dialysis) in patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency or decreased antithrombin concentrations.