# Definition/Introduction

An individual's surrounding environment, particularly his or her home environment, can significantly impact one's overall health and well-being. Furthermore, an individual's home's condition can dramatically influence one's risk for domestic accidents and subsequent suffering.

Home safety is significant for people of all ages. Young children may be at risk for injury or suffering from unintentional poisoning, falls from heights, drowning, or scalds and burns.

Some home safety assessments include:

- Safety Assessment of Function and the Environment for Rehabilitation—Health Outcome Measurement and Evaluation (SAFER-HOME v3)

- This pre-discharge assessment is an interview and observation-based assessment that evaluates an individual's ability to engage in functional activities safely.

- In-Home Occupational Performance Evaluation for Providing Assistance (I-HOPE Assist)

- This tool assesses changes in performance and safety in the home before home modifications and after home modifications.

- Home Falls and Accidents Screening Tool (Home FAST)

- A short, 25-item assessment for identifying fall hazards in the homes of older adults

- Westmead Home Safety Assessment (WeHSA)

- This tool has a long-form and a short-form and targets potential fall risks in older adults.

- Home Safety Self-Assessment Tool (HSSAT)

- Patients and patient caregivers can use this self-assessment tool to self-identify and correct potential fall hazards.

- Informal practitioner-created checklists.

- Some practitioners create their own checklists for home safety evaluation. These checklists can help to identify hazards to child/infant safety, hazards for individuals with differing levels of physical or cognitive disability, adults who are aging in place, or any general area of home safety.

Techniques and interventions for home safety are as varied as the potential hazards. Some strategies are as simple as removing the potential risk.

# Issues of Concern

Common injuries due to hazards in the home include falls, ingestion accidents, and heat accidents.

Falls can lead to serious injury and complications in individuals of all ages. Hazards that may increase the risk of falls include wires or loose rugs in walkways, steep steps or steps without a hand railing, and even cluttered floor space.

Ingestion accidents are also a serious risk across the lifespan.

Heat accidents are primarily characterized by scalding or burning of the skin. Burns may come from improperly protected cooking equipment or heating appliances, and lack of proper supervision for children and adults with declining cognition can lead to increased risk for such injuries.

These are just a few examples of potential hazards and techniques for home safety.

# Clinical Significance

Home modifications play an important role in the recovery and prevention of serious injury, as well as the promotion of functional and independent living. Proper evaluation, assessment, and implementation of home safety techniques can lead to better overall health and quality of life for all patients.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Interprofessional collaboration is essential to consider all the different facets of home safety for patients and clients. Additionally, coordination and communication between the caregiver team and the patient or patient caregiver are essential for long-term risk reduction in the home. Caregivers can help evaluate patients' home environments and track any changes with the patient or in the home. Evaluation and reevaluation can prevent delays in reducing risk, particularly for adults with declining cognition.