The original Allen test is performed by asking the patient to elevate both arms above the head for thirty seconds in order to exsanguinate the hands. Next, the patient squeezes their hands into tight fists, and the examiner occludes the radial artery simultaneously on both hands. The patient then opens both hands rapidly, and the examiner compares the color of the palms. The initial pallor should be replaced with the hands' normal color as the ulnar arteries restore perfusion. The test is then repeated while occluding the ulnar arteries rather than the radial arteries. The time that it takes for the normal color to return should indicate the degree of collateral blood flow. The test is positive when there is a return of normal color to both hands during occlusion of either artery alone. Persistent pallor in the palm indicates inadequate collateral blood flow to the hand.

The modified Allen test differs from the original Allen test mainly by examining the radial and/or ulnar arteries in one hand and then repeating on the other side, if necessary. Traditionally, it is performed by first having the patient's arm flexed at the elbow with the fist clenched tightly to exsanguinate the hand. The ulnar and radial arteries are then compressed by the examiner's thumbs simultaneously. The elbow is extended to no more than 180 degrees, avoiding overextension as that could lead to a false-negative test. The fist is subsequently unclenched, and the palm should appear white. The compression is then released from the ulnar artery while maintaining pressure over the radial artery (see image and video). Once the compression is released, the color should return to the palm, usually within 10 seconds. The test is repeated on the same hand while releasing the radial artery first and continuing to compress the ulnar artery if evaluation of radial collateral blood flow is required.

In a patient with normal, patent arteries, the color should return to the palms relatively quickly (within 10 seconds unless the patient is cold) after the release of either artery. If pallor persists within the palm after the patient unclenches their fist and one of the arteries is released, then the test is negative and indicative of an occlusion within the artery that is being released. For example, if the radial artery is compressed and palmar pallor persists, it indicates compromised blood flow in the ulnar artery. The same is true if the ulnar artery is compressed and palmar pallor persists; then the compromised blood flow is in the radial artery.

There are additional tools the examiner can use to make this test more accurate. Digital plethysmography, duplex ultrasonography with dynamic testing, and pulse oximetry (often with the sensor placed on the thumb tip) can all be used.