It is important to understand the indications and use of carbidopa along with levodopa for the treatment of Parkinson disease and parkinsonism motor symptoms. Determining patient-specific formulations and dosage is key to its effective use. Carbidopa can decrease peripheral side effects and lower the effective dose of levodopa, but it is essential to recognize adverse effects and toxicity to adjust dosages and medication combinations as needed.

Carbidopa/levodopa is among the most effective medical treatments for PD patients, but because of the “on/off” fluctuations and wearing off that occurs, it is often reserved for later in the disease course. For example, a patient may be started on an MAO-B inhibitor for early disease symptoms and transitioned to a dopamine agonist once noticeable functional impairment occurs. When additional therapy is required, carbidopa/levodopa is a therapeutic option. From that point, determining the proper administration methods and drug combinations is crucial to providing the patient with the most effective care. This is where the prescriber would do well to consult a pharmacist, particularly a board-certified pharmacotherapy specialist, who can guide agent selection and dosing and counsel the patient on adverse events and side effects. It is also relevant to note that deep brain stimulation can be another option when medication alone is not enough to control symptoms.

Clinicians who prescribe separate doses of carbidopa and levodopa should thoroughly explain the directions for the use of each drug to the patient. As an interprofessional health care team, it is crucial to understand treatment algorithms and allow patients to know their options, particularly as their disease progresses, which is why interprofessional collaboration and communication with other team members and accurate documentation of the patient's status in their medical record are vital to optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]