**Lab Findings**

Aminotransferases are usually mildly to moderately elevated with aspartate aminotransferase (AST) greater than alanine aminotransferase (ALT); however, normal levels do not exclude cirrhosis.

**Specific Labs to Investigate Newly Diagnosed Cirrhosis**

Serology and PCR techniques for viral hepatitis and autoimmune antibodies (anti-nuclear antibodies [ANA], anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMA), anti-liver-kidney microsomal antibodies type 1 (ALKM-1) and serum IgG immunoglobulins) for autoimmune hepatitis and anti-mitochondrial antibody for primary biliary cholangitis may be ordered. Ferritin and transferrin saturation for hemochromatosis, ceruloplasmin, and urinary copper for Wilson disease, Alpha 1-antitrypsin level, and protease inhibitor phenotype for alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency, and serum alpha-fetoprotein for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are other useful tests.

**Imaging and Liver Biopsy**

A number of imaging modalities are used alongside labs to help in the diagnosis of cirrhosis. These include ultrasound, CT, MRI, and transient elastography (fibroscan).

Ultrasonography is a cheap, noninvasive, and available modality for the evaluation of cirrhosis. It can detect nodularity and increased echogenicity of the liver, which are seen in cirrhosis; however, it is nonspecific as these findings can be seen in fatty liver as well.

CT and MRI with contrast can detect HCC and vascular lesions, with MRI being superior to CT.

Transient elastography (fibroscan) is a non-invasive method that uses high-velocity ultrasound waves to measure liver stiffness, which correlates with fibrosis. In cirrhosis, a colloid liver spleen scan using technetium-99m sulfur colloid may show increased uptake of colloid in the bone marrow and spleen when compared to the liver. The presence of varices in the esophagus or stomach on esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) suggests portal hypertension.

Liver biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosing cirrhosis as well as assessing the degree of inflammation (grade) and fibrosis (stage) of the disease. Nevertheless, it can miss the diagnosis at times due to sampling errors.

Noninvasive tests using direct and indirect serum markers are used to detect patients with significant fibrosis/cirrhosis from patients with no/mild fibrosis.