Patients typically present with signs of portal hypertension. Although individual presentations vary depending on the cause, patients commonly demonstrate

- Abdominal pain (91%)

- Fever (53%)

- Ascites (38%)

Depending upon the severity of the disease, splenomegaly will present in about 75 to 100% of patients. In patients with liver cirrhosis as the primary cause, signs such as spider angiomata and palmar erythema may be evident. If there has been longstanding portal hypertension, collaterals might be clinically evident with caput-medusae (umbilical veins), hemorrhoids (rectal veins), or in patients presenting with upper gastrointestinal bleeding from enlarged esophageal veins (varices).

Ascites is not uncommon in patients with portal vein obstruction.

In cases where malignancies are the primary cause, either from thrombus formation or direct invasion, clinical manifestations of the neoplasm could be prominent. In cases of pancreatic carcinoma, fatigue and jaundice are usually present. Similarly, jaundice is also present in hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. In patients with jaundice, associated pruritis is a common finding as well.

Decision-making on best treatment options for patients with PVT can be based upon separating patient status into either acute PVT or chronic PVT.  Patients with chronic PVT are more limited in treatment options and may only derive benefit from surgical shunt formation or from a conservative medical approach aimed at improving quality of life but not curing the disease.  The rationale for this is

- that chronic thrombus is less likely to respond to either mechanical maceration or to chemical (medicinal) lysis,

- that adequate flow is less likely to be re-established in the system if a vein is scarred down from thrombus and/or if collateral veins have already formed, and

- that the chance for the technical success of portosystemic shunt creation (specifically, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (TIPS) discussed below) is less likely if there is thrombus obscuring the portal vein and making the anatomy more difficult to navigate.

Different physicians define "chronic" in different ways. Two common definitions of "chronic" are:

- Thrombus proven to have been present for at least 4 weeks based on imaging or based on a reliable history of when symptoms started and

- Thrombus associated with visible collateral veins on imaging.

Some institutions do not offer TIPS to patients with chronic PVT, and some do