The leading cause of endocarditis in the pediatric population remains Staphylococcus aureus, followed by Viridans-type streptococci (alpha-hemolytic streptococci). Other organisms are involved but less frequently. Usually, staphylococcal endocarditis is more common in patients with an unremarkable history of heart disease. A recent dental procedure should prompt suspicions of viridans group streptococcal infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Serratia marcescens are seen commonly in intravenous drug users. Fungal organisms can be an issue during open-heart surgery. In the presence of an indwelling central venous catheter, a coagulase-negative staphylococcus is frequently found as the causative agent.

Native valve endocarditis:

- Chiefly involves the mitral valve, followed by the aortic valve

- Congenital heart disease or any defect with high flow tension is susceptible

- Mitral valve prolapse accounts for about 20% of cases

- Degenerative heart disease such as the bicuspid aortic valve, Marfan syndrome, or syphilis.

Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE)

- Early PVE is caused by S aureus and S epidermidis, including MRSA

- Streptococci usually cause late PVE

Intravenous drug abuse Infective endocarditis:

- usually presents with a new murmur and/or pleuritic chest pain

- S.aureus is the most common cause, but MRSA rates are increasing

- Gram-negative organisms are rarely involved

Risk factors

- Residual valve injury

- Diabetes

- Use of steroids

- Advanced age

- Pacemaker intervention