The classic triad of symptoms in patients with PCC consists of episodic headaches, diaphoresis, and tachycardia

Patients with PCC may also present with hyperglycemia, polyuria, polydipsia, tremor, orthostatic hypotension, visual blurring, and weight loss.

**Diagnosis**

Pheochromocytoma is suspected based on the clinical features and diagnosed by measuring the level of epinephrine (adrenaline), norepinephrine (noradrenaline), and their metabolites (metanephrine, normetanephrine, and vanillylmandelic acid ) either in urine or blood. Measurement of  24-hour fractionated urinary metanephrines and catecholamines levels in suspected patients is the best method to diagnose PCC

Measurement of plasma fractionated metanephrines is an alternative test, but 24-hour urine tests are generally considered superior to plasma tests for diagnosis because the tumor secretes catecholamines only intermittently, and the catecholamines have a short half-life. Plasma-fractionated metanephrines may be used as a first-line test when there is a high index of suspicion for PCC. Plasma-fractionated metanephrines may also be used as a first-line test for children due to the difficulty in obtaining complete 24-hour urine.

Patients with positive results should be further evaluated with imaging to confirm and localize the tumor. Computed tomography (CT) and MRI are most commonly used due to their wide availability. MRI involves no radiation, and it can distinguish PCC from other adrenal masses though it is expensive and more time-consuming. Computed tomography with or without iodine 131–labeled meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is very accurate in diagnosing as well as localizing the tumor

A provocative test with glucagon was used to confirm or exclude PCC in the past but is not preferred due to low sensitivity (< 50%) and risk of precipitation of severe hypertension