The spleen has several functions, including the filtering of blood, removing microbes and inadequate red blood cells (RBCs), producing white blood cells (WBCs), and antibody synthesis. It is important to note, that while the spleen does have a wide range of functions, it is not a vital organ. Individuals can survive without a spleen as other organs of the body, such as the liver, can adapt in its absence to serve just about the same functions. The spleen consists of 2 different tissue types, termed white pulp and red pulp, with each tissue type serving unique functions. White pulp is composed of periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths (PALS) and lymphatic nodules. The white pulp tissue is involved with the production and maturity of WBCs, particularly lymphocytes (types B and T) and thereby the production of antibodies. The red pulp is composed of splenic sinusoids (wide blood vessels) and cords/threads of connective tissue. The red pulp tissue is involved more so with the filtering aspect of the blood. The red pulp removes old, damaged, and/or useless red blood cells. Contained within the red pulp are also WBCs, particularly phagocytes (macrophages in particular) which destroy microorganisms such as viruses, bacteria, and fungi. The red pulp also acts as a storage area for WBCs and platelets, which are typically released to injury sites to aid in healing and inflammation regulation or to assist in blood loss compensation. The white and red pulp regions are separated by a border known as the marginal zone which functions as a filter, filtering pathogens out of the blood and into the white pulp.