# Continuing Education Activity

Globally, stroke is the second leading cause of death and a leading cause of disability, incurring enormous economic costs. Acute stroke is classified as ischemic or hemorrhagic, with some overlap in risk factors and clinical presentation, each requiring significantly different management. Ischemic strokes are due to blood vessel blockage limiting the blood supply to the brain. In contrast, hemorrhagic strokes are due to blood vessel rupture leading to blood spilling into the intracranial cavity. Interprofessional and multidisciplinary teamwork is necessary to rapidly recognize and treat patients with acute stroke and deliver effective care during recovery and rehabilitation. Guidelines for ischemic stroke, intracerebral hemorrhage, and subarachnoid hemorrhage recommend interprofessional healthcare teams for prehospital and hospital care to improve outcomes. Rehabilitation services delivered by a multidisciplinary team during and after hospitalization are essential to achieving functional recovery and patient independence in patients who have suffered an acute stroke. This overview of acute stroke is based on current AHA/ASA Guidelines and published literature and is designed to update providers on this potentially disabling and fatal condition to maximize clinical recovery for the individual patient and decrease the global burden of stroke.

**Objectives:**
- Differentiate acute stroke from stroke mimics and ischemic etiology from hemorrhagic.
- Efficiently and effectively evaluate a patient presenting with acute-onset focal neurologic dysfunction.
- Implement current AHA/ASA Guidelines for the management of acute stroke.
- Recognize the importance of the interprofessional team for prehospital and hospital care and rehabilitation services to enhance clinical outcomes.

# Introduction

Acute stroke is commonly called a cerebrovascular accident; however, a stroke is not an accident. A more meaningful term is "brain attack," similar in significance to "heart attack," but stroke is more heterogeneous than heart disease. Stroke is classified as ischemic or hemorrhagic, and hemorrhagic is subdivided into intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), more specifically nontraumatic (spontaneous) ICH and nontraumatic (spontaneous aneurysmal) SAH.

Ischemic strokes are due to blood vessel blockage limiting the blood supply to the brain. In contrast, hemorrhagic strokes are due to blood vessel rupture leading to blood spilling into the intracranial cavity.

The American Heart Association/American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) provides an exhaustive definition of stroke.

Globally, stroke is the second leading cause of death and a leading cause of disability.

Knowing that the ability to achieve complete neurologic recovery declines with each untreated minute of an acute stroke is essential. This is the basis for the "time is brain" concept in which due emphasis is placed on the timely evaluation and management of an acute stroke. With early and focused treatment, rehabilitation programs, and long-term lifestyle changes, clinical outcomes can be significantly improved for patients with an acute stroke, hopefully leading to maximal clinical recovery for the individual patient and decreasing the global burden of stroke.

# Etiology

**Ischemic stroke**

Ischemic stroke is heterogenous, with over 100 pathologies implicated.

Large vessel disease includes atherosclerosis, arterial dissection, and artery-to-artery embolism. Thrombotic or embolic occlusion of major arteries can present in predetermined syndromes due to decreased blood flow to specific areas of the brain that correlate with exam findings. Large vessels include intracranial arteries (circle of Willis and its proximal branches) and extracranial arteries (common carotid, internal carotid, vertebral).

The primary small vessel diseases causing lacunar strokes are lipohyalinosis and atherosclerosis. Lipohyalinosis is a concentric hyaline thickening of small cerebral vessels leading to the occlusion of penetrating arteries. Atherosclerotic plaques of parent arteries involving the ostium of perforating branches can also lead to occlusion, and microatheromas can occlude small penetrating arteries.

Numerous sources of cardioembolism lead to stroke and include arrhythmia, valvular heart disease, bioprosthetic and mechanical heart valves, and cardiomyopathy.

The main risk factors for ischemic stroke include advanced age, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, cigarette smoking, arrhythmia, and cardiac disease.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

ICH is the second most common type of stroke. ICH is typically caused by the rupture of small arteries secondary to hypertensive vasculopathy, cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), coagulopathies, and other vasculopathies. Hypertensive vasculopathy is most common in non-lobar ICH (basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, and brainstem), whereas CAA is more common in lobar ICH.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

Approximately 5% of all strokes are caused by spontaneous SAH, due to a ruptured aneurysm in 85% of patients. Other causes of spontaneous SAH include drugs (eg, amphetamines and cocaine), coagulopathy, a ruptured arteriovenous malformation, and vessel rupture due to a dural venous sinus thrombosis. Risk factors associated with SAH are smoking, hypertension, excessive alcohol consumption, advancing age, personal history of another type of aneurysm or SAH, and family history of an intracranial aneurysm.

# Epidemiology

Globally, stroke is the second leading cause of death and a leading cause of disability, with 62% due to ischemia, 28% to ICH, and 10% to SAH.

Compared to ischemic stroke, ICH and SAH showed more considerable reductions globally in age-standardized rates per year of incident and prevalent strokes, deaths from stroke, and DALYs due to stroke from 1990 to 2019.

Starting at age 25, the global lifetime risk of stroke for men and women is approximately 25% and is particularly high in East Asia and Central and Eastern Europe.

# Pathophysiology

**Ischemic stroke**

Ischemic stroke pathophysiology starts with inadequate blood supply to a focal area of brain tissue. The central core of tissue evolves toward death within minutes and is referred to as the area of infarction. Tissue in the surrounding area, known as the penumbra, does not die immediately and can recover with early reperfusion.

More adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is consumed than produced in the area of reduced blood flow, leading to decreased energy stores, ionic imbalance, and electrical disturbances. These ischemia-related changes cause an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO). Ultimately, the pathophysiological cascade leads to cell membrane destruction, cell lysis, and cell death by necrosis or apoptosis.

Microglia are activated almost immediately in the ischemic area and extend to the penumbra, peaking 48 to 72 hours later and lasting up to several weeks.

The culmination of the complex ischemic cascade initiated by acute stroke is the loss of neurons and supportive structures.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

Following the rupture of small arteries secondary to hypertensive changes, CAA, coagulopathies, and other vasculopathies, the expanding hematoma’s mass effect and perihematomal edema are the initial injury mechanisms in ICH. The increasing hematoma volume and edema cause an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP), which can then cause a decrease in cerebral perfusion and ischemic injury. Patients are also at risk for intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and herniation.

As with ischemic stroke, subsequent proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory phases occur in ICH. Secondary mechanisms of injury, including blood-related cytotoxicity, excitotoxicity, and oxidative stress, disrupt the blood-brain barrier, potentially leading to extensive brain cell death and fatal brain edema.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

A ruptured cerebral aneurysm primarily causes SAH; however, brain injury from a cerebral aneurysm can occur without a rupture. Compressive forces can damage local brain tissue and compromise the distal blood supply.

Aneurysmal rupture extravasates arterial blood into the subarachnoid space, rapidly spreading through the cerebrospinal fluid and causing increased ICP. Arterial blood can also spread to the intraventricular space and brain parenchyma.

Secondary brain injury can occur due to ICH, IVH, ICP, hydrocephalus, subdural hematoma, or delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI).

# History and Physical

A rapid, focused history and physical examination are essential for evaluating a patient presenting with acute-onset focal neurologic dysfunction. They are the initial steps in differentiating acute stroke from stroke mimics and ischemic etiology from hemorrhagic, including the subtype. Statistics vary, but common ischemic stroke mimics include hypoglycemia, seizure, and migraine.

**Ischemic stroke**

Ideally, the history will determine when the patient was last seen well, onset acuity, risk factors, medications, and pertinent details related to a possible relevant illness. In addition to vital signs, a focused neurologic examination using the NIH Stroke Scale is recommended.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

ICH most commonly occurs during routine activity but can occur during sex or other physical activity. Neurologic symptoms usually worsen over minutes to a few hours, and neurological deterioration is often seen before and during hospitalization secondary to an enlarging hematoma and its sequelae. Clinical presentation varies by the size and location of the hemorrhage, with the most common symptoms being nausea, vomiting, and headache.

If a seizure occurs, it is usually at the onset of bleeding or within the first 24 hours. The incidence of acute seizures within the first 24 to 72 hours is between 4 and 42%.

Without neuroimaging, no clinical decision scale can differentiate ICH from other conditions with high sensitivity or specificity.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

As with ICH, aneurysmal SAH usually occurs during routine activity, including rest or sleep, but can occur during physical activity.

Potential focal exam findings include unilateral vision loss, visuospatial neglect, and ophthalmoplegia; retinal, subhyaloid, and vitreous hemorrhage; third and sixth nerve palsy; hemiparesis, aphasia, and abulia.

The neurological examination can be categorized using the Hunt Hess scale or the World Federation of Neurological Surgeons scale.

# Evaluation

Neuroimaging is a critical component of stroke management, with computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) being the primary modalities.

When a patient with AIS presents within 6 hours of symptom onset and has a small core infarct on NCCT, CT angiography (CTA) or MR angiography (MRA) is recommended for guiding mechanical thrombectomy patient selection. When a patient with AIS presents in the 6- to 24-hour window following symptom onset and has a large-vessel occlusion (LVO) in the anterior circulation, diffusion-weighted MRI with or without MR perfusion or CT perfusion (CTP) is recommended.

In patients with a "wake-up" stroke or an unclear time of onset, an MRI should be obtained to identify diffusion-positive fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) negative lesions, as it can help determine if the patient would benefit from thrombolytic therapy.

In patients with ICH, CTA within the first few hours of symptom onset can help identify those at risk for hematoma expansion (HE). Additionally, serial head CT can assess for HE within the first 24 hours.

Diagnosis of SAH relies on NCCT, followed by lumbar puncture if the CT is negative and the clinical suspicion is high. In a recent study, the diagnosis of SAH was 95.5% sensitive and 100% specific when the Ottawa SAH rule was used when interpreting a CT scan done within 6 hours of headache onset.

CTA may be considered when evaluating SAH; however, if inconclusive, digital subtraction catheter angiography (DSA) with 3-dimensional reconstruction is the gold standard study for detecting aneurysms.

According to the 2019 AHA/ASA guidelines, all patients require blood glucose assessment before initiating IV alteplase because hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia may mimic AIS. Additionally, baseline electrocardiographic assessment is recommended in patients presenting with AIS but should not delay initiating IV alteplase, and baseline troponin assessment is recommended but should not delay initiating IV alteplase or mechanical thrombectomy.

# Treatment / Management

Knowing the ability to achieve complete neurologic recovery declines with each untreated minute of an acute stroke is essential. This is the basis for the "time is brain" concept in which due emphasis is placed on the timely evaluation and management of an acute stroke.

**Ischemic stroke**

The following are highlights from the 2019 AHA/ASA Management Guidelines for AIS.

Airway, Breathing, and Oxygenation: Supplemental oxygen should be provided to maintain oxygen saturation >94%, but it is not recommended in nonhypoxic patients.

Blood pressure (BP): Patients with elevated BP should have their BP carefully lowered to a systolic BP (SBP) <185 mmHg and diastolic BP <110 mmHg before IV fibrinolytic therapy is initiated, and their BP should be maintained at <180/105 mmHg for a minimum of 24 hours after treatment. When mechanical thrombectomy is planned, and the patient has not received IV fibrinolytic therapy, it is reasonable to maintain BP ≤185/110 mmHg before the procedure and at ≤180/105 mmHg during and for 24 hours after the procedure.

Temperature: Hyperthermia (>38°C or 100.4°F) in patients with AIS should be treated with antipyretic medication.

Blood glucose: Hypoglycemia (blood glucose <60 mg/dL) should be treated in patients with AIS. Also, hyperglycemia should be treated to achieve blood glucose levels in the range of 140 to 180 mg/dL.

IV alteplase: Table 8 outlines the criteria to determine patient eligibility. IV alteplase at a dose of 0.9 mg/kg with the initial 10% given as a bolus over 1 minute (maximum dose 90 mg over 60 min) is recommended for patients who meet eligibility criteria within 3 hours or within 3 and 4.5 hours of AIS witnessed symptom onset or when the patient was last known well or at baseline. The same dose can be given within 4.5 hours in patients with AIS who awake with stroke symptoms or have an unclear time of onset >4.5 hours from when they were last known well or at baseline and have a DW-MRI lesion smaller than one-third of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory and no visible signal change on FLAIR. Due to bleeding risk, abciximab should not be administered concurrently with IV alteplase, IV aspirin should not be administered within 90 minutes after starting IV alteplase, and IV alteplase should not be administered after a full treatment dose of low-molecular-weight heparin within the previous 24 hours.

Other IV fibrinolytics: A single IV bolus of tenecteplase at 0.25-mg/kg (maximum 25 mg) can be given instead of IV alteplase in patients without contraindications who are also eligible to undergo mechanical thrombectomy. Otherwise, IV defibrinogenating or IV fibrinolytic agents other than alteplase and tenecteplase are not recommended.

Mechanical thrombectomy: Patients eligible for IV alteplase should receive IV alteplase even if mechanical thrombectomy is being considered. If a patient meets all 6 of the following criteria, they should receive mechanical thrombectomy with a stent retriever or direct aspiration: (1) pre-stroke modified Rankin Scale score of 0 to 1; (2) AIS caused by an internal carotid artery or MCA segment 1 (M1) occlusion; (3) age ≥18 years; (4) NIHSS score of ≥6; (5) Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS) of ≥6; and (6) treatment can be started within 6 hours of symptom onset.

Mechanical thrombectomy is also recommended within 6 to 16 hours of witnessed symptom onset or within 16 to 24 hours of the patient's last known well or at baseline. These patients must demonstrate LVO in the anterior circulation and meet additional DAWN or DEFUSE 3 eligibility criteria.

Antiplatelet treatment: Aspirin administration is recommended within 24 to 48 hours after symptom onset; however, it is usually delayed until 24 hours afterward when treated with IV alteplase. Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel started within 24 hours after symptom onset is appropriate for patients diagnosed with minor, noncardioembolic ischemic stroke who did not receive IV alteplase.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

Initiating treatment for elevated BP within 2 hours of ICH onset and reaching the target BP within 1 hour may reduce HE risk and improve outcomes.

In patients with mild to moderate ICH presenting with an SBP of 150-220 mmHg, the target is 140 mmHg, with the goal of maintaining the SBP between 130 to 150 mmHg.

Anticoagulation should be discontinued immediately in patients with anticoagulant-associated ICH, and rapid reversal should be performed as soon as possible.

Platelet transfusion may be considered in patients being treated with aspirin who require emergency neurosurgery.

Surgical management, compared to medical management alone, has been shown to decrease mortality for selected patients. Surgical options include minimally invasive hematoma evacuation with endoscopic or stereotactic aspiration, external ventricular drain insertion, and craniotomy.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

According to the most recent European Stroke Organization (ESO) and AHA/ASA guidelines, aneurysms should be treated as early as possible to reduce rebleeding risk. The ESO recommends aiming to intervene within 72 hours after symptom onset.

Short-term antifibrinolytic therapy was considered a strategy to reduce the rebleeding risk; however, the routine use of tranexamic acid after SAH cannot be recommended.

Between SAH symptom onset and aneurysm obliteration, the AHA/ASA recommends keeping systolic blood pressure <160 mmHg. The ESO recommends keeping it <180 mmHg but only until the ruptured aneurysm has been coiled or clipped.

A patient with a SAH-associated seizure should be treated with antiepileptic drugs.

# Differential Diagnosis

A table of the 20 most common differential diagnoses of suspected stroke is provided in a systematic review of the differential diagnosis of suspected stroke. The 20 diagnoses account for the final diagnosis for nearly 100% of patients with suspected stroke who did not have a confirmed transient ischemic attack or stroke. In order of frequency, the 5 most frequent non-stroke diagnoses are seizure (19.6%), syncope (12.2%), sepsis (9.6%), benign headache disorder (9%), and brain tumor (8.2%).

# Prognosis

The results and conclusions of the following studies highlight the substantial impact of acute stroke, regardless of type or subtype, and reinforce the need for joint efforts to improve acute stroke care, secondary prevention, and subsequent long-term prognoses.

According to the 2019 systematic analysis of stroke for the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study, the annual number of strokes (ischemic, ICH, SAH, and all strokes combined) and deaths due to stroke increased substantially from 1990 to 2019.

A United Kingdom population-based cohort study showed that 5 years after a first stroke (ischemic, ICH, SAH, and uncertain type), 47% of patients had died, and 39% were disabled.

Based on a longitudinal observational study of the Swedish Stroke Register (Riksstroke), at 30 days after a first stroke, 89.9% of patients with ischemic stroke were alive compared to 69.3% of patients with ICH. Although early mortality was higher for patients diagnosed with ICH than ischemic stroke, it was determined that beyond 30 days, survival declined at about the same rate for both groups, but the proportion of functionally dependent survivors was consistently higher for patients diagnosed with ICH at all time points. Survival at 5 years was 49.4% for ischemic stroke and 37.8% for ICH. The authors concluded that 5 years after a first stroke, over 65% of patients with ischemic stroke and over 75% of patients with ICH, were either dead or functionally dependent.

In a large national cohort of stroke patients in Australia and New Zealand, 52.8% of patients hospitalized with a first stroke (ischemic, ICH, SAH, and unspecified) survived at 5 years and 36.4% at 10 years. The cumulative incidence of stroke recurrence was 19.8% at 5 years and 26.8% at 10 years.

A population-based study in the Netherlands of patients aged 18 to 49 years who were 30-day survivors of a first stroke (ischemic, ICH, and stroke not otherwise specified) showed the risk of mortality remained higher than the general population up to 15 years later.

In a United Kingdom population-based cohort study, the rate of stroke recurrence at 5 years reduced from 18% in those who had their stroke (ischemic, ICH, and SAH) in 1995 to 1999 to 12% in 2000 to 2005, but there has been no reduction since 2005.

A study using Danish nationwide health registries showed the overall 1-year and 10-year risks of recurrence were 4% and 13% following a first ischemic stroke and 3% and 12% following a first ICH. Additionally, the 1-year and 10-year all-cause mortality risks for ischemic stroke were 17% and 56% after a first stroke and 25% and 70% after a recurrent stroke. For ICH, the 1-year and 10-year all-cause mortality risks were 37% and 70% after a first stroke and 31% and 75% after a recurrent stroke.

# Complications

Medical complications after stroke are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality if they are not appropriately anticipated, prevented, and managed.

**Ischemic stroke**

Complications related to treating patients with intravenous alteplase include symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage (6%), major systemic hemorrhage (2%), and angioedema (5%).

Large territorial infarcts can be complicated by brain edema, and depending on the severity, surgical treatment may be required (decompressive surgery has been shown to reduce mortality).

Recurrent seizures after stroke should be treated similarly to when they occur with other acute neurological conditions. Prophylactic use of antiseizure drugs is not recommended.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

Early identification and prevention of acute medical complications are essential in the first hours and days after ICH. Standardized protocols, including order sets, are recommended to reduce disability and mortality.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

Secondary brain injury can occur due to ICH, IVH, ICP, hydrocephalus, subdural hematoma, or DCI.

Medical complications are common and significantly impact outcomes. Reported complications include pyrexia, sepsis, aspiration pneumonia, cardiac dysfunction, anemia, hyponatremia, hyperglycemia, and deep venous thrombosis. Critical care strategies should be directed at prevention, early detection, and targeted treatment, such as maintaining normothermia and normoglycemia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Acute stroke is preventable and treatable. Prevention can be achieved through awareness and knowledge of risk factors and warning signs. Public education programs for diverse populations regarding recognizing signs and symptoms early and seeking prompt emergency care have been shown to decrease the time to diagnosis and treatment.

Modifiable risk factors include physical inactivity, dyslipidemia, diet and nutrition, hypertension (most important and well-documented), obesity, diabetes mellitus, cigarette smoking, and atrial fibrillation (AF). Therefore, modifications in diet and exercise, smoking cessation, pharmacotherapy for hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and at-risk individuals with AF are essential to acute stroke prevention.

Stroke is a major complication of sickle cell disease (SCD), particularly in early childhood. Most SCD-related strokes occur in patients with homozygous SCD; therefore, this should be a primary target population for prevention.

After an acute stroke, patients should be provided with information, counseling, and the opportunity to discuss the impact on their lives.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional and multidisciplinary teamwork is necessary to rapidly recognize and treat patients with acute stroke and deliver effective care during recovery and rehabilitation. Guidelines for ischemic stroke, ICH, and SAH recommend interprofessional healthcare teams for prehospital and hospital care to improve outcomes. Additionally, rehabilitation services delivered by a multidisciplinary team during and after hospitalization are essential to achieving functional recovery and patient independence in patients who have suffered an acute stroke.

The prehospital team typically includes Emergency Medical Services (EMS) and paramedic personnel, often supported by emergency department (ED) clinicians. A stroke clinician, a stroke specialist nurse working with ED personnel, and a radiologist/neuroradiologist-led imaging team are necessary team members during the hyperacute phase (first 72 hours post-stroke).

A stroke clinician and a stroke specialist nurse commonly attend the ED when alerted by a Code: Stroke call. Stroke survivors should be admitted directly to stroke inpatient units from the ED and remain there throughout the inpatient stay to reduce mortality and increase patient independence.

Due to its proven benefits, rehabilitation is recommended as soon as possible.

Stroke coordinators may be part of the interprofessional team, working with the broader stroke team, stroke survivors, and their families from hospital admission to discharge. Along with other team members, they may assist in secondary stroke prevention education.

Early supported discharge (ESD) for stroke refers to an interprofessional team intervention that facilitates hospital discharge and delivery of stroke-specialized home rehabilitation. Worldwide, stroke care guidelines recommend ESD services provide treatment in the home beginning within 24 hours of hospital discharge as part of evidence-based stroke care.

The interprofessional care model, utilizing open communication channels among all care team members, will help drive optimal patient outcomes for patients with acute stroke. [Level 5]