The evaluation for testicular non-seminomatous germ cell tumors begins by getting a detailed history and performing a thorough physical examination. Physicians should inquire about clinical features such as anything unusual with either testicle. It is important to ask about antenatal maternal and neonatal history regarding undescended testes and orchiopexy. A family history of testicular cancer in the father, brothers, and male blood relatives should be elicited. A solid, firm intra-testicular mass felt on physical examination should be considered a testicular tumor unless proven otherwise. A complete general physical examination is necessary to identify any signs of systemic spread.

Non-seminomatous germ cell tumors are associated with male infertility due to low sperm counts, reduced sperm motility, and increased abnormal morphology. This is thought to be due to spermatogenesis abnormalities and has been reported in up to 35% of patients with NSGCT.

Patients with the localized disease will typically present with a painless nodule, lump, mass, or swelling in one of the testes. It might also present with dull scrotal or testicular pain. Ten percent of the affected individuals will experience acute testicular pain. Testicular cancer is not associated with trauma, but the presentation in the ER with scrotal or testicular trauma may elicit an examination or imaging of the testes resulting in the final diagnosis. A careful testicular examination will allow the examiner to detect a firm intra-testicular lesion.

To differentiate intra-testicular from extra-testicular lesions, each testis should be gently held and rolled between the fingers. It is important to examine the contralateral testis completely. Sometimes, due to a hydrocele presence, the testis cannot be adequately examined or palpated, and the presence or absence of a testicular lesion should be confirmed with ultrasonography (which is an extension of the physical examination in such situations). It is unusual for patients to present with symptoms or signs of disseminated disease.

Patients with a significantly enlarged or swollen testicle are most likely to have epididymo-orchitis, especially if the testicle is erythematous or painful. An apparent epididymo-orchitis that is painless or does not respond to antibiotics should be considered suspicious for a testicular malignancy.

Systemic symptoms include anorexia, malaise, and weight loss. The patients with pulmonary spread might present with cough, hemoptysis, or shortness of breath. Cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy can be palpated in the lymphatic spread. In patients with retroperitoneal spread, it can present with back pain, varicocele, or lower limb edema due to testicular vasculature compression. Patients who are having retro-duodenal spread can present with nausea, vomiting, or gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Early diagnosis and immediate treatment are pivotal since testicular NSGCT has excellent cure rates due to its extreme sensitivity to cisplatin-based chemotherapy and radiation when properly combined with orchiectomy or retroperitoneal lymph node dissection.