The facelift, or rhytidectomy, was the third most commonly performed cosmetic surgical procedure in the United States in 2020, after rhinoplasty and blepharoplasty. Aging causes skin and soft tissue descent as well as lipoatrophy that leads to tear trough deformities, deep palpebromalar grooves, loss of malar volume, descent of the jowls, pronounced nasolabial folds, and development of marionette lines. Facelifting ideally repositions descended soft tissue superiorly to restore facial volume and a more youthful appearance. Throughout the years, facelifting has evolved from simple skin crease cutting to the minimal access cranial suspension and the more sophisticated superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) manipulation. Multiple methods of facelifting currently exist, and each method is tailored to the individual patient's needs and a plastic surgeon’s expertise.

The head and neck region has five major soft tissue layers; from superficial to deep, those are: skin, subcutaneous fat, superficial fascia, loose aponeurotic tissue, and deep fascia. The superficial fascia is often known as the SMAS, depending on the region of the face. The extended SMAS technique involves dissection in a sub-SMAS fashion and suspending the SMAS posterosuperiorly. The reason for the term “extended” is that this technique dissects the SMAS more thoroughly and distally than any other technique. Additionally, the extended SMAS technique provides midface rejuvenation, while other SMAS techniques do not necessarily enhance the midface. Midface volume augmentation is achieved by transferring sunken tissue cephalad to enhance facial volume and malar augmentation, and hence to produce a more youthful appearance.