Upadacitinib is available as 15 mg and 30 mg extended-release (ER) tablets for oral consumption.

Before starting management with upadacitinib, immunizations should be up-to-date, and assessment for underlying TB (active or latent) should be evaluated. Other assessments include liver function, viral hepatitis panel, and pregnancy status in females of childbearing age. Upadacitinib is not recommended to be used concomitantly with other JAK inhibitors, biologic DMARD agents, or strong immunosuppressants (azathioprine and cyclosporine).

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

The recommended daily dosage is 15 mg orally as a monotherapy.

Figure 1: Upadacitinib uses in rheumatoid arthritis.

**Psoriatic Arthritis**

The recommended daily dosage is 15 mg orally as a monotherapy. The medication can be taken with or without food and is recommended as a whole 15 mg tablet without splitting or crushing the tablet.

**Atopic Dermatitis**

For pediatric patients aged 12 years and older weighing a minimum of 40 kilograms (kg), the recommended daily dosage is 15 mg once a day. Dosing can be increased to 30mg daily if the therapeutic response is not reached. If the desired therapeutic response is not attained with 30mg, upadacitinib should be discontinued.

For adult patients below the age of 65, the recommended daily dosage is 15 mg once a day. Dosing can be increased to 30mg daily if the therapeutic response is not reached. If the desired therapeutic response is not attained with 30 mg, upadacitinib should be discontinued.

For adult patients above the age of 65, the recommended daily dosage is 15 mg once a day.

Atopic dermatitis patients with compromised renal function should have their treatment adjusted to their creatinine clearance (CrCL). Subjects with CrCL< 30 mL/min are advised to continue treatment with 15 mg once daily. Subjects with CrCL> 30 mL/min do not require further dosing adjustments.