Photographic views should be obtained using a 5-view head series with the patient in a seated and upright position with no facial animation. Close-up views of the eyes (closed/open/upward gaze/lateral gaze) also require documentation.

Landmarks to identify include the supraorbital notch, the proposed highest point of the brow, the course of the frontal branch of the facial nerve, and the sentinel vein.

Incisions are marked. The placement of three frontal hairline incisions (1 median and two paramedian) is 1 cm posterior to the hairline, typically less than 2 cm in length. The paramedian incisions are marked vertically above and slightly medial to the planned highest point of the brow arch. Two temporal incisions are marked parallel and posterior to the temporal hairline on a line drawn from the ala through lateral canthus and extended into the hairline. Shaving is unnecessary and bothersome to patients, although hair ties may be used to control the hair on both sides of the proposed incision sites for improved visualization.

The patient is positioned supine with the endoscope monitor at the foot of the bed, within view of the surgeon.

Local anesthesia is infiltrated along the supraorbital and lateral orbital rims. Tumescent solution is injected subperiosteally from the supraorbital rim to the vertex between the superior temporal lines and then into the superficial temporal spaces bilaterally. The endoscopic brow lift may be performed entirely under local anesthesia; however, general anesthesia or intravenous sedation techniques are recommended to improve patient comfort. When using intravenous sedation, additional nerve blocks of the auriculotemporal and zygomaticotemporal nerves may reduce intra-operative and post-operative pain.

A single dose of intravenous antibiotics is the recommended for infection prophylaxis before the start of the procedure, particularly if implants are to be placed.