**Methods of Labor Anesthesia**

**Neuraxial Anesthesia**

The two main methods of neuraxial anesthesia during labor and delivery are epidural anesthesia and combined spinal-epidural anesthesia.  Epidural anesthesia generally has a slower onset to peak effectiveness at 15 to 20 minutes and provides greater sacral dermatomal coverage with more uniformity in the sensory blockade. Combined spinal-epidural is preferred for initiation of analgesia in cases of advanced labor due to its expediated onset in 2 to 5 minutes. Some practices are performing dural puncture epidural anesthesia in place of combined spinal-epidural.

Modern labor analgesia regimens for epidurals typically consist of a combination of a dilute local anesthetic with a low-dose opioid (i.e., bupivacaine and fentanyl).  The combination of two low-dose analgesics reduces the risk of local anesthetic systemic toxicity and a high or total spinal anesthetic (encountered with unintentional intrathecal injection).  Hemodynamic effects and placental transfer is minimized via this technique. Dilute local anesthetics helps to mitigate the risk of motor block, which would necessitate the need for instrumental delivery due to compromised ability to push.  Initiation of epidural anesthesia involves a bolus of an amide local anesthetic (i.e., bupivacaine or ropivacaine) with a lipid-soluble opioid (i.e., fentanyl or hydromorphone).

After an initial bolus, maintenance of epidural anesthesia can be obtained through various combinations of techniques, including continuous infusion, intermittent bolus, and/or patient-controlled bolus. An opioid-only intrathecal dose such as 25 micrograms of fentanyl provides excellent analgesia for the first and second stage of labor while maintaining hemodynamic stability. Still, it is associated with a high incidence of pruritis.

**Systemic Opioids**

Systemic opioids are an excellent choice for patients who cannot obtain neuraxial anesthesia due to various contraindications, including therapeutic anticoagulation and difficult spinal anatomy. A common approach includes patient-controlled analgesia with 25 micrograms of intravenous fentanyl administered every 10 to 15 minutes with a maximum of 100 micrograms per hour. Remifentanil for patient-controlled analgesia has gained popularity due to its short half-life, metabolism by plasma-esterases, and very low risk of significant transfer across the placenta. However, maternal sedation and risk of respiratory depression are higher for patients receiving remifentanil versus fentanyl alone for patient-controlled analgesia.

The downside of administering opioids is the side effect of pruritis. Pruritis can be managed with low doses of naloxone without comprising pain control. Interestingly, pain control quality with systemic opioids has been shown in some studies to be similar to pain control with nitrous oxide alone, albeit at the cost of the environment and for a much shorter duration of action.

**Nitrous Oxide**

Outside of the United States, nitrous oxide has been successfully incorporated into labor analgesia for years but is not wholely embraced in the United States. Nitrous oxide has a large margin of safety. Some countries will even allow patients to self-administer nitrous oxide via a face mask during labor; mixtures are 50% nitrous oxide and 50% oxygen to avoid a hypoxic gas mixture. The analgesia provided by nitrous oxide is inferior to that provided by neuraxial techniques but can be a suitable adjunct when epidurals do not work as intended.

Nitrous oxide has the benefit of having a fast onset and offset while producing minimal hemodynamic changes, which can be advantageous in the cardiac disease patient. Nitrous oxide also has the added benefit of no effect on labor progression. Maternal side effects include nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. More rigorous study is required to more clearly delineate if adverse neonatal effects are higher in mothers receiving nitrous oxide during labor and delivery. Some experimental models have shown higher incidents of neonatal neurotoxicity, although the gas has been used safely for many years.

**Conversion of Epidural Analgesia to Surgical Anesthesia**

Epidural analgesia with a combined low dose local anesthetic and an opioid infusion is generally inadequate to provide surgical anesthesia for a Cesarean section. When a vaginal delivery is converted to a Cesarean section, a dense block with either 15 to 20mL of 2% lidocaine with 1 to 200,000 epinephrine or 15 to 20 mL of 3% 2-chloroprocaine is preferred.  Chloroprocaine has the advantage of slightly faster onset and metabolism by plasma esterases, so accidental intrathecal injection is relatively inconsequential.  Successful conversion to segmental anesthesia is essential in patients with cardiac disease who may not be able to tolerate general anesthesia.

**Hypotension During Labor and Delivery**

Spinal anesthesia is associated with hypotension due to decreases in systemic vascular resistance.  Uterine blood flow does not have autoregulation like the brain during pregnancy, as the vessels are already maximally dilated as a consequence of massive increases in circulating volume. Placental blood flow is entirely dependent on uterine perfusion pressure and is sensitive to changes in uterine vascular resistance. Multiple trials have compared ephedrine to phenylephrine in gravid patients and found phenylephrine to be the superior vasopressor. Ephedrine is associated with greater fetal acidosis, while phenylephrine has the added benefit of less maternal nausea and vomiting.

Current evidence supports the initiation of prophylactic phenylephrine infusions at 25 to 100 micrograms per minute to preemptively combat hypotension associated with neuraxial anesthesia. More recent studies suggest that norepinephrine may also be a reasonable vasopressor choice. Norepinephrine has the advantage of weak beta-1 agonist activity in addition to a strong alpha-1 activity which is advantageous in patients with a low resting heart rate. Norepinephrine will increase heart rate and improve cardiac output in patients who need this effect, in addition to improving afterload.  Phenylephrine causes a dose-dependent reduction in heart rate. In patients with cardiac disease, norepinephrine may be a better choice depending on the circumstances.