Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet agent. It is also a vasodilator that is FDA-approved for use as an adjunctive agent in thromboembolism prophylaxis in those undergoing cardiac valve replacement and thallium-nuclear stress testing. It is also used off-label to prevent stroke; however, it is not FDA approved for this indication. In addition to its use as a sole agent, the combination of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole also has clinical use. This formulation obtained FDA approval for stroke prevention and as an alternative therapy for those with intolerable headaches. Off-labels for the combination medication include those with symptomatic carotid artery stenosis and maintaining hemodialysis graft patency.

**Stroke Prevention**

The indication for stroke prevention came from the data obtained from the European Stroke Prevention Study 2 Trial (ESPS-2).

Further, a 2009 study in the New England Journal of Medicine compared the combination of extended-release dipyridamole with aspirin (ASA-ERDP) against clopidogrel for the risk of recurrent stroke.

**Thromboembolism Prophylaxis in Cardiac Valve Replacement, Adjunct with Warfarin**

A 1994 metanalysis by Pouleur et al. demonstrated the value of dipyridamole in mechanical cardiac valve replacement by reducing the frequency and risk of embolization.

**Role in Thallium Myocardial Perfusion Imaging (off label-use)**

Myocardial perfusion imaging is a form of assessing blood flow to the heart and evaluating coronary artery disease. Dipyridamole was the first agent employed for pharmacologic stress testing but now also includes dobutamine and adenosine-induced testing.