A thorough history and physical exam are sufficient in most cases of balanoposthitis for diagnosis and establishing a course of treatment. It is essential to evaluate the duration of symptoms, hygiene habits, infectious exposures, potential allergens, and sexual practices. The examination should focus on the presence of phimotic discharge, urethral discharge, urinary retention, erythema, edema, tenderness, scarring, inguinal lymphadenitis, testicular edema, or tenderness.

Physiologic preputial smegma can be confused with discharge.  Discharge is more exudative in appearance, may have a foul order, and may be associated with erythema and tenderness. Penile ulcers, versicles, urethral discharge, and other lesions point toward sexually transmitted infections as etiology and indicate the need for appropriate tests.

Children in which sexual abuse is not suspected and in the absence of lesions or discharge are manageable empirically, and further testing is not required. Otherwise, guidance for further evaluation should be by other symptoms and a history of exposures.

If a sexually transmitted disease is suspected, cultures and swab for nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) for gonorrhea and chlamydia could provide a diagnosis. In adults and pediatric patients, whether suspecting sexual abuse or not, culture for Group A beta-hemolytic Streptococcus may be indicated.

In new cases of balanoposthitis, especially candidal etiology outside of the younger child period, evaluation for diabetes may be necessary as this may be the first sign of diabetes.

Although most cases will respond to hygiene improvements or empiric treatment, patients with symptoms that recur or are refractory to treatment after 4 weeks may warrant biopsy to investigate etiology and appropriate treatment further.