In recent years, there has been growing evidence of inhalational or cutaneous exposure to PTX toxicity associated with corals. It mostly occurs after the handling of PTX-contaminated soft corals, mainly during the cleaning and maintenance of home/public marine aquaria. The high toxic potential of PTX identified in soft corals, and the uncontrolled trade of these zoanthids has raised a serious concern for human health. In fact, with the growing number of documented cases of these poisonings, it can be considered an emerging sanitary problem.

One way to stay safe while keeping an aquarium with any coral would be to presume palytoxin is present. Thus, take appropriate precautions while handling corals to avoid being exposed. Also, the aquarium owners should be encouraged to minimize handling of coral and to use protective wears, including gloves, masks(with activated charcoal filters), and glasses whenever handling the corals. Avoid rough handling of corals, including excessive rubbing, scrubbing, and boiling, as these can produce aerosols and vapors. There have been proposals that the best approach to maintain these species of zoanthids in a home aquaria is their removal by a trained professional. After removal and disposal, water in the aquarium can be cleared of PTX ( over 99%) with the use of activated carbon treatment.

Public health activists can help by focusing on educating the public about this emerging health problem. Also, legal oversight of the buying and selling of corals, may increase awareness and help decrease future cases.