Once the patient is under anesthesia, the correct position of the head is fixed depending on the approach to be utilized. It is of utmost importance to avoid any pressure points on vulnerable body areas by adequately padding throughout. The location of the incision for the craniotomy depends on the part of the brain to be operated on. If the surgical craniotomy is assisted by neuronavigation, anatomical points are confirmed before the incision at this time.

For surgery in the supratentorial area, the incision is usually made over the frontal, temporal, parietal, or occipital bones or over a combination of bones. For surgery in the infratentorial area, the incision is usually made over the back portion of the skull below the transverse sinus. After the desired location of the incision is chosen on the skin, the hair in the area may be shaved off.

After the skin incision is made, the muscles below the scalp are dissected to expose the skull. Retractors can be placed on the edges of the incision to have adequate exposure to the surgical area to be focused on. Alternatively, fish hook retractors or sutures can be used to hold the scalp flap. The pericranium can be separated to be used as a dural substitute if necessary during the closure. Several burr holes are made into the skull utilizing the craniotome or cranial drill.

Once the surgery on the brain concludes, the bone is reattached in position with plates and screws. Adequate hemostasis should be obtained before closing the scalp. The overlying tissues are reattached, and the scalp is then sutured in anatomical layers. Depending on the surgeon’s preference, a subdural or subgaleal drain can be left in place to drain the accumulated blood products.

Systematic review supports the use of  Regional scalp block (RSB).

**The dictum of craniotomy:**

- Adequate surgical exposure to the underlying lesion.

- Shortest traversal to the target.

- Should encompass minimal normal brain retraction.

- Incision

- The incision should be tailored to the lesion.

- Emphasis is focused on wound healing and cosmetic aspects.

- Should be mostly placed behind the hairline.

- Skin incision should ideally be along Langer’s line (skin tension lines).

- Coronal incision gives better exposure and cosmetic result as preserves all aesthetic units of the forehead.

- The base of the flap should be wider with its length not more than 1.5 times the base of the flap.

- Safeguard the vascularity of the flap (should be ideally based on at least two named arteries) avoiding crossed incisions.

**Positioning of the patient should encompass:**

- Direct access to the surgical target.

- Promote gravity-assisted brain retraction.

- Should ensure effective cerebral venous return and airway patency.

- Comply with the surgical ergonomics.

**Head fixation**

Based upon three-point rigid cranial fixation constituting of two-point swivel arm and a contralateral single pin. It should avoid:

- The course of skin incision

- Pneumotized sinuses

- Sutures

- Dural venous sinuses

- Neurovascular structures (superficial temporal artery, supraorbital artery, and nerve, occipital artery),and

- Thin calvaria such as temporal squamosa, pterion.

The maximum allowable pin pressure is 80 lbs.

**Steps during craniotomy:**

- Thorough preoperative assessment.

- Proper positioning of the patient.

- Adequate scalp preparation.

- Stringent scalp toileting.

- Marking of the appropriate incision.

- Proper draping of the surgical site.

**Types:**

- Trephine craniotomy

- Flap craniotomy: Free bone flap or osteoplastic

- Keyhole Craniotomy

- Stereotactic Craniotomy

**The salient steps of the procedure:**

**Types of flaps:**

- Bicoronal/Souttar flap

- Frontal flap

- Temporal flap

- Pterional (fronto-temporal) flap

- Fronto-temporo-parietal (question mark) flap

- Horseshoe flap

- Occipital skin (Mitre) flap

- Midline suboccipital incision

- Retromastoid skin incision

- Linear and curvilinear incisions

**Bicoronal/ Souttar flap**

- Starts from the superior aspect of the zygomatic arch, 1 cm anterior to the tragus courses over the bregma to the corresponding contralateral side. The flap is reflected anteriorly up to the supra-orbital rim.

**Frontal**

- Can be unilateral or bifrontal.

- It curves course along the coronal suture to end at the mid-hairline.

- Performed for exposure of lesions within the anterior interhemispheric, sellar, lamina terminalis, and anterior third ventricular regions.

**Temporal**

- A linear or question mark incision.

- Based on the zygoma, goes behind the ear, then courses just above the superior temporal line up to the hairline anteriorly.

- Provides access to the middle fossa, anterior superior brainstem, trigeminal, petroclival lesions, and basilar aneurysm.

- Can be combined with an anterior petrosectomy.

**Parietal**

- Interhemispheric approach for parafalcine, medial parietal, and splenial lesions.

- The transcortical route through the non-eloquent superior parietal lobule.

- Should spare the motor and sensory cortices via Cortical mapping, navigation, or functional MRI (fMRI).

**Pterional (Frontotemporal)**

- Developed by Gazi Yasargil.

- Centered on the pterion.

- Allow access to the frontal and temporal operculum, Sylvian fissure, and supra-sellar cisterns.

- Can be combined with a sub-frontal approach for exposing the anterior cranial fossa.

**Orbitozygomatic (OZ)**

- First described by Pellerin and Hakuba.

- Can be one or two-piece osteotomies. The two-piece approach is made by removing a traditional pterional bone flap followed by a supraorbital craniotomy.

- Used for lesions within the orbital apex, paraclinoid, and para-sellar areas, the cavernous sinuses, the basal cisterns, and the upper clivus.

**Trauma flap**

- For traumatic lesions, and malignant MCA infarct.

- Based on zygoma.

- Blood supply from superficial temporal and supraorbital vessels.

- Curves around 3.5 cm posterior to the external auditory meatus.

**Retrosigmoid**

- Popularized by Woolsey and Krause as the lateral suboccipital approach.

- Vertical incision 1 cm medial to mastoid.

- Can be a ‘Lazy S’ incision, or an inverted ‘J’/Hockey stick incision.

- Provides access to the cerebellopontine and cerebellomedullary cisterns.

- Also applied for neurovascular decompression.

**Horseshoe flap**

- Inverted ‘U’ shape to expose any part of cerebral convexity.

**Mitre skin flap**

- Vertical limb extends from inion to vertex.

- The anterior limb eclipse the posterior parietal region towards the ear.

- Vascularity is based on the occipital artery.

- Applied for assessing lesions on the occipital lobe, posterior falx, and superior tentorial surface.

**Suboccipital**

- Developed by Rand and Yasargil.

- Extends from external occipital protuberance (EOP) to C2 level.

- Allows exposure of the cerebellar hemispheres, tonsils, vermis, medulla, fourth ventricle, craniocervical junction, and foramen magnum.

**Burr hole:**

- A handheld drill like a Hudson brace or motorized drill attached to a perforating bit.

- Kept perpendicular to the skull and turned rapidly.

- Difficult initially to penetrate the outer but relatively easy through the cancellous bone.

- Cogwheel resistance is felt once the inner cortex is engaged.

- Visually inspect to confirm the breach of the inner cortex.

- The drill is substituted with a sharp bone curette or a round burr for the Hudson brace to safely enlarge the hole.

- Bone wax is applied to the edges of the burr.

**Bone flap:**

- Direct and shortest access to the target.

- Centered over lesion for convexity lesions.

- Careful separation of underlying dura with Penfield’s dissector.

- Beveling to avoid sinking of the bone flap.

- The cuts along /across dural venous sinuses should be performed last.

- Liberal dural hitch/tack-up stitches to prevent and minimize dural bleeding.

**Durotomy**

- Epidural tacking sutures should be applied.

- Flap based on sinuses should be made.

- First opened with the help of a sharp hook and knife.

- Further opening with dural scissors with the placement of cottonoid beneath.

- Keep a suitable cuff of dura for closure at the end of the procedure.

**Wound closure**

- Dural repair should be watertight but not under undue tension.

- Bone flap replacement whenever feasible.

- Use of monofilament sutures- resist the ingress of bacteria, have minimal drag, and tissue reactivity.

- Should obliterate all potential dead space.

- Even distribution of tension on the suture line.

- Adequate tensile strength of the suture is needed.

- Tension-free closure.

- Interrupted suture better preserves galeal vessels supplying the scalp.

- Skin is closed in two layers.

Augmented and virtual reality (AR, VR) assisted awake craniotomy for lesions within the eloquent regions can supplement, augment, or even replace conventional approaches.

**Post-procedure management**

Routine ward admission appears safe in most patients. Approximately 2% of unplanned intensive care unit (ICU) admission are reported. Factors such as:

- Lengthy operation

- Profound blood loss

- High anesthetic risks

- New neurological and lower cranial nerve deficits

- Reduced consciousness or deficits of the lower cranial nerves, and

- Provisions for delayed extubation necessitate ICU admission.

**Factors to take into account for ICU admission include:**

- **Patient-specific risk factors**: age, neurological status, anesthesia-associated risks, frailty index, and medical comorbidities.

- **Surgical factors**: location, size and type of the lesion, surgical type and approach, duration of surgery, nature of procedures (elective Vs. emergency), and perioperative complications.

- **Anticipated postoperative complications**: stringent neurological and hemodynamic assessment, and management of hormonal or electrolyte imbalance such as systemic inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH), diabetes insipidus (DI), or cerebral salt wasting (CSW).

Univariate analysis showed diabetics, intra-operative high blood loss, need for blood transfusion, older patients, and longer surgical procedures whereas multivariate analysis showed diabetes and age as predictive variables of the need for postoperative intensive care unit admission.

A "safe transition pathway" model has to be adopted.

**General postoperative management:**

- Stringent neurological assessment and monitoring

- Hemodynamic stability

- Seizure prophylaxis

- Adequate analgesia and sedation-Opioids, paracetamol/NSAIDs, and regional anesthesia are effective.

- Fluid and electrolyte monitoring

- Chest physiotherapy

- Nutritional support, and

- Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis-low molecule weight heparin (LMWH) and intermittent compression devices (ICDs) are both effective in the prevention of VTE.

**The enhanced Recovery after Surgery (ERAS)principle incorporates:**

- Mental state assessment

- Antimicrobial, steroidal, and antiepileptic prophylaxes

- Nutritional assessment

- Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) prophylaxis

- Regional field block or scalp block

- Avoidance, minimization, and early removal  of invasive monitoring

- Use of absorbable skin sutures

- Avoidance of wound drains

- Early extubation

- Early mobilization

- Early fluid de-escalation

- Early initiation of oral intake, and

- Early postoperative imaging.****

Multimodal monitoring and patient-centered optimization of neurosurgical care in the perioperative period are pivotal.