Overall, the driving mechanism of CO2 narcosis is acute hypercapnia. The etiology can be extensive, but it can be helpful to divide the potential causes into three groups: decreased minute ventilation, increased physiologic dead space, increased carbon dioxide production.

The first group is anything that causes decreased minute ventilation (respiratory rate x tidal volume). The central respiratory center in the medulla takes feedback from multiple inputs and integrates them into a respiratory drive, which functions to control our minute ventilation. Anything that affects the central respiratory center can affect the minute ventilation. Notable etiologies include overdose of sedative medications (narcotics, benzodiazepines, tricyclic antidepressants, etc.), stroke, and hypothermia. Although the medulla functions to control the respiratory drive, many peripheral nerves and respiratory muscles are needed to perform respirations. Decreased respiratory neuromuscular function can decrease minute ventilation. Notable etiologies include Guillain-Barre, myasthenia gravis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, myositis, multiple sclerosis, phrenic nerve injury, tetanus, botulism, organophosphates, and ciguatera. Deformity of the thoracic cage can impact tidal volumes, therefore decreasing minute ventilation.

The second group is anything that increases physiologic dead space (part of the lung that does not participate in gas exchange); this is ventilation without perfusion. This condition can be due to pulmonary capillary compression (positive pressure ventilation) or the destruction of pulmonary capillaries (pulmonary vasculitides, COPD, asthma, interstitial lung disease). A large pulmonary embolism can also cause significant dead space. The third group is anything that increases CO2 production. It is more likely that this group only partially contributes to hypercapnia and is not commonly the primary cause but can occur in conditions that increase metabolic rate, sepsis, thyrotoxicosis, or fever.

Environmental exposure to areas rich in carbon dioxide, such as volcanoes or geothermal activity, puts patients at risk for carbon dioxide poisoning.

Another unique situation to consider is oxygen-induced hypercapnia, which presents in some patients with COPD when given supplemental oxygen.