Once the diagnosis of uterine inversion is made, immediate intervention to control hemorrhage and restore hemodynamic stability in the mother is required because a delay will lead to an increase in the mortality rate appreciably. The following actions should be taken urgently and simultaneously:

- Call for help and call for an anesthesiologist immediately.

- Hemodynamic stability is achieved by a large-bore cannula, and crystalloid and blood are given to combat hypovolemia.

- The recent uterine inversion with the placenta already separated from it may often be replaced by manually pushing up on the fundus with the palm and fingers in the direction of the long axis of the vagina. A delay will render replacement more difficult and also increase the risk of hemorrhage.

- If the placenta is still attached, it is usually not removed until fluids are given, and uterine-relaxing anesthetics, for example, a halogenated inhalation agent, have been administered. Other tocolytic agents such as magnesium sulfate or beta-mimetic and nitroglycerine have been used successfully for uterine relaxation and repositioning. Any portion of the inverted uterus prolapsed beyond the vagina is replaced within the vagina.

- After the placenta is removed, steady pressure with the fist is applied to the inverted fundus in an attempt to push it up into the dilated cervix. Alternatively, two fingers can be extended rigidly to push the center of the fundus upward. Undue force is not applied to avoid perforation of the uterus with the fingertips. This is followed by the administration of uterotonic agents, which help uterine contraction, thereby preventing recurrence of the inversion.

An appropriate antibiotic is administered to prevent infection.

Other options include hydrostatic reduction and surgical correction if manual repositioning is unsuccessful due to a dense constriction ring.

Hydrostatic reduction: If manual reduction alone is not successful, simple hydrostatic pressure may be of great assistance in pushing the fundus back to its normal anatomical position. Warmed sterile saline is infused into the vagina. The clinician’s hand or a silicone ventouse cup is used as a fluid retainer to generate intravaginal hydrostatic pressure and resultant correction of the inversion. The bag of fluid should be elevated about 100 to 150 cm above the vagina to guarantee sufficient pressure for insufflation. It is also effective at preventing blood loss and inhibiting the uterus from inverting again. The possible complications associated with the procedure include infection, failure of the procedure, and saline embolus.

Surgical options include Huntington and Haultain procedures, laparoscopic-assisted repositioning, and cervical incisions with manual uterine repositioning. The Huntington procedure involves laparotomy by gradually pulling on the round ligaments to restore the uterus to its proper position. In case the cervical ring is very tight, repositioning may be more easily achieved by incising the ring posteriorly with a vertical incision along with manual pushing of the fundus. As with manual repositioning, after replacing the fundus, the anesthetic agent used to relax the myometrium is stopped, and uterotonic therapy is administered immediately, followed by repair of uterine incision. If these procedures are performed, then pregnancies in the future will require a cesarean delivery.

If the placenta is not separated from the uterus, then a hysterectomy may be necessary.