The initial cornerstone treatment for minimal change disease is steroids. Children frequently achieve remission with steroids within 4 weeks vs. adults who achieve remission in two months or more

**Children**

Initial prednisone therapy is 60 mg/m^2(or 2 mg/kg) administered daily for 4-6 weeks (maximum dose, 60 mg/day), or 40 mg/m2/(or 1.5 mg/kg) on alternate days for 2-5 months taper. Reduce the dose by 5 mg/m2 to 10 mg/m2 each week for another four weeks, then stop, with a minimum duration of 12 weeks

**Adults**

Initial prednisone treatment is 1mg/kg per day or 2 mg/kg/kg every other day (max 80mg/day or 120 mg every other day) for 4-16 weeks. Taper slowly over a course of 6 months after remission

**Patients Who Relapse Demonstrate the following**

- Steroid resistance is noted as the persistence of proteinuria in children after 4 weeks of prednisone and after 16 weeks for adults.

- Frequent relapses occur, which are defined as two or more relapses in the first six months of presentation or four or more relapses within any 12 months

- Steroid dependency is defined as relapses that occur during the tapering phase of steroid therapy or less than two weeks after discontinuing steroids

- Relapse nephrosis - > 2+ proteinuria on 3 consecutive days

- **Prednisolone**should be restarted if there is a relapse: 2 mg/kg daily (maximum 60 mg) until in remission for 3 days, then 1.5 mg/kg alternate days for 4 weeks, then stop or taper the dose over 4-8 weeks.

**For frequent relapses/ steroid-dependent (steroid-sparing agents)**

- **Cyclophosphamide:**the dose of 2 mg/kg/ day for 8 to 12 weeks (should be started after reaching remission with the steroid)- potential gonadal toxicity, alopecia, bone marrow suppression.

- **Cyclosporine:**At a dose of 4 to 5 mg/kg/day, usually for 1-2 years. Levels should be monitored after 1 to 2 weeks. Aim for a trough of 70 to 150. Can cause nephrotoxicity, hirsutism, hypertension, and gingival hyperplasia.

If intolerant to the above-mentioned drugs, can give**:**

- **Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF):**Doses of 500 to 1000 mg two times a day for 1 to 2 years. Should be monitored for leukopenia.

- **Rituximab (chimeric monoclonal antibody):**375 mg/weekly for 1 to 4 doses.Pneumocystis jirovecii infections, ulcerative colitis, and allergic reactions.