The otoscope exam helps to assess the condition of the external auditory canal (EAC), tympanic membrane (TM), and the middle ear.  Mastering the otoscope exam leads to accurate diagnoses, allowing for targeted treatment and prevention of complications. Early stages of otologic diseases can be present in the absence of complaints such as ear pain, ear fullness, and hearing loss.

A quarter of adult and one-half of pediatric general practice consultations are related to ears, nose, and throat (ENT) complaints. In the emergency department, up to two-thirds of pediatric visits are relevant to the ear, nose, and throat. Lastly, primary care physicians consistently recognize ENT as one of the most pertinent surgical subspecialties to their practice.

Despite the recognized importance of performing an accurate otoscope exam, there are reports that current healthcare didactic programs offer limited exposure to otolaryngology, which often correlates into decreased comfort amongst students when performing the otoscope exam. This limited exposure to proper otoscopy training may negatively impact patient outcomes and ultimately create an inefficient utilization of health care resources.

To combat this suspected inefficiency in the otoscopic exam, it is incumbent upon all healthcare professionals involved (e.g., physicians, nurse practitioners, nurses, audiologists, students) to narrow the knowledge gap that currently exists regarding the otologic examination. This education can be done in a matter of ways, starting with self-educating on how to perform a proper otologic exam. Indeed, several methods and resources are available to accomplish this, many of which have shown diagnostic accuracy improvement after its implementation.

Improved knowledge of otoscopy will lead to better interprofessional communication among the relevant health professionals involved. Subsequently, these enhancements should allow for increased patient-centered care, improved outcomes, higher patient safety, and enhanced team performance. [Level 5]