Because disease outbreaks are rare and difficult to predict, well-controlled studies of treatment are nearly impossible. As such, most recommendations come from an expert consensus of review of previous outbreaks. The best way to reduce morbidity and mortality associated with avian influenza is to improve public knowledge of the disease, reduce the spread of infection once an outbreak is identified, and educate vulnerable populations on risk reduction and early recognition of disease. While providers can play an essential role in this, public health officials (often through media assistance) are critical to limiting the human impact of the disease. [Level 4]

Additionally, a high index of suspicion is often needed to diagnose early cases of avian influenza in a population. Care and detailed history-taking, as well as early testing in at-risk patients presenting with a severe viral infection, is needed to allow health care professionals to intervene early to restrict the impact of an outbreak. [Level 4]

There is currently an FDA-licensed vaccine for the H5N1 strain of avian influenza in the United States. In the case of an H5N1 outbreak in the United States, the CDC and public health officials may decide to vaccinate at-risk populations to reduce spread. Apart from the available H5N1 vaccine, no human vaccines exist for avian influenza, although there are currently vaccine development studies in progress that may result in more availability in the future (see above). [Level 4]

An interprofessional team is beneficial in the management of this disease. The emergency department and primary care providers should be cognizant of this diagnosis. Patients should receive a referral to infectious disease, intensivists, and pulmonologists. Critical care nurses monitor patients, answer patient questions, and provide updates to the team. Pharmacists review antiviral and other medications as to the dose and possible drug interactions and make recommendations to the providers where appropriate. With interprofessional collaboration and communication across both disciplines and even with media and other public health personnel, the risks of avian influenza can remain contained. [Level 5]