Most patients with a febrile seizure event do not require hospitalization or intensive medical interventions. Occasionally a patient with a prolonged complex febrile seizure of a focal nature may develop focal weakness, commonly known as Todd's paralysis. Typically this resolves within a few hours, but it may take up to a few days for complete resolution. Even though febrile seizures are often considered relatively benign, studies have shown that patients with a febrile seizure status have an increased risk of developing mesial temporal sclerosis which can increase future chances of focal epilepsy. Febrile seizure status is defined as a seizure lasting longer than 30 minutes. Therefore, prompt treatment of prolonged seizures of a febrile nature is as necessary as a prompt treatment of prolonged seizures arising from other etiologies.

Additionally, as above, it is vital to quickly expand the differential diagnosis considerations if a patient is not awakening and steadily improving toward baseline, or if a patient has unexpected abnormalities on neurologic exam. A patient who will not respond to noxious stimuli after a seizure or who appears to be waxing and waning in mental status needs evaluation for possible ongoing seizure activity. Standard procedure for this evaluation is typically by a prolonged EEG study. Other considerations in a patient not recovering as expected include intracranial abnormalities such as a tumor, hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, stroke, or another significant metabolic abnormality.