**Horner Syndrome**

Horner syndrome can occur due to damage along any point in the OSP (covered above in Structure and Function), including at preganglionic (first- and second-order neurons) and postganglionic (third-order neurons) fibers.

The cocaine solution blocks norepinephrine reuptake at the synapse of preganglionic and postganglionic fibers in the OSP, which will manifest as decreased pupillary dilation in patients with Horner syndrome relative to the normal eye (Figure 3).

Common first-, second-, and third-order neuron lesions in the OSP (pathway covered above in "Structure and Function") along with differentiating factors are as follows

- First-Order Neuron Lesions (Preganglionic): Miosis is the most prevalent symptom with the distribution of anhidrosis being the entire half of the body ipsilateral to the lesion. Pharmacologic provocation will show reduced pupillary dilation with cocaine administration, followed by an increase in dilation after administering hydroxyamphetamine.

- Examples: Hypothalamic lesions, Wallenberg syndrome, syringohydromelia, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord neoplasms

- Second-Order Neuron Lesions (Preganglionic): Patients with lesions in second-order neurons typically present with the full spectrum of miosis, ptosis, and anhidrosis (distribution is localized only to the ipsilateral head and neck). Pharmacologic testing with cocaine and hydroxyamphetamine will have the same results as first-order lesions.

- Examples: Pancoast tumors, sympathetic schwannomas, neuroblastic tumors, goiters

- Third-Order Neuron Lesions (Postganglionic): The full triad of ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis will be present. Lesions proximal to the superior cervical ganglion will have anhidrosis of the entire ipsilateral head and neck. In contrast, lesions distal to the superior cervical ganglion will present with anhidrosis limited only to the ipsilateral forehead and nose. Testing with cocaine solution will show reduced pupillary dilation relative to the normal eye, but hydroxyamphetamine application will reveal no dilation since postganglionic fibers will become depleted of norepinephrine.

- Examples: Fibromuscular dysplasia, carotid dissection, skull base/orbital lesions, parasellar lesions

**First-Bite Syndrome**

Occasionally, sympathetic trunk division during parapharyngeal space or deep lobe parotid surgery can lead to parotid region pain after the first bite of every meal.

**Ganglion Blocks and Sympathetectomy**

Ultrasound-guided injections to the sympathetic ganglia have received attention as treatments for chronic pain.