When attempting to determine the cause of an SPN, one first needs to look at the location and characteristics of the nodule. This is best done with a CT scan. Malignancy, which only comprises about 5% of incidental SPNs, tends to be located in the upper lobes. Other malignancy characteristics are increased size, spiculated margin (sunburst or corona radiata sign), nodule enhancement after injection of IV contrast, and high growth rate.

It is important to consider any pulmonary nodule to be malignant, but here are some examples of benign nodules and how they present on CT imaging. Tuberculosis, which is a granulomatous infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, may present with tree in bud opacities, cavitary lesions with a thick wall, and central hypo-enhancing necrotic nodules on CT. Organizing pneumonia presents with granulation tissue causing a consolidation or nodule with spindle-shaped margins and central necrosis. Sarcoidosis, which can affect any organ system, presents as noncaseating granulomas, bilateral perihilar opacities, honeycomb-like cysts, and fibrotic changes in a peri-bronchovascular distribution. Aspergillosis, which is a mycotic infection by Aspergillus, colonizes a preexisting cavity to form an aspergilloma. This is seen as a nodule or consolidation with either the crescent or halo signs. The crescent sign is radiolucency within the nodule, and the halo sign is when a zone of low attenuation surrounds the nodule. Another fungal infection, mucormycosis, also presents with a halo sign and crescent sign in the later stages of the disease. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a necrotizing vasculitis that presents as waxing and waning parenchymal nodules with or without the halo sign and may have associated ground-glass opacities, circumferential tracheobronchial thickening, and pleural effusions. Pulmonary sequestration is a rare congenital malformation of nonfunctioning lung tissue typically seen as a heterogeneous or homogeneous soft-tissue mass. Schwannoma, a benign mesenchymal tumor in Schwann cells, presents as homogeneous or heterogeneous enhancement with cystic degeneration or hemorrhage. Hamartoma, a benign mesenchymal neoplasm, presents a well-defined, smooth, round, or lobulated nodule with popcorn calcifications or central calcifications and fatty attenuation. Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, which is a tumor of spindle myofibroblasts that presents as an enhancing, well-defined nodule in the peripheral lung fields as well as an endobronchial lesion. A solitary fibrous tumor is a tumor of spindle cells presenting as a hyperdense, well-defined heterogeneous mass that forms obtuse angles with the pleura. Perivascular epithelial cell tumors (PEComas) are rare mesenchymal neoplasms that present as a well-defined solitary peripheral lung nodule without calcifications or cavitation. Pleomorphic adenoma is a common benign neoplasm of the salivary gland but may be found in the lung. It presents with a homogeneous, smooth, circular, soft-tissue density in the peripheral lung field. Carcinoid, a neuroendocrine tumor, presents as a well-defined homogeneous sphere that may cause narrowing or obstruction of the bronchus. Castleman disease, also known as angiofollicular hyperplasia and giant lymph node hyperplasia, presents as a well-circumscribed homogeneous mass commonly found in the hilum.

- Amyloidosis

- Aspergillosis

- Arteriovenous malformation

- Castleman disease

- Carcinoid

- Granulomatosis with polyangiitis

- Hamartoma

- Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor

- Intrapulmonary lymph nodes

- Mucormycosis

- Perivascular epithelial cell tumor

- Pleomorphic adenoma

- Pulmonary sequestration

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Round atelectasis

- Sarcoidosis

- Schwannoma

- Tuberculosis