Research has identified several mechanisms for the development of fascial dehiscence, secondary to both modifiable and non-modifiable factors. Traumatic injury requiring exploratory laparotomy is itself a risk factor; presumably, the damage-control nature of the surgery, the open abdomen, and re-exploration (with associated potential for loss of domain), and the often critical nature and course of these patients present likely mechanisms for poor fascial healing. Emergency non-trauma surgical intervention confers a similar risk. The high rates of associated sepsis and intraabdominal contamination, prolonged critical care requirements including the need for vasopressors for shock states, elevated rates of ileus and pulmonary complications, need for planned or unplanned re-exploration and development or continuation of malnutrition states present a myriad of factors influencing the breakdown of the fascial closure.

Surgical site infection is a well-documented cause of dehiscence; bacteria and inflammatory factors present in infected sites are detrimental to wound healing. Nutritional factors, including preoperative malnutrition or prolonged delay in the resumption of postoperative enteral or parenteral nutrition, can deprive the body of needed substrates for adequate healing. Chronic steroid use is a well-known inhibitor of tissue repair; chronic diseases such as ESRD and diabetes and their associated microvascular complications similarly are well-published independent risk factors for failure of wound healing and surgical site infections. Importantly, clinicians cannot ignore a technical error as a cause; loose knots, tissue strangulation, or inadequate tissue incorporation in suture bites can lead to failure of the fascial closure and tissue dehiscence. Smoking is also a well-known inhibitor of wound healing.

The physiology of wound healing involves a well-choreographed pathway. Local tissue factors promote platelet aggregation, acute hemostasis, and chemotaxis. The inflammatory response recruits neutrophils, macrophages, and fibroblasts, which clear cellular debris and begin the formation of a regenerative matrix. Angiogenesis occurs, extracellular matrix components get deposited, and collagen forms and remodels. This process is detailed and complicated, requiring multiple cofactors, enzymatic signals, adequate vascularity, and tissue oxygenation. The process commences immediately upon injury, or in this case, surgical incision and closure, and continues for months with remodeling and maturation. Collagen production begins within 12 to 72 hours of injury and peaks within 7 to 21 days; 80% of tissue strength returns at three months. Due to the complicated nature of wound healing, multiple opportunities for factors detrimental to the process are present.

Ultimately, dehiscence results from a failure or inadequacy in the wound healing pathway. Deprivation of tissue repair factors and substrates, overabundance of inflammatory cells and products, presence of clinically significant bacteria load, or malperfusion (from tissue strangulation, microvascular disease, or critical illness) all act at the cellular level to impair the healing pathway; reducing the risk of fascial dehiscence relies upon the optimization of these factors as able given the patient’s clinical status and course.