**Hemorrhagic Stroke**

Treatment modalities for hemorrhagic stroke mainly revolve around hypertension control and surgical evacuation of the hematoma.

**Acute Ischemic Stroke (AIS)**

Brain tissue is lost rapidly after stroke, and hence, time is brain concept was introduced to emphasize the need for emergent evaluation and treatment to limit its progress.

There is an ongoing debate about the effectiveness of general anesthesia (GA) over conscious sedation and vice versa, as some studies have shown that GA is associated with a lower disability while others demonstrated worse outcomes with GA.

Anastasian enumerated the advantages and disadvantages of GA and local anesthesia.

American Heart Association/ American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) guidelines recommend that the choice of anesthetic technique should be based on patient risk factors, clinical conditions, and technical performance of the procedure. They recommend that either method, i.e., GA or procedural sedation is reasonable until more data is available. Society for neuroscience in anesthesiology and critical care (SNACC) expert consensus statement also recommends that the choice of anesthesia should be tailored according to the patient’s clinical condition.

Blood pressure, heart rate, electrocardiogram, oxygen saturation, end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration should be continuously monitored throughout the procedure. Invasive arterial blood pressure should be employed to monitor beat-to-beat pressure.

Hypertension is present in about 80% of patients presenting with acute ischemic stroke.

A U-shaped relationship exists between blood pressure and neurological outcome, with hypertension and hypotension, with both associated with poor outcomes. Data shows that the best neurological outcomes are observed at a systolic blood pressure of 150 mmHg (range between 140 to 179 mmHg).

AHA/ASA guidelines recommend maintaining BP ≤180/105 mmHg during and for 24 hours after mechanical thrombectomy.

For patients presenting with hypertension in the setting of AIS, the overall clinical picture should be taken into account, e.g., patients with acute coronary syndrome, acute heart failure, aortic dissection, or post thrombolysis symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage. In these cases, the initial lowering of BP should not be more than 15% of baseline.

Different antihypertensive options to control BP as recommended by AHA/ASA are:

- Labetalol 10 to 20 mg IV over 1 to 2 min, may repeat one time; or

- Nicardipine 5 mg/h IV, titrate up by 2.5 mg/h every 5 to 15 min, maximum 15 mg/h;

- Clevidipine 1 to 2 mg/h IV, titrate by doubling the dose every 2 to 5 min until desired BP reached; maximum 21 mg/h

- Other agents (e.g., hydralazine, enalaprilat) may also be considered.

If BP is not controlled or diastolic BP >140 mm Hg, IV sodium nitroprusside can be considered.

Anesthesia should be planned in a way that avoids hypotension and acute fluctuations in blood pressure, as they are associated with loss of penumbra.

Hypotension is associated with poor outcomes in the setting of acute ischemic stroke.

Hypotension and hypovolemia should be corrected to achieve hemodynamic stability and organ perfusion, and excessive volume expansion is not recommended as it may lead to hemodilution. If hypoglycemia is not a concern, non-glucose-containing fluids should be used.

Aspirin should be administered in patients with AIS within 24 to 48 hours after onset, but it should not be used as a substitute to the treatment by either thrombolysis or mechanical thrombectomy.

Supplemental oxygen should be used to maintain oxygen saturation >94%, or PaO2 > 60 mmHg.

Body temperature should be maintained in a range of 35 to 37 degrees centigrade. Causes of hyperthermia (temperature >38 degrees C) should be identified and treated. Antipyretic medications and cooling devices should be used to correct the temperature when needed.

Blood sugar should be closely monitored, and hypoglycemia (blood glucose <60 mg/dL) and hyperglycemia should be avoided. AHA/ASA recommends target blood sugar levels of 140 to 180 mg/dl range.

Routine use of prophylactic antibiotics, antiseizure drugs, and flathead positioning has not been proven beneficial.

After the procedure, the patient should be transferred to the neuro-critical care unit for continued hemodynamic and neurological monitoring.