**Alcohol**

The signs and symptoms of alcohol withdrawal may range from a simple tremor to a fully blown delirium tremens characterized by autonomic hyperactivity, tachypnea, hyperthermia, and diaphoresis. About 25% of patients may develop alcohol hallucinations. Some patients with alcohol use disorder may also develop seizures which are brief.

On exam, the alcoholic withdrawal signs and symptoms may include hyperventilation, tachycardia, tremor, hypertension, diaphoresis, or hypothermia. Signs of chronic alcoholism may include spider angiomata, flushed facies, paralysis of extraocular muscles (Wernicke encephalopathy), poor dentition, skull or facial trauma (as a result of falls) and tongue lacerations (biting tongue during seizures). Other features of chronic alcohol use disorder include ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, and melena. Thinning of hair, spider angioma, and gynecomastia are all also seen in patients with chronic alcohol use disorder.

Many patients with alcohol withdrawal have additional medical or traumatic conditions that may increase their associated risk of morbidity and mortality. Risk factors associated with increased mortality include cirrhosis, the presence of DTs at the time of diagnosis, the existence of underlying chronic pathology other than liver disease, and a need for endotracheal intubation.

**Barbiturates and Benzodiazepines**

Use of sedatives like barbiturates and benzodiazepines can also produce withdrawal responses that resemble alcohol withdrawal syndrome. Autonomic and psychomotor dysfunction often characterize the withdrawal symptoms. The symptoms tend to develop 2 to 10 days after discontinuation of the agent. Gamma Hydroxybutyrate (GHB) is now a common club drug abused at nightclubs and all-night parties. The withdrawal response is mild, resembles a sedative withdrawal syndrome with psychotic symptoms. Severe withdrawal symptoms tend to occur in chronic users and can also present with seizures and rhabdomyolysis.

**Opiates**

Opiate withdrawal response is usually mild and not life-threatening. It usually resembles a flu-like illness characterized by yawning, sneezing, rhinorrhea, nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, and dilated pupils. Depending on the half-life of the drug, the symptoms may last for three to ten days. Also, individuals who abuse IV drugs are prone to infections like endocarditis, osteomyelitis, cellulitis, hepatitis, and septic emboli. Patients with Opioid Use disorder may have signs of a cough, hemoptysis, and tachypnea due to opportunistic infections as a result of acquiring HIV and PCP. IV drug users may have scars and needle marks.

**Cocaine and Amphetamines**

Central nervous system (CNS) stimulants like cocaine and amphetamine can also produce withdrawal symptoms. Like opioids, the withdrawal symptoms are mild and not life-threatening. Often the individual will develop marked depression, excessive sleep, hunger, dysphoria, and severe psychomotor retardation but all vital functions are well preserved. Recovery is usually slow, and depression can last for several weeks.