There are some disease states that are causally related to APPs, and some are associated with them. The central role of fibrin during hemostasis and thrombosis is well known. However, fibrinogen also increases the risk of bleeding and thrombosis in many pathologies, including inflammation, infection, neurologic disease, and cancer. CRP can activate complement. In cardiac infarction, CRP has a key role in some forms of tissue alteration. Elevated levels of CRP are associated with the risk of atherosclerosis.

The prolonged elevation of serum amyloid A (SAA) can eventually lead to secondary amyloidosis. Amyloidosis is caused by amyloid fibrils (misfolded SAA) depositing extracellularly in various organs, including the heart, liver, tongue, spleen, hematologic, and spleen. Patients can develop symptoms of restrictive cardiomyopathy or arrhythmia, macroglossia, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, cough, and dyspnea. There is a casual relationship between SAA and amyloid fibrils. However, the cause of misfolded SAA is not fully understood. Sustained high SAA levels, amyloid enhancing factor, apolipoprotein-E4, impaired SAA-degrading proteases, and many other factors have been implicated. Some of the diseased states with a prolonged elevation of SAA include chronic infection, rheumatoid arthritis, familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), inflammatory bowel disease, and malignancy.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is released from the liver and acts as a serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that protects the cells from neutrophil elastase activity. AAT deficiency is caused by a mutation in the SERPINA1 gene. The mutation is more common in European descendants. The production of AAT in individuals with the mutation is dependent on the allele type. There are three alleles for the AAT gene: M, S, and Z with autosomal codominant inheritance. The normal allele for the SERPINA1 gene is M, and AAT production in homozygous (PiMM) individuals is normal. The S mutation causes a moderate decrease in AAT production, and the Z mutation causes a significant decrease. Therefore, the severity of the disease is dependent on the genotypic expression. Individuals with two normal alleles, PiMM (protease inhibitor MM), have 100% expression of normal protein and have normal levels of AAT. Individuals with PiMS have 80% of normal serum levels of AAT. Individuals with PiSS, PiMZ, and PiSZ have 40-60% serum levels of AAT. Severe AAT deficiency is in individuals homozygous of the Z allele (PiZZ). They produce 10% of the normal serum AAT.

AAT gene mutation induces AAT protein conformation change in the structure. It affects the liver and the lungs. In the liver, AAT accumulates because of impaired secretion. As a result, there is hepatocyte destruction leading to hepatitis and liver cirrhosis. In the lungs, the absence of AAT causes uninhibited neutrophil elastase activity. It leads to the destruction of pulmonary architecture and panacinar emphysema.