The evaluation for mood disorders mandates comprehensive and detailed history taking. Patients with bipolar disorder are easily diagnosed when they present with episodes of mania characterized by inflated self-esteem, grandiosity, impulsivity, irritability, increased psychomotor activity, delusions, or hallucinations. When the patients exhibit symptoms of depression such as sad mood, decreased concentration, guilt, decreased interest in pleasurable activities, ideas of self-harm, and suicide, it is crucial to differentiate unipolar from bipolar depression. Clinical features suggestive of bipolar depression are early age of onset, acute onset, recurrent episodes of depression (more than 5 episodes), positive family history of bipolar disorder, antidepressant-induced hypomania, depression with psychotic symptoms before the age of 25, postpartum depression, and depressive mixed state.

Once the patient is stabilized, a formal mental status examination is mandatory. Patients suffering from depression show poor/limited eye contact during the interview, have a flat or blunted affect with decreased speech and increased reaction time. They appear disheveled with unkempt hair and poor hygiene. Psychomotor activity is markedly decreased. On the other hand, patients with mania have increased psychomotor activity, are agitated, irritable, hyper talkative, have pressured speech, tangentiality, decreased reaction time, and are difficult to interrupt. Patients with mania can sometimes have hallucinations, delusions, and paranoia. Occasionally, major depression can have psychotic features.