Given that most people with mental health concerns first seek help from their primary care provider, streamlined screening is essential to realistically implement lifestyle medicine in a fast-paced clinical environment. Screening tools are most valuable when they can be easily administered and provide quick feedback indicating symptom levels or areas of concern. Computerized screening allows for integration with electronic health records, which may optimize diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up and provide consistent data on outcome metrics.

Two primary assessments are used for screening patients' status in the six lifestyle medicine pillars. Both measures are available through the American College of Lifestyle Medicine (ACLM) website. One measure, developed by Jonathan Bennett and recommended by the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), titled Lifestyle Medicine Assessment Screening Tool, consists of 21 questions assessing all pillars except for stress management. The other measure, the lifestyle assessment form, developed in a collaboration between Loma Linda University and ACLM, is available in both long and short versions.

The long form is comprehensive and assesses the status of motivation, sleep, nutrition, weight management, exercise, mental health, purpose and connection, smoking and substance history, medical symptoms, and preventive services. The short version assesses sleep, nutrition, weight management, exercise, purpose, connection/mental health, smoking/substance use, and motivation. These measures can help quickly identify areas for further assessment and targeting. Recommendations for additional measures specific to each pillar can be found on both the ACLM and AAFP websites.

Data from screening measures for mood typically already used in primary care can, of course, be utilized (e.g., Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-2/PHQ-9), Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-2/GAD-7), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10), Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support (MSPSS)).

From a lifestyle medicine perspective, primary care that emphasizes the pillars of lifestyle medicine may address physical and mental health concerns, thereby being well-suited to prevent the onset, reduce the symptoms, and slow the progression of mental health symptoms and disorders.

Interventions within the primary care context, given time constraints, are best when able to be quickly delivered; evidence supports the use of brief interventions for behavior change.

In addition, self-efficacy may be enhanced as a function of achieving small lifestyle changes, fostering additional changes.

Follow-up also resulted in increased effects compared to initial referral only.

Action planning, helping patients move toward action, and coping planning, helping patients identify their barriers to change and proactively create plans to manage their barriers, are two techniques that also help the goal-setting and achievement process.

Referral to a mental health provider with knowledge of lifestyle medicine can complement and strengthen any additional treatment which might be necessary. For patients who screen positive, further evaluation is necessary. Referral options vary by setting/organization: self-help, guided self-help, group treatment, integrated primary care (IPC), referrals within the organization, and outside referrals. Ideally, if integrated primary care is available, a "warm handoff" or referral for later follow-up can help connect the patient to behavioral health options.

Factors that prompt referrals to mental health providers include patient preference, the need for mental health assessment and diagnosis, management of complicated medical regimens, and/or help with behavior change due to lack of initial response. In addition, referrals are common when mental health disorders are comorbid with specific physical illnesses (e.g., diabetes and depression) or the patient presents with severe mental illness (SMI) or suicidality.