For electroencephalography and polysomnography exams, the scalp electrodes are placed based on the International 10-20 system.  Each region is labeled, including pre-frontal (Fp), frontal (F), temporal (T), parietal (P), occipital (O), and central (C). The midline sagittal plane is labeled as Z. Even-numbered electrodes are on the right side of the scalp, and odd-numbered electrodes are on the left side of the scalp.

During ABR testing, a positive electrode is placed at the vertex (Cz) or the high forehead (FPz). Two electrodes are placed on the right and left ear lobes or mastoids (A1, A2). A ground electrode is placed posteriorly at Pz or the lower forehead.

When performing the ABR for a neurological assessment, acoustic stimuli are delivered through insert earphones at a high intensity of 80-90dBnHL for adults at both a standard and high repetition rate. If the patient has hearing loss, the sound intensity can be adjusted to 60-65 dB SL. Hearing Level (HL) is based on the hearing threshold of a normal control population, whereas Sensation Level (SL) is based on the hearing threshold of the tested ear. Thus, 60 to 65 dB SL would imply a stimulus that is 60-65 decibels above the test ear’s threshold of hearing. The intensity of stimulation should be increased by 10 dB increments until reproducible waveforms are obtained, allowing the analysis of thresholds.

The stimuli are given monoaurally to compare the responses between the ears as well as to prevent any cross-contamination of stimuli. However, stimuli to one ear can reach the other ear through air and bone conduction and create an evoked potential in the contralateral, non-test ear. To prevent this, the non-tested ear is masked using continuous white noise at 30-40 dB below that of the stimuli. Evoked potentials are recorded for 10 milliseconds after the stimulus and can be extended to 20 milliseconds for patients with pathologically prolonged waveform latencies.

**Interpretation**

The primary measurements from an ABR are the absolute wave latencies, amplitudes, and interwave intervals between waves I to III, III to V, and I to V. The final ABR result is the averaged responses to several thousand repetitions of a stimulus.

Wave latency is defined by the time between the initial auditory stimulus and the peak of a wave.

Wave amplitude is defined by the height between the wave peak and the succeeding trough. The amplitude is determined by the stimulus intensity and amount of synchronized neural activity. The more fibers that are simultaneously activated, the larger the peak amplitude.

The ABR may be utilized to estimate hearing levels and can determine the type and degree of hearing loss if present. The threshold of ABR is the lowest stimulus intensity at which reproducible ABR waveforms can be detected. It provides a good estimation for the hearing sensitivity threshold.

Broadband click stimulus is the standard for the majority of ABR testing that can be utilized to estimate thresholds of hearing sensitivity between 2000 and 4000 Hz.

The chirp stimulus addresses the temporal delay of the click stimulus by delaying the high-frequency component to give time for the lower frequency stimulus to reach the cochlear apex.

Another option is to perform frequency-specific, tone burst-evoked ABR to assess for hearing thresholds beyond the 1000 to 4000 Hz range. Frequency stimuli utilized most commonly include 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz to mimic the standard in-clinic pure-tone audiogram. This method has shown an accurate correlation with the pure-tone audiogram and in predicting the magnitude and pattern of hearing loss.

**Anatomical Generators**

There is controversy regarding the exact anatomical attributions for each wave. Historically, each waveform was thought to correspond to a single anatomical site but is now established that each wave draws contributions from multiple anatomic sources.

- Wave I is generated at the distal portion of the auditory nerve with an absolute latency of 1.5 msec.

- Wave II is associated with the proximal portion of the auditory nerve and cochlear nucleus with an absolute latency of 2.5 msec.

- Wave III is associated with the cochlear nucleus and superior olivary complex with an absolute latency of 3.5 msec. As the superior olivary complex receives bilateral contributions, wave III anomalies are more pronounced on the stimulated ear ipsilateral to the lesion.

- Wave IV corresponds to the superior olivary complex and ascending auditory fibers of the lateral lemniscus with an absolute latency of 4.5 msec.

- Wave V corresponds to the lateral lemniscus and inferior colliculus with an absolute latency of 5.5 msec.

Hearing loss is first assessed to be attributed to the peripheral or central auditory pathway. Peripheral hearing loss presents with delayed latency of wave I or absence of all waveforms. Etiology can be conductive or cochlear pathology. A central hearing loss presents with a prolonged interwave peak between wave I to V.

For patients with increased waveform latencies, increasing the intensity of sound stimulus can differentiate between conductive hearing loss versus slowed neural conduction. For patients with conductive hearing loss, increasing the intensity can overcome the conductive loss and results in normally evoked potentials. Patients who fail to have normalized evoked potentials after increasing stimulus intensity likely have neural conduction pathology.

Increased interwave latency of the I-III interval can indicate auditory nerve and cochlear pathology. Increased latency of the III-V interval can indicate a central pathology above the cochlear nerve such as neuromas, hydrocephalus, anoxic encephalopathy, corpus callosum anomalies, bilirubin encephalopathy, or Charcot’s disease.

Abnormal ABR was found in more than 95% of patients with vestibular schwannomas.

Postoperatively, the patient can resume normal activities immediately after the procedure. If the patient required sedation, they would be monitored in the recovery room until the anesthesia wears off.