**Undercorrection**

This phenomenon may occur with any technique. In the immediate post-operative period, the lid appears undercorrected due to the lid edema. Patients may be reassured. However, if the under-correction persists then revision surgery may be required. The wound can be reopened and aponeurosis re-advanced.

**Overcorrection**

Overcorrection is more often encountered following advancement for aponeurotic/involutional ptosis. Mild overcorrection in the immediate postoperative period may be tackled with eyelid traction. The patient may be asked to look downward and pull on the eyelashes with the thumb and forefinger; this may be done for a few minutes 3 to 4 times a day. Severe overcorrection will require immediate revision. The wound can be reopened and the sutures cut. The levator is then placed at a more recessed position or secured to the tarsal plate using hang back sutures.

**Lagophthalmos and exposure keratopathy**

All patients are counseled pre-operatively about post-operative lagophthalmos and decreased blink rate. Management of lagophthalmos in the immediate post-operative period is with copious lubricants. A temporary frost suture may be applied. In cases where severe exposure keratopathy develops a revision surgery is done to lower the lid height.

**Eyelid contour defects**

Contour defects occur due to improper placement of sutures on the tarsus. Patients presenting with small contour defects usually settle down with time. Lid massage and eyelid traction exercises are advised. Persistent or severe contour abnormalities require revision surgery and proper placement of sutures on the tarsus.

**Conjunctival prolapse**

Extensive dissection between the conjunctiva and levator can disrupt the suspensory ligaments of the superior fornix and produce conjunctival prolapse. Mild prolapse can be treated conservatively with lubricants. Severe prolapse requires repositioning of the conjunctiva with pang sutures; suture is passed through the prolapsed conjunctiva and secured at the skin crease.

**Eyelash ptosis**

Excessive dissection of the orbicularis from the tarsus results in lash ptosis, which can be corrected by anterior lamella repositioning sutures.

**Suture granuloma**

Small granulomas can form at the suture site. They can be excised with Wescott scissors and the base cauterized. The suture causing the granuloma also requires removal.