# Continuing Education Activity

Trauma is the leading cause of death worldwide. In the United States, trauma is the leading cause of death in young adults and accounts for ten percent of death in all men and women. This activity reviews proper trauma assessment as set forth by trauma guidelines and highlights the roles of the interprofessional team when assessing the trauma patient. This activity includes proper organization and the process that should be followed for patients with traumatic injury, as well as a strategy for improving patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the proper technique of trauma assessment.
- Describe the preparation needed for trauma assessment.
- Review the clinical significance of findings during a trauma assessment.
- Describe the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance trauma assessment and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Trauma is the leading cause of death worldwide. In the United States, trauma is the leading cause of death in young adults and accounts for ten percent of death in all men and women. In the U.S., there are approximately 50 million visits to the emergency department annually related to trauma. The most common causes of mortality in trauma victims include hemorrhage, cardiopulmonary arrest, and multiple organ dysfunction syndromes.

The assessment of trauma victims requires an organized and systematic approach. When caring for a trauma victim, physicians, nurses, and support staff must work together and communicate effectively. The goal of assessing trauma victims is identifying immediate life threats and stabilizing the patient.

# Technique or Treatment

**Prehospital**

The first step in trauma assessment begins prior to the patient's arrival. This includes gathering the care team, equipment, and initial information. Emergency medical services (EMS) should provide information including mechanism of injury, patient vital signs, obvious injury, current interventions, and patient's age and sex if available. After receiving this information, the healthcare team members should begin thinking of possible injuries that may be a threat to the patient's life. The trauma team may vary based on the hospital location and staffing but should, at a minimum, include a physician and nurse. Once the team is present, and ideally before the patient arrives, roles should be assigned. There must be one individual assigned as a team leader, usually the physician. Other roles may include documentation, airway management, IV access, attaching monitoring devices, and medication administration. The team leader should assign the roles and be in charge of the direction and decision making upon patient arrival and throughout the assessment.

**Primary Survey**

Upon patient arrival, the room should be quiet, and EMS should briefly present the patient and their findings. Depending on the patient's condition, the primary survey may have to start during the EMS presentation. If this occurs, every effort should be made to obtain the pertinent information from EMS before their departure. Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS), developed by the American College of Surgeons, promotes the primary survey sequence as airway, breathing, circulation, disability, exposure (ABCDE).

**Airway**

Airway obstruction is a major, preventable cause of death in trauma victims, and therefore it is the initial step of the primary survey.

**Breathing**

Once the airway is secured or maintained by the patient, breathing and ventilation should be assessed. This involves visual inspection of the patient's chest, looking for injury. Look for paradoxical chest movement, which indicates flail chest, penetrating injury, or tracheal deviation. Auscultate the lungs listening for decreased breath sounds. Palpate the chest for signs of crepitus. If the patient has signs of tension pneumothorax, immediate needle decompression or chest thoracostomy should be performed. Evaluate the patient's oxygen saturation. Ultrasound or x-ray imaging of the chest should be considered as an adjunct to the physical exam.

**Circulation**

The assessment of circulation focuses on hemorrhage control and maintaining adequate perfusion. Hemorrhage has been identified as the most common cause of preventable death in trauma victims.

**Disability**

Once airway, breathing, and circulation have been evaluated and stabilized, the patient's neurologic function should be assessed. Measure the patient's consciousness using the Glasgow coma score (GCS) (Table 1, GCS chart). For patients with a GCS of 8 or less, consideration should be given to definitive airway control (if not already achieved). Check pupils for size and reactivity. Assess the patient's motor ability and sensation in all four extremities to look for signs of spinal cord injury. Cervical spine immobilization should be maintained.

**Exposure**

The fifth and final step of the primary survey includes removing all clothing to assess for signs of injury such as gunshot wounds, stab wounds, abrasions, lacerations, ecchymosis, or any other traumatic findings. During this stage, it is important to remember to keep the patient warm as hypothermia can lead to multiorgan failure.

**Secondary Survey**

Once the patient is stabilized, and if they do not need immediate surgical intervention, a secondary assessment is performed. The secondary assessment involves further history from the patient, a thorough head-to-toe exam, and diagnostic testing. The four most commonly missed diagnoses during the survey are blunt abdominal trauma with internal organ injury, penetrating abdominal trauma, penetrating thoracic trauma, and extremity trauma such as fractures and compartment syndrome.

# Complications

There are several pitfalls in the evaluation of trauma patients that should be avoided if at all possible. If a patient has a clinical deterioration during the trauma evaluation, do not continue with the next step in the evaluation. Immediately go back to the ABCDE evaluation of the patient as this is most likely to identify a life-threatening condition. Similarly, do not be distracted by obvious injuries such as burns, open extremity fractures, or penetrating injuries and, therefore, not follow the sequence of ABCDE evaluation. Another pitfall to avoid is not to send the hemodynamically unstable patient away from the resuscitation area to obtain testing, such as X-rays or CT scans. Further, do not delay transfer to definitive care, if not at the highest level of care, to obtain tests or perform unnecessary procedures. Once the identification of the need to transfer to a higher level of care is identified, the transfer process should be initiated.

# Clinical Significance

Traumatic injuries are seen daily in the emergency department. It is important to be familiar with the process of trauma assessment in each health care provider's place of work. An efficient and thorough trauma assessment leads to decreased morbidity and mortality.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Assessing and caring for a trauma victim is a team effort and requires proper organization and effective communication. Poor patient outcomes can occur from missed diagnosis, communication errors, and lack of situational awareness. To avoid missing a diagnosis, there are several things to remember. Assume the worst-case scenario, listen carefully to EMS but remember that the information may be inaccurate, repeatedly reassess the patient, cooperate and be professional with other members of the trauma team, and never get stuck on your initial diagnosis. To avoid communication errors, it is crucial to have one team leader. The team leader is responsible for assigning roles and specific tasks. The team leader should continuously update the entire team of new findings and changes in the patient’s stability and change in the overall plan. Closed-loop communication should be used at all times. To maintain situational awareness, the team leader should encourage all members of the team to announce any concerns or abnormal findings. Proper patient monitoring and constant reevaluation of the patient will help maintain situational awareness.

**Summary**

The trauma assessment begins prior to the patient’s arrival with information gathering, the formation of the trauma team, and equipment preparation. On patient arrival, the team begins with the primary survey, which includes an assessment of the patient’s airway, breathing, circulation, disability, and exposure. Once the patient has been stabilized, and if they don’t require surgical intervention, the secondary survey begins. This involves a thorough history and physical exam to avoid missing an injury. Patient outcomes can be improved with efficient teamwork and effective communication. One team leader should lead the trauma assessment, and closed-loop communication should be used at all times.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The nursing team carries out actions during the assessment of trauma victims. Prior to patient arrival, the nursing staff is assigned roles. It is essential to know your role and prepare to perform the actions necessary for that role. Common roles include documentation, placing the patient on cardiac monitoring, obtaining vital signs, placing an intravenous catheter, obtaining a glucose level, drawing labs, obtaining an electrocardiogram, administering medications, and participating in CPR. If a nurse is assigned a role that they are unable to perform, it is important to inform the physician of this so the role may be reassigned. On patient arrival, the nursing staff should perform their assigned roles. When administering any medication, the name of the medication, dose, and route of administration should be repeated prior to giving the drug and once it has been given. The documenting nurse keeps a log of exam findings and actions performed as well as the time that the actions occurred. The nursing team can help improve patient outcomes by repeating back what they are asked to do before the action is completed. This improves communication and accuracy of treatment. Nursing should also voice any concerns and provide any suggestions that they feel may help the patient.