Acute kidney injury (AKI) does have significant morbidity and mortality if it is left untreated. The aim today is to try and prevent the condition in the first place by employing an interprofessional team approach. All healthcare workers must be aware of the condition, its causes, and potential complications.

At the first signs of creatinine elevation, the pharmacist should ensure that the patient is on no nephrotoxic medications. The patient should be educated that the regular consumption of NSAIDs is harmful to the kidney. The patient should be instructed to remain compliant with his blood pressure medications since uncontrolled hypertension can worsen kidney injury.

The nurse practitioner should ensure that the patient is well hydrated and is producing adequate urine before any contrast study. For those who develop acute kidney injury, the nurse should educate the patient to avoid agents such as NSAIDs to prevent the worsening of the renal injury. Plus, close follow-up with a nephrologist is highly recommended. Finally, the patient should have a dietary consult because salt and fluid restriction is vital when managing acute kidney injury. Similarly, the patient should avoid a high potassium diet when there is renal dysfunction. Because acute kidney injury induces a catabolic state, the patient should be encouraged to eat at least 1800 calories per day.

Finally, the primary care provider should closely monitor renal function, and if it is found to be worsening, a prompt nephrologist consult is recommended. Only through an interprofessional approach can the morbidity of acute kidney injury be lowered. If the kidney injury is allowed to progress, end-stage renal disease is the outcome.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes for patients with AKI depend on the cause of renal dysfunction, the presence of any underlying kidney disease, and the duration of the renal dysfunction. In the past, it was widely believed that AKI was fully reversible in all patients. Studies now show that in patients with a low eGFR, not only is there a higher risk of progressing to end-stage renal disease, but it also increases the mortality rate. In addition, AKI can also worsen the quality of life compared to the general population. Individuals who have a sudden increase in creatinine usually tend to have the worst prognosis. Today, in-hospital mortality for patients with AKI varies between 30-50%, especially when dialysis is required. Negative prognostic factors include:

- Advanced age

- Oliguria

- Use of vasopressors

- Multiorgan dysfunction

- Need for blood transfusions

- Hypotension

Over the long term, at least 12-15% of patients with AKI may require permanent dialysis. Mortality is increased in patients with high APACHE III scores, advanced age, and persistent creatinine elevation.