Management is dependent on the cause of hypopituitarism. Initial treatment should aim to address the underlying cause of hypopituitarism. Mass lesions should be removed surgically, and other medical conditions treated accordingly. Many patients may require hormone replacement therapy.

**ACTH Deficit**

Corticosteroid replacement should be initiated before the replacement of the thyroid hormone to avoid precipitating an adrenal crisis. Hydrocortisone at a dose of 10 mg to 20 mg in the morning and 5 mg to 10 mg in the afternoon are usually recommended. Some endocrinologists still recommend hydrocortisone to be given three times a day on symptomatic patients to imitate the physiologic hormonal secretion. The last dose of the day (second or third) should not be administered at night as it can cause insomnia. Sometimes patients do well with only once a day dose, which can be trialed on an individual basis.

**TSH Deficit**

Thyroid hormone (L-thyroxine) replacement is required, particularly for the elderly and those with cardiac disease. It is important to start with a low dose of 25 ug/daily and then up-titrate as required according to biochemical findings and clinical signs or symptoms. Peripheral hormone levels (T4 free or total) need to be measured as the TSH is not a reliable marker anymore.

**FSH/LH Deficit**

In men: testosterone can be delivered by gel, patch, oral, or intramuscular (IM) injections with careful monitoring of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and hemoglobin levels.

In women: estrogen/progesterone hormone replacement therapy via oral, intramuscular, or transdermal routes can be given.

If fertility is desired in men, then one starts with human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) to augment testosterone levels and improve semen quality. If this is not successful after one year, consider human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG)/recombinant FSH concomitant therapy to further enhance fertility. Specialty fertility clinics are dedicated to further evaluate and manage those patients.

**Growth Hormone Deficit**

Unlike in children with short stature due to GH deficiency, the role of GH replacement in the treatment of adult GH deficiency has not been well established. In children, synthetic growth hormone replacement is used for this purpose, such as somatotrophin. Replacement therapy is titrated against IGF1 levels. The goal of treatment is to ensure that adult height is obtained. Further evaluation is made post-puberty to determine whether GH replacement should continue into adulthood.

**ADH Deficit**

Replacement of ADH with intranasal or oral desmopressin (synthetic vasopressin) helps stabilize water balance and polyuria. Sodium levels need to be kept within normal range; urine specific gravity and osmolality can be measured to warranty appropriate replacement of ADH.