The differential diagnosis of Alexander disease is centered on disorders with cerebral white matter changes or macrocephaly. In younger children, all conditions characterized by megalencephaly, developmental delay, and spasticity must be addressed. In older children, the differential diagnosis must be made with disorders presenting with spasticity, signs ofinvolvement of the brain stem with or without megalencephaly, and convulsions.

However, Alexander disease can be distinguished from similar diseases by utilizing the MRI criteria and the clinical presentation. The differential that should be considered includes:

- Adrenoleukodystrophy: Lesions are predominantly in the occipitoparietal region and are bilateral.

- Canavan disease: Lesions have a frontal predominance. There is increased N-acetylaspartic acid on magnetic resonance spectroscopy. However, there is no contrast enhancement.

- Metachromatic leukodystrophy: Lysosomal storage disease. Lesions have a frontal predominance. However, it is not associated with contrast enhancement.

- Megalencephalic leukodystrophy: Lesions have a frontoparietal and anterior-temporal predominance.

- Classic congenital muscular dystrophy: Extensive cerebral white matter changes with relative sparing of the occipital lobe.

Very often, the type of distribution of white matter lesions helps the diagnosis. The distribution of the cerebral white matter involvement is, in Alexander disease, pathognomonic. The alterations, in fact, are predominantly of frontal distribution with rostral-caudal progression.