TTH is a clinical diagnosis using the IHS diagnostic criteria. No laboratory testing or imaging studies are usually necessary for the diagnosis of TTH. However, if one or more red flags are present, then appropriate investigations, including but not limited to brain imaging, should be performed to rule out secondary causes. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium contrast is the recommended imaging study in these patients.

**IHS Diagnostic criteria for TTH:**

IHS has proposed the diagnostic criteria in the third edition of the International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD-3).

- At least ten episodes of headache fulfilling criteria B-D

- Lasting from 30 minutes to as long as seven days

- Minimally two of the following four characteristics:

- Bilaterally located
- Pressing or tightening (non-pulsating) quality
- Mild or moderate in intensity
- Not exacerbated by routine physical activity, e.g., walking or climbing stairs.

- Both of the following:

- No nausea or vomiting
- No more than one of photophobia or phonophobia

- They are not better explained by another ICHD-3 diagnosis.

The above is a general ICHD-3 diagnostic criterion for the TTH. If one of the above ICHD-3 features for TTH is missing and not fulfilling the criteria for another headache disorder, a diagnosis of probable tension-type headache is possible. These patients with probable TTH should undergo evaluation over time, and the clinician usually makes a diagnosis of TTH in these patients. TTHs are further subdivided into three subtypes based on the frequency of headache episodes.

- **Infrequent episodic TTH:**At least ten episodes of headache occurring on <1 day/month on average (<12 days/year).

- **Frequent episodic TTH:**At least ten episodes of headache occurring on 1 to 14 days/month on average for over 3 months (≥12 and <180 days/year).

- **Chronic TTH:**Headache occurring on ≥15 days/month on average for >3 months (≥180 days/year).