Due to its high mineral content, enamel, which covers the visible part of the tooth (the crown), is the hardest substance in the human body, and for a good reason.

The teeth are generally conceptualized as a U-shape, with the bottom of the U representing the front teeth. The upper arch is the maxillary arch, with the teeth embedded in the maxilla, and the lower arch is the mandibular arch, with the teeth embedded in the mandible. The shape of the crown, in combination with arch mechanics and its position in the mouth, determines a tooth’s function in chewing.

The anterior teeth are called incisors, directly reflecting their role in cutting food into smaller pieces without performing any grinding function. There are eight incisors in normal adult dentition; two central and two lateral incisors on each arch.

Moving posteriorly, the next tooth is the canine, or the cuspid, known as the cornerstone of the dental arch. The canine is considered one of the most important teeth due to its crucial role in jaw dynamics, helping to control how the teeth slide on and off each other. The canine often has the longest root and is fastened tightly to the bone. Canine teeth function to tear and puncture holes.

Posterior to the canines are the eight premolars (bicuspids), four in each arch, which assist in crushing, grinding, and mixing food.

The most posterior functioning teeth are the first and second molars. Adults have eight molars, four per arch, with many adults having more posterior third molars (wisdom teeth). Third molars are often extracted for reasons beyond the scope of this article; it should be understood that wisdom teeth rarely contribute to mastication.