The sinoatrial node is an aggregation of specialized myocardial tissue located in the right atrium of the heart which spontaneously releases electrical signals to the atrial tissue and atrioventricular node signaling the heart to contract. Its more colloquial name is the “pacemaker” of the heart. Like any living tissue, it has a metabolic requirement to function appropriately. As stated above, this tissue receives vascular supply via the sinoatrial nodal artery, and if there is any disruption to this blood supply, devastating consequences can result such as arrhythmias.

Coronary artery disease ranks as one of the leading causes of death in the United States, and this is predominately due to disruptions to the vasculature supplying the heart. Risk factors of coronary artery disease are numerous, but the most significant are smoking, male gender, family history of coronary artery disease, increased LDL, decreased HDL, and hypertension, which can lead to the formation of atherosclerotic plaques in the arterial lining and progressively limit the blood supply passing through the artery or lead to thrombotic events. If the artery is not able to transport enough blood to meet the tissues metabolic requirements the tissue can become non-viable leading to tissue necrosis. Furthermore, like any other artery, the sinoatrial nodal artery can be prone to aneurysms. Though these are rare, they occur mainly in proximal or midportions of the artery. They are usually secondary to atherosclerotic lesions and treatable with surgical approaches.