CKD has a multitude of manifestations and is optimally managed by an interprofessional team of health care professionals who practice at a single location such as a CKD clinic. These clinics focus on guideline-driven kidney care, evaluate and treat complications, suggest patient lifestyle modifications, and provide adequate patient education regarding the various modalities of dialysis. Fishbane et al. compared a standard care model with a healthy transitions program where a nurse care manager works with a protocol-driven informatics system that provides daily reports with incomplete steps of the process for each patient.

The interprofessional CKD clinics have access to a nutritionist who assesses the nutritional status of a patient and also formulates a meal plan. Similarly, a pharmacist performs a medication check and screens for nephrotoxic medications and adjusts the non-nephrotoxic medications to the patient’s renal function. The nurse practitioner evaluates the blood pressure and adjusts the blood pressure medications accordingly. The primary care provider educates the patient on the importance of discontinuing smoking, eating healthy and maintaining healthy body weight. The dialysis nurse assists the team by providing education on how to look after the dialysis catheters or AV fistulas. A vascular access nurse also evaluates appropriate patients for hemodialysis access. Finally, a renal transplantation nurse provides information on the procedure and the criteria for selecting patients for the procedure.

Evidence shows that an interprofessional approach to chronic renal failure avoids duplication of studies, is cost-effective, results in less patient morbidity, and ensures better outcomes.