Microsporidia are difficult to detect because of their small size, their slowly infecting properties, and sometimes asymptomatic infection. Therefore, there are many undetermined cases of diarrhea worldwide. The organism needs to be visualized using special techniques involving special laboratory facilities and trained personnel to characterize the infection.

Detection of Microsporidia is based on stool examination through microscopic observation. However, the new staining methods including trichrome stain and fluorescence staining using optical brighteners can be useful. Microsporidia can be stained with Gram stain, carbol-fuchsin stain, and with silver stains.

The immunoblot, the Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA), and Immunofluorescence Assay (IFA) that utilizes monoclonal and polyclonal antibody are also helpful serological assays for in microsporidia characterization.

The molecular characterization including polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and nucleotide sequencing are promising highly sensitive assays with a sensitivity of more than 90% for a quick characterization of human-infected microsporidia. The array can simultaneously detect all 4 species of Microsporidia at a sensitivity of 10 spores per 100 microliters of fecal sample.Microsporidia and amplifying the certain sequence enzymatically in thermal cyclic condition and then compare it to the control. To determine the genotype of microsporidia in the infecting host, the rRNA sequence is a gold standard for further characterization.

The in vitro and in vivo assays are also developed to propagate microsporidia for study purposes. Microsporidia generally propagate in the insect cells or tissue or amplified with in vivo inoculation, for example, N. bombycis growth in ovarian tissue of Bombyx mori and N. ceranae inoculated in Apis species or the honeybee.Microsporidia from samples, including urine, sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage, feces, duodenal aspirates, conjunctival scraping, corneal biopsies, cerebrospinal fluids, muscle biopsies, and brain tissue, can grow in mammalian cell lines.Nosema algerae, a microsporidian parasite of mosquitoes can be grown in laboratory colonies and propagated under in vitro setting in the pig's kidney cell line. In vitro cultures of fish, Microsporidia have been successfully demonstrated by using epithelial cell cultures of Aedes albopictus at 28 C. Both in vivo and in vitro assays are useful; however, these techniques require trained personnel, adequate facilities, and the right equipment.