**Common Adverse Effects**

- Infection (viral, bacterial, and fungal – mostly upper respiratory tract infections)

- Injection site reaction (erythema, itching, pain, swelling, bleeding, bruising)

**Rare Adverse Effects (in alphabetical order):**

- Blood and lymph disorders: aplastic anemia, leukopenia, myelodysplastic syndrome, neutropenia, pancytopenia, thrombocytopenia

- Cancers: lymphoma, skin cancers

- Cardiopulmonary problems: congestive heart failure, interstitial lung disease

- Gastrointestinal and liver problems: autoimmune hepatitis,

- Immune and inflammatory conditions:  angioedema,

- Infections: aspergillosis,

- Nervous system disorders: headache,

- Skin disorders: cutaneous lupus erythematosus,

**US Boxed warnings**

**Infections, Including Tuberculosis**

Patients using etanercept have an increased risk of acquiring serious and/or fatal infections, including the development of active tuberculosis or reactivation of latent tuberculosis. There are reports of various bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, including invasive fungal (aspergillosis, blastomycosis, candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and pneumocystosis) and opportunistic infections (legionellosis, listeriosis).

Infections were more common in patients that received adjunct immunosuppressive medications, such as methotrexate or corticosteroids. Medical providers should exercise caution when prescribing etanercept to patients at higher risk for infections, including elderly patients, immunocompromised patients, patients with a history of recurrent/chronic/opportunistic infections, and patients exposed to tuberculosis or endemic mycoses. Physicians should consider empiric antifungal therapy for patients living in or traveling to endemic areas with an increased risk of invasive fungal infections.

**Malignancies**

Reports exist of malignancies in patients receiving etanercept, especially in children and adolescents. Lymphomas were most commonly reported, followed by melanoma and other skin cancers. Though the connection between etanercept and malignancies is not fully understood, clinical trials and case reports showed an increased rate of lymphoma and other malignancies in patients on etanercept compared to the general population. However, it is worth noting that rheumatoid arthritis alone has associations with increased rates of lymphoma and leukemia.