In the general population, the most common vascular abnormality in the GI tract is angiodysplasia, which mainly occurs in patients over 60 years of age.

End-stage renal disease - Peptic ulcer disease remains the most common cause of GI bleeding in end-stage renal disease patients. Still, angiodysplasia is another sizeable cause of both upper and lower GI bleeding in these patients and accounts for almost 20% to 30%, respectively. According to one report, one-half of patients with recurrent bleeding in chronic renal failure were because of angiodysplasia.

Aortic stenosis (Heyde syndrome) - Heyde in 1958 first suggested association of unknown cause of GI bleeding, which was later attributed to angiodysplasia and aortic stenosis. The association is still subject to debate, and there are mixed small case-control and retrospective studies both in favor and against the association. There have also been reports of cessation of recurrent GI bleed on long term follow up after aortic valve replacement.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) - Gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE or watermelon stomach) is vascular malformation of gastric antral mucosa sometimes is considered a variant of angiodysplasia under the broad spectrum of vascular anomalies however many authors consider it as a systemic disease such as systemic sclerosis-related vascular ectasia. The prevalence of GAVE has been estimated at 5.7% in patients with SSc based on one large retrospective disease

There is no causal association found yet and the association between these diseases, and angiodysplasia could be secondary to more endoscopic investigation related bias because patients with these conditions are more prone to have gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to underlying coagulopathy such as uremic platelet dysfunction in ESRD and acquired Von Willebrand factor deficiency in aortic valve stenosis and left ventricular assist device (LVAD).