# Introduction

The papillary muscles of the heart are pillar-like muscles seen within the cavity of the ventricles, attached to their walls. They have an integral role in proper cardiac valvular function. They arise from the inner walls of the left and right ventricle and attach to mitral and tricuspid valve leaflets respectively via chordae tendinae. Historical documentation of the existence of papillary muscles as a component of cardiac anatomy exists at least as early as the 16th century.

# Structure and Function

The papillary muscles arise from the walls of the left and right cardiac ventricles. The classic description of the left cardiac ventricle is as containing two papillary muscles: the anterolateral and posteromedial.

The general understanding is that the papillary muscles arise uniformly from the smooth surface of the ventricles. Nevertheless, a recent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) study has identified a 'cypress-tree' root-like structure at the base of the papillary muscle of the left ventricle with many thin projections which coalesce before forming into a thick muscle pillar.

The primary function of these muscles is the proper functioning of the valves, i.e., opening and closer of the atrioventricular orifice. When the ventricles contract during the systole, simultaneous contraction of the papillary muscles taut the chordae tendinae. This arrangement prevents prolapse as well as the inversion of the cusps of the mitral and tricuspid valves.

# Embryology

Embryologic development of the papillary muscles begins at approximately week five of development and ends at about week nineteen of development.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The blood supply to the left anterolateral papillary muscles derives from branches of the left coronary artery. The blood supply to the left posteromedial papillary muscles most commonly derives from the right coronary artery. In some cases, posteromedial papillary muscles receiving blood supply from branches of the left circumflex artery.[9] The dominant circulation explains this variance in supply in the heart. The article “Papillary Muscle Perfusion Pattern, A Hypothesis for Ischemic Papillary Muscle Dysfunction” by Voci et al. (1995) found the posteromedial papillary muscle to have perfusion by only one vessel in 63% of patients, while the anterolateral papillary muscle more often demonstrated perfusion by multiple vessels.

The blood supply to the anterior papillary muscle of the right ventricle most commonly originates from vessels branching from the left and right coronary arteries, with some anatomical variants receiving blood supply originating only from the left coronary artery.

The lymphatic supply of the papillary muscles forms from lymphatic plexuses with a range of lymphatic vessel sizes.

# Nerves

Post-ganglionic axons arising from cervical, thoracic and mediastinal ganglia provide sympathetic motor innervation to the ventricular myocardium.

Further information about specific innervation of the papillary muscles is not very well described in the available literature.

# Physiologic Variants

Physiologic variants of the papillary muscles can include modifications in muscle morphology, ventricular wall origin, and chordae attachment. Morphological variants can be described based on the number of papillary muscle heads and the presence of shared or separate basal origins.

Usually, the left ventricles have two papillary muscles, but studies indicate that 46% of hypoplastic and 18% of the borderline left ventricle cases had just a single papillary muscle. In these cases, it was also observed that the supporting pedicle had a more extensive attachment over the ventricular wall.

# Surgical Considerations

Surgical considerations regarding the papillary muscles include pathologic papillary muscle abnormalities leading to left ventricular outflow tract obstruction and papillary muscle rupture. Left ventricular outflow tract obstruction secondary to papillary muscle pathology that is amenable to surgical resection has been established in multiple case reports, with significant clinical improvement described post-intervention.

Pathologic papillary muscle anatomy has been described as a contributing factor to left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It may require modifications to surgical techniques generally used for the treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Surgical intervention, such as mitral valve replacement or repair, is the recommended treatment for treatment following papillary muscle rupture after myocardial infarction.

# Clinical Significance

The papillary muscles are integral to proper valvular coordination and alignment. Papillary muscle dysfunction can occur due to congenital abnormalities resulting in left ventricular outflow tract obstruction as well as from injury to the papillary muscles from ischemia or ventricular remodeling. Given the integral role of the papillary muscles in valvular coaptation, clinically significant valvular abnormalities correlate with these derangements.

Congenital abnormalities of the papillary muscles include pathological insertion of the papillary muscles and abnormal chordae tendinae attachment. Direct papillary muscle leaflet insertion has been described in case reports and is associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.

Left ventricular remodeling due to cardiomyopathy or cardiac ischemia can lead to secondary (functional) mitral regurgitation. In contrast to primary mitral regurgitation, in which intrinsic defects of the mitral valve apparatus lead to insufficiency, secondary mitral regurgitation results from disease of the atrium or ventricle without the mitral valvular disease.

# Other Issues

Rupture of the papillary muscle can occur following acute myocardial infarction as well as following traumatic injury.

As previously described, the posteromedial papillary muscle often has perfusion by only one vessel. Accordingly, the rupture of the posteromedial papillary muscle occurs more commonly than that of the anterolateral papillary muscle.

Blunt trauma leading to papillary muscle rupture has appeared in multiple case reports. It should be a consideration when a new murmur or elevated cardiac enzymes present following severe trauma.

This research was supported (in whole or in part) by HCA and/or an HCA-affiliated entity.  The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) do not necessarily represent the official views of HCA or any of its affiliated entities.