# Continuing Education Activity

Subchorionic hemorrhage is bleeding beneath the chorion membranes that enclose the embryo in the uterus. It is thought to occur due to partial detachment of the chorion membranes from the wall of the uterus. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of subchorionic hemorrhage in pregnant patients and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition. Subchorionic hemorrhage and subchorionic hematoma are the most common cause of vaginal bleeding in patients who are 10 to 20 weeks gestational age and make up about 11% of cases.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the evaluation for a subchorionic hemorrhage.
- Review the complications for a subchorionic hemorrhage.
- Describe the typical imaging findings associated with subchorionic hemorrhage.

- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for pregnant patients with a subchorionic hemorrhage.

# Introduction

Vaginal bleeding in the first trimester of pregnancy is a common complication, with an incidence of 16 to 25%.

Subchorionic hematoma is another commonly used term for subchorionic hemorrhage. Most women present with light vaginal bleeding, but some are asymptomatic with incidental ultrasound findings.

# Etiology

The etiology of subchorionic hematoma remains unclear.

# Epidemiology

Subchorionic hemorrhages occur in females of reproductive age. They are common sonographic findings in patients with vaginal bleeding in weeks 9 to 20 of pregnancy.

# History and Physical

Patients can be asymptomatic or experience vaginal bleeding. Abdominal pain is usually absent; however, a minority of patients can experience cramping or contractions.

The abdomen should also be examined, starting by using gentle percussion in the quadrant with the least pain

# Evaluation

All women of reproductive age presenting with abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding, or menstrual abnormalities should undergo a urine pregnancy test and determination of beta hCG. Pregnant patients who present with vaginal bleeding and or abdominal cramping should undergo an evaluation to exclude any life-threatening conditions. This differential includes ectopic pregnancy, which should be ruled out using ultrasound. Ultrasound is the imaging of choice when assessing these patients and can diagnose several pathologies that may lead to bleeding in early pregnancy.

Ultrasound findings will reveal a hypoechoic or anechoic crescent-shaped area behind the fetal membranes, which may also elevate the edge of the placenta.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment and management should focus on specific patient complaints, gestational age, and if the patient is hemodynamically stable or unstable. Depending on the severity of the patient’s complaint (which is commonly vaginal bleeding in the setting of a subchorionic hemorrhage), treatment should be rapidly initiated.

Some sources suggest vaginal progesterone supplementation for patients with vaginal bleeding in the first trimester; however, this has not been shown to increase live birth rates, and its routine use is not recommended.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for a female patient of reproductive age presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding is vast. The initial goal is to identify patients with a serious or life-threatening disease or condition for their symptoms. If the patient is known or found to be pregnant, intrauterine pregnancy should be confirmed via ultrasound to rule out a life-threatening ectopic pregnancy. Other common differential diagnoses include early pregnant loss (miscarriage or spontaneous abortion), threatened abortion, implantation bleeding, placental abruption, placenta previa, vasa previa, gestational trophoblastic disease, uterine rupture, ovarian torsion, a tubo-ovarian abscess.

# Prognosis

For women with a subchorionic hematoma that is sonographically identified, the fetal outcome is dependent on the size of the hematoma, maternal age, and gestational age.

Subchorionic hematoma increases the risk of spontaneous abortion, while premature delivery rate and delivery mode are not affected if pregnant women can continue the pregnancy.

# Complications

Pregnant women with subchorionic hematoma (SCH) are associated with an increased risk of early pregnancy loss.

Subchorionic hematoma diagnosed at the beginning of pregnancy is a risk factor of pregnancy-induced hypertension in the third trimester.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Subchorionic hematoma, although not considered normal in pregnancy, is not an unusual occurrence. It is important to let patients know that this does not mean they will lose the pregnancy. With close monitoring, the majority of these cases go on to deliver healthy babies. Subchorionic bleeding does not mean that the pregnancy is in imminent danger; however, it is important to follow up with the physician. Patients need to know the necessary precautions and when to be concerned or return to the hospital. These precautions include but are not limited to vaginal bleeding or spotting, abdominal pain.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because of the many causes of bleeding in the first trimester, when a subchorionic hematoma would normally present, this must be managed by an interprofessional healthcare team that encourages close follow-up with the patient. This team can include primary care, emergency providers, obstetricians, midwives, and specialty trained nurses in obstetrics. In cases where patients present with heavy vaginal bleeding and pelvic cramping, it is important to stabilize the patient if needed, followed by evaluating the pregnancy. In most cases, a subchorionic hematoma is managed by an obstetrician and gynecologist, who follows up with serial ultrasounds and monitoring patient symptoms.