Over 45% of Americans are on at least one prescription medication. Therefore, product safety is paramount and is enforced by laws and regulations through the FDA.

The FDA is unable to track or inspect the individual ingredients used to make the product imported into the US. In 2018, the recalls of angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB) were needed due to contamination and poor manufacturing of APIs. In 2020, the removal of ranitidine resulted from the chemical instability of the drug molecule.

In addition, the PDMA seeks to combat the growing presence of counterfeit drugs worldwide, a $75 billion industry accounting for approximately 10% of all medicines worldwide.

Long and convoluted pharmaceutical supply chains pose a significant risk to counterfeiting as drugs experience varying levels of oversight during change of custody. The PDMA addresses this risk factor by encouraging wholesale distributors to become authorized distributors of record (ADR), which involves a written agreement authorizing a wholesaler to sell a particular drug. The PDMA also initially stated wholesale distributors without an ADR must possess a drug pedigree which included the entire chain of custody from the manufacturer to the distributor.

However, the pedigree provision of the PDMA was abandoned after passing the Drug Supply Chain Security Act (DSCSA) in 2015, which established an electronic system to trace prescription medications. In addition, the DSCSA requires all distributors to provide transaction information, transaction history, and a transaction statement (a triad also known as T3 information).