**Heat CT Scan - Sylvian Fissure Signs**

Early signs of the middle cerebral artery occlusion in non-contrast head CT scan (<24 hours):

- Hyperdense MCA (middle cerebral artery) sign: the appearance of increased attenuation of the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery.

- MCA (middle cerebral artery) dot sign: hyperdensity in the distal middle cerebral artery and its branches inside the Sylvian fissure.

**Brain MRI - Sylvian Fissure Signs**

"Bat-wings" appearance: bilateral open Sylvian fissures typically seen in type I glutaric aciduria.

**Angiography**

The different segments of the middle cerebral artery can be identified in cerebral angiography. At the limen insulae, the M1 segment becomes the M2 segment, at the genu, and turns around the insular pole. The M1 segment runs horizontally (horizontal segment) and could or could not include the main bifurcation. When the bifurcation is present in the horizontal segment it is divided into pre-bifurcation and post-bifurcation M1. The middle cerebral artery bifurcation can be classified as "classic" when it occurs at the genu or "non-classic" when it occurs before the genu.

The M2 segment starts at the genu, at the limen insulae, and has a vertical course (vertical segment). Immediately medial to the M2 segment is located the lateral surface of the insula. The M2 segment forms several loops when it reaches the superior limiting sulcus of the insula, becoming the M3 segment. The first loop of M2 is more medially located in the angiography because it takes place in the anterior insular cleft. The last loop of the M3 segment, over the temporal operculum exiting the Sylvian fissure, is a relevant angiographic landmark: the M point or angiographic Sylvian point. The angiographic Sylvian point is the point where the angular branch leaves the insula posteriorly and turns inferolaterally to reach the brain's surface. This point represents the posterior limit of the Sylvian fissure and typically is located 3.0 to 4.6 cm medially from the inner table of the skull (on anteroposterior view) and in the middle point of the clinoparietal line (on the lateral view).

The Sylvian triangle is an important landmark on the lateral cerebral angiograms. It is formed by three lines: a straight line that follows the tops of the insular loops of the M2 segment superiorly, the major trunk of the middle cerebral artery anteriorly, and the first ascending insular branch of the M2 segment posteriorly. The angiographic Sylvian point is the most medial point of the highest loop of the Sylvian triangle (superior line of the triangle) on the anteroposterior projection. In the past, the Sylvian triangle was the most important vascular configuration to diagnose and localize space-occupying lesions in the supratentorial space.

**Middle Cerebral Artery Aneurysms**

The middle cerebral artery is the third most common location of the intracranial saccular aneurysms (22%). Most of them arise from the bifurcation or trifurcation of the M1 segment, located in the Sylvian fissure's sphenoidal compartment.

The classification by size for the middle cerebral artery aneurysms is shown below (Table 2).

Different treatment strategies for management include transluminal embolization techniques, microsurgical techniques, or hybrid techniques (table 3).

**Coil or clip? General Principles**

- Microsurgical and embolization techniques complement each other

- Microsurgical clipping is particularly effective for the middle cerebral artery aneurysms

- Patient's age and comorbidities: 

- ruptured aneurysms in young patients may be a better candidate for microsurgical clipping 
- ruptured aneurysms in elderly patients with comorbidities, maybe a better candidate for embolization techniques

- Middle cerebral artery aneurysms with wide necks and/or perforating branches associated (dome or base) can be approached safer with surgery and clip reconstruction than embolization.

- Ruptured aneurysms with mass effect due to intracerebral hematoma are better candidates for open surgery.

- Experience and preferences of the surgeon

- Patient's preference

- Costs and accessibility

**Table 2**. Classification of the middle cerebral artery aneurysms according to the seize

**Table 3**. Strategies in the management of intracranial aneurysms

**Sylvian Fissure Arachnoid Cysts**

The arachnoid cysts represent less than 1% of the intracranial lesions. They are benign cystic lesions that can be located along the neuroaxis. The Sylvian fissure is the most common location; these are called middle cranial fossa arachnoid cysts (34%). They are predominant in male patients and on the left side. The pathophysiology is not clear, but some authors consider arachnoid cysts as congenital lesions.

Most of these cysts are found incidentally during brain images. In symptomatic patients, usually larger cysts, the most common symptoms include headache, seizures, and motor deficit. Rarely, the Sylvian cysts can be localized bilaterally, and there is an association of bilateral cysts with glutaric aciduria type I (GA-I).

According to the size of the Sylvian arachnoid cysts, they can be classified into three categories I-III (table 2).

The management of the arachnoid cysts includes conservative and surgical alternatives. Conservative management is preferred in asymptomatic patients with small cysts and includes a follow-up brain imaging 6-8 months after the initial image to rule out the enlargement of the cyst. Surgical techniques include endoscopic, microsurgical (craniotomy), and shunting. The surgical approach is indicated in symptomatic patients and/or large cysts with mass effect. A metanalysis suggests the middle cranial fossa arachnoid cysts. Neuroendoscopic fenestration is the best initial procedure.

**Table 4**. Galassi's classification of the middle cranial fossa arachnoid cysts (based on CT scan and CT cisternography)

A small lesion, spindle-shaped, limited to the anterior aspect of the temporal fossa.

Lack of mass effect, no distortion of the ventricles, no displacement of the midline structures.

A medium-sized lesion, quadrangular shape in at least one CT-scan' slice, straight inner margin

Occupies the anterior and middle part of the temporal fossa and extends superiorly along the Sylvian fissure (proximal and intermediate segments), which is widely open.

A large lesion, oval or round in shape, involves the entire Sylvian fissure; midline structures are displaced.

The atrophic temporal lobe, with compression of the frontal and parietal lobes, middle cranial fossa extension.