The concern lies in the healthcare community about the inappropriate long-term use of prescribed clonazepam and other BZD drugs despite their serious adverse effects profile, like the risk of falls, cognitive impairment, and addiction. Interventions to decrease the inappropriate use of clonazepam involve an interprofessional team that includes clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and primary care providers.

Clonazepam is usually started after an acute event or during the hospital stay by the clinicians. Once ordered by the clinicians, nurses often administer the drug. Following administration in hospital settings, its use may carry over to primary care without any indication; this is where a pharmacist performing medication reconciliation on discharge is invaluable. In primary care, patients also influence clinicians by having this conceived notion about clonazepam and BZD drugs being wonder drugs to make them feel and sleep better. These issues can result in poor patient outcomes from drug dependence, misuse, abuse, motor impairment, etc. Therefore, an interprofessional approach is required to develop ideas to reduce the use of hypnotics and develop interventions to prevent misuse in the hospital and at the primary and secondary care interface.

The prescribing clinician, nurse, and pharmacist should use controlled substance prescription monitoring program (CSPMP) databases to ensure the safe and proper use of benzodiazepines, sedative-hypnotics, opioids, and other controlled substances. A study suggests that interprofessional teamwork between primary care physicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists can enhance safe medication practices involving high-risk benzodiazepines.