Borrelia species are fastidious spirochetes. They are large with irregular spirals and readily stain with aniline dyes. Although Borrelia is technically gram-negative, they are most readily identified by Giemsa or Wright staining.

Borrelia recurrentis is transmitted when an infected human body louse, Pediculosis humanus corporis, is crushed and Borrelia recurrentis present in the hemocoel penetrate through intact skin and mucosal surfaces. Epidemic relapsing fever is not transmitted by intact lice. A louse is infected when it feeds on a febrile patient with relapsing fever. Humans are the only known host and reservoir of Borrelia recurrentis. On the contrary, small rodents and other mammals(birds, bats) serve as a reservoir for tick-borne Borrelia species. Borrelia hermsii, Borrelia parkeri, and Borrelia turicatae are transmitted via the bite of soft-bodied night-feeding Ornithodoros ticks. As the ticks feed at night, patients are often unaware of the bite. Exposure to these ticks has been associated with sleeping in mountain cabins and spelunking. Borrelia miyamotoi is transmitted via the Ixodes tick, similar to Lyme disease.

The clinical manifestations of relapsing fever, including fever, myalgias, chills, and arthralgias, are caused by an endotoxin-like substance produced by the spirochete. The initial febrile episode in relapsing fever resolves due to the development of antibodies directed at surface proteins of the organism. However, a reservoir of organisms in reticuloendothelial organs undergo genetic reassortment to alter the expression of surface proteins. This allows for an escape from immune clearance and re-emergence of spirochetemia and clinical symptoms. The typical recurrence pattern of Borrelia symptoms in relapsing fever is due to repeated cycles of reassortment of surface proteins followed by antibody-mediated suppression of infection. This characteristic variation of the outer-membrane lipoprotein is known as the relapse phenomenon. Infection is not associated with long-term immunity and patients may be reinfected as soon as six months after the initial infection.