The history and physical examination are essential components in the evaluation of a patient with orthostatic syncope. The history may reveal a cause for hypovolemia such as vomiting, diarrhea, and decreased oral intake. Melena, hematemesis, hematuria, menorrhagia or hematochezia point to blood loss. Elderly deconditioned patients, especially after prolonged hospitalization, may have reduced muscle tone. Review of the patients' medication list may show polypharmacy, culprit medications (including diuretics, vasodilators, other antihypertensives) and steroids (a clue to steroid-induced adrenal insufficiency). Review of the past medical history will reveal associated predisposing medical conditions (diabetes, Parkinsonism, dementia).

Orthostatic syncope may occur suddenly with no warning or may be preceded by symptoms. Associated symptoms are usually because of cerebral hypoperfusion occurring in the upright position and include dizziness, feeling faint or nauseated, diaphoresis, a sense of warmth or blurred vision. Other general symptoms regardless of the position include a feeling of generalized weakness, headache, fatigue, cognitive slowing and shortness of breath.

Blood pressure and heart rate should be measured in supine and standing positions. As described above, orthostatic hypotension diagnosis is when there is a drop of greater than or equal to 20 mmHg or greater or equal to 10 mmHg in systolic and diastolic blood pressures, respectively within 3 minutes of standing. In the case of hypovolemia, there is also a compensatory rise in heart rate of greater than 15 beats/minute.