Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) is used in cardiomyopathy to assess ventricular volumes, ejection fraction, myocardial mass, and wall thickness. The high resolution of CMR helps in assessment of the ventricle systolic function and differentiate between ischemic and non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) can identify the fibrosis of the myocardium which helps to differentiate between types of cardiomyopathy. LGE CMR can be used to check for the arrhythmogenic substrate; this helps for future treatment options including ablation.

In DCM, the dilated ventricles and decreased ejection fraction are the main findings.

In HCM, the CMR can show the septal and left ventricular hypertrophy and helps in the assessment of variant types of HCM. CMR is more sensitive than echocardiogram to identify areas of segmental left ventricular hypertrophy. Myocardial fibrosis can be detected when using IV gadolinium.

CMR is essential in the diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy and the differential diagnosis of etiology of this type of cardiomyopathies; it helps to differentiate the restrictive cardiomyopathy from the constrictive pericarditis.

In cardiac sarcoidosis, the typical findings on CMR are biventricular dilation and thinning of the septum.

CMR can be used as part of the workup for other unclassified cardiomyopathies. In stress cardiomyopathy, the CMR can show the left ventricular wall motion dyskinesia or akinesia in the mid and apical areas of the left ventricle in up to 75% of patients.