Gastric resection may be performed using an open, laparoscopic, or robotic-assisted approach. Randomized controlled trials comparing laparoscopic and open gastrectomy have shown oncologic equivalency and demonstrated favorable outcomes in postoperative recovery with minimally invasive approaches.

For all techniques, the patient is placed on the operating room table in the supine position and prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion. Preoperative antibiotics are given, and a nasogastric tube is placed for gastric decompression. The outline below describes the key steps for gastric resection.

**Step 1: Staging Laparoscopy and General Inspection**

Diagnostic laparoscopy should be performed initially to rule out the occult metastatic disease of the liver or peritoneum. If no evidence of grossly metastatic disease is seen, the surgeon can proceed with gastric resection. A liver retractor may be placed to mobilize and retract the left lobe of the liver.

**Step 2: Entry into the Lesser sac and Mobilization of the Greater Curvature of the Stomach******

The patient is placed in a slightly reverse Trendelenburg position, and the division of the gastrocolic ligament provides entry into the lesser sac. Care should be taken to avoid damage to the transverse colon mesentery and vasculature. The splenic flexure is dissected, and the left gastroepiploic artery and short gastric vessels are divided. Lymph nodes from the splenic hilum are left en bloc to be taken with the specimen. Omentectomy is then carried out along the transverse colon laterally towards the liver, and the right gastroepiploic vessels are divided. Dissection is carried down to approximately 2 cm distal to the pylorus.****

**Step 3: Mobilization of the Lesser Curvature of the Stomach and Duodenum******

The lesser curvature of the stomach is mobilized toward the esophagus and the right crus of the diaphragm. The gastrohepatic ligament is divided, and care should be taken to avoid damage to an accessory right hepatic artery. The left and right gastric vessels are divided. Lymphatic tissue following the common and proper hepatic arteries is mobilized and taken en bloc with the specimen. For total gastrectomy, dissection of the intraabdominal esophagus is performed. Pericardial lymph nodes (stations 1 and 2) are dissected en bloc with the specimen. The gastrohepatic omentum must be divided at the level of the esophageal hiatus.****

**Step 4: Lymphadenectomy******

A D2 nodal dissection is a gold standard for gastric carcinoma. Stations 1-7 are perigastric nodes that are taken en block with the gastric specimen. Lymphadenectomy continues along the proper hepatic artery and is carried along the common hepatic artery (station 8) toward the celiac axis (station 9) and splenic artery (station 11p and 11d). Dissection is then carried down to the hepatoduodenal ligament to harvest associated lymph nodes. (station 12a)

**Step 5: Gastric Transaction******

The duodenum is divided using a linear GIA stapler after the nasogastric tube is removed. The duodenum is taken en bloc with the inferior and superior pyloric nodes (stations 5 and 6). Once the tumor is identified, the stomach or distal esophagus is transected with a linear GIA stapler so that adequate oncologic proximal margins of 4-6 cm are obtained.

**Step 6: Reconstruction**

There are various reconstruction techniques that have been described for gastric resection. For subtotal gastrectomy, reconstruction with Billroth 1 gastroduodenostomy, Billroth 2 gastrojejunostomy, or Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy may be performed. For total gastrectomy, reconstruction with a Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy or a Hunt-Lawrence jejunal pouch may be performed.

Roux-en-Y Reconstruction - Jejunum at a distance 30 to 50 cm from the ligament of Treitz is divided using a linear GIA stapler to create the Roux limb proximally and the biliopancreatic limb distally. Jejunojejunostomy is made 60-70 cm along the Roux limb. The antimesenteric borders of the biliopancreatic limb and Roux limb are aligned, and enterotomies are made for the linear GIA stapler. The anastomosis is completed using a TA stapler. The mesenteric defect is closed with an absorbable suture to prevent internal hernias. The Roux limb is brought up to the proximal stomach or esophagus in an antecolic or retrocolic fashion. Stapled or hand-sewn end-to-end esophagojejunostomy or gastrojejunostomy anastomosis is created. A water-bubble test can be performed to rule out a leak. A water-soluble upper GI contrast study can be performed on postoperative day 5 to assure the integrity of the anastomosis before initiation of oral intake.

**Step 7: Optional Distal Feeding Tube Placement**

Additional consideration should be given to patients with preoperative weight loss or risk factors for complicated or delayed postoperative recovery. In such cases, a jejunostomy feeding tube may be considered and placed in the distal jejunum in a Stamm or Witzel fashion. The placement of a feeding jejunostomy tube is not routinely recommended but may be required in patients with severe preoperative nutritional deficiencies or if adequate nutrition post-operatively is a concern.