In the past, PNH treatment was mostly supportive. Patients were given a blood transfusion and iron supplementation for recurrent hemolysis and anemia. They were given anti-thrombosis prophylaxis to prevent thrombosis. For bone marrow complications, an allogeneic bone marrow transplant was offered.

In PNH, complement-mediated hemolysis and chronic dysregulation of the alternative complement pathway are the main culprits. Commonly there is a loss of anchoring proteins such as CD55 and CD59, which causes cells to hemolyze and lead to complications like thrombosis, which causes morbidity and mortality. Hence the mainstay of current therapy for PNH includes drugs to block alternative complement pathways such as eculizumab, ravulizumab, and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Eculizumab is a lifesaving therapy that is associated with a greater than 50% reduction in transfusion requirements and a close to 70% reduction in risk of thrombotic events and significant adverse vascular complications.

In addition, about 11 to 27% of patients on eculizumab undergo fatigue and breakthrough hemolysis (BTH) on approved treatment doses due to insufficient complement inhibition.

In an attempt to overcome those limitations, new drug ravulizumab was developed. In December 2018, the US Food and Drug administration approved ravulizumab for the treatment of PNH.

Another possible option is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). This is the only curative therapy for PNH. Limited data suggest that risks such as graft versus host disease are at acceptable levels for high-risk patients when risk versus benefit is considered for this treatment.

Other interventions of PNH are based on the potential complications related to PNH. For instance, PNH related to acute kidney injury is best treated with continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT).