Sialolithiasis is the most common benign cause of salivary gland swelling; however, it remains a relatively rare diagnosis with an incidence of 1 in 10000 to 1 in 30000. The disease commonly gets diagnosed in the primary care or emergency medicine setting, where initial patient contact is mostly with nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, primary care physicians, and emergency medicine physicians. Given the oral nature of the disease, some patients may initially present to their dentist for evaluation of symptoms. Diagnostic radiologists are often involved in the initial workup for imaging recommendations and interpretation. The potential involvement of all these disciplines is why an interprofessional team approach is necessary for the diagnosis and management of this condition.

An interprofessional approach and open communication among providers can aid in ensuring patients receive appropriate initial management resulting in a quicker resolution of symptoms.  Communication among the radiologist and primary care provider can help timely referral to an otolaryngologist when a large sialolith is likely to fail conservative measures. Additionally, patients should be educated to inform their provider if symptoms are not improving or are worsening, indicating failure of conservative measures and the potential need for referral to an otolaryngologist for advanced interventions. Well-informed nursing staff can assist in the management and provide patients with assurance that with modern multimodal treatment algorithms, success rates approach 100%. Gland removal is rarely necessary, especially with interprofessional team collaboration.