The mainstay of treatment in TTP is plasma exchange (PEX) with high-dose corticosteroid therapy.

Other treatments used include splenectomy, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and rituximab.

A newer agent, caplacizumab, has a high potential for the treatment of TTP. It is a humanized monoclonal antibody fragment (a bivalent, variable-domain-only fragment) that attacks the A1 section of VWF and prevents platelet adhesion.

Plasma infusion without exchange is not an adequate treatment for TTP. It can be used as a temporizing measure in patients who are unable to receive PEX immediately. This is supported by the data that plasma infusion has similar efficacy to PEX if equivalent volumes of plasma are administered.

A packed red blood cell (PRBC) transfusion can be given if there is a clinical indication. Platelet transfusion is controversial but is considered to be contraindicated unless major bleeding is present.

**2020 Treatment Guidelines by the International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis**

- For initial treatment of TTP, they gave a strong recommendation for the addition of corticosteroids to therapeutic plasma exchange (PEX) over PEX alone; however, they did not make any specific recommendation regarding a preferred dosage or type of corticosteroids.

- For patients with the first acute event, the panel suggested the addition of rituximab to corticosteroids and PEX. The primary documented effect of rituximab in patients with TTP is to prevent relapses, although they noted that the true benefit of rituximab might be masked by the fact that it has only been used in severe cases. They make a conditional recommendation for the use of this therapy based on practitioner judgment, especially if comorbid autoimmune disorders exist.

- For patients with relapsing TTP, the panel recommended PEX, corticosteroids, and rituximab as recommended for initial treatment, with the addition of caplacizumab.

- For patients with TTP who are in remission but still have low plasma ADAMTS13 activity without any evidence of clinical signs/symptoms, they recommended using rituximab for prophylaxis.

- For patients who are pregnant and have decreased plasma ADAMTS13 activity but have no clinical signs/symptoms of TTP, the panel recommended prophylactic treatment with plasma infusion products.