# Introduction

Bile acids are steroidal acids found in bile. Primary bile acids are steroids produced via the liver, specifically in peroxisomes.

# Function

Bile acids get conjugated in the liver to increase their water solubility because bile salts have a decreased pK, which favors the basic anionic form in the acidic duodenum. As amphiphiles, conjugated bile salts have a hydrophobic and hydrophilic side that, hence, their function as surfactants. The hydrophobic portion faces lipids, the hydrophilic portion facing the water, which allows them to act as bridges at the lipid/water interface, where they can make micelles when sufficiently concentrated.

Other functions of bile acids include removing the body's cholesterol, powering bile flow to remove various metabolites (like bilirubin), and facilitating the removal of bacterial flora of the small bowel and biliary tree (e.g., by disrupting their cellular membranes).

# Mechanism

Altogether, bile salts comprise a broad variety of different molecules, each being a steroid with the following basic components: (1) 4 rings, (2) a 5-/8-carbon side chain that ends with a carboxylic acid, and (3) a number of hydroxyl groups (whose position/number changes among the various salts). The rings are ascribed the letters A, B, C, and D based on their distance from the side chain with the -COOH group, the D ring being the most distant (as well as being 1 C smaller than the other rings). Beta hydroxyl groups face up/out, alpha groups down, and every bile acid has a 3-hydroxyl group that came from their cholesterol precursor.

Primary bile acids are made by hepatocytes either by the classic or acidic pathway. The former, which constitutes 95% of bile acid synthesis, is via cytochrome P450-mediated oxidation of cholesterol that requires NADPH and oxygen and occurs in a series of steps, the most important of which is the rate-limiting hydroxylation of the 7th steroid nucleus of cholesterol by cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) to create 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol. That then gets metabolized into 7alpha-hydroxy-4 cholesten-3-one in the second step. In sum, primary bile acid synthesis requires 14 enzymatic steps. The most common bile acids are cholic and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA). Cholic acid (3alpha, 7alpha, 12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholan-24-oic acid) is the commonest bile acid, and CDCA is the prototypical and most basic of bile acids produced and is also known as 3alpha,7alpha-dihydroxy-5beta-cholan-24-oic acid.

The alternative/acidic pathway acts via mitochondrial sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1), found in the liver, macrophages, and other tissues. Before secretion of bile acids, hepatocytes conjugate them with the amino acids taurine or glycine, thereby creating eight different conjugated bile acids/salts (including cholic and chenocholic acids). CYP27A1 significantly adds to bile acid synthesis by facilitating the oxidation of sterol side chains, followed by a peroxisomal cleavage of a 3-C unit to generate a C24 bile acid. Miscellaneous pathways, in addition to these two, include those started by the liver's 25-hydroxylase and the brain's 24-hydroxylase.

The purpose of conjugation is so that the bile acids can become water-soluble and thereby emulsify fats.

# Pathophysiology

Bile acid synthesis defects comprise about 1 to 2% of the cholestatic diseases found in children.

# Clinical Significance

Impairing enterohepatic circulation of bile acids decreases cholesterol because the liver is driven to use more cholesterol to make more. This state is the basis behind treating hyperlipidemia with bile acid resins like cholestyramine, colestipol, and colesevelam, which bind bile acids in the gut, preventing their reabsorption in the intestines. The bound bile acids are then fecally removed. However, because bile acid sequestrants also interfere with the absorption of fat, the absorption of drugs and fat-soluble vitamins are impaired.

Structural/functional abnormalities of the biliary tract can produce an increase in bilirubin, causing jaundice, as well as an increase in serum bile acids. This observed cholestasis (disrupted bile flow to intestines) may also present with primary sclerosing cholangitis, intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, and primary biliary cholangitis, where the buildup of bile acids can lead to pruritus because of the bile salts in skin.

Bile that has diluted concentrations of bile acids or phospholipids, in addition to increased cholesterol, leads to a decrease in the solubilization of cholesterol. This situation increases the risk for microcrystal formation from this supersaturated bile--eventually leading to the formation of cholesterol stones. Fibrates like gemfibrozil, bezafibrate, and fenofibrate also increase the risk of cholesterol gallstones by inhibiting cholesterol-7alpha-hydroxylase, resulting in decreased bile acid production.

Too much bile acid in the colon may precipitate chronic diarrhea, which may occur in conditions that impair the ileal absorption of bile salts, as seen with surgical removal for Crohn disease (which normally causes fat malabsorption by affecting the terminal ileum). Such malabsorption of bile acids is treatable with bile acid resins.

There may also exist a link between bile acids and colorectal cancer.

Bile acids have also been used to get rid of undesired fat, i.e., mesotherapy, with deoxycholic acid being one such drug.