The clinical presentation can be variable, with mild pancytopenia being asymptomatic to life-threatening emergencies in severe pancytopenia. Patients can present with manifestations of any of the decreased cell lines. Anemia can present as shortness of breath, fatigue, and chest pain. Leukopenia manifests as increased infections, while thrombocytopenia presents with bruising, petechiae, and a propensity for bleeding. Patients with severe neutropenia can present with severe infections. Patients with underlying liver disease can present with anorexia, nausea, or lethargy. Patients with splenic sequestration can present with left upper quadrant pain. Constitutional symptoms can be seen in patients with underlying autoimmune disorders or malignancies.

History is of utmost importance in the evaluation of pancytopenia. This should include investigating symptoms of autoimmune conditions, malignancies, recent infections, medications, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. A detailed history of nutritional status should be taken. It should be noted that the presentation of malabsorption could be subtle, and pancytopenia may be the only presentation. Family history should be taken into account as well for inherited aplastic anemia.

Physical examination may reveal pallor, petechiae, ulcers, and rash. Signs of underlying liver disease may be seen in patients with cirrhosis. Splenomegaly may be seen in patients with splenic sequestration. Lymphadenopathy can be seen in patients with infections and lymphoma. Attention must be paid to signs of nutritional deficiencies in patients with eating disorders and alcoholism. The neurological examination is essential as it may show impairment of proprioception with a positive Romberg test and ataxia, suggesting subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord secondary to vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deficiency and macrocytic anemia.