Since the exact cause of the MDE is still unknown, there is no specific treatment, and all treatments are aimed at symptom relief and excluding more malicious pathologies.

In mild cases that present only with intermittent nipple discharge, after excluding other diseases and confirming MDE, reassurance is adequate and all that is required.

Patients with discharge and discomfort are advised to treat symptomatically via applying warm compresses over the central part of the breast, wearing a supportive bra with breast pads to absorb any nipple discharge, and maintaining nipple and areola hygiene. These measures both ameliorate symptoms of MDE, as well as reduce the risk of infection.

MDE is a non-infective disease process, but as mentioned earlier, there is clinical overlap with periductal mastitis in terms of clinical manifestations, and the two diseases can exist together. Symptoms can mimic other infections, including mastitis or malignancy, particularly the former, including rubor, tumor, calor, and dolor. Bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus, anaerobic Streptococcus, Enterococcus, and Bacteroides are the most commonly reported isolates from nipple discharge cultures in 60% to 80% of cases.

Oral antibiotics, effective against Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Streptococci, and anaerobes for ten days, should be prescribed. The majority of patients will improve dramatically with antibiotic treatment and pain medication. The periareolar discomfort and swelling will subside in the majority of cases.

If the localized infection progresses to abscess formation, then the response will be partial or nil. The management protocol of breast abscess is as follows: Aspiration with antibiotic cover is effective as a treatment when the abscess cavity is equal or smaller than 4 cm in diameter; otherwise, incision and drainage are required for larger collections, or if recurrent after aspiration. Bacterial culture and sensitivity should be done on any aspirated or drained material for more specific antibiotic therapy. Retrograde drainage through duct opening under ultrasound guidance is a procedure that can be successful when purulent discharge is seen from a single duct opening, though is often more technically difficult, and painful, than direct aspiration.

In cases with consistent or recurrent symptoms and swelling, excision of the involved duct and surrounding inflammatory tissue is performed, termed a “microdochectomy.” Intraoperative swab for culture and sensitivity from the wound site is advisable when inflamed tissues are dissected. However, in MDE alone, the cultures are mostly sterile, but when MDE is associated with periductal mastitis, then 50% or more of the swabs will be positive. There is no evidence in the literature to suggest that MDE predisposes to cancer development, hence routine biopsy is not indicated, and the decision must be individualized and based on patient risk factors independent of MDE.

More aggressive procedures and major mammary duct excision may be required for smokers or those patients with recurrent periductal mastitis associated with duct ectasia and duct fistulation.