The first step in the evaluation of POD is to determine if the person is arousable to voice. If the person is not arousable to voice, then that person is considered to be in a coma. After the level of arousal has been determined, the delirium instruments can assess the content of the arousal by examining for fluctuating change in mental status highlighted by inattention and altered level of consciousness.

The Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS) is the most commonly used assessment tool for the level of arousal.

Using the DSM-5 criteria, delirium is characterized by:

- A disturbance in attention (reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention) and awareness (reduced orientation to the environment).

- A disturbance that develops over a short period (usually hours to a few days) represents a change from baseline attention and awareness and fluctuates in severity during the day.

- An additional disturbance in cognition (memory deficit, disorientation, language. visuospatial ability, or perception).

- The disturbances in Criteria A and C are not better explained by another pre-existing established or evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur in a severely reduced level of arousal, such as coma.

- There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal (due to a drug of abuse or to a medication), or exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies.

There are many assessment tools for delirium that have been validated for a variety of patient populations and hospital locations, including postoperatively on the ward or in the intensive care unit.

These include:

- Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)

- Delirium Symptom Interview (DSI)

- Confusion Assessment Method for the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU)

- Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC)

CAM and variations of CAM are most commonly used. The CAM-ICU and 3D-CAM are brief versions of CAM that perform moment in time assessments for delirium. The Brief Confusion Assessment Method (bCAM) has been validated in the non-ICU setting. The CAM-ICU is validated for intubated patients on mechanical ventilation. See figure 1.

The Delirium Detection Scale (DDS) and the Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale (MDAS) can assess the severity of delirium.