Amoxicillin-clavulanate is only available in oral formulations and, like most bactericidal antibiotics, needs to be administered at regularly scheduled intervals to minimize differences in the antimicrobial's peaks and troughs. This approach helps maintain consistent serum concentrations over the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) needed to destroy the targeted organism effectively; this is generally accomplished by a twice or three times daily administration of the medication.

Oral Suspension for reconstitution is available in the following strengths. It could be flavored in apple, banana cream, bubble gum, cherry, or watermelon flavor for better palatability in the pediatric population. Exercise caution to verify that dosage forms contain the same amoxicillin to clavulanic acid ratio to be interchangeable. The reconstituted solution should be kept in the refrigerator and shaken well before the administration to maximize its longevity and effectiveness.

- Amoxicillin 125 mg / potassium clavulanate 31.25 mg per 5 mL

- Amoxicillin 200 mg /  potassium clavulanate 28.5 mg per 5 mL

- Amoxicillin 250 mg / potassium clavulanate 62.5 mg per 5 mL

- Amoxicillin 400 mg / potassium clavulanate  57 mg per 5 mL

- Amoxicillin 600 mg /potassium clavulanate  42.9 mg per 5 mL (ES formulation: It is not interchangeable with other immediate release strengths)

Oral tablets are available in the following strengths. Exercise caution to verify that dosage forms contain the same amoxicillin to clavulanic acid ratio to be interchangeable. Amoxicillin 250 mg and potassium clavulanate 125 mg strength tablets are not recommended in pediatric patients because of a higher amount of clavulanate than other strengths.

- Amoxicillin 250 mg and potassium clavulanate 125 mg

- Amoxicillin 500 mg and potassium clavulanate  125 mg

- Amoxicillin 875 mg and potassium clavulanate  125 mg

- Amoxicillin 200 mg and  potassium clavulanate28.5 mg (chewable)

- Amoxicillin 400 mg and potassium clavulanate 57 mg (chewable)

- Amoxicillin 1000 mg and potassium clavulanate 62.5 mg (extended-release 12-hour formulation: It is not interchangeable with other immediate release strengths )

**Dosing Keypoints**

- The usual adult dose for the immediate release formulation is 500 mg every 8 to 12 hours or 875 mg every 12 hours, or for the extended-release formulation is 2 g every 12 hours.

- Pediatric Patients weighing more than 40 kg should be given 250 or 500 mg every 8 hours or 500 or 875 mg every 12 hours.

- Pediatric patients aged 12 weeks and older should be given 20 to 40 mg amoxicillin/kg/day divided every 8 hours or 25 to 45 mg amoxicillin /kg/day divided every 12 hours.

- Neonates and infants < 12 weeks should be given 30 mg amoxicillin/kg/day divided every 12 hours. Use of the 125 mg/5 mL oral suspension is recommended.

**Specific Population**

**Pregnancy:**It is Pregnancy Category B medicine.

**Breastfeeding Patients:**Amoxicillin is excreted in human milk and, when used by nursing women, may lead to sensitization of infants (restlessness, diarrhea, and rash occurring occasionally). Caution when amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate is administered to a nursing patient.

**Hepatic Impairment:**Discontinue medicine if signs/symptoms of hepatitis (hepatic dysfunction or cholestatic jaundice) occur. Monitor liver function tests in patients with hepatic impairment. The product label has no information on using amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate in this patient population.

**Renal Impairment:**Amoxicillin is primarily removed from the body by the kidney, and dosage adjustment is recommended in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCL<30 mL/min).