Median nerve injuries occur by multiple mechanisms and can become injured at different sites along its course in the upper limb.

Common injuries to the median nerves include anterior shoulder dislocation, elbow dislocation, humerus fracture, midshaft radius fractures, stab wounds, prolonged placement of a tourniquet, and repeated use of crutches. However, these injuries are rarely in isolation and are often associated with radial or ulnar nerve neuropathies.  The most common mechanisms of injury are listed below.

- Direct trauma at the wrist and elbow joints

- Accidental trauma in the axilla, wrist, and palm during a surgical procedure can damage the median nerve.

- The nerve may become injured in attempted suicide.

- Median nerve injury is associated with a fracture of the humerus, especially supracondylar fractures.

- Entrapment at the elbow between the two heads of pronator teres (pronator teres syndrome) and under the flexor retinaculum (carpal tunnel syndrome)

- The median nerve can be involved in generalized degenerative and demyelinating disorders.

- Neuropathy such as chemotherapy-induced peripheral chemotherapy

While the majority of cases of carpal tunnel syndrome are idiopathic, several conditions can induce, or precipitate, the entrapment of the nerve at the elbow and, in turn, the development of the clinical picture. The etiology of pregnancy-induced carpal tunnel syndrome is fluid retention. Space occupying lesions, including tumors, fractured callus, osteophytes, and hypertrophic synovial tissue, can be secondary causes along with metabolic conditions such as hypothyroidism, pregnancy, and rheumatoid arthritis. Infection is another secondary cause alongside alcohol use disorder and familial disorders. Connective tissue diseases are risk factors for carpal tunnel. Repetitive activities requiring repeated wrist extension and flexion, obesity, and recent menopause also have established links with carpal tunnel syndrome.