Withdrawal from caffeine causes mild to clinically significant distress and impairment of normal functioning. The severity of symptoms vary from individual to individual, and most commonly include a headache, fatigue, decreased energy/activeness, decreased alertness, drowsiness, decreased contentedness, depressed mood, difficulty concentrating, irritability, and feeling foggy/not clearheaded. The severity of symptoms varies from mild to extreme. The incidence or severity of symptoms increased with increases in the daily dose. Still, abstinence from low doses, such as about one small cup of coffee per day, also produced symptoms of withdrawal.

Some studies have shown that the incidence of a headache is about 50%, and the incidence of clinically significant distress or functional impairment is 13%. Typically, the onset of symptoms starts 12 to 24 hours after caffeine cessation, peaks at 20–51 hours, and may last up to two to nine days.

One study has demonstrated that caffeine withdrawal occurred after as little as three days of caffeine exposure, with a somewhat increased severity of withdrawal observed after seven or 14 days of exposure.

Thus, in taking a history from a patient with the suspected caffeine-withdrawal syndrome, it is useful to elicit the information about habitual intake dose (caffeine maintenance dose) and the duration of caffeine consumption, time of the last drink, any history of previous caffeine withdrawal episodes and their severity.

Some signs of caffeine withdrawal include: impaired behavioral and cognitive performance, decreased or increased blood pressure, decreased motor activity, increased heart rate, hand tremor, increased diuresis, skin flushing, flu-like symptoms, nausea/vomiting, constipation, muscle stiffness, joint pains, and abdominal pain.