The first episode of anterior uveitis usually may not require a laboratory workup but recurrence should prompt further evaluation.  Intermediate, posterior, and panuveitis warrant further evaluation with differential diagnosis-guided laboratory evaluation due to the association with systemic diseases and the more profound risk of permanent vision loss.  If the patient experiences recurrent anterior uveitis, further workup may be indicated to rule out an underlying autoimmune or infectious process.

For anterior uveitis, consider testing for HLA-B27 typing, FTA/RPR, serum ACE/lysozyme, chest x-ray, and quantiferon gold.  Intermediate uveitis should be guided by other systemic symptoms and risk factors but should include FTA/RPR, chest X-ray, ACE/lysozyme, and quant gold.  Neuroimaging for multiple sclerosis should be considered in the proper demographic population.  Findings and other associated systemic manifestations should guide laboratory selection.  As anywhere else in the body, syphilis is the "great masquerader" and should be considered in all cases of uveitis.  A detailed differential diagnosis can be found in Diagnosis and Treatment of Uveitis (ed. Foster and Vitale), or for children, Pediatric Retina (ed. ME Hartnett).

Although rare (<0.5% of cases at tertiary referral centers), a patient's current medications may cause uveitis

Key diagnoses to rule out in every case of uveitis: syphilis, sarcoid, and tuberculosis

Use the following laboratory tests: FTA AND RPR, ACE/lysozyme, chest x-ray, and quantiferon gold or PPD