Most hip fractures can be diagnosed, or at least suspected, from history alone. Classically a fall leads to a painful hip with an associated inability to walk. Clinicians should explore potentially sinister causes of the fall, such as syncope, stroke, or myocardial infarction. As these patients are often elderly with a complex medical background, a full medical history is vital and should include both a history of the presentation as well as a full assessment of the patient's medical background. A thorough social history that provides baseline mobility and the patient's home circumstances is also of great value and is likely to guide postoperative rehabilitation and discharge planning.

It is recommended that a cognitive assessment be performed in all patients presenting with hip fractures. Ideally, this should be done both on admission and pos-operatively. The aim of this is to recognize patients with underlying dementia or those who are developing an acute delirium, both of which are associated with a poorer prognosis.

The physical examination will demonstrate pain, immobility, and potentially a deformed limb. The degree of deformity seen is dependent on both the anatomical configuration of the fracture and the degree of displacement. The classically described presentation is a shortened and externally rotated limb due to the unopposed pull of the iliopsoas muscle that attaches to the lesser trochanter. Recognizing this, deformity immediately makes one suspicious of a hip fracture. Further examination often reveals pain on any, or all, of the following: palpation in the groin or greater trochanter, axial loading of the hip, and 'pin-rolling' of the leg.

A full primary trauma and secondary trauma assessment should be performed to assess the patient for other injuries. It is always useful to assess the patient's cardiovascular and respiratory status prior to undergoing surgery. Specific examinations to identify the cause of the fall should also be considered.