**Physiotherapy for Tears: First and Second Degree**

With an anatomical lesion, the treatment in the first 24 to 48 hours consists of the RICE protocol (**R**est,**I**ce,**C**ompression,**E**levation). This treatment avoids the aggravation of the lesion and inflammation. This protocol includes rest, ice 3 to 4 times a day for 20 minutes, bandaging, and elevation of the limb.

Generally, muscle relaxants and analgesics are taken, the latter being preferable to anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs) because post-injury inflammation is a physiological mechanism of repair of the human body. The athlete must stay away from the field for a variable time depending on the size of the injury, ranging from 1 week to 2 months.

After an injury, the muscle closes the lesion forming a fibrous cicatricial result, that is, a less elastic connective tissue of the muscle. If the muscle is immobilized, the scar is formed with fibers that can go in any direction; if, instead, the muscle is kept moving, the fibers of the connective tissue that is formed have an arrangement according to the lines of force and are more elastic. Instrumental physiotherapy with CO2 laser, ultrasound, and Tecar therapy is indicated; when the lesion is closed, activity is needed to make the muscle more elastic and prevent recurrences. Stretching and eccentric reinforcement are important. In general, the elective exam is muscle-tendon ultrasound, but magnetic resonance may be necessary if the lesion is deep in a very developed muscle.

**Rupture of the Calcaneal Tendon**

The rehabilitation treatment of calcaneal tendon rupture has a duration of about 12 weeks, at three sessions per week, alternating between the gym and swimming pool, including massage on the scar and the calf muscles, physical therapies for pain and swelling, exercises for the articulation, for restoring strength and correct walking and running.

After about three months, it is possible to perform an isokinetic test to measure the muscular strength of the leg. Based on the result, the therapeutic protocol must adapt to the athlete's sport to speed up the return, refining the recovery of the coordination of the specific technical gesture of the sport practiced.

**Kinesio Taping**

The application of elastic bands on the muscle tissue could be helpful for some conditions of the gastrocnemius muscle. In the presence of trigger points, taping has proved useful in reducing symptomatology.

It would seem that the use of taping on the calcaneal tendon has a rationale for preventing sports injuries.

**Osteopathy**

The osteopathic approach with gentle techniques in the presence of scars may help prevent further pain and improve function.

Osteopathy in patients with tendinitis has proven to help reduce symptomatology and improve the active movement of plantar flexion.

**Popliteal Fossa: An Important Area for the Function of the Gastrocnemius Muscle**

In the popliteal fossa, a fundamental site for the gastrocnemius muscle, it is possible to find tensor fasciae suralis (also known as ischioaponeuroticus), a muscle that could disturb the function of the calf area and is clinically relevant. One of the variants of the tensor fasciae suralis muscle is to extend over the lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle, innervated by the common peroneal nerve. The abnormal presence of this muscle could alter the function of the gastrocnemius, with dysfunctional problems in the knee and ankle, with repeated traumas in these articular areas. This is because the lines of tension are altered and do not allow the joints to withstand the workloads correctly, from running to jumping.

Another muscle variable that could alter the function of the gastrocnemius muscle is a strip of muscle (it does not have a name) that goes from the medial head transversely to the tendon tissue of the biceps femoris; this anomaly is innervated by the tibial nerve. This muscular structure covers the neurovascular components of the popliteal fossa. Its hypertrophy could cause paresthesia, entrapment of the popliteal artery, and create abnormal tensions for the correct function of the calf area.

A Baker cyst in the popliteal fossa could mimic a problem of deep vein thrombosis. An examination with ultrasound may not be sufficient to understand the reasons for the pain (for example, in the area of insertion of the gastrocnemius muscle when bending the knee). A further consideration is the MRI. If the pharmacological therapy for thrombosis does not remove the pain from the popliteal fossa, one of the etiologies reported in the literature is the presence of this cyst.

**Dry Needling**

Clinicians and physiotherapists use dry needling to improve the muscular response to previous sports injuries or for the presence of trigger points. They are easy-to-use tools and, according to literature, can increase the muscular performance of the gastrocnemius muscle in sports subjects or the presence of neurological pathology.