The intrinsic venous system refers to the collecting veins within the spinal cord parenchyma and further divides into central and peripheral drainage systems. In the central region of the cord, blood is drained centrifugally via numerous sulcal veins located both ventrally and dorsally. Ventral sulcal veins drain the medial portion of the anterior horn, the anterior commissure, and the white matter of the anterior funiculus.

The pial venous network, radicular veins, as well as longitudinally oriented anterior and posterior spinal veins, comprise the extrinsic system of the spinal cord, which collects blood from radial and sulcal veins. The usually paired anterior spinal veins course from the medulla oblongata to the filum terminale. While the anterior spinal veins are typically in pairs in the cervical and thoracic regions, they become a single vessel in the lumbar area. It is located within the anteriomedian fissure and runs anteromedially, alongside the anterior spinal artery. The posterior median spinal vein begins at the conus medularis and can extend the length of the cord, usually within the posterior median fissure. It is often a single vessel but can be paired or even form a plexus.

The vertebral venous plexus, also called the Batson plexus refers to veins located extradurally within the spinal canal (internal plexus), surrounding the vertebral column (external plexus) as well as horizontal basivertebral veins that run through the vertebral bodies (basivertebral plexus).

Intervertebral veins of the cervical cord empty into the vertebral, deep cervical, and jugular veins. Those of the thoracic cord drain into the hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins on the left, and the azygos vein on the right. Intervertebral veins draining the lumbar region empty into the azygos and ascending lumbar veins.