The triangle-shaped area between the head and neck of the rib. The paravertebral space is delineated anterolaterally by the parietal pleura, posteriorly by the costotransverse ligament, medially by the vertebrae, and intervertebral foramina, inferior and superior by the ribs. The vertebral root divides in this anatomical space after emerging from the intervertebral foramen to give the dorsal and ventral branches. Thus the content of this space includes adipose tissue, anterior ramus of the spinal (intercostal) nerves, posterior ramus of the spinal (intercostal) nerves, sympathetic chain, and rami communicantes. The sympathetic chain communicates with the intercostal nerves via the rami communicantes.

Thoracic paravertebral space communicates with:

- Medially: Epidural space via the intervertebral foramen

- Laterally: Intercostal space

- Superiorly: Cervical paravertebral space

- Inferiorly: The origins of the Psoas Major muscle

The nerves in this space are devoid of the fascial sheath, making them particularly sensitive to local anesthetics injected. This injection of local anesthetic will cause unilateral, segmental, somatic, and sympathetic anesthesia, including the posterior branch in several thoracic dermatomes.

This extensive dissemination of the local anesthetic has been demonstrated by several authors, notably Cheema et al. (1995), using a thermographic imaging technique.

Other authors have described a diffusion in the epidural space of this nerve block or even on the contralateral side of the block reported by Karmakar et al. (2000) after injection of contrast medium through a thoracic paravertebral catheter.