Symptoms of burning, numbness, or tingling in the feet tend to worsen at night are characteristic. Patients with pedal paresthesias and dysesthesia often describe a nonspecific constellation of symptoms resulting in difficulty with ambulation and other basic activities of daily living (ADL). The characteristic polyneuropathy and distal sensory peripheral neuropathy are present in about 80% of DM PN patients. This is often described as a "stocking-glove distribution," which can take several years to develop.

Since the protective sensation is lost after sensory impairment, the standard Semmes-Weinstein 5.07 monofilament 10 grams of pressure protective sensation test may be accurately sensed even after a neurotrophic ulcer has developed. Simply timing the duration that a vibrating 128 Hz tuning fork is felt at the dorsal hallux interphalangeal joint (usually 18 seconds) can be used to detect sensory deficits earlier and quantify severity. Decreased light touch sensation or loss of ankle reflexes tend to occur earlier in the disease process, while the detectable loss of protective sensation tends to occur later in the disease, sometimes even after a neuropathic ulcer develops. Needle electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity testing can be both painful and expensive and mainly test the large myelinated fibers. Epidermal nerve fiber density testing can be performed to evaluate the small unmyelinated fibers.

**Autonomic Symptoms**

Autonomic neuropathy is also very common in diabetes and can affect the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and genitourinary organs. Typical symptoms include:

- GI: Abdominal discomfort, dysphagia, nausea, fecal incontinence, constipation, diarrhea

- Cardiac: Hypotension, sinus tachycardia, variable heart rate, syncope

- Bladder: Weak urinary stream, straining to void, incomplete emptying of bladder,

- Skin: Heat intolerance, gustatory sweating, extreme diaphoresis

- Nervous: Carpal tunnel syndrome, radiculopathy, lumbosacral, and cervical neuropathy. In addition, cranial nerves 3,4,6, and 7 may be affected.