Treatment consists of managing the complications of medullary sponge kidney.

For UTIs, antibiotics and meticulous personal hygiene practices are recommended.

For calcium stones, initial recommendations include a high fluid intake sufficient to generate 2000 mL of urine per day. In general, a diet that is low in sodium, normal in calcium, high in potassium, and low to normal in protein may be helpful.

A 24-hour urine test is recommended to help optimize the urinary chemistry in motivated patients with medullary sponge kidney who develop stones. These patients will tend to have a higher incidence of renal leak type hypercalciuria and hypocitraturia than most calcium stone formers. If this is confirmed by the 24-hour urine test, these disorders can be treated with thiazide diuretics for the hypercalciuria and potassium citrate supplements for the hypocitraturia.

The potassium citrate supplementation also seems to help minimize the long-term bone loss that is sometimes associated with medullary sponge kidney. This bone loss is thought to be due primarily to the persistent renal leak type hypercalciuria although impaired urinary acidification has also been suggested. There is also a possible association with hyperparathyroidism.

Most of the stones in patients with medullary sponge kidney tend to be small and will usually pass spontaneously, but occasionally surgery, ureteroscopy, or lithotripsy may be needed. Overall, medullary sponge kidney patients who produce calcium stones tend to make about twice as many stones as other calcium stone formers.

Some patients will also have distal type renal tubular acidosis (RTA) which will demonstrate hypocitraturia and can then be treated with supplemental potassium citrate. The dosage of the potassium citrate should be titrated to approach an optimal 24-hour urinary citrate level (usually greater than 500 mg/24 hours) with a urinary pH around 6.5 if possible. A urinary pH over 7.2 to 7.5 should generally be avoided to minimize the production of calcium phosphate calculi. Serum potassium should also be monitored periodically to avoid hyperkalemia.