In T1DM, there is cellular-mediated, autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells. T1DM has a strong genetic predisposition. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC), also known as human leukocyte antigens (HLA), is reported to account for approximately 40 to 50% of the familial aggregation of T1DM. The significant determinants are polymorphisms of class II HLA genes encoding DQ and DR4-DQ8, with DR3-DQ2, found in 90% of T1DM patients.

Another form of T1DM is latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA). It occurs in adulthood, often with a slower course of onset.

The rate of destruction is generally rapid in children and faster in adults. Autoantibodies against islet cells, insulin, glutamic acid decarboxylase-65 (GAD-65), and zinc transporter 8 (Zn T8) may be detected in the serum of such patients. These antibodies wane over time and do not have sufficient diagnostic accuracy to be used routinely for diagnosis, especially after the first year. With the progressive destruction of beta cells, there is little or no secretion of insulin. These patients are generally not obese. They are more prone to develop other autoimmune disorders such as Addison disease, Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, and celiac disease. A subset of T1DM not associated with insulin autoimmunity and not associated with the above HLA is termed idiopathic T1DM. It is more common in African and Asians and presents with episodic diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).

T2DM is an insulin-resistance condition with associated beta-cell dysfunction. Initially, there is a compensatory increase in insulin secretion, which maintains glucose levels in the normal range. As the disease progresses, beta cells change, and insulin secretion is unable to maintain glucose homeostasis, producing hyperglycemia. Most of the patients with T2DM are obese or have a higher body fat percentage, distributed predominantly in the abdominal region. This adipose tissue itself promotes insulin resistance through various inflammatory mechanisms, including increased FFA release and adipokine dysregulation. Lack of physical activity, prior GDM in those with hypertension or dyslipidemia also increases the risk of developing T2DM. Evolving data suggest a role for adipokine dysregulation, inflammation, abnormal incretin biology with decreased incretins such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-I) or incretin resistance, hyperglucagonemia, increased renal glucose reabsorption, and abnormalities in gut microbiota.