Treatment of nerve compression syndromes divides into non-surgical and surgical approaches.

**Nonsurgical treatment**

Most instances of nerve compression are manageable non-operatively. Initially, it is important to instruct the patient to avoid repetitive use of the affected extremity and to modify symptom provoking wrist movement. This modification can be through proper ergonomic changes to activities of daily living or work activities. Counseling on weight loss and increased aerobic activity may also be beneficial as obesity can contribute to the development of nerve compression. The use of wrist splints can be beneficial to minimize motions that provoke symptoms. Wearing wrist splints is typically recommended during night-time or symptom-provoking activity. However, the regular use of splints during the day is not recommended as it can lead to stiffness of the wrist. The recommended duration for wrist splinting varies from as little as one week to as much as twelve weeks. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories can be beneficial to reduce inflammation and provide symptoms relief. Additionally, physical therapy or hand therapy may be beneficial as it can release myofascial restriction and help reduce edema. In refractory cases, corticosteroid injections may be an option. Corticosteroid injections are not only useful in the treatment of nerve compression syndromes but can also be used to confirm the diagnosis as well as be a useful predictor of surgical success. A single corticosteroid injection can have moderate success in treating underlying symptoms. For example, one injection improved carpal tunnel syndrome symptoms in 76% of patients after six weeks. However, the symptoms are rarely long-lasting, and only 22% remained symptom-free at 1 year.

**Surgical treatment**

Surgical decompression can be a consideration after the failure of non-operative treatment. Typically non-operative treatment is attempted for a period of at least 3 months. Surgical decompression involves the identification of the affected nerve and release of adhesions or fascial bands that are contributing to the compression. Additionally, the surgeon can excise soft tissue masses that contribute to the compression. Surgical treatment can be considered as a first-line option in the instance when there is trauma or nerve compression from orthopedic hardware.