Initial evaluation of macrocytic anemia includes a thorough history and physical followed by limited labs (PBS, reticulocyte count, and serum B12). Pure RBC indices will underestimate the presence of macrocytosis by 30% because MCV represents the mean distribution curve of all RBCs and fails to identify smaller macrocytes. If the PBS is normal, no megaloblastic RBCs,  order additional testing for liver and thyroid diseases (aminotransferases and thyroid stimulating hormone), the most common causes of non-megaloblastic anemia. If there are megaloblastic RBCs on PBS, check the reticulocyte count: less than 1% indicates underproduction, while greater than 2% is associated with hyperproliferation due to hemolysis or hemorrhage (commence hemolytic anemia work-up). If hyperproliferative, look at the B12 level. Values less than 100 pg/mL indicate deficiency. Order RBC folate level (not serum folate due to lack of sensitivity) for B12 above 400 pg/mL; low levels indicate folate deficiency and normal ones may need further investigation with bone marrow evaluation. Measure homocysteine and methylmalonic acid (MMA) in patients with B12 100 pg/mL to 400 pg/mL; these are biochemical compounds important in pathways involving cell metabolism and use folate and vitamin B12 as cofactors. Both or MMA only are elevated in vitamin B12 deficiency; homocysteine is elevated in folate deficiency. Normal values may warrant hematology consultation for bone marrow studies. Specialist consults are recommended in patients with abnormal myeloid morphology on PBS (disordered immaturity, hypo-granulated or hypo-segmented neutrophils, or additional cytopenias).

Work-up for specific causes of megaloblastic anemia should be based on presentation. Antibodies for intrinsic factor or parietal cells are indicative of pernicious anemia. The Schilling test, once used to measure vitamin B12 uptake before and after administration of intrinsic factor, has fallen out of favor.