Cefepime is usually well tolerated by both adults and pediatric patients. The most common adverse effects in adults are diarrhea and rash. The most common adverse effects in the pediatric population are fevers, diarrhea, and rash.

There are multitudes of other less common adverse effects listed according to the system affected:

- Neurological: headache, fever, and neurotoxicity

- Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, hepatic injury, colitis including pseudomembranous colitis, oral candidiasis

- Genitourinary: vaginitis, renal injury

- Dermatological: local site injection irritation, pruritus, urticaria, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and erythema multiforme

- Hematological: positive Coombs test without hemolysis, pancytopenia, and anaplastic anemia

Adverse effects typically reverse upon removal of the medication.

Neurotoxicity is a serious, life-threatening adverse effect that deserves special mention. Symptoms can present as altered mental status, encephalopathy, seizures, myoclonus, hallucinations, coma, and stroke-like symptoms. The onset of symptoms is typically four days after starting cefepime. Risk factors include renal failure (creatinine less than or equal to 60 mL/min), the aging adult, critically ill patients in ICU, strokes, Alzheimer disease, brain malignancy, seizure history, and a compromised blood-brain barrier (BBB). The theorized mechanism is that cefepime can cross the BBB and antagonize gamma-aminobutyric acid receptors.

Treatment consists of stopping the drug, seizure management with benzodiazepines, or renal replacement therapy in severe refractory cases. It is important to monitor and adjust dosing with renal dysfunction; however, reports exist of neurotoxicity in patients with normal kidney function.

**Drug Interactions:**Significant drug interaction exists when using cefepime. Concurrent use of cefepime with other aminoglycoside antibiotics increases the risk of cytotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Concurrent use of cephalosporins (cefepime) and potent diuretics (e.g., furosemide) can result in nephrotoxicity. Monitor renal function when these medicines are administered to the patient.