# Continuing Education Activity

Adhesive capsulitis, also known as frozen shoulder, is an inflammatory condition characterized by shoulder stiffness, pain, and significant loss of passive range of motion. Long-term disability has been reported at ten to twenty percent in patients, and the persistence of symptoms at thirty to sixty percent. Adhesive capsulitis has a prevalence of approximately two to five percent in the general population. The mean age of onset is typically 55 years of age. There is a slightly greater predominance in females (1.4:1). The exact pathophysiology of adhesive capsulitis is unknown. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of adhesive capsulitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe common presenting signs and symptoms of adhesive capsulitis.
- Review how to evaluate a patient for adhesive capsulitis.
- Identify treatment considerations for adhesive capsulitis. 
- Outline interprofessional team strategies to improve care coordination and outcomes for patients with adhesive capsulitis.

# Introduction

Adhesive capsulitis, also known as frozen shoulder, is an inflammatory condition characterized by shoulder stiffness and pain. The American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons defines adhesive capsulitis as “a condition of varying severity characterized by the gradual development of global limitation of active and passive shoulder motion where radiographic findings other than osteopenia are absent.”

Most patients have significant loss of passive range of motion, a feature crucial for diagnosis.

# Etiology

Adhesive capsulitis can be classified as either primary or secondary. The primary disease typically has an insidious onset, is idiopathic, and is often associated with other diseases such as diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, drugs, hypertriglyceridemia, or cervical spondylosis.

The secondary disease typically follows trauma or injuries to the shoulder. Common injuries include rotator cuff tears, fractures, surgery, or immobilization.

# Epidemiology

Adhesive capsulitis has a prevalence of approximately two to five percent in the general population. The mean age of onset is typically 55 years of age. There is a slightly greater predominance in females (1.4:1). Usually, the non-dominant hand is affected. Interestingly, several autoimmune comorbid conditions have been shown to predispose patients to this condition, including thyroid disorders and diabetes mellitus. Additionally, patients with diabetes typically have worse treatment outcomes depending on the duration of their diabetes.

# Pathophysiology

The exact pathophysiology of adhesive capsulitis is unknown. The most commonly accepted hypothesis states that inflammation initially occurs within the joint capsule and synovial fluid. The inflammation is followed by reactive fibrosis and adhesions of the synovial lining of the joint. The initial inflammation of the capsule leads to pain, and the capsular fibrosis and adhesions lead to a decreased range of motion.

# Histopathology

During arthroscopy, the following may be seen:

- Subacromial fibrosis

- Proliferative synovitis

- Capsular thickening

# History and Physical

Patients with adhesive capsulitis usually present with progressively worsening shoulder pain over weeks to months, followed by significant limitation in shoulder motion. The key clinical sign of adhesive capsulitis is reduced active and passive range of motion with forward flexion, abduction, and external and internal rotation. The natural arm swing that happens when walking may be lost in patients with severe illness. Muscular atrophy may be discovered upon further evaluation of the afflicted shoulder. The palpation reveals diffuse tenderness around the shoulder joint. The distal neurology must be intact in these patients. Resisted movement of the shoulder produces pain and marked limitation in movement mimicking rotator cuff tear. Internal rotation may be measured using the Apley scratch test.

# Evaluation

During a physical exam, patients will often have a decreased glenohumeral range of motion and associated pain with testing. Pain will often limit a complete and thorough physical exam. Typically, there is a significant reduction in the active and passive range of motion in 2 or more planes of motion compared to the unaffected side. Usually, the range of motion is lost in the following order: external rotation, abduction, internal rotation, and forward flexion. When using special tests of the shoulder, the Neer and Hawkins tests for impingement and the Speed’s test for biceps tendinopathy are positive. Diagnosis is clinical and based on history and physical exam findings described above.

There is no laboratory testing indicated for diagnosis. If there is a concern for underlying systemic disease, test as needed.

Imaging is not indicated. The diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis is primarily clinical. If there is a concern about an alternative diagnosis, such as evaluating for a fracture, imaging, such as a shoulder X-ray, may be useful.

The injection test can be performed if a clinician is uncertain of the etiology of shoulder pain based on history and exam. The subacromial space is injected with an anesthetic, typically 5 ml of 1% lidocaine. In patients with adhesive capsulitis, the ROM limitations and pain will persist after the injection. Patients with subacromial pathology (rotator cuff tendinopathy or subacromial bursitis) will show an improvement in pain and improved range of motion.

# Treatment / Management

In most cases, adhesive capsulitis is a self-limited disease with high rates of spontaneous recovery within 18 to 30 months. Treatment is focused on symptomatic relief and improving ROM.

- NSAIDs: During the initial phase, NSAIDs can be used to aid with pain control.

- Physical therapy: Therapy has limited evidence supporting its benefit, but patients often in the recovery phase may benefit from gentle range of motion exercises, stretching, and graded resistance training. These have been shown to reduce pain and increase function. Patients and providers should not allow vigorous rehab, which can lead to worsening symptoms.

- Oral corticosteroids: These provide short-term pain relief for improved ROM and function. The benefits often do not last longer than a few weeks, and the clinician should be cognizant of the side effects associated with oral steroid use.

- Intra-articular steroid injection: Injections have been shown to improve function, decrease pain, and increase ROM. Like oral steroids, the duration of the effects of steroid injections is limited as providers must be aware of side effects. Often patients who receive injections early in their disease course are more likely to obtain a benefit. Multiple injections can be given to provide symptomatic relief.

- Hydrosilation: In this treatment modality, the joint is injected with saline and steroid to dilate the glenohumeral capsule. This has been shown to reduce pain and improve ROM and function in the short term. Current evidence shows no significant difference in outcomes when comparing hydrodilatation to intra-articular steroid injection.

- Manipulation under anesthesia: this is reserved for more refractory cases that do not respond to the modalities mentioned above. There is an increased risk of humerus fractures. The patient's arm is supported by a small lever arm (close to the shoulder), and the shoulder is gently manipulated in flexion, abduction, external rotation, and 90° abduction. To prevent complications, it is essential to highlight that no movement should be forced if "extra" resistance is felt. Injection triamcinolone mixed with bupivacaine is injected into the shoulder joint to prevent inflammation.

- Arthroscopic capsular release: This is reserved for refractory cases. Typically, if symptoms do not improve with conservative measures within 10 to 12 months, referral to an orthopedic surgeon is recommended. The entry is usually tricky as the joint capsule is thick and contracted. After making the standard posterior or lateral portal entry, rotator cuff interval, coracohumeral ligament, middle glenohumeral ligament, anterior capsule, and posterior capsule are released. The inferior capsule adhesiolysis is done by just manipulation because of its proximity to the axillary nerve. At the end of the procedure, the subacromial space is inspected for possible debridement of inflamed tissue and bursa. Injection triamcinolone mixed with bupivacaine is injected into the shoulder joint to prevent inflammation. Early passive and active range of motion exercises is started following arthroscopic capsular release. The literature has not demonstrated the superiority of arthroscopic capsular release over manipulation under anesthesia in terms of clinical efficacy.

- Open capsular release: Patients with strokes or head injuries and those with posttraumatic or postsurgical adhesive capsulitis who have substantial adhesions and contractures limiting arthroscopic surgery are candidates for open release. The open procedure has higher morbidity as compared to arthroscopic capsular release.

**Indications for Surgery**

- The patient fails a trial of prednisone or NSAIDs.

- No response to glenohumeral or subacromial injections

- No response respond to physical therapy

**Contraindications for Surgery**

- The patient has had an inadequate course of steroids or NSAIDs.

- The patient has not had any attempt at conservative therapy.

- There is an acute infection.

- The patient has a concomitant malignancy in the shoulder.

- The patient has a neurological deficit or nerve complaint originating from the cervical spine.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Cervical radiculopathy

- Fracture

- Calcifying tendinitis/synovitis

- Malignancy

- Rotator cuff impingement

- Polymyalgia rheumatica

- Shoulder impingement syndrome

# Staging

Disease progression is described in three clinical phases.

- Phase 1: The painful phase. Development of diffuse and disabling shoulder pain is initially worse at night but then progresses to pain at rest. Associated with increasing stiffness. It can last from two to nine months.

- Phase 2: The frozen or adhesive phase. This period is characterized by progressive limitation in ROM in all shoulder planes but with the pain gradually becoming less pronounced. It can last from four to 12 months.

- Phase 3: The thawing or regression phase. During the recovery phase, there is a gradual return of the range of motion. It takes 12 to 24 months for the complete return of range of motion (ROM).

# Complications

- Residual shoulder pain and/or stiffness

- Humeral fracture

- Rupture of the biceps and subscapularis tendons

- Labral tears

- Glenohumeral joint dislocation

- Rotator cuff tear

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

The patient must enroll in a formal exercise program, irrespective of treatment.

# Consultations

Once a diagnosis of a frozen shoulder is made, a physical rehabilitation clinician should be consulted.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Continue with exercise to prevent the recurrence of symptoms.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Adhesive capsulitis, also known as frozen shoulder, is an inflammatory condition characterized by shoulder stiffness and pain.

- The majority of patients have significant loss of passive range of motion, a feature that is key for diagnosis.

- The exact pathophysiology is unknown. The most commonly accepted hypothesis states that inflammation initially occurs within the joint capsule and synovial fluid.

- There is no laboratory testing indicated for diagnosis. If there is a concern for underlying systemic disease, test as needed.

- Imaging is not indicated. The diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis is primarily clinical. If there is a concern regarding an alternative diagnosis, such as evaluating for a fracture, imaging, such as a shoulder X-ray, may be useful.

- Frozen shoulder is a self-limiting condition and, if diagnosed early, has a favorable outcome. However, physical therapy must be a crucial part of treatment to achieve satisfactory outcomes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with a frozen shoulder may present to their primary caregiver (MD, DO, NP, or PA). If needed, an orthopedic referral may be appropriate. Specialty care nurses assist with evaluation and patient education. It is important to know that a frozen shoulder is a self-limiting condition and, if diagnosed early, has a favorable outcome. Physical therapy must be a crucial part of treatment to achieve satisfactory outcomes. All these caregivers must engage in open communication and maintain accurate patient records; reaching out to other team members if they note any changes in the patient's condition warrant additional intervention. Several studies show that in the long term, patients continue to have pain and/or stiffness following conservative management. The interprofessional team approach has been shown to improve outcomes. [Level 5]

Long-term disability has been reported in 10 to 20% of patients, and the persistence of symptoms in 30 to 60%.