Mutagenesis is a technique used in molecular biology to create mutant genes, proteins, and organisms. Two primary mutagenesis techniques are site-directed mutagenesis (SDM) and random-and-extensive mutagenesis (REM). These methods are largely accomplished by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and non-polymerase chain reaction (non-PCR). Other methods for accomplishing mutagenesis include CRISPR/Cas9 technology, TALENs (transcription activator-like effector nucleases), and Zinc-Finger Nucleases (ZFN).

**Site-directed Mutagenesis**

SDM is a technique where DNA can be modified at a specific nucleotide location, causing a predetermined amino acid change. These substitution mutations can result in drastic changes in protein conformation and function. This technique requires (1) a DNA template with a target gene, (2) knowledge of the target gene's nucleotide sequence, and (3) a short primer (commonly 20 to 30 base pairs) complementary to the target sequence that is modified to contain a mismatched nucleotide (typically 1 to 3 base pairs that will cause an amino acid change). The general procedure for SDM is the following:

- Step 1: Separation of the two strands of template DNA. This can be accomplished by heat or an alkali solution.

- Step 2: Addition of the modified DNA primer. Once the DNA primer anneals with a single strand, a DNA polymerase replicates the strand.

- Step 3: The second round of replication yields a mutant DNA strand that can be used to synthesize a modified protein.

**Techniques for Performing SDM**

PCR and non-PCR techniques are in vitro methods for performing SDM. In vitro synthesis has four essential components: DNA template, modified primers, deoxyribonucleic nucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs [i.e., dATP, dCTP, dGTP, dTTP]), and DNA polymerase (thermostable or thermolabile). The polymerase chain reaction technique****utilizes thermostable DNA polymerases (e.g., Taq, Pfu, and Vent), at least two different primers, and multiple heating and cooling cycles (average 30 cycles). Each cycle has three phases: denaturation (approximately 95 degrees Celsius), annealing (approximately 55 degrees Celsius), and extension (approximately 72 degrees Celsius). The denaturation phase is when the template DNA molecule separates into two single-stranded molecules. The annealing phase is when the modified primer base pairs at the sequence of interest. Lastly, the extension phase is when the annealed primers are extended according to the template strand. The advantage of PCR is that it works more favorably with different DNA templates (i.e., single or double-stranded DNA and GC-rich regions) and produces millions of copies of a target gene. The disadvantage is there is less sequence fidelity (i.e., thermostable polymerases are more error-prone in comparison to thermolabile polymerases). Thenon-polymerase chain reaction technique****utilizes thermolabile DNA polymerases, one primer, and constant reaction temperature (e.g., 37 degrees Celsius). In this strategy, the DNA template is denatured with an alkali solution or heat. The template is annealed with the modified primer and DNA synthesis occurs at 37 degrees Celsius. Though single or double-stranded DNA templates can be used, more favorable outcomes occur if a single-stranded DNA template is used (this increases the success of annealing). This process produces a hybrid DNA molecule (i.e., one template strand and one newly synthesized mutant strand), which can be transformed or infected intoE. coli. Once in E.coli, the mutant DNA and wild-type DNA can be segregated. Non-PCR has greater sequence fidelity than the PCR method; however, there is only one DNA strand generated (rather than millions).

**Screening for Desired Mutants in SDM**

There are different methods for selecting and screening for desired mutants. One of the PCR approaches is to use plasmids that are grown in E. coli (these are dam methylated) and contain a gene for antibiotic resistance. As discussed, modified forward and reverse primers are extended around plasmid DNA, creating copies of the template with the inserted mutations. Since the original parental template strand is methylated, a restriction endonuclease Dpn I - specific for methylated and hemimethylated DNA - digests this DNA leaving only the mutant plasmid, which is further amplified. The plasmid is transformed into E.coli, and bacteria are grown on media that contain the appropriate antibiotic for the plasmid. One can then pick single colonies and grow them overnight to isolate the mutant plasmid DNA. Please refer to the article by Bachman for a more detailed review.

**Random and Extensive Mutagenesis**

REM is a useful approach when many mutations are desired; however, there is less control over the resulting modifications. This technique has helped map out critical residues of proteins (e.g., EcoRV restriction endonuclease). REM can be accomplished through different methods:

- Primers randomly produced with mismatched bases. In this technique, a set of mutagenic primers with three mismatched bases at a single base position are synthesized in the same reaction. These sets of primers are then used to synthesize mutant DNA with three different mutations at the same base position. Other than this, a primer can be synthesized using an ambiguous base (e.g., deoxyinosine), which is capable of base-pairing with varying dNTPs. In theory, there is a 75% probability a wrong base will pair with this ambiguous base, which will generate mutations in subsequent rounds of replication.

- Erroneous PCR. Taq DNA polymerase typically has lower fidelity in comparison to other polymerases (e.g., Pfu and Vent). Furthermore, altering external conditions, such as buffer composition (e.g., high pH or high magnesium concentration), can affect the frequency of errors. Under various combinations of external conditions, the error rate of Taq PCR can be increased to 1 in 150 base pairs, from 1 in 633.

- Use of ambiguous base analogs (e.g., deoxyinosine). As already stated, deoxyinosine triphosphate (dI) can base pair with different dNTPs. In a reaction that contains dI and adjusted dNTPs concentrations (e.g., typical levels of three dNTPs and low levels of the fourth dNTP), a dI is likely to be incorporated into the newly synthesized sequence. Theoretically, there is a 75% chance that a wrong base will pair with a dI during subsequent replication events. This technique can result in 1 in 250 base pair mutation rates.

- Use of mutagenic agents. A classic method for causing widespread random mutations is by exposing a cell or organism to a mutagen (e.g., ENU).

**Insertions and Deletions**

PCR is effective at producing insertions or deletions. Small insertions or deletions (less than ten base pairs) can occur by utilizing the modified primer design described above. Large deletions can occur by joining two PCR-amplified fragments, which omits a portion of a DNA fragment. Large insertions can occur using megaprimers or overlap-extension PCR.

**CRISPR-Cas9**

This technology is a genome-editing tool derived from bacterial defenses against viruses and foreign plasmids. It has two vital components: a guide RNA (gRNA) that binds complementary to a target DNA sequence, and an endonuclease (Cas9) that causes a dsDNA break that requires repair. Cas9-induced site-specific dsDNA breaks induce endogenous cell repair mechanisms, which can be exploited to modify DNA. The error-prone nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) can rapidly ligate DNA breaks; however, it may generate small insertions and deletions that can cause frameshift mutations. Alternatively, dsDNA breaks can be repaired by homology-directed repair (HDR), which can insert exogenous DNA and introduce precise genome editing.

**TALENS vs. Zinc Finger Nucleases**

TALENs and ZFN are gene-editing tools with similar principles; however, different underlying designs. They both are proteins that consist of DNA binding domains (i.e., TALE proteins vs. zinc fingers domains) and DNA cleavage domains (e.g., Fok1). DNA specificity resides in the TALE proteins and the zinc finger domains. For cleavage to occur, there must be dimerization of the restriction enzyme; therefore, at least two proteins are needed per target DNA. Once dimerization occurs at a target location, a double-stranded DNA break is made. Similar to CRISPR, this is repaired by NHEJ (with the possibility of insertions and deletions) or homologous recombination (where exogenous DNA can be added). A key difference between TALENs and ZFN is that TALE proteins recognize a single base, while zinc finger domains recognize 3 or 4 bases. Given zinc fingers must recognize multiple bases, it may reduce DNA specificity in comparison to TALE proteins.