A multi-disciplinary approach to patients with chronic orchialgia is recommended. This would ideally include pain management specialists, psychiatry, pelvic floor physical therapists as well as primary care and urology. This type of approach along with conservative therapy should be tried before resorting to invasive and irreversible surgical procedures.

There are no clear and established guidelines for treatment. The following are the consensus treatment recommendations for idiopathic chronic orchialgia from the published literature.

If an obvious source of the pain is found, begin specific therapy (hernias, spermatoceles, epididymitis). If unsuccessful or if no specific etiology is found, a course of conservative therapy is undertaken.

If the patient is on amiodarone, the drug may have to be discontinued as the orchalgia it sometimes produces is not self limiting.

Conservative therapy includes heat, ice, scrotal elevation, antibiotics, analgesics, NSAIDs, antidepressants (doxepin or amitriptyline), anticonvulsants (gabapentin and pregabalin), regional and local nerve blocks, pelvic floor physical therapy, biofeedback, acupuncture, and psychotherapy for at least 3 months. While conservative therapy has almost always been considered first-line treatment, success is relatively poor ranging from 4.2% to 15.2% in some studies. There are no good, published studies regarding reliable non-surgical interventions. Nevertheless, it is advisable to try conservative therapies first.

Treatment starts with dietary and lifestyle advice usually consisting of eliminating dietary caffeine, citrus, hot spices, and chocolate as well as avoidance of constipation and prolonged sitting.

Antibiotics prescribed are usually trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or a quinolone because of their lipid solubility. They are typically prescribed for 2 to 4 weeks. Antibiotic therapy is not recommended for empiric use, only if there are objective signs or a reasonable suspicion of an infection.

Initial pharmacological therapy is usually with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). They are typically prescribed for at least 30 days. Preferred agents include 600 mg ibuprofen 3 times daily, naproxen (Naprosyn), celecoxib 200 mg daily or piroxicam (Feldene) 20 mg daily. Recurrence rates after successful NSAID use are as high as 50%. Narcotic analgesics should be avoided except possibly for occasional breakthrough pain. There is some evidence than tamsulosin may be of some use in selected patients.

Tricyclic antidepressants work by blocking the reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin in the brain. Their analgesic effect is thought to be due to inhibition of sodium and L-type calcium channel blockers in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Tertiary amines in this class (amitriptyline and clomipramine) are more effective for neuropathic pain than secondary amines (desipramine and nortriptyline) but are also more sedating and more likely to be associated with postural hypotension. They are usually given as a single dose at bedtime and will typically require at least 2 to 4 weeks for their effectiveness to become apparent although this may take up to 8 weeks. Usual dosing is amitriptyline 25 mg at HS.

If tricyclic therapy is not successful after 30 days, the next conservative therapy approach would be to add an anticonvulsant such as gabapentin (Neurontin) at 300 mg TID and pregabalin (Lyrica) at 75 to 150 mg daily. Usually, gabapentin is used first as insurance coverage often requires a gabapentin failure before pregabalin will be covered. These are recommended due to their proven efficacy in neuropathic pain and their relative lack of side effects. They work by modulating the N-type calcium channels which significantly affects pain fibers. Typical dosage of pregabalin for pain control would be 75 mg 3 times daily. If the pain persists beyond 30 days, the treatment would be judged ineffective. In one small study, over 60% of patients with idiopathic chronic orchialgia showed significant pain relief, but large-scale, definitive studies are lacking.

Trigger point dry needling was recently found to be effective in 85% of patients with chronic orchialgia. For those patients who responded, the average number of dry needling treatments was 4.6 while this increased to 6.5 for those who did not respond.

Pelvic floor physical therapy is useful for those with pelvic muscle dysfunction or identifiable myofascial trigger points. In properly selected patients, about 50% have noted improvement in their pain after 12 sessions. It also appears that physical therapy can improve pain and quality of life scores for chronic orchialgia patients even after other treatments.  Therefore, a physical therapy evaluation and treatment should be considered an effective, low risk therapeutic option for patients with chronic orchialgia.

The next step is the spermatic cord block which is recommended prior to performing any invasive or irreversible surgical procedures. This is usually done by injection 20 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine without epinephrine using a 27 gauge needle. Steroids may or may not be added. The injection is done directly into the spermatic cord at the level of the pubic tubercle. Ultrasound can be used to assist if the anatomy is challenging due to body habitus or prior surgery. If spermatic cord nerves are involved in the pain signals, the testicular discomfort should be rapidly relieved by the injection. While this often provides relief, it is rarely long term. Those patients who experience more than 90% pain relief can be offered repeated blocks up to every 2 weeks. If the injection provides no pain relief, it is not repeated. If the spermatic cord block is not at least 50% successful in reducing the orchialgia, consider a possible missed diagnosis. A re-examination of the patient along with a careful review of his laboratory studies and imaging is suggested. In general, the better the response to the spermatic cord block, the better the outcome with MDSC. The use of "sham blocks," with normal saline instead of local anesthetic, is discouraged due to ethical considerations.

Surgical intervention is indicated if the spermatic cord block is at least 50% successful in reducing the orchialgia.

About 1% to 2% of all men who undergo vasectomies will develop constant or intermittent testicular pain lasting greater than 3 months which is then defined as post-vasectomy pain syndrome. Post-vasectomy patients who fail conservative therapy should consider a vasectomy reversal. This is especially recommended if scrotal imaging shows evidence of epididymal congestion and there is an association of testicular pain with sexual intercourse. The success rate of vasectomy reversal for chronic orchialgia patients with post-vasectomy pain syndrome has been reported as 69%. Sperm granulomas should be removed if they appear to be tender or contributing to the scrotal pain.

Varicoceles are relatively common findings in men with orchialgia and are found in 2% to 10% of such patients. Partial or complete relief of pain symptoms after varicocele surgery is reported in 72.4% to 94.3% of men in various studies.

Epididymectomy is a more aggressive surgical option that is highly successful (greater than 90%) in selected patients when the source of the pain is localized to the epididymis such as from a spermatocele or granuloma. It also demonstrates reasonable success in controlling post-vasectomy pain as an alternative to vasectomy reversals. Epididymectomy is less successful in patients with chronic epididymitis (43% patient satisfaction). It is probably not an acceptable surgical choice for diffuse pain in the cord or testicle that cannot be well localized to the epididymis.

Microsurgical Denervation of the Spermatic Cord (MDSC) has become the de facto surgical standard when a procedure is indicated for idiopathic chronic orchialgia unresponsive to conservative therapies. Very good outcomes with microsurgical denervation of the spermatic cord (MDSC) are reported (up to 76.5%), especially if patients have had a positive response to a spermatic cord block.

The procedure is usually done through an inguinal incision, and the spermatic cord is exposed and delivered out of the wound. A sub-inguinal incision is an acceptable alternative approach. The testicle is usually left in place in the scrotum. The spermatic cord is then stabilized and supported by a Penrose drain or tongue depressor placed underneath. The cord is carefully dissected using a microscope to locate the cremasteric and testicular arteries which are identified and isolated with small vessel loops. These arteries are spared along with the artery of the vas deferens if present. The peri-vasal fascia is stripped as this tissue is full of afferent nerves. A vasectomy is typically done if it was not previously performed. Leaving the vas for fertility reasons tends to reduce the success of the procedure. However, a few experts recommend leaving the vas after stripping the perivasal fascia for about 2 cm, to avoid epididymal congestion and possible post-vasectomy pain syndrome. The vasal artery is preserved if not previously sacrificed.

Cremasteric muscle fibers are cut, with care taken to avoid injury to the cremasteric artery. The goal of the procedure is to transect all of the nerves in the spermatic cord while preserving the arterial supply (testicular artery, cremasteric artery, and the artery of the vas deferens) and a few lymphatics which are left to reduce the likelihood of developing a post-operative hydrocele. Testicular veins and the ilioinguinal nerve are also sacrificed. (Despite this, patient complaints of sensory loss in the ilioinguinal nerve distribution area are uncommon.) The proximal end of the ilioinguinal nerve is buried to minimize neuroma formation.

Roughly 70% to 80% of men have complete relief of symptoms and another 10% to 20% have partial pain relief after MDSC. Even in patients who have previously undergone a prior surgical intervention, MDSC provided 50% of them with complete relief of pain. Complete resolution of the pain after this surgery may take up to 3 months, but 40% noted complete pain relief immediately after the MDSC. The procedure has been done with the da Vinci robot with similar results.

Possible complications include hydrocele formation (less than 1% risk), wound infections, incisional hematomas and testicular atrophy (1% risk).

Vasectomy reversal may be effective in relieving post-vasectomy pain syndrome not responding to conservative measures. Only relatively small studies are available, but they consistently show high rates of pain relief from vasovasostomy, with 50% to 69% of patients getting complete pain relief. The negatives with this procedure include negating the purpose of the original vasectomy and the cost which may not be covered by insurance. Failure of the procedure to provide substantial pain relief include neuropathic causes, nerve entrapment, post-operative scarring and continuing vasal obstruction. In one series of 6 men who had persistent pain after their initial vasectomy reversal, a second reversal was performed, and 50% of those men noted pain relief. An epididymectomy would be an alternative surgical treatment that would guarantee maintenance of infertility.

The surgical treatment of last resort is an orchiectomy with the inguinal approach demonstrating a slightly higher success rate that the trans-scrotal approach. Unfortunately, even this last resort treatment is not 100% successful in relieving chronic pain and might result in hypogonadism, so it is important to inform and counsel patients accordingly.