The cornerstone of the management of an acute amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) is prompt and effective cardiopulmonary resuscitation of the mother and rapid evacuation of the fetus. For the mother, this, of course, would include securing the airway, effective ventilation, ideal fluid management, and the appropriate use of vasopressors. Initially, after intubation, large-bore intravenous catheters should be instituted for infusions. Pulmonary wedge catheters (Swan Ganz) will directly measure left atrial and pulmonary artery pressures as well as cardiac output through thermal dilution. Pulmonary artery blood aspirants may reveal the presence of fetal components. Intra-arterial lines are useful to facilitate minute-to-minute pressure measurement and frequent arterial blood gas samplings. A central venous pressure line may assist in assessing right-sided preload. Urethral catheterization facilitates urine output documentation. Crystalloid fluids are generally given judiciously but must be limited if coagulopathy ensues. Copious fluid administration dilutes clotting factors making bleeding worse. For this reason, the decision to move to vasopressors should be considered earlier as compared to significant bleeding from other etiologies.

The general sequence of vasopressors support starts with dopamine, dobutamine, or epinephrine, but may be switched to norepinephrine for persistent hypotension. Vasopressin may be added at this point to augment cardiac output. Ideal management is to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) of more than 65 mmHg, a cardiac index of more than 2 L per meter square, an adequate urine output of 40-50 ml/hr, and a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of more than 250. Ventilation using inhaled nitric oxide assists in reducing RV afterload. Sildenafil is utilized for its pulmonary arterial vasodilatation. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been used successfully for refractory cardiogenic shock secondary to amniotic fluid embolus. Any patient who remains in persistent cardiopulmonary collapse should have femoral arterial and venous 4 Fr sheaths placed in anticipation of ECMO. Patients may need to be transferred to tertiary facilities capable of ECMO. This mandates early decision-making and knowledge of local capabilities. Once ECMO is instituted, it is recommended to remove arterial and venous catheters once cardiovascular stability has been obtained. Intravascular catheters exacerbate an ongoing coagulopathy.

The management of the coagulopathy (DIC) of AFE has classically been to empirically administer units of packed red blood cells (pRBCs), fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and platelets in a 1:1:1 ratio until bleeding is controlled. Cryoprecipitate contains concentrated clotting factors, including factor VIII, von Willebrand factor, and fibrinogen. It is also given to maintain fibrinogen levels of more than 200 mg/dl. Tranexamic acid is given for fibrinolysis. Standard laboratory turnaround times for important clotting parameters such as prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, clotting factor analysis, and fibrinogen tend to be excessive. The use of viscoelastic tests such as thromboelastography (TEG) and rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM), when done at the bedside (point of care) by a trained specialist, offers the capability of a minute to minute evaluation of fibrinogen level, platelet count, and function, as well as evaluation of the entire extrinsic clotting pathway. Algorithms derived from these measurements dictate appropriate administration of cryoprecipitate, fibrinogen, prothrombin complex concentrates, platelets, FFP, pRBCs, and tranexamic acid (TXA). Anecdotal reports in the literature cite the use of rivaroxaban, a factor Xa inhibitor, as successfully reversing the DIC of AFE. Other anecdotal reports suggest the use of ketorolac to inhibit thromboxane, which activates platelets in AFE. Besides, ondansetron has been utilized to block serotonin receptors in the lung. Serotonin is thought to be a potent pulmonary vasoconstrictor.

Obstetrical management must include the rapid evacuation of the fetus, usually by cesarean section. The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine recommends this for all fetuses over 23 weeks gestational age. Ongoing resuscitation of the mother in the obstetrical operating room with an anesthesiologist or critical care provider running the cardiovascular resuscitation must go on during the extraction of the infant. It is recommended to shift the gravid uterus to the left, therefore, relieving aortocaval compression. This multidisciplinary team must be able to initiate neonatal resuscitation and should include a neonatologist because the majority of these infants are born with a low Apgar score. The infant will likely need rapid suctioning, intubation, and vascular access. The obstetrician may elect several different procedures to alleviate the ongoing uterine hemorrhage. Uterine artery ligation or embolization has been documented with some success. Circumferential B-Lynch, Hayman, or Pereira compression sutures have been utilized to compress the atonic uterus and staunch bleeding. However, in the setting of massive hemorrhage and an atonic uterus, the best course is an emergency hysterectomy.