CN VIII pathology can result from direct trauma, congenital malformations, tumor formation, infection, and vascular injury. Presenting symptoms include vertigo, nystagmus, tinnitus, and sensorineural hearing loss.

Auditory pathology can occur anywhere along the auditory pathway, central or peripheral. The most common mechanisms of injury are infarcts and demyelination (i.e., Multiple Sclerosis). Patients can present with unilateral or bilateral sensorineural loss, depending on the location of the injury. Additionally, traumatic injury to the temporal bone can present with unilateral sensorineural loss due to IAC or bony labyrinth fracture. There can also be a concussive injury to the labyrinth. Imaging studies for such injuries are typically negative unless an MRI shows an intralabyrinthine hemorrhage.

Notable congenital malformations of CN VIII include aplasia or hypoplasia. These malformations are subdivided into three subtypes: 1, 2A, and 2B. Type 1 refers to an aplastic CN VIII with a normal labyrinth. Type 2A refers to an aplastic/hypoplastic cochlear branch with an accompanying labyrinth malformation. Type 2B, the most common subtype, refers to an aplastic/hypoplastic cochlear branch but with a normal labyrinth.

Vestibular schwannomas (acoustic neuromas) are of Schwann cell origin, and they are the most common CPA tumors. All cranial nerves have a peripheral transition zone where glial myelination by oligodendrocytes gives way to peripheral myelination by Schwann cells.

Bilateral vestibular schwannomas are the hallmark sign of neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF-2), an autosomal dominant genetic syndrome. The usual presentation is progressive, unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, and commonly associated symptoms are tinnitus and vertigo. Notably, facial nerve (CN VII) palsy rarely occurs with vestibular schwannomas because the facial nerve is resistant to chronic pressure. MRI is the diagnostic imaging of choice.

Acute vestibular syndrome (AVS) is characterized by vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and gait disturbances with an acute onset (seconds to hours), which are associated with nystagmus and head-motion intolerance (days to weeks). Etiology can either be peripheral, most commonly vestibular neuritis, or central, such as brainstem or cerebellar stroke. Vestibular neuritis is usually viral in origin and self-limiting, while a central stroke can have permanent effects. Therefore, it is critical to distinguish between these two etiologies to ensure proper patient care. This can be done at the bedside using the “Head-Impulse—Nystagmus—Test-of-Skew” (HINTS) exam. The horizontal head-impulse test, which assesses the vestibulo-ocular reflex, would be normal with central etiologies and abnormal with peripheral etiologies. Nystagmus would be vertical and/or bidirectional with central etiologies and unidirectional with peripheral etiologies, regardless of gaze direction. Skew deviation would be present with central etiologies and absent with peripheral etiologies.

Also, the involvement of the facial nerve due to its proximity should not be excluded during evaluation.