Evaluation and work up are based on the type of dystonia where clinical presentation remains the cornerstone of evaluation.

In primary dystonia, clinical evaluation and genetic testing (DYT1 and DYT6) can guide to the correct diagnosis. The gene at the DYT1 locus has been determined to serve as a cause of the dystonia described by Oppenheim. In a vast majority of patients with DYT1 dystonia, symptoms begin in childhood or adolescence, and the mean age of onset is 13 years. Oppenheim dystonia affects most ethnic groups but is considerably wide spread in the Ashkenazi Jewish population.

Dystonia plus syndrome encompasses nondegenerative disorders in which parkinsonism dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) and rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP) or Myoclonus-Dystonia (M-D) co-occur with dystonia. Dopa responsive dystonia predominantly starts between ages six and 16 but can arise at any age. When it begins in infants has the appearance of cerebral palsy. When it occurs in adults, it often manifests as pure parkinsonism, responding to levodopa with a benign course. Dopa responsive dystonia affects girls more often than boys, has a worldwide distribution and is not known to have a higher specific prevalence in any particular ethnic group. Mutations in the gene for GTP cyclohydrolase 1(GCH1) located at 14q22.1 are accountable for the greater number of dopa-responsive dystonia. Dopa responsive dystonia can be suspected if a young patient with dystonia responds greatly to a low dose of anticholinergics. On the other hand, the most effective agent is levodopa.

Clues suggestive of secondary dystonia emerge from the definition of the disorder that develops as a result of environmental factors that affect the brain, especially the basal ganglia. Spinal cord injury and peripheral injury can serve as a cause of dystonia as well. So the history of possible head trauma, encephalitis, toxin and drug exposure, perinatal anoxia, also the presence of neurologic abnormality independently from dystonia, for example, Parkinsonism, dementia, seizures, ocular symptoms, ataxia, neuropathy, spasticity with abnormal brain imaging will guide to the diagnosis of secondary dystonia.

Because many of the neurodegenerations are a result of genetic abnormalities, the term Heredodegenerative dystonia is applied to this category. Dystonia in Neurodegeneration is a prominent feature. MRI of the brain, ceruloplasmin level, slit-lamp exam, lysosomal screen, peripheral blood smear, nerve conduction studies, creatine kinase (CK) level, vitamin E are a few worth mentioning investigations.

Imaging studies may identify central lesions, hemorrhage or hypoxic damage.