# Continuing Education Activity

Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of the knee is a somewhat rare cause of knee dysfunction and pain that has been recognized for over one hundred years, but the etiology is still poorly understood. The highest incidence is in patients between the ages of 10 and 20 years, and males have a much higher incidence of osteochondritis dissecans than females. The most common location for osteochondritis dissecans lesions of the knee is the distal femur, specifically in the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of patients who present with osteochondritis dessecans of the knee and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for those with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of osteochondritis dessecans of the knee.
- Summarize the diagnostic procedure for suspected osteochondritis dessecans of the knee, including any necessary diagnostic imaging.
- Outline the various treatment options for osteochondritis dessecans of the knee.
- Explain possible interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the evaluation and treatment of osteochondritis dessecans of the knee and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of the knee is a somewhat rare cause of knee dysfunction and pain that has been recognized for over one hundred years, but the etiology is still poorly understood.

Patients with osteochondritis dissecans can present with knee pain as the primary complaint, or osteochondritis dissecans can be discovered incidentally on radiographs obtained for unrelated injuries.

# Etiology

While it has been more than 125 years since Konig first described the term osteochondritis dissecans, the exact etiology remains a mystery.  Numerous hypotheses exist for the precise etiology of osteochondritis dissecans, including inflammatory, vascular/ischemic, trauma/microtrauma, and hereditary/genetic causes, although none have been proven definitive.

# Epidemiology

Osteochondritis dissecans of the knee is much more commonly diagnosed in young patients, mostly affecting patients between the ages of 10 and 20.

# Pathophysiology

The lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle (64%) is the most common location for osteochondritis dissecans lesions in the knee, followed by the lateral femoral condyle (32%).

# History and Physical

High clinical suspicion should be maintained as the presentation of osteochondral lesions can mimic several much more common causes of knee pain. The historical features and symptoms of osteochondritis dissecans lesions lie along a spectrum depending on the age of the patient and disease progression at presentation. Asymptomatic osteochondritis dissecans may be discovered incidentally on plain radiographs taken for other reasons while advanced stages may present similarly to an acute knee injury once a loose body is present. Important historical questioning includes a history of trauma, a recent increase in activity level, previous knee injuries and the presence of mechanical symptoms. Pain during weight bearing is the most commonly reported symptom, occurring in approximately 80% of symptomatic osteochondritis dissecans cases.

As mentioned above, osteochondritis dissecans lesions of the knee may be completely asymptomatic, stressing the importance of a comprehensive physical examination to rule out other causes of knee pain. Inspection of knee alignment may reveal genu varus, associated with a lesion at the medial femoral condyle, or genu valgus, more common with osteochondritis dissecans of the lateral femoral condyle.

# Evaluation

Like many orthopedic conditions, evaluation begins with plain radiographs in order to localize the lesion, evaluate the growth plates and rule out other conditions. The typical series includes standing A/P, lateral, sunrise and notch views. Osteochondritis dissecans lesions are often initially missed on radiographs. The notch view, an A/P projection taken in 30 to 50 degrees of knee flexion, allows for better evaluation of the posterior femoral condyles.

Plain radiographs are limited in determining the stability of osteochondritis dissecans lesions, which is vitally important for clinical decision making. As a result, magnetic resonance imaging is often indicated for further evaluation. MRI allows for more precise evaluation of the size of the lesion in addition to the structure of the overlying cartilage. Hefti et. al developed a classification system based on magnetic resonance findings as listed below.

**Stage**

- A small change of signal in the subchondral bone without clear margins

- Osteochondral lesion with clear margins, no underlying fluid between fragment and bone

- Fluid partially visible between the fragment and underlying bone

- Fluid completely surrounding fragment, fragment remains in situ

- Loose body

Several authors have studied the correlation between MRI findings and the prognosis of osteochondritis dissecans lesions. De Smet et al. described several T2 weighted MRI signs that may be associated with an unstable lesions including a line of intense signal equal to that of fluid at the fragment-bone interface measuring 5 mm or more in length, a discrete round focus of intense signal deep to the osteochondritis dissecans lesion measuring 5 mm or more, a focal defect in the overlying articular cartilage that measures 5 mm or more in width and an intense signal equal to that of fluid that traverses both the articular cartilage and subchondral bone and extends into the lesion.

Ultimately, arthroscopy in the gold standard for assessing lesion stability and determining the appropriate management. The International Cartilage Repair Society developed an intraoperative classification which defines the integrity and stability of the fragment, as described below.

**Types**

- Softening of intact cartilage

- Cartilage breached, stable fragment when probed

- Fragment discontinuity, unstable when probed, the fragment is in place

- Osteochondral crater and loose body

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of osteochondritis dissecans of the knee includes both conservative and surgical approaches. The approach depends on severity, age, and location of the disease.

Conservative approaches to treatment can be considered in juvenile patients with stage I to III disease and asymptomatic adults with stage I disease. Conservative therapy is preferred if the lesions are stable with no loose bodies or there are open physes.  If osteochondritis dissecans of the knee is diagnosed incidentally in an asymptomatic patient, no treatment is necessary, but the patient should be followed until documented radiographic healing occurs.

A surgical approach to osteochondritis dissecans of the knee is used if conservative therapy is not appropriate or if conservative therapy fails after 3 to 6 months. A surgical approach is a primary treatment in adults with any symptoms related to osteochondritis dissecans, or in patients who have at least stage II disease. Juveniles start with surgery if the lesion is unstable, if there are loose bodies, or if physes have closed.

# Differential Diagnosis

As the symptomatology of osteochondritis dissecans of the knee can vary from asymptomatic to vague pain with weight-bearing to the extremes of effusion and mechanical symptoms, the differential diagnosis is broad. For the typical osteochondritis dissecans patient in the pediatric age range experiencing atraumatic knee pain with weight-bearing, the differential would include patellofemoral syndrome, patellar tendonitis, Osgood-Schlatter disease, Sinding-Larsen-Johannson syndrome, fat pad impingement, symptomatic discoid meniscus, and symptomatic synovial plica. For an adult with typical weight-bearing knee pain, the differential would include patellofemoral pain, knee osteoarthritis, chondromalacia, patellar tendonitis, meniscal tear, fat pad impingement, and symptomatic synovial plica. For adults with more severe atraumatic edema as well as mechanical symptoms in the knee, the differential would include a meniscal tear, osteochondral loose body, and neoplasm.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of osteochondritis dissecans of the knee depends on patient age, location and appearance of the lesion on imaging. In general, younger patients do better than adults with osteochondritis dissecans of the knee. Specifically, pediatric patients with open distal femoral physes have the best prognosis for complete recovery with conservative measures. Adults with the disease often progress to arthritis if not treated.

# Complications

As mentioned above in the treatment section, patients who fail conservative treatment strategies for osteochondritis dissecans of the knee typically require surgery for full recovery. As stated in the prognosis section, patients with higher stages of osteochondritis dissecans lesions who do not fully heal or who fail surgical therapies often progress to chronic pain, mechanical symptoms, and arthritic disease.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The exact etiology of osteochondritis dissecans of the knee has not been confirmed, and there are no clear guidelines for the prevention or deterrence of osteochondritis dissecans of the knee. Patients with osteochondritis dissecans of the knee who are between the ages of 10 and 20 should receive education and encouragement regarding the high success rates of conservative management. Adults with osteochondritis dissecans of the knee should be informed that there is a high likelihood surgical therapy will be required to help them fully recover.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Osteochondritis of the knee can pose a diagnostic dilemma, as the lesion may either be asymptomatic or mimic other causes of knee pain.  Managing osteochondritis dissecans of the knee requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a physician, physical therapists for conservative management, a radiologist trained in reading musculoskeletal imaging, and an experienced orthopedic surgeon. The physician will need to keep osteochondritis dissecans of the knee in their differential diagnosis for possibly vague presentations of knee pain and must order the correct radiographs as well as MRI for proper identification and staging of these lesions. Physical therapists will be required to manage most patients with osteochondritis dissecans of the knee properly, whether they receive conservative therapy or surgical therapy and need strengthening as well as gait retraining after a period of non-weight bearing. A well-trained radiologist will be required to identify and grade osteochondritis dissecans lesions in the knee properly. An experienced orthopedic surgeon is essential to provide guidance regarding the likelihood of successful treatment with conservative therapy versus surgery. Timely diagnosis and recognition are critical, as stable osteochondritis dissecans lesions with intact articular surfaces are likely to heal with nonoperative treatment, especially in pediatric patients.