**Microbial Role**

Carious lesions have a higher percentage and incidence of certain bacterial species: Streptococcus mutans, Streptococcus sobrinus, and Lactobacilli, isolated from advanced caries.**specific plaque hypothesis**was based on this finding, believing that only specific bacteria caused the disease.**nonspecific plaque hypothesis,**where caries is believed to result from the net metabolic activity of the microbiota of the biofilm. Although the etiology of dental caries is not completely specific, we cannot ignore that a limited type of bacteria is consistently found in higher numbers from the affected areas.**ecological plaque hypothesis.**

The ecological plaque hypothesis believes that dental caries is not caused by a specific type of microorganism acting alone but is the result of a shift in the microbiota of the dental biofilm towards more cariogenic species.

**Demineralization and remineralization**

Fermentable carbohydrates are metabolized by the biofilm bacteria that produce organic acids, primarily lactic acid. These end products of bacterial metabolism accumulate in the fluid phase of the biofilm, causing a pH drop and demineralization of the surface layer of the tooth.

The enamel porosity increases, the spaces between the crystals widen, and the surface softens, which provides an opportunity for the acids to get deeper into the tooth structure and demineralize the subsurface.

At this point, the reaction products of the demineralization - calcium and phosphate - accumulate in the enamel surface and can protect it from further mineral loss. Also, available fluoride can help to protect from surface demineralization.

Sugars are swallowed and cleared by saliva that can return the biofilm pH to neutrality thanks to its buffer capacity; calcium, phosphate, and fluoride now remineralize the tooth's surface.

If the acidic conditions perpetuate, the pH drops will continue reaching a point when the rate of mineral loss in the subsurface is higher than the surface, resulting in a subsurface lesion. When there is sufficient mineral loss, a white spot becomes clinically visible.

A white spot can be arrested or reversed if behavioral changes and preventive measures are implemented (ICDAS 1 and 2). If caries progresses further, microcavities are formed in the enamel due to the increased surface porosity, clinically corresponding to an ICDAS code 3. The surface lesion will collapse with time, leaving a macroscopic hole (ICDAS 5 or 6). Despite the severity of the lesion at this point, it can still be arrested, but the cavity will remain.