# Continuing Education Activity

Hydralazine is a direct vasodilator used orally to treat essential hypertension, among other diseases, and intravenously to rapidly reduce blood pressure in hypertensive urgency or emergency. Per JNC 8 guidelines, it is not a first-line agent for the treatment of essential hypertension. This is due to hydralazine’s stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, among several other adverse effects that make the current newer first-line agents more efficacious. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, administration, contraindications, and adverse effects of hydralazine.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for initiating hydralazine therapy.
- Summarize the theorized mechanism of action of hydralazine.
- Discuss the parameters of hydralazine administration.
- Outline how an interprofessional team can coordinate the use and monitoring of hydralazine to obtain the best patient outcomes.

# Indications

Hydralazine is primarily used to treat hypertension and hypertensive urgency/emergency.

In current practice, oral hydralazine is used in essential hypertension refractory to other therapeutic agents.

IV hydralazine has had increased off-label use in the setting of hypertensive emergencies. It is often given to hospitalized patients but has little evidence of improved outcomes. Reasons for this include highly variable blood pressure changes and adverse hypotensive episodes.

IV hydralazine along with IV labetalol are considered first-line therapy for the treatment of acute-onset, severe hypertension in pregnancy and during the postpartum period. Either of these medications should be administered during the intrapartum or postpartum period if severe blood pressure persists for greater than 15 minutes.

For African-American patients with severe heart failure (New York Heart Association Class III and IV) with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), the American Heart Association recommends ACE inhibitors and beta-blockers as first-line therapy.

# Mechanism of Action

Hydralazine is a direct arteriole vasodilator. Although the mechanism is not completely understood, it is theorized to be associated with intracellular calcium homeostasis. Specifically, it acts to inhibit inositol trisphosphate (IP3)-induced release of calcium from the smooth muscle cells' sarcoplasmic reticulum and inhibits myosin phosphorylation within the arterial smooth muscle.

Hydralazine is metabolized by the liver. It undergoes polymorphic acetylation. Slow acetylators require lower doses of the drug. Both the acetylated drug and unchanged drug are excreted in the urine and feces.

For intravenous dosing, the blood-pressure-lowering effects occur within 5 to 30 minutes with a total duration of 2 to 6 hours. For oral dosing, the blood-pressure-lowering effects occur within 20 to 30 minutes with a total duration of 2 to 4 hours.

# Administration

For the treatment of hypertensive emergencies, hydralazine should be administered at a dosage of 10 mg via slow IV infusion with a maximum initial dose of 20 mg. This can be repeated every 4-6 hours as needed. Due to its unpredictable response and prolonged duration of action, hydralazine is not a desirable first-line agent for acute treatment.

To treat essential hypertension, hydralazine should be initiated at a dosage of 10 mg orally four times daily for the first 2 to 4 days, then increased to 25 mg four times daily to complete 1 week of treatment. It can then be increased to 50 mg four times daily for maintenance therapy. The oral dosage maximum is 300 mg per day.

For the treatment of Stage C Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction (HFrEF), the recommended fixed initial dose combination of hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate is 37.5 mg hydralazine/20 mg isosorbide dinitrate 3 times daily with a maximum dose of 75 mg hydralazine/40 mg isosorbide dinitrate 3 times daily.

# Adverse Effects

Hydralazine has been reported to cause headaches, nausea, flushing, hypotension, palpitations, tachycardia, dizziness, and angina.

Immune phenomena such as drug-induced lupus erythematosus (DILE), serum sickness, hemolytic anemia, vasculitis, and glomerulonephritis have been reported using hydralazine.

Hydralazine-related DILE, also known as hydralazine-induced lupus syndrome (HILS), usually occurs with greater than 6 months of exposure, and roughly 5-8% of hydralazine users are at risk of developing DILE.

Cases of drug-induced liver injury (DILI) have also been reported with the use of hydralazine. Symptoms of DILI are consistent with hepatitis and include nausea, vomiting, dark urine, jaundice, abdominal pain, and pruritus. Treatment entails discontinuation of hydralazine.

There have been rare cases of toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) reported in association with hydralazine.

There have also been rare cases reported of polyneuritis that are amenable to pyridoxine supplements.

# Contraindications

Coronary artery disease: this is due to hydralazine’s stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system. This leads to increased cardiac output and oxygen demand, which can provoke myocardial ischemia.

Lactation: use caution in breastfeeding women as it is unknown if hydralazine is excreted in human milk

Aortic dissection:  it can increase aortic wall shear stress

# Monitoring

A complete blood count (CBC) and an antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer should be obtained prior to initiating therapy and periodically during therapy. In 95-100% of HILS, the serum ANA titer is positive. Abnormal hematologic findings to be aware of in HILS includes anemia, leukopenia, and/or agranulocytosis.

If the patient develops arthralgias, fever, chest pain, continued malaise, hematologic findings mentioned above, or other unexplained signs or symptoms related to DILE, the drug should be discontinued immediately, and corticosteroids and/or immunosuppressive therapy should be considered in life-threatening cases.

# Toxicity

Published reports of toxicity with acute use of hydralazine are uncommon. Signs of toxicity include hypotension, tachycardia, headaches, and generalized flushing.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Hydralazine should not be considered a first-line agent for essential hypertension but can be considered in hypertension refractory to other first-line medications. The newer hypertensive medications are more efficacious with fewer adverse effects. The recommended dosing of three to four times daily makes hydralazine patient compliance a challenge. Patients tend to tolerate this medication better when the hydralazine is given with a beta-blocker and/or diuretic.

IV hydralazine has had increased off-label use for the treatment of hypertensive urgency or emergency.

For African Americans with HFrEF, the combination of hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate can be added to medication therapy if the patient is already receiving an ACE inhibitor, ARB, or ARNI and a beta-blocker.

While hydralazine is relatively safe, it is important to be aware of some of its adverse effects, which, although rare, include triggering lupus-like syndrome.

An interprofessional team approach involving clinicians, mid-level practitioners, and specialists, plus the nursing staff and pharmacists, can help monitor the patient's therapeutic results, watch for potential adverse events, provide patient medication counseling regarding dosing and signs of toxicity, check for drug-drug interactions, and alert the prescriber. These types of interprofessional strategies will result in improved outcomes from hydralazine therapy. [Level 5]