The evaluation of minor wounds begins with determining the mechanism and timing of the injury. Additionally, the possible presence of a foreign body should be established. This is done with a detailed visual inspection of the entire area involved. In some settings, radiographs may be required to evaluate for radiopaque foreign bodies. Ultrasound can also be helpful if non-radiopaque foreign bodies are suspected. If the wound is full thickness, then the extent of the abrasion should be determined, including any damage to neurovascular structures, muscles, or tendons. This includes an assessment of pulses and capillary refill in the area of the wound. A neurological evaluation should include motor and sensory testing. Depending on the nature and location of the abrasion, there may be cosmesis concerns that warrant further evaluation.

The medicolegal investigation may require a biopsy of the abrasion for histological examination. The histological examination investigates the stage of wound healing to provide an estimate of the time of injury. Wound healing involves a series of coordinated cellular changes that include bleeding and coagulation, inflammatory response, regeneration, and remodeling. The regeneration process further involves migration and proliferation, while remodeling involves extracellular matrix protein and collagen synthesis, as well as the formation of new parenchymal and connective tissue. These processes are four time-dependent phases: (1) bleeding and coagulation, which begins immediately; (2) inflammation, also begins without delay; (3) regeneration, which begins in days and lasts for the primary part of the acute healing phase; and (4) remodeling, which begins weeks after the injury and can last for longer than a year.