Surgical resection is the primary treatment for medullary thyroid carcinoma. Medullary thyroid carcinoma does not respond to radioactive iodine (RAI) or conventional chemotherapy. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) suppression is not required for medullary thyroid cancer as C cells do not have the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor. As mentioned previously, all patients should be evaluated for hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma. If a pheochromocytoma is found, it should be removed prior to thyroidectomy.

**Total Thyroidectomy**

Total thyroidectomy is indicated for all patients with medullary thyroid cancer. Bilateral neck dissection (level IV LN) is indicated for tumors more than one centimeter in the greatest dimension, as well as for bilateral disease. It should also be considered for unilateral tumors and tumors less than one centimeter, though definitive data are lacking. Total thyroidectomy greatly increases the efficacy and utility of postoperative calcitonin level monitoring as a marker for recurrence.

In cases of inherited disease, it is recommended to perform total prophylactic thyroidectomy by age five or when the mutation is found, especially with RET mutation codon 609, 611, 618, 630, 634. In multiple endocrine neoplasia 2B with RET codon 883, 918, or compound heterozygotes, prophylactic total thyroidectomy is recommended by age one. In patients with a less high-risk mutation in codon 768, 790, 791, 804, and 891 prophylactic surgery can be deferred if there is no family history for aggressive medullary thyroid cancer, the family agrees to postpone surgery, and annual basal calcitonin and ultrasounds are performed. Adjuvant radiotherapy has not been adequately studied but can be considered in extrathyroid extension and extensive nodal disease.

**Monitoring for Recurrence**

Two to three months after surgery, serum CEA and calcitonin levels should be assessed. If CEA is within normal limits and calcitonin is not detectable, then the patient is considered cured and has the best prognosis. This group needs to be monitored by annual CEA, calcitonin, and potentially with annual ultrasound (based on symptoms and physical exam). For multiple endocrine neoplasia 2A and 2B, annual exams for hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma are prudent.

Detectable calcitonin or elevated CEA two to three months after surgery raises suspicion for residual disease. These patients should have a neck ultrasound and in cases of calcitonin greater than 150 pg/ml, further imaging in the form of CT neck, chest, and abdomen liver protocol evaluating for potential metastatic disease. If the imaging is negative and the patient is asymptomatic, continue close surveillance with the physical exam and calcitonin/CEA measurements. If levels remain stable, no further imaging is needed. There is no indication to treat asymptomatic elevated calcitonin. If the imaging is positive and the patient is symptomatic, surgical resection of residual lesions is indicated. In the case of unresectable disease, radiotherapy can provide potential palliative therapy.

**Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors**

In cases of unresectable and symptomatic disease, tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKI) like vandetanib and cabozantinib may be indicated. Vandetanib is an oral receptor kinase inhibitor that inhibits RET, EGFR, and VEGFR. In a phase III study, which included 331 patients with advanced, unresectable, or metastatic medullary thyroid cancer, patients showed improved progression-free survival (PFS) compared to placebo.MET, RET, and VEGFR2. A phase III EXAM study showed improvement in PFS in advanced or metastatic medullary thyroid cancer.