Cancer cachexia is a well-known problem for many patients with advanced malignancy. The cause of the cachexia is multifactorial and is best managed by an interprofessional team that consists of an oncologist, oncology nurse, dietitian, social worker, pharmacist, physical therapist, and a mental health counselor. The key is to recognize the problem early when treatment is most successful. Even though many pharmacological agents may help boost appetite, long-term studies on the effectiveness of these agents are lacking. At a minimum, the patient should be seen by a dietitian and a therapist. Improving the mood and offering supportive services may also help. Sadly, when cancer cachexia is advanced, the outlook for most patients is poor, and thus one should always try and ensure that the quality of life does not deteriorate.

The oncology nurse should focus their attention on monitoring the patient and making sure regular followup appointments are maintained. Family education by the nurse is essential. If the patient has signs of cachexia, the nurse should report their concerns to the clinician managing the case. The pharmacist also plays a role, and often the pharmacist can provide additional pharmaceutical solutions that may help control the patient. Further, with the complexity of the combination of medical therapy, reconciliation of the medications is essential and reporting to the clinician if there is a concern of medication combinations that may be making the condition worse. While extremely challenging, the best outcomes will be achieved by an interprofessional team providing care. [Level V]