Rats are definitive hosts for the nematode. The adult nematode enters the rat bloodstream and matures there. Fertilization occurs, followed by the production of eggs, which are released into the blood. The eggs are lodged in the smaller pulmonary vessels and hatch. The first-stage nematodes break into the airways, then migrate to the upper airways and pharynx. First-stage larvae in the pharynx are swallowed and passed down the gastrointestinal tract and finally in the feces. Snails and slugs (intermediate hosts) ingest these larvae, which mature into the third-stage larvae (infective form) that are passed on to the definite hosts again when the definite hosts consume infected intermediate hosts. Third-stage larvae are neurotropic and develop into young adults in the brain of definite hosts, then migrate to the venous system and finally reach the pulmonary vasculature where they sexually mature and female worm lays eggs. Some other transport (paratenic) hosts such as snails, frogs, lizards, prawns, crabs, freshwater shrimps pick up the third-stage larvae by ingesting the infected intermediate hosts which are then passed on to the definite host that ingest these paratenic hosts. Vegetables covered with snail slime can also be a source of infection.

Humans become the incidental hosts by consuming the infected intermediate or paratenic hosts (or ingestion of snail slime). As these are lung flukes, their method of infection is similar in humans as they are in rats. It occurs mainly through the fecal-oral route. When larvae are ingested, they travel from the intestinal mucosa into the bloodstream, where they mature, and adult female flukes lay eggs in the terminal branches of the pulmonary arteries. The eggs hatch and the larvae move into the pharynx, and they are coughed and subsequently swallowed and travel to the intestinal mucosa where they are expelled through feces. The intermediate hosts (snails) ingest these eggs and first-stage larvae. They then mature into third-stage larvae. At this point, the definitive hosts: rats/humans will ingest the intermediate hosts that contain the third stage larvae that enter the bloodstream and finally travel to the brain. This is the site of maturation into the adult phase. They travel via the venous drainage of the brain to the heart, where they mature into mature adults in the terminal branches of the pulmonary arteries and lay eggs. The worm inside the central nervous system, especially in the subarachnoid space, elicits an intense eosinophilic inflammation and causes acute eosinophilic meningitis. When the infestation is more severe, it will result in other inflammatory manifestations in the human hosts, including radiculitis, cranial neuropathy, myelitis, encephalopathy, coma, and even death. The nematode eventually dies in the human nervous system, and therefore humans do not transmit the worms.