Exercise in pregnancy has been shown to decrease macrosomia, gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, cesarean delivery, low back pain, pelvic girdle pain, and urinary incontinence.  In counseling a pregnant patient, sometimes it is not so much about recommending to her that she needs to exercise but rather giving her specific recommendations such as which exercise is safe and when she should begin? If a patient participates in regular exercises before pregnancy, it is acceptable to continue this same regimen during pregnancy. Sometimes the intensity may need to be decreased, or if the activity involves a contact sport, then adapting to a different activity would be wiser for overall safety. Aerobic exercise is considered the most beneficial. This is sometimes referred to as cardio exercise, which involves the heart pumping oxygenated blood to the working muscles. It uses large muscle groups (legs/ arms) repetitively for a sustained amount of time. Ideally, 150 min per week is performed. This can be broken into smaller sessions- for example, 30 minutes per day for five days each week. If one is beginning an exercise program, one can begin with as little as 5 minutes a day and then add 5 to 10 minutes each week.

Common examples of cardiovascular exercise are walking, cycling, stair steppers, ellipticals, swimming, aerobic dance, and yoga. One should be exercising vigorously enough to elevate one's heart rate to approximately 110 to 120 beats per minute. (This varies with age, but the average pregnant woman is between 18 to 35 years of age.) A practical way to monitor one's exercise intensity is the “talk test." If the individual can converse while exercising, she usually will not be overexerting. Overexertion can lead to complications in pregnancy and should be avoided. Walking is easy, requires no skill or cost, and can be done indoors or outdoors. One should pay close attention to adequate hydration and temperature control of the environment while pregnant, especially if the patient is new to exercise and just beginning a regimen.

A pregnant woman should avoid overheating, and a mall or an indoor track or treadmill can provide a safe and protected environment for her while exercising.  Drinking water before and throughout exercise can prevent overheating and dehydration. Cycling is best if done on a stationary bike since falling is more likely to occur with a regular bike and could injure the pregnant patient and her unborn fetus. Cycling can be more comfortable than walking, which can cause strain in the pelvis. Swimming is an excellent aerobic exercise and is ideal if one suffers from joint pain or other discomforts of pregnancy. The water provides buoyancy and a weightless environment for one to work on all the major muscle groups. Yoga and Pilates are excellent stretching and strengthening exercises that can also improve mental health and reduce pain.

These are just examples of potential options. There are some forms of exercise that one should avoid during pregnancy. These include any contact sport (basketball/ soccer) or sport that can cause significant injury (horseback riding/ hockey) or altitude changes (skiing/ skydiving/ scuba diving).