Diagnosing inhaled rib dysfunctions can be started by assessing the patient's chest wall motion. With the patient lying supine or seated, the physician provider can place their palms flat on the patient's right and left anterior chest wall, careful not to touch delicate breast tissues. With hands stable on the chest wall, ask the patient to breathe in and out. Assess for symmetry in the rise and fall of the chest wall.

**Rib Raising**: Rib raising is an articular technique that places pressure on a restrictive barrier of the rib angle against the spine. It is a non-invasive, passive technique that can be useful with acutely ill, hospitalized patients.

- To perform rib raising, the physician provider places their finger pads under the posterior rib angle and pushes upward, applying gentle pressure and traction on the rib angle, which the clinician does until there is release. Reassess for an increased articular range of motion; this inhibits sympathetics from the thoracic chain ganglia to the ribs and increases chest wall expansion and negative intrathoracic pressure.

**Myofascial release:**increases lymphatic flow, releases muscle tension, and can be performed on acutely ill patients. Re-doming the diaphragm is an indirect myofascial technique that increases lymphatic flow and increases the mechanics of inspiration and expiration.

- To perform myofascial release to the thoracic diaphragm with the patient seated, the physician provider can stand behind the patient and wrap hands around their infra-costal margin until anteriorly palpating the fascia of the thoracic tissues.

- To perform myofascial release to the thoracic diaphragm with the patient supine, the physician provider can place their thumbs under the costal margins, beneath the xiphoid process, on the right and left. To assess the restricted side, the physician provider should press with the thumbs on the right and left of the diaphragm, gently pressing with infra-lateral traction. For an indirect approach to treatment, hold the thumb into the side of the tissue to ease where the tissues move more freely and allow the fascia to release, gently unwinding. Always reassess after treatment for bilateral tissue softness and increased diaphragmatic range of motion.

**HVLA:**High-Velocity Low Amplitude (HVLA) techniques are direct manipulative techniques bringing the dysfunctional segment into the restricted plane of motion. When performing HVLA, the physician provider is thrusting a short distance through the inhibited plane of motion of the dysfunctional segment.

- To perform HVLA on the first rib inhalation dysfunction (exhalation restriction): The physician provider is at the head of the bed. The patient lays supine. Assess for right or left first rib inhalation dysfunction (exhalation inhibited). The dysfunctional side will palpate as firmer and cephalad. Side bend the patient's head toward the side of dysfunction and rotate away from the dysfunctional rib. The physician provider places their thenar eminence on the side of dysfunction. The patient participates by inhaling, then exhaling. On the patient's exhalation, the physician provider administers a thrust caudad. Then reassess the patient's first rib.

- HVLA to the thoracic ribs 2 through 10 can be performed by using the Kirksville Krunch.

**Muscle Energy:**Muscle Energy is a direct and active technique where a patient is placed into their restrictive barrier by a physician provider then participates in the treatment.

- To perform muscle energy to a group of ribs with an inhalation dysfunction, place the patient supine on a waist-high cushioned treatment table if available. Identify the key rib; it will be the rib on the bottom of a group of dysfunctional ribs.

- To perform muscle energy on bucket handle ribs (6-10), follow the steps above. However, when asking the patient to breathe out and hold their exhaled breath for 3 to 5 seconds, have them reach for their knee on the side of the dysfunction. Follow the steps above to repeated rounds of treatment.