Corticosteroids are hormone mediators produced by the cortex of adrenal glands that are further categorized into glucocorticoids (major glucocorticoid produced by the body is cortisol), mineralocorticoids (major mineralocorticoid produced in the body is aldosterone), and androgenic sex hormones. Endogenous cortisone was first isolated in 1935 and synthesized in 1944. In 1948, Dr. Philip S Hench published administered cortisone (called Compound E at that time) to a 29-year-old woman who was bed-ridden secondary to active rheumatoid arthritis. The patient was able to walk after three days of treatment. This case was published in 1949, and in 1950, Philip S. Hench, Edward C. Kendall, and Tadeusz Reichstein were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine "for their discoveries relating to the hormones of the adrenal cortex, their structure, and biological effects."

Glucocorticoids (GCs) are a group of drugs structurally and pharmacologically similar to the endogenous hormone cortisol with various functions like anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive, anti-proliferative, and vaso-constrictive effects. Their actions are used medically for the treatment of various conditions indicated below. The list of indications of glucocorticoids is extremely long. We have categorized and mentioned the most important and broad-spectrum indications below.

**As a Replacement Therapy**

- Adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison disease)

- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)

**Systemic Symptomatic Treatment**

**Acute**

- Allergic reactions and anaphylactic shock (vasoconstrictive effects)

- Asthma (bronchodilatory effects)

- Antiemetic treatment, for example, nausea due to chemotherapy)

- Toxic pulmonary edema

- Acute exacerbation of autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, vitiligo, uveitis, rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, etc.

- Acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

- Cerebral edema: Recommended only in specific conditions like elevated intracranial pressure due to the neoplasm or central nervous system (CNS) infection; generally avoided in moderate to severe brain injury

**Long-Term**

- Chronic inflammatory diseases (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, inflammatory bowel disease)

- Rheumatic diseases (sarcoidosis, Sjogren syndrome, SLE)

- Graves' ophthalmopathy

- Local symptomatic treatment: anterior uveitis, steroid-responsive dermatoses (SRD), tenosynovitis, and osteoarthritis or juvenile idiopathic arthritis

**Prophylactic**

- Organ transplant (to prevent rejection due to their immunosuppressive action)

- Preterm delivery (to allow fetal lung maturity)

Mineralocorticoids are primarily involved in the regulation of electrolyte and water balance by modulating ion transport in the epithelial cells of the collecting ducts of the kidney. The use of mineralocorticoid drugs is limited to their replacement therapy in acute adrenal crisis and Addison disease.

Due to several roles played by corticosteroids in the human body, they see extensive use in medical practice to treat various diseases. As a result, their side-effects have, in turn, become another significant medical issue requiring special attention.