**Outpatient Care**

The decision to discharge patients following a seizure requires good clinical judgment.

**Prevention**

To date, there are no data to suggest that any intervention other than prescribed anti-seizure medications can prevent status epilepticus or recurrent seizures. Thus, the most important thing to emphasize to patients is medication compliance. The anti-seizure medication prescribed depends on the patient's underlying diagnosis, severity, pre-existing medications, other comorbidity and potential for drug interactions. A consultation with a neurologist who will oversee and direct the medication prescribed is necessary. Anytime a medication dose or frequency changes, it should be done in consultation with the neurologist.

**Discontinuing Anticonvulsant Agents**

To discontinue the anticonvulsant agent, the patient has to be seizure free for about 2 to 5 years. Children usually outgrow their epileptic syndromes, and most do not require the use of antiseizure medications in adult life. The relapse rate in children is about 25%, whereas in adults it varies from 40% to 60%. This difference is most likely due to the different epileptic syndromes present in the two populations. Almost 75% of seizure relapses occur within the first 12 months after discontinuation of the medication. About 50% of patients have a seizure within the first 12 weeks. It is therefore critical to educate patients on seizure precautions during the first 3 months after discontinuation of medications; this means absolutely no driving and the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) might need to be informed. There are no formal guidelines for discontinuation of antiseizure drugs and roughly done over 8 to 24 weeks. A slower titration recommended for particular drugs such as carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenobarbital, primidone, and benzodiazepines. Before discontinuing anti-seizure medications, it is important to know the risk factors for seizures. A normal EEG and a brain MRI are indicators of a low-risk of recurrence, but if the EEG shows focal abnormalities or MRI brain reveals focal limbic or cortical abnormalities, then the risk of recurrence is higher. Other factors also associated with a high risk of seizure recurrence after discontinuing medication include:

- Having a history of tonic-clonic or atonic seizures are associated with a much higher risk than absence seizures

- Higher and increased frequency of seizures

- A long duration of epilepsy before seizure control

- A short duration of freedom in between seizures