**Structure of the Somatosensory Cortex**

The primary somatosensory cortex (S1) and the secondary somatosensory cortex (S2) are in the parietal lobe of the brain. The primary somatosensory cortex is found just behind the central sulcus and receives sensory information from the VPL of the thalamus via the internal capsule and corona radiata. Often referred to as the postcentral gyrus, this area receives the sensory input from specific areas of the body, correlating to specific regions of the contralateral postcentral gyrus. This is known as somatotopy and is used to construct maps such as the sensory homunculus, as described in further detail below. Much like the rest of the neocortex, each primary cortex os paired association cortices to help interpret and assess the initial sensory information delivered. A larger association cortex is needed to assess more complex input. The S2 region helps to process the sensory information delivered to S1. The somatosensory cortex is organized into six layers, much like the rest of the neocortex. The sensory and motor layers tend to be more heterogeneous and differ in the sizes of layer four (internal granular) and layer 5 (internal pyramidal). Layer four is associated with more input, and layer five is associated with more output. Thus the primary somatosensory cortex receiving peripheral input will tend to have a larger fourth layer and smaller fifth layer. The opposite is true for the motor cortex. The association cortices tend to have a more homogenous organization in that all six layers are roughly the same size. While the somatosensory cortex is organized in the layers of similar cells described above, one should also note that the areas involved in similar functions are organized vertically in columns.

**Functional Neuroanatomy**

The primary somatosensory cortex receives the peripheral sensory information but requires the secondary somatosensory cortex to store, process, and retain it. The S2 region has links to the hippocampus and amygdala; this helps to receive information from our environments and make decisions on how to approach them by integrating our prior stored experience, factoring our current appraisal of the stimulus, and finally forming a reaction using other areas of the brain based on the former two aspects to aid higher-order processing and problem-solving. The S1 region would be associated with identifying the aspects of touch, such as shape, size, and texture. The S2 region would be associated with spatial and tactile memory associated with sensory experiences.

**Sensory Homunculus**

The concept of somatotopy refers to the mapping points of the cortex that correspond to its function in the body. In the postcentral gyrus, the sensory homunculus is a common way of representing which portion of the coronal cut of the postcentral gyrus corresponds with the sensation of in the respective part of the body. Often depicted in a coronal section of the postcentral gyrus, the medial portions of the homunculus tend to represent the hips and below along with the genitals while the more lateral sides of the coronal section constitute a larger area for the fingers, face, lips, eyes, and everything else that would require more sensory acuity. The sensory homunculus represents the concept by which we can use sensory deficits in the neurological physical exam to localize lesions in the sensory cortex.