- Hurler syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder.

- Affected individuals demonstrate typical coarse facial features including a flat nasal bridge and excessive hair growth.

- Usually manifests as cognitive developmental delay, corneal clouding, cardiac disease, and characteristics musculoskeletal manifestations.

- Additional symptoms include hearing loss, recurrent respiratory tract infections, macroglossia, and claw hand deformities.

- Vertebral bodies are characteristically hypoplastic and show anteroinferior beaking on radiological examination. They usually develop typical skeletal abnormalities known as dysostosis multiplex.

- Most patients with severe cases die with heart failure before the age of 10. Cardiac evaluation is recommended every 1 or 2 years after an initial diagnosis.

- MPS I is subdivided into three subtypes: Hurler syndrome (severe), Hurler-Scheie syndrome (intermediate), and Sheie syndrome (mild).

- Diagnosis of this condition is based on a thorough clinical examination, and measurement of urinary GAG levels is a useful screening test. Enzyme activity assays based on cultured fibroblasts, leukocytes, plasma, and serum are confirmatory and are considered a gold standard.

- A differential diagnosis for Hurler syndrome includes Hunter syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type 2) and Sly syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type 6).

- The mainstay of treatment is enzyme replacement therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplant.

- Additionally, surgical management alleviates the symptoms, thereby reducing the morbidity and hospitalization frequency.

- Early detection of the disease and the appropriate, multidisciplinary approach to management is recommended to improve the quality of life.