During puberty, lobule type 1 is formed. Changes in the level of estrogen and progesterone during each menstrual cycle stimulate lobule 1 to produce new alveolar buds and eventually evolve to more mature structures, known as type-2 and type-3 lobules. Once puberty is complete, no further changes occur to the female breast until pregnancy.

During pregnancy, stage-II mammogenesis (alveolar development and maturation of the epithelium) occurs largely in response to higher levels of progesterone. The increased volume of breast tissue during pregnancy is a result of the proliferation of secretory tissue. In early pregnancy, lobule type 3 is formed due to the influence of chorionic gonadotropin. These newly formed lobules have larger size and number of epithelial cells composing each acinus. In late pregnancy, the proliferation of new acini are reduced, and the lumen becomes distended with secretory material or colostrum.

During labor and lactation, further growth and differentiation can be seen in the lobule along with milk secretion. The glandular component of the breast has now increased to the point where it is mainly formed of epithelial elements and very little stroma. This will persist throughout lactation.

Finally, the involution of mammary glands occurs with the cessation of lactation and requires a combination of lactogenic hormone deprivation and local autocrine signals that signal apoptotic cell death and tissue remodeling. Full regression does not occur, and pregnancy causes a permanent increase in the size and number of lobules. Following lactation, there is always the potential of the glands to produce milk in response to regular stimulation.