There have been a few documented physiologic variants of the extensor carpi radialis brevis. Researchers found the extensor carpi radialis brevis to originate from the fascia of the extensor digitorum communis rather than its usual origin on the lateral epicondyle.

Another identified physiologic variant involves uniting the extensor carpi radialis brevis and extensor carpi radialis longus muscles. In one case report, the extensor carpi radialis longus split from its attachment on the supracondylar ridge of the humerus into a lateral, intermedial, and medial head. The lateral and intermedial heads insert onto its typical insertion site on the second metacarpal base, but the medial head inserts onto the extensor carpi radialis brevis muscle.

There have also been variants involving accessory muscles to the extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis. In one case report, an accessory muscle arose from the medial aspect of the extensor carpi radialis brevis muscle and continued down the forearm to insert onto the second metacarpal bone. An additional muscular bundle was also found between the extensor carpi radialis brevis and longus muscles.

These physiological variants of insertions, origins, and structure are significant because the abnormal findings may underlie certain pathologies such as lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow). Awareness of these anatomic variants by providers is also important during the planning and treatment of a patient for various conditions that affect the forearm so that they can adjust their procedures to the modified variants.