The management of pancreatic fistulas requires non-operative and operative measures. Regardless of the presentation, it is significant to medically optimize an individual, which involves fistula control and proper nutrition before any definitive intervention. To medically optimize, supportive care measures are essential. There are three supportive care measures to stabilize and optimize a patient. First supportive care measures involve controlling the pancreatic exocrine secretion. Patients are nil per os (NPO), and ideally starting postpyloric feeds or temporary parenteral nutrition.

Further control of pancreatic secretion is accomplished medically via somatostatin analogs, such as octreotide. Secondly, proper correction of fluids and electrolyte abnormalities are necessary. Individuals with pancreatic fistula are at risk of losing pancreatic fluid that is bicarbonate rich, leading to metabolic acidosis. Lastly, the surrounding skin near an external pancreatic fistula should be cared for and protected to prevent further damage.

In addition to supportive care, some pancreatic fistulas require further intervention with endoscopic therapy or operative management. Endoscopic therapy is usually the preferred method for many pancreatic fistulas. With an ERCP, sphincterotomy and/or placement of a pancreatic stent is performed to promote the flow of pancreatic secretions into a chosen internal drainage route. Therefore, this will decrease the flow through the fistula tract and facilitate fistula closure. When the endoscopic approach fails or not an option due to the complexity of the pancreatic fistula, then surgery would be the next best alternative.

The surgical approach depends on the ductal anatomy and location of the fistula. Some examples include a pancreaticojejunostomy in patients with large duct disease, a caudal pancreatectomy in patients with ductal injury solely at the pancreatic tail, and distal pancreatectomy for pancreatic disruption in the pancreatic body. Surgery will also include drainage of the fluid. For pancreatic fistula cases that occur after pancreatectomy, percutaneous drains are placed for drainage.