Several HER2-targeted therapies have US FDA approval for breast cancer include trastuzumab, pertuzumab, ado-trastuzumab emtansine, lapatinib, trastuzumab-deruxtecan, and tucatinib. Some are still under clinical trials. The presently used agents include:

- Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody. It binds to the extracellular segment of the HER2 receptors. Its mechanism of action is still not fully understood. It seems to have its most significant effects on tumors with increased HER2 homodimers. Although it does not block the autophosphorylation of HER2, it does inhibit HER2 downstream signaling.

- Pertuzumab: is also a monoclonal antibody. It binds to the extracellular dimerization domain of HER2 and prevents it from binding to itself or other members of the EGFR family. Dosing is in combination with trastuzumab rather than a single agent.

- Ado-trastuzumab emtansine: Also known as T-DM1 is an antibody-drug conjugate composed with trastuzumab and emtansine, the antimicrotubule agent.

- Lapatinib: is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor against EGFR1 and HER2, inhibiting the signaling pathways down from HER2 level.

- Trastuzumab-deruxtecan: is an antibody-drug conjugate composed of trastuzumab and deruxtecan, a topoisomerase I inhibitor.

Patients with HER2 positive metastatic breast cancer are usually managed with a combination of chemotherapy and HER2-directed agent. For patients with hormone receptor and HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer, they may receive a combination of HER2 directed therapy and endocrine therapy.

No ideal strategy exists for hormone receptor-negative HER2 positive metastatic breast cancer. For those who did not receive therapy in the past, the preference is for a combination of trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and a taxane, as data showed this to have improved clinical outcomes.