The administration of spinal anesthesia requires appropriate positioning and understanding of neuraxial anatomy. The goal is to deliver appropriately dosed anesthetic into the intrathecal (subarachnoid) space.

The spine comprises seven cervical, 12 thoracics, five lumbar, and five fused sacral vertebral bones. The different vertebral bones earn their names based on their relative positions and structural differences. The vertebrae are stacked end to end with articulating joints and ligaments, and a hollow space running through them called the spinal canal. This canal houses the spinal cord. The spinal nerves exit the spinal canal via lateral spaces formed between pedicles from adjacent vertebrae.

As mentioned earlier, spinal anesthesia is only performed in the lumbar area, specifically the mid to low lumbar levels to avoid damage to the spinal cord and also to prevent intrathecally-injected medications from having any activity in the upper thoracic and cervical regions. The caudal end of the spinal cord is the conus medullaris and usually is at the lower border of the first or sometimes the second lumbar vertebral body. In pediatric patients, it is a little more inferior, generally ending around L3. In the adult population, the mean conus position is the lower third of L1 (range: the middle third of T12 down to the upper third of L3). The variation in conus positions follows a normal distribution. No significant difference in conus position is seen between male and female patients or with increasing age.

On entry, and starting at the skin, the needle traverses a number of structures. The structures traversed depend on the approach (see technique).

Understanding dermatomal anatomy is imperative for an understanding of the level of the blockade of target structures. For example, for lower abdominal cesarean sections, the incision is usually made below the T10 dermatome. However, coverage of up to T4 dermatome is required to prevent discomfort or pain from peritoneal tugging; this is especially evident with uterine manipulation. Patients complain of "pulling on their inside." some corresponding dermatomal landmarks are:

- C8: fifth finger

- T4. Nipple

- T7: Xiphoid process

- T10: Umbilicus