Beevor sign is an abnormal upward (cephalad) umbilicus movement upon truncal flexion while the patient is in a supine position.

**How to perform the test**: the patient should be in a supine position. To elicit the sign, the patient is asked either to flex his neck or to sit up from the recumbent position without using the arms (the patients can keep their arms across their chest).

**Differential diagnosis**: several publications after Dr. Beevor era reported this sign in an array of neurological and neuromuscular disorders. It becomes diagnostic to certain diseases such as facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), particularly when accompanied by other muscular features, yet not pathognomonic. Beevor sign can be present in the following conditions:

- Spinal cord lesion between T10 and T12 segment, tumors, for instance.

- FSHD is autosomal dominant muscle dystrophy. Beevor sign is considered as a "sine qua non" clinical sign of this disease.

- There are less frequent reports fo this sign in the following diseases:

- Pompe disease: type 2 glycogen storage disease

- GNE myopathy (autosomal recessive myopathy): this sign was observed in 90% of the patients in one study.

- Tubular aggregate myopathy

- Myotonic dystrophy

- Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM)

- Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

- Acid maltase deficiency in an adult patient

**Radiological findings**: in one GNE myopathy study,

**Less frequently used terms**: inverted Beevor sign where the umbilicus moves downward due to upper rectus abdominis weakness.