Nitrofurantoin should not be administered to patients with acute bacterial pyelonephritis as nitrofurantoin does not reach therapeutic concentrations in the upper urinary tract, and bacteremia often accompanies this disease. Patients with anuria, oliguria, or significant impairment of renal function (defined as creatinine clearance [CrCl] of less than 60 mL/min or clinically significant raised serum creatinine) should not take nitrofurantoin. The limit of CrCl less than 60 mL/minute has been challenged in the literature as there is limited data for this cutoff; some studies show that an alternative creatinine clearance threshold may be considered. A retrospective chart review suggests that a cutoff of CrCl less than 40 ml/min would be more appropriate.

The drug is contraindicated in pregnant women at term (38 to 42 weeks gestation), during labor and delivery, or when the start of labor is imminent; and is also contraindicated in neonates younger than one month of age. This is because of the possibility of hemolytic anemia caused by immature erythrocyte enzyme systems, specifically glutathione instability. Nitrofurantoin is contraindicated in men with urinary tract infections as these infections are often related to prostatitis, and nitrofurantoin does not penetrate prostatic tissue effectively. Nitrofurantoin is identified in the Beers Criteria as a potentially inappropriate medication to be avoided in patients 65 years and older due to its potential for pulmonary toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and peripheral neuropathy, particularly when given long-term.