Thyroid hormonal function and the growth rate of the thyroid gland reflect the clinical presentation of a goiter. If the patient has hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, he or she will have the signs or symptoms of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. The vast majority of patients will be euthyroid. The growth rate is usually slow and patients accommodate the enlarging thyroid at is a usual anatomic place very well without any sign or symptoms except for esthetical complaints or if the thyroid grows inferiorly to the thoracic cavity.

Rapid growth may be due to hemorrhage into a nodule, inflammatory thyroid disorders, or malignancy. Hemorrhage into a nodule causing sudden enlargement and subacute thyroiditis can cause pain on the lower neck at the thyroid area. Large goiters or rapidly enlarging goiters can cause obstructive or compressive symptoms. Obstructive symptoms are choking sensation, cough, exertional dyspnea, and stridor due to compression of the trachea, hoarseness due to compression of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, and difficulty in swallowing due compression of the esophagus. These symptoms are subjective and patients with large goiters may not have any obstructive symptoms. Tracheal diameter can be assessed by CT scan and needs to be over 10 mm.

Rarely, compression of nervous structures such as Horner’s syndrome due to compression of the cervical sympathetic chain, compression of venous structures especially jugular vein compression, compression of arterial structures with cerebrovascular steal syndrome can occur.

**History**

Prior history of thyroid disease or surgery in the patient, family history of thyroid disease, the geographic area where the patient spent most of his life to determine if the patient is from an endemic goiter area, information about iodine deficiency, medication history, prior exposure to head and neck irradiation, and history of accidental radioactivity exposure should be sought. The presence of dyspnea, cough, pressure sensation on the anterior neck, and hoarseness should be inquired. Patients should be asked if the appearance of goiter is bothersome esthetically.

**Physical Examination**

A comprehensive physical examination should be done to detect signs and symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism. Thyroid should be inspected visually by standing anterior to the patient and asking him or her to swallow. An enlarged thyroid and asymmetry can be obvious to the plain eye. Then the thyroid needs to be palpated either from the front with both thumbs or from behind with index, 2, and/or 3 fingers and the patient is asked to swallow. A glass of water helps the patient to swallow. With swallowing, the thyroid moves up and down facilitating palpation. The examiner should orient themself by identifying thyroid cartilage, bilateral sternocleidomastoid muscles, and sternal notch. These anatomical structures border the thyroid gland.

The examiner compresses the thyroid against posterior structures to better feel its size, texture, consistency, tenderness, and feel any nodules. The lower border of goiter should be determined. The patient should lie down and hyperextend his or her neck by placing a pillow under the shoulder if the lower border cannot be felt when upright. The inability to palpate the lower border indicates the presence of substernal goiter. Pemberton’s sign is employed to assess the substernal extension. The patient is asked to raise both arms until medial parts touch to lateral sides of the head for at least one minute. If the patient develops facial congestion, bulging of neck veins, hoarseness, or dyspnea, then Pemberton sign is positive, indicating compression at the thoracic inlet due to substernal goiter. Arm elevation spirometry with flow volume loops has been suggested to increase the sensitivity to detect upper airway obstruction and also as an objective assessment of Pemberton sign.

“Corking” of the thyroid at the thoracic inlet is believed to cause compression of surrounding anatomical structures and a positive Pemberton sign. The size of the thyroid should be determined by palpation. Palpation of a thrill and auscultation of a bruit over the thyroid area suggests Grave’s disease and are due to increased vasculature. One or more nodules can be palpable in uni- or multinodular goiter, respectively. Then the rest of the neck should be examined for enlarged lymph nodes and other masses.