# Continuing Education Activity

Mechanical ventilation (MV) works by applying a positive pressure breath and is dependent on the compliance and resistance of the airway system. Although mechanical ventilation can be a complex and seemingly elusive topic, expectations are that healthcare professionals who deal with critically ill patients have a basic familiarity with the management of a patient on a ventilator. Providers must also recognize how applying mechanical ventilation affects patient physiology and response to disease states. The focus of this activity will be on managing the intubated patient in the first few hours of care on mechanical ventilation and will review the basics of mechanical ventilation and highlight ventilator strategies when managing a patient by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the basics of mechanical ventilator management.
- Describe the different ventilator strategies utilized for different disease processes.
- Outline major complications of mechanical ventilation.
- Summarize the advantages of a patient receiving mechanical ventilation.

# Introduction

Mechanical ventilation is necessary to sustain life in acute settings; hence, its management is essential for clinicians and other healthcare providers to understand and apply it safely. This knowledge must be built on a solid understanding of the basic principles of human physiology and airway mechanics. This article will focus on the management of the intubated patient in the first few hours of care on mechanical ventilation. It will review the basics of invasive mechanical ventilation, the common modes of ventilation, initial settings, and supportive care for intubated patients will be discussed in this review. Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) will be addressed separately.

The primary indications for invasive mechanical ventilation can be divided into the following categories:

- Airway disease of compromise.
- Airway protection in a patient who is obtunded or has a dynamic airway, e.g., from trauma or oropharyngeal infection.
- Airways obstruction is either proximal ( eg angioedema) or distal (asthmatic bronchospasm or acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).

- Hypoventilation due to impaired drive, pump failure, or inability to exchange gases resulting in hypercapnic respiratory failure. The etiology can be divided into the following subcategories:

- Impaired central drive (e.g., drug overdose)
- Respiratory muscle weakness (e.g., muscular dystrophy and myositis)
- Peripheral nervous system defects (e.g., Guillain-Barré syndrome or myasthenic crisis)
- Restrictive ventilatory defects (e.g., chest wall trauma or disease or massive pneumothorax or effusion)

- Hypoxemic respiratory failure can be due to the inability to exchange oxygen or delivery to the peripheral tissues due to one of the following reasons: 

- Alveolar filling defects (e.g., pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), or pulmonary edema)
- Pulmonary vascular defects leading to ventilation-perfusion (VQ) mismatch (massive pulmonary embolism or air emboli)
- Diffusion defects (advanced pulmonary fibrosis)

- Increased ventilatory demand due to severe sepsis, shock, or severe metabolic acidosis

# Function

Mechanical ventilation (MV) works by applying a positive pressure breath and is dependent on the compliance and resistance of the airway system. During spontaneous inspiration, the lung expands as transpulmonary pressure (P) is produced mainly by a negative pleural pressure generated by the inspiratory muscles. In contrast, during controlled mechanical ventilation, a positive airway pressure drives gas into the lungs, resulting in a positive P.

MV can be delivered in different modes, including mandatory mode or assisted mode. In the assisted mode the inspiratory effort generated by the patient triggers the MV to deliver the breath while the P is the product of negative pleural pressure and positive alveolar pressure combination. The most common modes of MV include:

- Volume-limited assist control ventilation (VAC)

- Pressure-limited assist control ventilation (PAC)

- Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation with pressure support ventilation (SIMV-PSV)

Pressure support ventilation (PS) is usually not used alone; instead, it is commonly used during weaning from MV. Other types of modes of MV include controlled mechanical ventilation (CMV; volume-limited or pressure-limited), intermittent mandatory ventilation (IMV), and airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) or Bilevel MV are less commonly used as initial settings.

Generally, breath delivery can be divided into either volume-limited or pressure-limited types. Depending on respiratory compliance, airway resistance, and the type or mode of MV, the breath's VT and airway pressure will change. For example, in cases of using volume assist control VAC mode, VT is set to a fixed amount; therefore, the static airway pressure (or plateau pressure at end inspiration) will depend on lung compliance. On the other hand, when pressure assists control PAC mode is used, the driving pressure is set and fixed; hence VT is variable from breath to breath and dependent on lung compliance (i.e., when the lung compliance is high, VT is high, and when lung compliance is low, VT is low).

There are four stages of mechanical ventilation. There is the trigger phase, the inspiratory phase, the cycling phase, and the expiratory phase. The trigger phase is the initiation of an inhalation which is triggered by an effort from the patient or by set parameters by the mechanical ventilator. The inhalation of air into the patient defines the inspiratory phase. The cycling phase is the brief moment when inhalation has ceased but before exhalation has begun. The expiratory phase is the passive exhalation of air from the patient.

**Setting MV**

Mode selection: It is recommended to use commonly used MV modes listed above for initiation of MV. The selection of MV mode should be individualized to achieve safety via optimization of ventilation-perfusion matching and pressure-volume relationship of the lungs.

**VAC mode:**When VAC  mode is chosen, the following parameters have to be set on the ventilator:

- Tidal volume: VT is usually selected based on ideal or predicted body weight (PBW), not actual weight. In conditions such as ARDS that require a protective lung strategy, the VT is set at a low range of 4 to 8 mL/kg PBW.

- Respiratory rate (RR): RR is typically set at 12 to 16 breaths/minute, and higher RR ( up to 35 breaths/minute) is selected to achieve adequate minute ventilation, such as during protective lung strategy in ARDS to avoid severe hypercapnia or to offset severe acidosis.

- Inspiratory flow rate (IFR): IFR is usually set at 40 to 60 L/minute to target an inspiratory: expiratory ratio of 1:2 or 1:3. Higher IFR is usually recommended (up to 90 L/min) in cases of severe distal airway obstruction such as acute COPD exacerbation or severe asthma exacerbation which will allow longer expiratory time to empty the lung and hence target I:E ratio of more than 1:3.[10]

- Fraction of inspired oxygen (FI02): FI02 should be set to the lowest level to achieve pulse oximetry (SP02) of 90% to 96%, as hyperoxemia has been shown to increase mortality in critically ill patients.

- Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP): PEEP is used to increase the functional residual capacity and stent open collapsable alveoli, thus reducing atelectatic trauma.

- Trigger sensitivity: The triggers are two types flow-trigger and pressure-trigger. For pressure-trigger, it is usually set at -2 cmH2O but should be avoided in cases where auto-PEEP is suspected, and instead, flow-trigger should be used and set at a 2 L/min threshold.

**PAC mode:**When PAC mode is selected, the following parameters have to be set on the ventilator:

- Inspiratory Pressure (Pi): Pi level is usually selected (10 to 20 cmH2) to achieve adequate tidal volume based on the patient's underlying condition, as discussed above.

- Inspiratory time (Ti): Ti is typically set to  1 second and adjusted to achieve an I:E ratio of 1:2 to 1:3.

- PEEP and FiO2 are selected similarly to VAC mode. However, the Pi adds additional pressure to the peak airway pressure and may further increase the risk of barotrauma.

**SIMV/PSV mode:**When SIMV/PSV  mode is selected, the initial settings include the following:

- Pressure support (PS): The PS typically starts with 5 to 15 cm H2O for spontaneous breaths taken by the patient above the set rate. The PS can be adjusted as needed to maintain certain Minute ventilation.

- Tidal volume: VT is set similarly to VAC mode at levels to achieve targeted minute ventilation without causing ventilator-associated lung injury (4 to 8 mL/kg PBW) for the non-spontaneous breaths.

**Airway Pressure Release Ventilation Mode**

APRV is a form of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) characterized by a timed pressure release while allowing for spontaneous breathing.

Setting up APRV requires adjusting four main variables, P-high, P-low, T-high, and T-low.

Spontaneous breathing is paramount in APRV; thus, a small amount of pressure support or automatic tube compensation should be added to account for the endotracheal tube's intrinsic resistance.

# Issues of Concern

Ventilator-associated lung injury (VALI): Lung injury related to ventilator use is common when the setting is not selected based on PBW, particularly in cases of stiff lungs such as ARDS that require lung protective strategy using low tidal volume and targeted airway pressures to prevent lung injuries.

Ventilator-associated events (VAE): VAE is defined as "deterioration in respiratory status after a period of stability or improvement on the ventilator, with evidence of infection or inflammation, and laboratory evidence of respiratory infection."

Hemodynamic changes: When placing a patient on mechanical ventilation, there is a change in their natural negative pressure ventilation to one of positive pressure ventilation; this will affect the heart-lung physiology and can alter the patient's hemodynamic status. The addition of positive pressure ventilation increases intrathoracic pressure. The increase in intrathoracic pressure will lead to a decrease in right ventricular preload and left ventricular preload and afterload. It will also increase the right ventricular afterload.

# Clinical Significance

Three clinical strategies may be chosen to assist in ventilator management.

**Lung Protective Strategy**

This strategy should be used for any patient with the potential to develop acute lung injury (ALI) or whose disease state risks progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This low tidal volume strategy was developed after the landmark ARDSnet trials, specifically, the ARMA study, which showed low tidal volume ventilation in patients with ARDS improved mortality.

Tidal volume should be initially set at 6 ml/kg based on ideal body weight.

Immediately after intubation, an attempt should be made to reduce the FI02 to 40% to avoid hyperoxemia.

**Table 1. ARDSnet PEEP/FIO2 Protocol**

Upon connecting a patient to mechanical ventilation, it is essential to frequently reassess its effects on the patient, especially the alveoli.

**Obstructive Strategy**

Generally, patients with obstructive lung disease (OLD), such as asthma and COPD, are often treated with non-invasive ventilation. However, they sometimes require intubation and placement on mechanical ventilation. Obstructive lung disease is characterized by narrowed airways and the collapse of the small airways on expiration.

The most important thing to accomplish when managing the ventilator for an obstructive patient is to increase the expiratory phase, allowing for more time to exhale, which will reduce auto-PEEP and dynamic hyperinflation.

The ventilator waveform requires careful assessment. If the waveform does not reach zero by the beginning of the new breath, then the RR must be decreased, or else hyperinflation and auto-PEEP will rise. If an obstructive patient suddenly desaturates or drops their blood pressure, they should be disconnected from the vent to allow for a full exhalation with a clinician pushing on their chest to facilitate exhalation. After this, a full workup specifically ruling out pneumothorax due to volume trauma should be undertaken.

**Intermediate Strategy**

The PReVENT trial showed no difference in an intermediate tidal volume strategy (10 ml/kg) versus a low tidal volume strategy (6 ml/kg) in patients without ARDS.

# Other Issues

Ventilator bundles play a vital role in preventing ventilator-associated events. Some of these measures include minimizing sedation, daily spontaneous breathing trials, early mobilization, conservative fluid and transfusion strategies, and lung protective strategies.

**Sedation:**Before initiating mechanical ventilation, one should also consider what medications to provide for post-intubation pain control and sedation. An "analgesia first" sedation strategy is recommended, with the most commonly used agent being fentanyl due to its forgiving, i.e., minimally hypotension-inducing hemodynamic properties.

**Head of the bed elevation:**All patients on mechanical ventilation should have the head of the bed elevated to at least 30 degrees. According to a 2016 Cochrane review on ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), "a semi-recumbent (30º to 60º) position reduced clinically suspected VAP by 25.7% when compared to a 0° to 10° supine position" however, they acknowledge that the data is severely limited.

**Airway maintenance:**If the patient suddenly desaturates, then the DOPES mnemonic should be followed to determine the causes of the problem. DOPES stands for displacement, obstruction of the ETT or airways, pneumothorax/pulmonary embolism/pulmonary edema, equipment failure, and stacked breaths. The patient should immediately be disconnected from the ventilator and switched to a bag valve mask. The person bagging should ventilate calmly and allow for a full exhalation. Following this, a systematic approach should be followed. Does the patient still have a good waveform on their ETCO2? If not, then the ET tube may have become dislodged. Does the patient bag easily or with difficulty? If bagging is difficult, this will inform you of some obstructive problems, such as an obstructed ET tube, pneumothorax, or bronchospasm. If the patient bags easily and SpO2 rises rapidly, it points to equipment failure. While this is under evaluation, another provider should assess the patient with an ultrasound of the lungs and heart, and a chest X-ray should be obtained ASAP. Pulmonary embolism should be a consideration if no other cause of the desaturation is found.

**Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis:**Invasive mechanical ventilation is an independent risk factor for increased odds of venous thromboembolism in the intensive care unit.

**Gastrointestinal prophylaxis**: Gastrointestinal bleeding occurs in approximately 5 % of critically ill patients not receiving prophylaxis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing a patient on mechanical ventilation requires an interprofessional team involving clinicians, nurses, and respiratory therapists. Good communication among team members is paramount. Respiratory therapists are crucial in managing ventilated patients, and their expertise should be utilized extensively.