**Mechanical Ventilation:**Pulmonary compliance is directly measurable in a mechanically ventilated patient. For accuracy, airway resistance is removed as a contributing factor by taking static measurements as opposed to dynamic. To determine static measurements, the examiner records end-expiratory alveolar pressure and end-inspiratory alveolar pressure. The tidal volume, change in lung volume, is divided by the change in pressure.  After plotting these measurements, the slope reveals lung compliance. Measurement of compliance is useful when monitoring critically ill patients at the bedside.

**Pulmonary Function Tests**(PFTs) are a group of noninvasive tests that measure lung function. PFTs are not tests of diagnosis, but they help support a diagnosis by supplementing detailed history, physical exam findings, and laboratory results. To interpret and use PFT results, an understanding of lung compliance is necessary.

- **Spirometry**measures airflow and estimates lung size. The tests require the patient to fully inhale and exhale forcefully into a mouthpiece connected to a spirometer. The spirometer records the rate of exhalation and the amount of air exhaled. More specifically, spirometry measures forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume (FEV). Spirometry helps evaluate the severity of a large range of lung diseases. Appropriate compliance is vital to expand the lungs and breathe in the air.

- **Lung volume tests**measure the amount of air that can be held in the lungs. The elastin and collagen within the lungs allow this expandability, as mentioned above. There are two approaches to measuring lung volume.
- Body plethysmography: This test is the gold standard for lung volume measurement. It involves the patient breathing against a shutter valve while sitting in a body box. The pressure change in the box helps measure the functional reserve capacity (FRC).
- Gas dilution: This method requires the patient to inhale nitrogen washout and inert gas dilution until achieving equilibrium. Then, the patient exhales the gas mixture, which is measured to calculate FRC.

- **Pulmonary diffusion capacity**is measured by monitoring gas diffusion, usually carbon monoxide (CO), across the alveolar-capillary membrane. This test is also known as diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) and single breath D. This test is essential in diagnosing emphysema and interstitial lung disease, especially after reduced vital capacity measured by spirometry.

- **Respiratory muscle strength****testing**includes maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) and maximal expiratory pressure (MEP). Both can be measured quickly in a noninvasive fashion. MIP indicates the strength of inspiratory muscles like the diaphragm. The MEP measures the strength of expiratory muscles like the abdominal muscles. Measurements are taken by maximal inhalation and exhalation through a flanged mouthpiece while wearing nose clips. The examiner notes the maximal inspiratory and/or expiratory mouth pressure.