The European society for immunodeficiencies (ESID) clinical criteria to diagnose CVID are listed below:

- Diagnosis can only be made after the fourth year of life. We have excluded the secondary cause of hypogammaglobulinemia as mentioned above and no evidence of profound T-cell deficiency.

- And at least one of the following:

- Increased susceptibility to infection
- Autoimmune manifestations
- Granulomatous disease
- Unexplained polyclonal lymphoproliferation
- The affected family members with antibody deficiency

- And marked decrease of IgG and marked decrease of IgA with or without low IgM levels (<2 SD of the normal levels for their age) with at least 2 measurements

- And at least one of the following: poor antibody response to vaccines, i.e., absence of protective levels despite vaccination where defined low switched memory B cells.

**Evaluation**

Initial history, including family history and physical examination, will help us determine if there are other risk factors predisposing the patients to be susceptible to infections. High index suspicion for CVID based on the history and physical exam should guide the laboratory investigations and immune function testing. The initial laboratory evaluation should include routine blood tests, such as complete blood counts with differential, serum chemistries, electrolytes, or urinalysis. These tests will aid in finding other secondary causes of immunodeficiency/secondary hypogammaglobulinemia (discussed below), the extend of the disease process, and complications. Immunoglobulin levels should be obtained; serum immunoglobulin levels are markedly abnormal in patients with common variable immunodeficiency. Serum IgG should be <2 SD of the normal levels for their age with at least 2 measurements, and IgA and/or IgM levels should be below the lower limit of normal. The test is done during illness, and it should be repeated three months after the resolution of the illness. After we establish hypogammaglobulinemia, we should proceed to further testing, such as flow cytometry to enumerate B-cell subsets, specific antibody response to immunization, IgG subclass analysis, Ig production in response to stimuli, and genetic testing.