For individuals who have limited options for protecting themselves against HIV, pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis is both cost-effective and practical.

Several large trials have been conducted on pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis. In almost every study the risk of acquiring HIV was significantly lowered by 54% to 90%. In fact, if the data only included individuals who adhered to medication use, then the effectiveness of this drug combination is close to 100%. The most well-publicized PROUD trial conducted in the United Kingdom revealed that pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis decreased the risk of HIV transmission by 86% and there were no negative changes in the sexual behavior of the participants.

The first pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis studies were done in 2007, and since then many other studies have reported similar benefits. Data from France, Canada, Kenya, South Africa, and Uganda show that use of tenofovir/emtricitabine significantly decreases the risk of HIV in different scenarios. More importantly, these studies have not shown that use of pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis leads to reduced use of a condom or high-risk sexual behavior. The PROUD study conducted in the United Kingdom found no difference in the number of STDs or condom usage among individuals who were treated with pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis and those who were not treated. Fortunately, the few observational studies have not shown that high-risk sexual behavior occurs in the short term, but there are no data on long-term behavior.