Evaluation is usually directed to the underlying etiology of the conjugated hyperbilirubinemia based on history and physical findings, which includes biliary obstruction, intrahepatic cholestasis, hepatocellular injury, or an inherited condition. Following studies are performed as a part of a workup for conjugated hyperbilirubinemia:

- **Serum Bilirubin, Total and Direct**: Jaundice, discoloration of body tissues, usually results from bilirubin levels greater than 3 mg/dl. Following identification of jaundice, unconjugated and conjugated fractions of bilirubin need to be obtained to distinguish between prehepatic and posthepatic jaundice. Elevation in unconjugated bilirubin indicates prehepatic or hepatic jaundice and may be managed medically;

- **Urine Bilirubin**: The presence of bilirubin in urine suggests conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

- **Complete Blood Count (CBC)**: CBC will facilitate evaluation for anemia and the presence of hemolysis or hypersplenism with thrombocytopenia.

- **Serum Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) and Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT):**AST and ALT serve as markers of hepatocellular injury. ALT increases are more specific to liver injury. Nonetheless, in chronic liver disease, these markers may be less significant as they may be normal or slightly elevated due to minimally remaining undamaged hepatic parenchymal cells. AST and ALT levels in 1000s are typically secondary to ischemia or liver toxins. Viral hepatitis may also yield ALTs in 1000s. AST to ALT ratio greater than or equal to 2:1 may suggest alcohol-induced liver damage.

- **Prothrombin Time/INR and Albumin:**These values evaluate the synthetic function of the liver. INR more than or equal to 1.5 with hepatic encephalopathy in a patient without underlying liver cirrhosis or chronic liver disease represents acute liver failure and needs transplant referral.

- **Viral Hepatitis, Serologic Studies**: Serologic studies for viral hepatitis must be conducted to identify potential etiologies.

- **Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) With or Without Gamma-Glutamyl Transpeptidase (GGTP)**: If elevated, these values may indicate obstruction; furthermore, GGTP may distinguish the hepatic source of increased ALP from alternate sources such as bone. A rise in these enzymes suggests the presence of cholestasis and may necessitate bile duct imaging. An increase in ALP over greater than fivefold usually supports extra-hepatic cholestasis.

- **Blood Alcohol**: Obtaining blood alcohol level is useful in confirming etiology in cases of suspected alcohol-induced liver damage.

- **Serum Acetaminophen**: Serum acetaminophen level will allow confirmation of acetaminophen toxicity as an underlying cause.

- **Serum or Urine Drug Screen**: Drug screen confirms suspected drugs as the potential cause.

- **Serum Lipase**: Elevated serum lipase, in an appropriate clinical setting, suggests acute pancreatitis.

- **Antimitochondrial Antibody**: Elevated antimitochondrial antibody may indicate primary biliary cholangitis.

- **Autoimmune Hepatitis Screening**: Serologic tests, including antinuclear antibodies and anti-smooth muscle antibodies, may reveal autoimmune etiology. Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), thought to be secondary to autoimmune etiology, is often associated with inflammatory bowel disease and is complicated by cholangiocarcinoma.

- **Genetic and Iron Studies**: Genetic and iron studies must be conducted if differential includes hemochromatosis. Hemochromatosis involves iron overload and can cause damage to vital organs like the liver, heart, and pancreas. Transferrin saturation greater than or equal to 60%, serum ferritin greater than 300 nanograms/ milliliter in male and greater than 200 nanograms/ milliliter in females suggests the presence of hemochromatosis. Hemochromatosis is an autosomal recessive disease mostly affecting Whites, with the most common mutation being HFE C282Y mutation.

- **Copper Studies**: Copper studies must be performed when differential includes Wilson disease. Wilson disease is characterized by abnormal copper accumulation, the mutation in the ATP7B gene,  reduced serum ceruloplasmin levels, and increased urinary copper excretion.

- **Alpha-1 Antitrypsin (AAT) Phenotyping**: Alpha-1 antitrypsin phenotyping is performed when hereditary AAT deficiency is suspected.

To summarize, elevation in AST and ALT suggests hepatocellular injury; whereas, elevation in alkaline phosphatase indicates biliary obstruction. ALT is more specific than AST for liver disease. Elevated bilirubin and low albumin may result due to both hepatocellular injury and biliary obstruction. Alcoholic liver disease may have an AST to ALT ratio 2:1 or greater, especially in the presence of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase.

- **Right Upper Quadrant Ultrasonography (USG)**: Right upper quadrant ultrasound allows the exclusion of biliary obstruction; it also enables the assessment of parenchymal liver diseases, including cirrhosis, steatosis, congestion, and tumor. It is often the initial imaging performed as it is widely accessible, less expensive, and devoid of radiation exposure.

- **Computed Tomography (CT) Abdomen:**CT scans are utilized to assess hepatobiliary anatomy and may serve as the initial or preferred imaging if suspicion for biliary obstruction is low. CT offers improved resolution compared to the USG and allows guided needle biopsies. Nonetheless, some limitations of CT include increased expense, radiation exposure, potential contrast exposure, and limited sensitivity to choledocholithiasis.

- **Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP):**MRCP may be conducted when suspected biliary obstruction is not appreciated on the right upper quadrant ultrasound or CT abdomen. A thorough assessment of the biliary tract is feasible with contrast agents due to the availability of various available contrasts and scanning modalities. Cystic and pancreatic ducts may be visible with appropriate contrast. Without radiation exposure, MRCP visualization is comparable to that of the USG.  Thus, it may be utilized for assessment of cholestasis of pregnancy or in patients unable to tolerate traditional cholangiography. Guided needle biopsies may be possible, but MRCP can't provide therapeutic intervention. Moreover, MRCP may have limited accessibility and clinical experience; it is also inappropriate with metallic implants.

- **Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)**: Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) or ERCP may be the initial screening procedure if suspicion for extra-hepatic obstruction is high. ERCP is primarily advantageous in the evaluation and diagnosis of biliary obstruction, pancreatic cancer, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and choledochal cysts. This modality is preferred for the identification and treatment of bile duct stones. With the possibility of stone extraction, sphincterotomy, balloon-dilation, and stent placement, ERCP offers treatment for extra-hepatic obstructions. Direct visualization allows reliable biopsies and clear assessment of bile ducts. Despite these opportunities, the patient is exposed to radiation, sedation, and potential for pancreatitis, among other complications.

- **Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiography (PTC or PTHC)**: PTC or PTHC is both diagnostic and therapeutic via interventions including extraction of biliary calculi, drainage of infected bile, dilation of strictures, and placement of stents.

- **Biopsy:**Liver biopsy may be performed if the diagnosis remains uncertain following extensive workup. With insight into liver architecture, it may also aid in establishing prognosis.