Tartarella et al. have classified leukocoria as below:

- Pre-lenticular leukocoria

- Lenticular leukocoria

- Retrolenticular leukocoria

- Mixed presentation leukocoria

International Classification of Retinoblastoma (ICRB)

- Group A: Small intraretinal tumors (less than 3 mm) away from the foveola and the disc.

- Group B: Tumors more than 3 mm, macular or juxtapapillary in location, or with subretinal fluid.

- Group C: Tumor with focal subretinal or vitreous seeding more than 3 mm from the tumor.

- Group D: Tumor with diffuse subretinal or vitreous seeding more than 3 mm from the tumor.

- Group E: Extensive retinoblastoma occupying more than 50 percent of the eye-globe volume with or without neovascular glaucoma, hemorrhage, tumor extension to the anterior chamber, or optic nerve.

International Classification of Retinopathy of Prematurity

Zones

- Zone 1: a small circle of the retina around the disc with a radius twice the distance from the macula to the center of the disc.

- Zone 2: circle surrounding zone 1, which extends to the nasal ora Serrata

- Zone 3: crescent-shaped area of the Temporal retina

- Extent: involved areas measured in clock hours

- Stages:

- Stage 1: Demarcation ‘line’ between the vascular and avascular retina

- Stage 2: Capillary growth over the demarcation line forms a ‘Ridge’

- Stage 3: Tufts of extraretinal blood vessels grow over the ridge

- Stage 4: Subtotal retinal detachment (4A-extrafoveal,4B-foveal)

- Stage 5: Total retinal detachment.

‘Plus’ disease: Dilated tortuous retinal vessels surrounding the optic disc, vitreous haze, and iris vascular congestion.

Aggressive posterior ROP(AP-ROP): ‘Plus’ disease in zone 1 or posterior zone 2 with vascular loops. Such aggressive disease may worsen rapidly and not follow the typical stages of ROP.

Staging of Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (FEVR)

- Stage 1: Avascular retinal periphery

- Stage 2: Retinal neovascularization (2A-without exudate,2B-with exudate)

- Stage 3: Extramacular retinal detachment (3A-without exudate,3B-with exudate)

- Stage 4: Subtotal retinal detachment involving the macula (4A-without exudate,4B-with exudate)

- Stage 5: Total retinal detachment.

Classification of retinochoroidal coloboma

- Type 1: Coloboma extending above the disc

- Type 2: Coloboma extending up to the superior border of the disc

- Type 3: coloboma extending below the inferior border of the disc

- Type 4: Coloboma involving the disc

- Type5: Coloboma present inferior to the disc with normal retina above and below the coloboma

- Type 6: pigmentation present in the periphery

- Type 7: coloboma involving only the periphery