Experimentally, vaccines to reduce the recurrence of urinary tract infections have been developed from whole bacterial cells, but so far, they have been only marginally successful, and the beneficial effect wears off after just a few weeks.E. coli genotypes seems to work better with a longer-lasting effect, and yet another promising experimental vaccine focuses on E. coli type 1 fimbrial adhesion protein.E. coli. This is already commercially available in Europe but not the US and has demonstrated a reduction in E. coli recurrences of 95%.

In many women, recurrent UTIs may be affected by inadequate or suboptimal personal hygiene, especially in women. Controlled studies have not proven significant efficacy in reducing recurrent urinary tract infections purely from personal hygiene lifestyle modifications.

The following information covers what should be imparted to patients, so they understand their condition and its management:

**Preventing Urinary Tract Infections:**

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are extremely common, especially in women. About 50% of all women will have at least one such infection at some time. While a UTI is usually just bothersome with symptoms such as burning on urination, urinary frequency, urgency, nocturia, hematuria (blood in the urine), and odor, it is possible for a urinary tract infection to progress and affects the kidneys or other organs which can potentially be serious.

When a patient has three or more urinary tract infections within one year, it is termed a recurrent infection, and a medical review may be recommended. Much of the time, the problem can be easily corrected with some simple changes in personal hygiene. Of course, the patient doesn’t have to wait for three new infections before starting any of the following suggestions. They shouldn’t feel bad if they are not doing everything correctly, as most women will find several things they could improve. Instead, they should make the necessary changes starting right now and help reduce the future risk of urinary tract infections.

**Wash Hands Before Wiping:**Patients should wash their hands before using the toilet to urinate or at least before wiping. They should also wash their hands before they get into the shower to avoid passing germs from their hands back to their body near the bladder opening area.

**Wipe Front to Back:**Always wipe from the front to the back after urinating. The patient should start from the front and push down and away towards the rectum. They shouldn’t try to reach from behind because their hand, wipes, or tissues will pick up bacteria from the rectum. Most urinary infections are from bacteria that normally live around the rectum and anus. Therefore, any wiping motion that starts nearer to the rectum and then approaches the bladder opening area will move potentially dangerous bacteria closer to the bladder and urinary tract. Patients should also wipe the same way, front to back, after a bowel movement.

**When Wiping, Use Toilet Paper or Baby Wipes But Only Wipe Once:**It is acceptable to use toilet paper to wipe after urination, but the patient needs to wipe once, or they may actually add more bacteria to the bladder opening area. Sterile baby wipes are even cleaner than toilet paper and can be carried in their purse for use outside the home. They can also be useful if no other wipes are available. As a general rule, anything safe for babies can also be used in the delicate area around the vagina and bladder opening.

**Avoid Baths:**Bathwater is full of dirt and bacteria from the skin. Sitting in a tub gives the bacteria an easy way to reach the urethra and bladder opening area. Point out to the patient that they wouldn't drink that water, so it follows that they shouldn’t put their bladder opening area, since the goal is to keep it as clean as humanly possible, in the dirty water. If the patient absolutely must take a bath instead of a shower, they shouldn’t use any bubble bath or other cosmetic bath additives, which tend to be irritating to the delicate skin of the vaginal mucosa. Instruct the patient to take showers instead. Showers are preferable to baths in women who are prone to urinary tract infections. They should just let the water runoff naturally and not spray any water directly into the vagina or bladder opening area.

**Avoid Luffas and All Reusable Sponges:**Luffas and other reusable sponges, including nylon, cannot be adequately cleaned or sterilized once used, so they retain bacteria that cannot be eliminated. They are also used repeatedly for days, weeks, or even months, during which they can accumulate more and more bacteria and germs. Women who are prone to infections, especially UTIs, should absolutely not use or even touch such reusable but heavily contaminated items.

**Use A Gentle Liquid Soap When Washing:**Bar soap will always have bacteria due to exposure to the air and bathroom environment. Also, other household members may handle it and use it. A body wash is fine for regular skin cleaning, but regular body wash is too harsh for the very gentle tissue of the vagina and bladder opening area. It is important to avoid using products with unnecessary perfumes, astringents, creams, or other possibly irritating chemicals. The recommendation is to use a gentle liquid soap with minimal additives. The patient can also use any gentle liquid baby soap or baby shampoo because it is probably acceptable for the bladder opening area if it is safe for babies.

**Use Washcloths:**The best and cleanest way to apply soap is to use a very clean, soft cotton or microfiber washcloth. The washcloths can be placed into a clean, resealable plastic bag immediately after they are washed and dried as they are cleanest when they are just coming out of the dryer.  This keeps them extra clean until needed and avoids any bacterial contamination from body spray in the shower or unnecessary handling. No matter how often the patient washes their hands, they will not be as clean as these freshly laundered washcloths. The patient may want to use a second washcloth to finish their shower after properly cleaning the bladder opening area.

**Clean the Bladder Opening Area First:**The bladder is the only area of the body that can get infected if it is not cleaned properly when washing. Since it is the most important area to get clean, it should be washed first before the washcloth, or their hands have picked up any dirt, germs, or bacteria from other body parts. When surgeons perform surgery, they clean the surgical site first before moving to the surrounding area. The same principle applies to cleaning the bladder area. They need to remember only to wipe once, wiping from the front towards the back.

**How to Wash - Summary:**Wash the hands first, even before getting into the shower. Take a fresh, clean washcloth from the sealed plastic bag as described previously. Wet the washcloth, add some clean liquid soap, and clean the bladder opening area first with a single front to back wipe with the washcloth. Rinse well without directly spraying the bladder opening area. The washcloth used to clean the bladder opening area should probably not be used for anything else and should only be used once before being laundered.

**Douches may be Acceptable but Avoid Other Personal Hygiene Products:**In most cases, a vinegar and water douche or a douche with iodine or benzalkonium chloride is helpful if carried out correctly at appropriate intervals. The patient should not use any feminine hygiene sprays, cosmetics, perfumes, medicated towelettes, or similar products in the vagina or bladder opening area unless specifically approved by their clinician.

**Use Tampons for Periods:**Tampons are advised during menstrual periods rather than sanitary napkins or pads. A tampon will keep the bladder opening area drier and cleaner than a sanitary pad and help keep any bacterial growth and contamination away.

**Avoid Long Intervals Between Urinations: The**patient should try to empty their bladder at least every four hours during the daytime while awake, even if they don’t feel the specific need or urge to void. When the need to empty the bladder presents, they shouldn’t try to “hold it” until a more convenient time or place. When the bladder indicates that it is time to urinate, they need to pay attention and use the restroom as quickly as possible.

**Don’t Wear Tight Clothes:**Avoid wearing pantyhose, bathing suits, or tight slacks for prolonged periods. Cotton panties for general use are suggested. They should also try to avoid habitual leg crossing. All of these will tend to press the skin folds around the vagina into the body and may introduce more bacteria into the area around the bladder opening.

**Drink More Water:**Start with one extra glass with each meal. If the patient's urine appears any darker than a very pale yellow, this could mean that they are not drinking enough and should increase their fluid intake. Cranberry juice is helpful in patients with urinary tract infections, but if they don’t like cranberry juice, they can or substitute other beverages.

**Take Some Extra Vitamin C and Drink Some Cranberry Juice:**The clinician may recommend taking additional vitamin C. This may help increase the body’s resistance to infection. Extra vitamin C that the system cannot use immediately will be released into the urine, where it helps block bacterial growth. As noted earlier, cranberry juice may be of some extra benefit in reducing urinary tract infections. If the patient doesn’t like cranberry juice, they can get the same benefit from cranberry pills available in most drug and health food stores.

**Avoid Irritating Foods Like Caffeine:**Symptoms of bladder irritation may be aggravated by caffeine, regular coffee, tea, alcohol, “hot” spices, aspartame, chocolate, cola drinks, and high potassium foods like bananas and oranges.

**Avoid Activities Which Increase the Risk of Bladder Infections:**Prolonged bicycling, motorcycling, horseback riding, and similar physical activities and exercises may increase the risk of bladder infections. The patient may need to limit these types of activities.  When engaging in physical activity and exercise, the patient should frequently empty their bladder and drink plenty of water and other fluids. Sexual activity may also increase the risk because it can introduce bacteria into the bladder area.

**Take Special Precautions After Sexual Activity:**After intercourse, instruct the patient to empty their bladder and drink two extra glasses of water. Some patients will be advised by their clinicians to take a urinary antiseptic or antibiotic after sexual activity. They should take the medication exactly the way, and at the time their clinician recommended.

**An Estrogen Vaginal Cream May Help Increase Resistance to Bladder Infections:**Clinicians may suggest an estrogen cream for the vagina if the patient has had menopause, even if they are already on an oral estrogen supplement or patch. The vaginal cream will help keep the tissues around the bladder opening healthy and more resistant to infection.

**Take Antibiotics Only As Prescribed by the Clinician:**If the clinician has prescribed medication or antibiotic to take as a preventive therapy, patients should follow their instructions carefully. They need to be aware that medications may be necessary for up to a year or more, depending on the nature and severity of the urinary infection problem. For some patients, a small amount of a urinary antibiotic or antiseptic taken daily at bedtime will prevent most urinary infections, give the bladder a chance to heal, and restore its natural resistance. Other patients may need to take an antibiotic only when they think they are getting an infection. The patient needs to take any prescribed medication per clinician recommendations. If they cannot remember exactly how to take the medication and there are no clear instructions on the container bottle, they should be instructed to contact their clinician or pharmacist.

**If Patients Follow All These Suggestions And Get An Infection Anyway****:**The guidelines and suggestions listed here will help most women avoid bladder infections most of the time. If they get an infection despite these precautions, they need to seek medical help promptly. A urine specimen for the examination should be given to the clinician if requested. Patients should seek prompt help for excessive vaginal discharge or other signs of vaginal inflammation and infection. Patients may be started on an antibiotic at this time, and compliance is crucial. In some cases, the clinician may request additional tests such as kidney X-rays or a direct examination of the bladder with a telescope (cystoscopy). Sterilization of washcloths may be the next reasonable step for those where simpler measures have not been adequate.

**Sterilizing Washcloths for Home Use**

The clinician may recommend sterilizing washcloths for washing and personal hygiene to help prevent recurrent urinary tract infections. This extra step is probably unnecessary for most patients with recurrent infections, but it can be beneficial for the more severe or resistant cases. Patients should use only those washcloths purchased for this purpose and remember to wipe correctly from front to back.

**Home Sterilization of Washcloths**

- Wash the washcloths with hot water and soap or detergent as one normally would in a clothes washer. If the patient doesn’t have a washer, they can use soap and hot water in a sink.

- Boil the washcloths in water for at least 20 minutes.

- Take the washcloths out of the water and allow them to dry or use the clothes dryer.

- When dry, place each washcloth in a separate, sealable microwave-safe plastic bag such as a ziplock bag.

- The bags should be left open and not sealed yet.

- Place the bags in the microwave. In the center of the microwave, put a large glass of cold water. The washcloths should not be placed in the water.

- Put the microwave on high for five minutes and turn it on. Replace the glass of cold water (now very hot) with a new glass of cold water and microwave on high for an additional five minutes.

- Let the bags cool, then close them. The washcloths are now sterile inside a sterile bag.

This technique will kill the germs and bacteria on the washcloths by using microwave radiation for sterilization. Without the glass of cold water to absorb the heat, the bags would melt, and the washcloths would catch fire.

**Summary of Tip for Preventing Infections**

- Wipe in the correct direction, from front to back.

- Wash hands before using washcloths, tissues, or toilet paper for wiping or washing.

- Use a clean, gentle liquid soap because it tends to be much cleaner than bar soap.

- Only wipe once with each washcloth or tissue. If more cleaning is needed, use another washcloth.

- Clean the bladder area first when washing to prevent contamination with bacteria from other parts of the body.

- Don’t use these washcloths for any other purpose except to clean the area around the bladder opening.

- Drink extra water and take some extra vitamin C. Drink cranberry juice or take cranberry pills.

- The patient can consider using an estrogen cream twice a week (or as prescribed by the clinician) if they are past menopause.