The course of posterior cortical atrophy is usually insidious and primarily affects the central visual deficits without peripheral visual deficits.

Further exploration of the functioning can reveal difficulties in judging distances and traffic speed while driving. History is also likely to show impairment in reading analog clocks and digitalized pixelated signs. It is not uncommon for patients to bump into door frames while walking or locating door knobs due to visual processing difficulties. Patients can also report anxiety while going down the escalators, especially when going down and difficulty with revolving doors. Considerable difficulty reading degraded letters and numbers compared to reading the same letters in a completed form is highly suggestive of apperceptive agnosia.

Patients can present with features of acalculia, agraphia, finger agnosia, and left-right disorientation, which are features of Gerstmann syndrome, or with Balint syndrome characterized by ocular apraxia, optic ataxia, and simultagnosia. Most of the patients present with components of these syndromes (simultanagnosia and acalculia) in the initial course of the disease. Patients with PCA often fail to see the picture as a whole and only see specific features.

There is a marked inability to describe a complex picture in its entirety, and this classic finding is referred to as simultanagnosia. These patients have defects in visual attention, thereby causing only 'local capturing and 'partonomic' errors. These cohorts show an inability to read pseudoisochromatic plates, despite intact color vision and have problems interpreting a Navon figure.

Neurological examination is typically unrevealing. Mild gait abnormalities may be a consequence of poor balance due to visual processing difficulties. However, a small percentage of the patients may show myoclonus or other motor signs. Symptoms of parkinsonism may suggest underlying Lewy body disease. Asymmetric motor symptoms of dystonia, dyspraxia, myoclonus, and the alien limb may be secondary to underlying corticobasal degeneration.

Crutch et al. described it as a clinical-radiological syndrome with the following core features: Clinically presenting as insidious onset with gradual progression and visual disturbances being prominent early in the course (with or without other posterior cognitive functions). The following cognitive features are seen in the decreasing order of frequency: Deficits in space perception, simultanagnosia, deficits in the perception of objects, constructional dyspraxia, environmental agnosia, oculomotor apraxia, dressing apraxia, optic ataxia, alexia, inability to differentiate left and right side, acalculia, limb apraxia, apperceptive prosopagnosia, agraphia, homonymous visual field defects, and finger agnosia. At least three of the above cognitive features must be present as a presenting feature or early in the course of illness with or without evidence of impairment in activities of daily living.

The criteria emphasize the relative sparing of all of the following: anterograde memory, speech, and nonvisual language functions, executive functions, personality, and behavior. On neuroimaging (MRI/FDG-PET/SPECT), occipitoparietal or occipitotemporal atrophy/hypometabolism/hypoperfusion is predominant. Exclusion criteria include the presence of structural lesions, including brain tumor or vascular lesions, and afferent visual pathology involving optic nerve, optic chiasm, or optic tract. The presence of other causes of cognitive impairment, such as renal failure, also needs to be ruled out.

The PCA should always be considered among patients presenting with:

- Spatial disorientation

- Problem with Ishihara charts despite a normal color vision

- Homonymous visual field defects

- Omission of letters on the acuity chart