Before arrival in the hospital, there are no established universal protocols for prehospital care of mandibular dislocation. The basis for a transport decision is on patient stability and other factors that may have contributed to the injury, for example, trauma, shock, or altered mental status. So long as the patient has no airway symptoms, transport can proceed.

In the emergency department, consider ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation) upon initial presentation. Stabilizing the patient’s life-threatening conditions should take priority in the initial workup. History and physical should include a thorough history, including risk factors for TMJ dislocation. If physical exam and imaging are concerning for fracture or chronic dislocation, consultation to oral maxillofacial surgery or otolaryngology may be appropriate. Severe fractures, chronic dislocations, or patients with concomitant injuries may necessitate open reduction performed in the operating room (OR).

Anesthesia or sedation should be performed to reduce the patient's pain and anxiety. Benzodiazepines such as midazolam and fentanyl are the recommended agents. Intravenous propofol bolus is a useful agent for TMJ reduction. It is commonly used for sedation and has a short half-life and anti-emetic effects.

Reduction techniques include intraoral techniques and extraoral techniques. Intraoral techniques include the bimanual, wrist pivot, and recumbent position. Extraoral techniques protect the provider's fingers from being bitten. Extraoral techniques include the gag reflex method, the syringe method, and the external approach.

The materials involved in all intraoral reduction techniques include gloves, a bite block, Yankauer suction, and MacGill forceps. Rolled gauze and tongue depressors can be used to protect the provider's thumbs.

**Bimanual Method:**also known as the classic, traditional, or Hippocratic intraoral reduction method, which is the most common technique used for TMJ reduction. The provider stands directly in front of the seated patient, facing toward the patient. An assistant should stabilize the head throughout the procedure. While wearing gloves, the provider places both thumbs into the patient's open mouth. Thumbs may be wrapped in gauze for protection. Each thumb gets placed on the patient’s respective lower molars or the external oblique ridge as far back as possible. The provider’s fingers are placed out of the mouth on the angle of the mandible to elevate the body of the mandible and chin. The pressure is applied by the thumbs to push the mandible downward and then backward while maintaining the mouth slightly open. The goal is to free the condyle from the anterior eminence and push the mandible back into the temporal fossa.

**Wrist Pivot Method:**It is an alternative method that uses the same materials as the bimanual intraoral technique. The provider faces the seated patient. An assistant should stabilize the patient's head during the reduction. With gloved hands, the thumbs of the provider are placed out of the mouth under the mentum (chin), pointing toward the midline. The index and middle fingers get positioned on the bilateral lower molars. The thumbs apply upward pressure with equal downward pressure by the fingers. The wrist is then pivoted forward, causing the angle of the mandible to move downward and posterior, reducing the dislocation.

**Recumbent (or Supine) Technique:**In this technique, the provider stands or sits behind the patient while the patient is in a supine position. The patient's head is braced against the provider’s abdomen. While wearing gloves, the provider’s thumbs are placed on the lower molars. The fingers of the provider’s hands are out of the mouth and used to grip the angle of the mandible. Downward then backward pressure is applied by the thumbs to free the condyle from the anterior eminence and guide the condyle into the temporal fossa.

**Gag Reflex Method:**It is a technique in which the provider's fingers do not enter the patient's mouth, thereby protecting the provider's fingers from biting. This technique is performed by using a mouth mirror to stimulate the gag reflex by touching the patient’s soft palate and pharynx; this will trigger the depressor and protrude muscles, which may flex and relocate the mandibular condyle into the temporal fossa.

**Syringe Method:**This is performed by placing an empty 5 or 10 mL syringe, oriented transversely, on one side in the posterior portion of the patient's mouth, between the upper and lower molars or posterior gums. The patient is directed to bite down softly and roll the syringe backward and forward. This maneuver gets repeated until the mandible reduces on that side. The opposite side can reduce spontaneously; however, if it does not, the syringe can be placed on the opposite side of the mouth, and the technique repeated. Syringe size is chosen based on which size can fit most easily. Procedural sedation or anesthesia is not a requirement for this technique.

**External Approach:**It is performed by placing the patient in a seated position with the provider facing the patient. The provider places the fingers of one hand on the ascending ramus, grasping the mandibular angle. Thumb placement is on the malar eminence of the maxilla or zygomatic bone. The opposite side is positioned using the thumb above the displaced coronoid process, applying posterior pressure. The fingers of the same hand pull traction on the mastoid process of the temporal bone. The simultaneous action of both hands is performed to reduce the mandible. The angle of the mandible is pulled anteriorly while on the opposite side, the coronoid process is pushed posteriorly and directed into the temporal fossa. One side of the mandible will reduce. If the opposite side does not reduce spontaneously immediately following the first reduction, reverse hand positions and reduce the second side.

Dislocations that require emergent consultation to otolaryngology or oral maxillofacial surgery include chronic dislocation, superior or posterior dislocation, fracture-dislocation, open dislocation, cranial nerve injury associated with a dislocation, recurrent or history of two or more prior dislocations, or dislocation that is nonreducible following multiple attempts using closed reduction technique.

Subspecialists can perform conservative management following recurrent dislocation. Examples of conservative management include botulinum toxin injections, autologous blood injections, physiotherapy, soft diets, mandibular range of motion restriction, local anesthesia.

**Botulinum Toxin A Injection:**This can be used with other techniques or as primary therapy. Twenty-five to fifty units of botulinum toxin A is injected directly into the lateral pterygoid to prevent recurrent dislocation. Injections can be repeated every 3 to 6 months to improve outcomes and reduce morbidity.

**Autologous Blood Injection:**This is a conservative technique in which the joint space receives an injection with the patient's whole blood. In this technique, the joint space is lavaged with crystalloid fluid and drained. Whole blood is then drawn from the patient and injected into the joint space. The volume of blood injected is approximately 2 to 4 mL into the joint space and 1 to 1.5 mL into the pericapsular structures. The goal of injecting autologous blood into the joint space is to cause an inflammatory reaction resulting in fibrosis and scarring of the joint and capsular tissue. This process will decrease compliance of the joint and decreased range of motion. There are reports regarding concerns about damage to the joint cartilage secondary to the inflammatory reaction using this technique.