Beta-lactam antibiotics are one of the most commonly prescribed drug classes with numerous clinical indications. Their advent starting from the 30s of the twentieth century drastically changed the fight against bacterial infectious diseases. Nowadays, it has been calculated that the annual expenditure for these antibiotics amounts to approximately $15 billion USD, and it makes up 65% of the total antibiotics market.

From a biochemical point of view, these drugs have a common feature, which is the 3-carbon and 1-nitrogen ring (beta-lactam ring) that is highly reactive. This class includes:

- Penicillins. These antibiotics (most of which end in the suffix -cillin) contain a nucleus of 6-animopenicillanic acid (lactam plus thiazolidine) ring and other ringside chains. The group includes natural penicillins, beta-lactamase-resistant agents, aminopenicillins, carboxypenicillins, and ureidopenicillins.

- Cephalosporins. They contain a 7-aminocephalosporanic acid nucleus and side-chain containing 3,6-dihydro-2 H-1,3- thiazane rings. Cephalosporins are traditionally divided into five classes or generations, although acceptance of this terminology is not universal.

- Carbapenems. Their defining structure is a carbapenem coupled to a beta-lactam ring that confers protection against most beta-lactamases, although resistance to these compounds is a significant issue and occurs mainly among gram-negative pathogens (e.g., Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Acinetobacter baumannii), which produce different classes of beta-lactamases termed as carbapenemase.

- Monobactams. The beta-lactam ring stands alone and not fused to another ring.

- Beta-lactamase inhibitors. They work primarily by inactivating serine beta-lactamases, which are enzymes that hydrolyze and inactivate the beta-lactam ring (especially in gram-negative bacteria). These agents include the first-generation beta-lactamase inhibitors (clavulanic acid, sulbactam, and tazobactam) and the newer avibactam and vaborbactam that are active against carbapenemase such as Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC).

**Mechanism of Resistance**

Resistance to beta-lactams is an alarming and growing phenomenon and, in turn, a public health challenge. It concerns, above all, Streptococcus pneumoniae and individual gram-negative bacilli such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. With emerging resistance for antibiotics, it makes sense to look into mechanisms of resistance as it can help decide which drugs to prescribe in different scenarios and ways to overcome the same. Although bacterial resistance to beta-lactams mostly expresses through the production of beta-lactamases, other mechanisms are involved. Following are the mechanisms of resistance

- Inactivation by the production of beta-lactamases

- Decreased penetration to the target site (e.g., the resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

- Alteration of target site PBPs (e.g., penicillin resistance in pneumococci)

- Efflux from the periplasmic space through specific pumping mechanisms

**Indications For Beta-Lactam Antibiotics******

The indications for using the beta-lactam antibiotics are many and vary according to the subclass considered

**Penicillins**

Natural penicillins [penicillin G (IV), penicillin V (PO)] are used to treat selected gram-positive and gram-negative infections:

- Penicillin susceptible Streptococcus pneumonia and meningitis

- Streptococcal pharyngitis

- Endocarditis

- Skin and soft tissue infections

- Neisseria meningitides infections

- Syphilis

**Beta-lactamase-resistant Agents**

These agents [oxacillin (IV), nafcillin (IV), dicloxacillin (PO)] are active against gram-positive organisms. Despite the occurrence of widespread resistance among staphylococci, they remain antibiotics of choice in managing methicillin-susceptible staphylococci (MSSA):

- Skin and soft tissue infections (MSSA)

- Serious infections due to MSSA

Aminopenicillins

These antibiotics have activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (e.g., many Enterobacteriaceae) anaerobic organisms. They are commonly used together with beta-lactamase inhibitors.

Amoxicillin (PO), ampicillin (PO/IV):

- Upper respiratory tract infections (sinusitis, pharyngitis, otitis media)

- Enterococcus faecalis infections

- Listeria infections

- Aminopenicillins/beta-lactamase inhibitors: amoxicillin/clavulanate (PO), ampicillin-sulbactam (IV)

- Upper respiratory tract infections (sinusitis, otitis media)

- Intra-abdominal infections

Ureidopenicillins

Piperacillin (ureidopenicillin) has activity against aminopenicillin-resistant gram-negative bacilli (Pseudomonas aeruginosa). They are commonly combined with beta-lactamase inhibitors.

**Cephalosporins**

First-generation cephalosporins

Cefazolin(IV), cephalexin (PO), cefadroxil (PO)

- Skin and soft tissue infections serious infections due to MSSA

- Perioperative surgical prophylaxis

Second-generation cephalosporins

Cefuroxime (IV/PO), cefoxitin (IV), cefotetan (IV), cefaclor (PO) cefprozil (PO)

- Upper respiratory tract infections (sinusitis, otitis media)

- Cefoxitin, cefotetan-gynecologic infections,

- perioperative surgical prophylaxis

Third-generation cephalosporins

Cefotaxime (IV), ceftriaxone (IV), cefpodoxime (PO), cefixime (PO), cefdinir (PO), cefditoren (PO), ceftibuten (PO)

- Community-acquired pneumonia, meningitis

- Urinary tract infections

- Streptococcal endocarditis

- Gonorrhea

- Severe Lyme disease.

Anti-pseudomonal Cephalosporins

Ceftazidime (IV), ceftazidime/avibactam (IV), cefepime (IV) [Fourth-generation], ceftolozone/tazobactam (IV) [also been described as "fifth-generation"]

- Nosocomial infections-pneumonia

- Meningitis

- Complicated Intra-abdominal Infections (cIAI) [ceftazolone plus beta-lactamase inhibitor]

- Complicated Urinary Tract Infections (cUTI) [ceftazolone plus beta-lactamase inhibitor]

Anti-Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) cephalosporins

Ceftaroline (IV), ceftobiprole (IV) [Also been described as "fifth-generation"]

- Community-acquired pneumonia

- Hospital-acquired pneumonia (excluding ventilator-acquired pneumonia)

- Skin and soft tissue infection

**Carbapenems**

Imipenem/cilastatin (IV), meropenem (IV), doripenem (IV)

- Nosocomial infections-pneumonia, intra-abdominal infections, urinary tract infections

- Meningitis (especially meropenem)

Ertapenem (IV)

- Community-acquired infections

- Nosocomial infections.

**Monobactams**

Aztreonam (IV). It is effective only against aerobic gram-negative organisms but shows no activity against gram-positive bacteria or anaerobes.

- Nosocomial infections, e.g., pneumonia

- Urinary tract infections

Because the emergence of antimicrobial resistance has become a progressively great concern, new beta-lactam and beta-lactamase inhibitor combinations (ceftolozane/tazobactam, ceftazidime/avibactam, meropenem/vaborbactam, imipenem/cilastatin/relebactam, aztreonam/avibactam), siderophore-conjugated cephalosporins (cefiderocol), and siderophore-conjugated monobactams have been developed and represent options for the management of complicated infections, especially in the intensive care unit.