Agitation is a nonspecific constellation of relatively unrelated behaviors that can be seen in various clinical situations, usually presenting as a fluctuating course. One of the biggest difficulties in delineating its pathophysiology is its episodic nature, no distinct clinical features, and a non-linear relationship with various neurotransmitters in the body. Multiple neurotransmitters have been postulated to be the cause of aggression. Dysregulations of dopaminergic, serotonergic, noradrenergic, androgenic, and GABAergic systems have been most widely studied. Agents that reduce dopaminergic or noradrenergic tone or increase serotonergic or GABAergic tone will attenuate agitation, often irrespective of etiology. Sheard et al hypothesized that serotonin 5-HT was a modulator of aggression, and this finding was validated by Asberg et al. In inmate populations, Sheard studied effects of lithium for 3 months and concluded that lithium (does have serotonergic activity) and could have a clinically useful effect on impulsive aggression not related to psychosis. It was Asberg and colleagues who studied cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of depressed patients and concluded that patients with low levels of 5-HIAA, a breakdown product of serotonin, are more likely to commit suicide using more violent means. Further studies verified that low levels of 5-HIAA are significantly associated with more violent attempts. This led to more studies searching for other neurotransmitters involved in aggression.

Experimental studies in which 5-HT activity was manipulated and aggressive responding monitored have been conducted in research volunteers without documented psychopathology. Four studies in which brain 5-HT was putatively manipulated by tryptophan depletion, supplementation, or both reported data consistent with an inverse relationship between 5-HT activity and aggressive response in the laboratory. Based on animal studies, increased noradrenergic (NE) and dopaminergic (DA) activity could be hypothesized to facilitate aggressive responses in humans. NE pharmacological challenge studies in this field have been limited and include a positive correlation between the growth hormone response to the alpha 2-NE agonist clonidine and self-reported ‘‘irritability’’ (a type of aggression) in a limited sample of male personality-disordered and healthy volunteer test subjects. Testosterone has also been postulated to play a role in aggression, but aggression levels do not change during puberty when testosterone levels increase.

Furthermore, aggression is not observed more in hypogonadal males when exogenous testosterone is administered, or in hirsute females where androgens levels can double. However, studies like the one by Rasanen et al. have shown that plasma testosterone levels are higher in aggressive individuals in the psychiatric and criminal populations. They also showed that male prisoners with personality disorders had a higher level of plasma testosterone compared to prisoners with schizophrenia. Cortisol, prolactin, and vasopressin have all been postulated to cause aggression, but research shows no conclusive results, Studies have shown that aggression is multifactorial and cannot be attributed to one cause.