Management for constipation includes medical supervision, dietary instructions, behavioral changes and instructions regarding toilet training. A normal fiber intake, fluid intake, and physical activity level are recommended, and the routine use of prebiotics or probiotics is not recommended in the treatment of childhood constipation. The non-pharmacological intervention consists of demystification, explanation, and guidance for toilet training in those children with a developmental age of a least 4 years.

Laxatives represent first-line treatment for childhood constipation and, if an adequate regimen is implemented, they often have a symptomatic improvement. Consensus guidelines recommend daily polyethylene glycol (PEG) at a dose of 1 to 1.5 gm/kg per day for 3 to 6 days for initial fecal disimpaction, followed by a daily maintenance dose of 0.4 gr/kg per day for at least 2 months to prevent re-accumulation. A stimulant laxative should be added if PEG alone does not cause disimpaction after 2 weeks of treatment.

Polyethylene glycol is reported to be effective in some patients. The FDA has also approved prucalopride and lubiprostone for chronic idiopathic constipation. However, there continues to be a debate about the safety of these agents in the long run and caution is advised against starting patients on these drugs.

Biofeedback has improved defecation dynamics but does not affect constipation. Hence this approach has not been supported for management of idiopathic constipation in children.

Sacral nerve stimulation is a modality that has been used to treat refractory constipation, helping extrinsic neural control of large bowel and modulating inhibitory reflexes. This has improved the defecation frequency in some children with functional constipation, but effects last less than 6 months in a large group of patients.

Surgical management is reserved for patients with refractory to medical interventions. At least 10% of children with functional constipation referred to a pediatric surgeon will require an operation. The surgical treatment goal is to produce symptom alleviation. Surgical options may include anal procedures, antegrade enemas, colorectal resection, and intestinal diversion.