Treatment of autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease mainly focuses on managing the symptoms associated with each type of disease and slowing down the progression to end-stage renal disease. It seems reasonable that potentially affected family members be well managed for other risk factors known to worsen or cause CKD, such as arterial hypertension, diabetes, smoking, and obesity, and annual kidney function testing is necessary. There are few treatment options for children at risk for UMOD- or MUC1-associated diseases. On the contrary, minors with HNF1B- and REN-associated diseases are likely to improve from early treatment. Affected individuals should typically be treated according to established CKD guidance.

Regarding ADTKD-UMOD, allopurinol or febuxostat are the best treatment options for gout and hyperuricemia. Patients should be encouraged to take one of these medications as soon as gout develops to prevent further gout attacks and gouty tophi. Although starting allopurinol early in life may prevent gout from developing later, the risks and benefits should be discussed thoroughly with the patient or the family if the patient is minor because allopurinol has some important side effects and severe allergic reactions.

Regarding ADTKD-MUC1, there is no specific therapy at present. Optimal therapy to manage chronic kidney disease, such as controlling blood pressure and secondary chronic kidney disease changes, are the only available treatments for this condition. As progression to end-stage renal disease is at a slow rate, and the fact that this condition affects only the kidney, these patients are excellent candidates for renal transplantation.

For ADTKD-REN, there are several treatment options currently available. As these patients are in mild hypovolemia with a low renin state, it is essential to avoid the low sodium diet, commonly recommended for chronic kidney disease. These patients are prone to develop acute kidney injury on a low sodium diet due to worsening hypotension. Hyperkalemia and mild hypotension could be treated by fludrocortisone or a higher sodium content diet. Fludrocortisone may correct hyperkalemia and hypotension and improve hyperuricemia but does not ameliorate hemoglobin levels. Fludrocortisone may slow chronic kidney disease progression by lowering renin production (both the normal and the mutated renin).

For ADTKD-HNF1B, there is no specific therapy for this disease. The treatment is mainly supportive of chronic kidney disease. Allopurinol or febuxostat should be considered for patients with early-onset gout to prevent tophus development and urate accumulation. Screening for abnormal liver function tests, hyperglycemia, hypomagnesemia, and hyperuricemia is an essential part of the management to prevent further complications. Renal ultrasound should be performed to evaluate renal morphologic abnormalities.

Regarding ADTKD-SEC61A1, there is no specific therapy to treat the underlying cause, but managing the associated congenital anemia and preventing opportunistic infection should be carried out for a better prognosis.

It is important to know that patients with ADTKD are excellent candidates for kidney transplantation, particularly if there are no extra-renal manifestations.