The process of delivering quality, patient-centered care to an erythrodermic patient presenting to a clinic or emergency department is a multi-step process requiring the coordination and communication of a multitude of healthcare providers from different backgrounds. It requires proper training for healthcare staff, including triage nurses, and excellent clinical acumen from physicians and other medical providers in inpatient and outpatient settings for appropriate diagnosis and management of erythroderma cases. The dermatology department should be consulted if not already involved in the patient's care. Additionally, infectious disease, cardiology, and pulmonology specialists should be consulted and engaged if severe erythroderma complications arise. Hematology/oncology should be included in the interprofessional team if an underlying malignancy is suspected or confirmed.

A thorough history and physical is necessary, and appropriate pharmacy staff should be included in the discussion if drugs are suspected culprits. Clear communication and collaboration with the laboratory staff and pathologist should be a priority to help establish the underlying cause. The pharmacy team also has an essential role in helping develop a treatment regimen in conjunction with the managing provider to ensure optimal management. Finally, appropriate follow-up with the next echelon of care must take place before discharge from an inpatient setting. The patient's primary care manager should be informed, and the patient should have follow-up care established with a dermatologist if they don't already. In the case of underlying malignancy, proper continuity with hematology/oncology should also be arranged to ensure appropriate monitoring and treatment.

Nursing and pharmacy will also contribute to the interprofessional team management of the condition. Nursing can counsel, verify treatment progress and patient compliance, and answer patient questions. Pharmacists will verify all dosing on drug therapy, counsel patients on administration and adverse effects, and contact the provider if any interactions present secondary to the therapy regimen. These interprofessional strategies will optimize outcomes for patients. [Level 5]