The management of empyema can be challenging and complex. Coordination of care across multiple disciplines is necessary, functioning as a cohesive interprofessional team, to optimize positive patient outcomes. Since therapeutic options for empyema involve medical and surgical intervention, the involvement of several specialists is prudent in improving morbidity and mortality. The American Association for Thoracic Surgery (ATS), British Thoracic Society (BTS) and American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) have published comprehensive, evidence-based guidelines to help guide healthcare professionals in their treatment of empyema. ATS and BTS guidelines provide a concise approach on appropriate antibiotics use, sampling, and analysis via thoracentesis, tube thoracostomy drainage for frank empyema, and prompt surgical referral if patients are not improving. BTS guidelines recommend early involvement of a chest physician or thoracic surgeon in the care of patients requiring tube thoracostomy. These highly skilled physicians can help identify surgical candidates early, assess thoracic surgical risk, manage potential complications associated with invasive procedures, and involve their cardiothoracic surgeon colleagues when appropriate.

In addition to the specialists, other members of the interprofessional healthcare team need to collaborate to optimize patient outcomes for empyema patients. Nurses will provide post-surgical care, and can report to the team regarding patient progress. Nursing is also on the front lines for adverse drug reactions, and can contact the pharmacist if necessary for guidance, then reach out to the managing physician. Pharmacists can perform medication reconciliation and alert the prescribing clinicians regarding and potential drug interactions, as well as verifying dosing and antimicrobial coverage. All these disciplines must collaborate across interprofessional lines as a team for optimal patient treatment. [Level 5]