Digestion begins immediately in the oral cavity with both mechanical and chemical digestion. Mechanical digestion in the oral cavity consists of grinding of food into smaller pieces by the teeth, a process called mastication. Chemical digestion in the mouth is minor but consists of salivary amylase (ptyalin, or alpha-amylase) and lingual lipase, both contained in the saliva. Salivary amylase is chemically identical to pancreatic amylase and digests starch into maltose and maltotriose, working at a pH optimum of 6.7 to 7.0. Lingual lipase, also contained in the saliva, hydrolyzes the ester bonds in triglycerides to form diacylglycerols and monoacylglycerols.

After passage through the esophagus, the bolus will enter the stomach and undergo mechanical and chemical digestion. Mechanical digestion in the stomach occurs via peristaltic contractions of the smooth muscle from the fundus towards the contracted pylorus, termed propulsion. Once the bolus is near the pylorus, the antrum functions to grind the material by forceful peristaltic contractions that force the bolus against a tightly constricted pylorus. The churning by the antrum serves to reduce the size of the food particles and is called grinding. Only particles smaller than 2mm in diameter can pass through the contracted pylorus into the duodenum. The rest of the bolus is pushed back towards the body of the stomach for further mechanical and chemical digestion. This backward movement of the bolus from the pylorus to the body is termed retropulsion and also serves to aid in mechanical digestion. This sequence of propulsion, grinding, and retropulsion repeats until the food particles are small enough to pass through the pylorus into the duodenum. All chyme not pushed through the pylorus during the active digestion process is eventually swept into the duodenum through a relaxed pylorus by a series of strong peristaltic contractions in the stomach. This activity occurs during the inter-digestive phase called migrating motor complexes (MMCs) that function to move the bolus in an aboral fashion to prevent stagnation and bacterial accumulation.

There is significant chemical digestion in the stomach. Two types of glands exist in the gastric mucosa that aid in chemical digestion: oxyntic glands and pyloric glands. Oxyntic glands are located in the body of the stomach and contain parietal cells and chief cells. Parietal cells secrete hydrochloric acid, concentrated to approximately 160 mmol/L and a pH of 0.8. Hydrochloric acid secreted by the parietal cells serves three main functions: 1) to create a hostile environment for pathogenic microorganisms taken in through the mouth, 2) to denature proteins and make them more accessible for enzymatic degradation by pepsin, and 3) to activate the zymogen pepsinogen to its active form, pepsin. Parietal cells also secrete a substance called intrinsic factor, necessary for the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the terminal ileum. Oxyntic glands also contain chief cells that secrete the zymogen pepsinogen. Pepsinogen is the precursor to the proteolytic enzyme pepsin and must be activated to pepsin by the acidic pH of the stomach (below 3.5) or from autoactivation by pepsin itself. Pepsin will then act on the internal peptide bonds of proteins at the optimal pH of 2 to 3. The pyloric glands are found in the antrum of the stomach and contain mucous cells and G-cells. Mucous cells secrete a bicarbonate-rich mucous onto the surface of the gastric mucosa to protect it from the acidic contents of the stomach. The G-cells secrete gastrin, a hormone that acts in an endocrine fashion to stimulate the secretion of hydrochloric acid by parietal cells.

The majority of chemical digestion occurs in the small intestine. Digested chyme from the stomach passes through the pylorus and into the duodenum. Here, chyme will mix with secretions from both the pancreas and the duodenum. Mechanical digestion will still occur to a minor extent as well. The pancreas produces many digestive enzymes, including pancreatic amylase, pancreatic lipase, trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, procarboxypeptidase, and proelastase.

Once in the duodenum, there will be an activation cascade beginning with enterokinase produced by the duodenum to activate trypsinogen to trypsin, and trypsin will activate the other pancreatic peptidases. Importantly, the duodenum also contributes several digestive enzymes such as disaccharidases and dipeptidase. The disaccharidases include maltase, lactase, and sucrase. Maltase cleaves the glycosidic bond in maltose, producing two glucose monomers, lactase cleaves the glycosidic bond in lactose, producing glucose and galactose, and sucrase cleaves the glycosidic bond in sucrose, producing glucose and fructose. Dipeptidase cleaves the peptide bond in dipeptides. At this point, the mouth, stomach, and small intestine have broken down fat in the form of triglycerides to fatty acids and monoacylglycerol, carbohydrate in the form of starch and disaccharides to monosaccharides, and large proteins into amino acids and oligopeptides. Thus, the digestive process has converted macronutrients into forms that are absorbable into the bloodstream for bodily use.