Treatment can be divided into conservative, medical and invasive therapies, which can be further subdivided into percutaneous or open surgical techniques.

**Conservative and Medical Treatment**

Conservative treatment is the preferred option for asymptomatic, incidentally picked up Tarlov cysts.

Medical therapy is generally analgesics, such as paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs), opiates, anti-depressants such as amitriptyline, and anticonvulsants such as pregabalin and gabapentin.

Caudal epidural steroid injections have been described as a treatment with good effect for patients with bladder pain syndrome type symptoms and incidental Tarlov cysts.

**Percutaneous Therapies**

The cyst can be aspirated, or through a newer two-needle technique, the cyst can be aspirated and injected with fibrin glue to reduce the dead space and reaccumulation of CSF.

The aspiration-injection technique will have a needle deep in the cyst and a superficial second needle to allow fluid to be aspirated from the deep needle and allow air to enter through the superficial needle.

The air-fluid level that develops can be monitored using CT fluoroscopy, or alternative, an iodinated contrast agent that would allow visualization through an image intensifier. However, the agent would fill up and reduce the effectiveness of the injected fibrin glue.

Once communication with the thecal sac is established by rapid refilling of the cyst, a fibrin glue such as Tisseel is used to plug the cyst.

**Open Surgical Techniques**

**Microsurgical**

This option includes cyst excision or fenestration with subsequent imbrication and dural repair. The repair is often then covered with a patch and/or Tisseal to reduce the incidence of CSF leak.**Radical Techniques**

Decompressive laminectomy is less often practiced, but single-level laminectomies can be offered. A keystone article identified that 7 out of 10 patients that received treatment had complete or substantial resolution with follow-up on average of over two years. The authors noted that cysts above 1.5cm correlated with better outcomes, but this has been shown to not be statistically significant in meta-analysis in recent publications.

Shunting - This can include lumbo-peritoneal or cyst-subarachnoid shunts.

**Complications of Invasive Treatment**

Surgery is associated with higher complication rates compared to percutaneous procedures.

Specific complications include

- Surgical site infection

- CSF leak and pseudomeningocele - usually due to inadequate closure of the dura (iatrogenic durotomy)

- Worsening or new bladder dysfunction

- Failure of treatment - in the form of recurrence of symptoms or cyst