Acupuncture has gained popularity as an adjunct to conventional allopathic medical treatments and is offered even at prestigious academic medical centers. However, despite numerous studies, the mechanism for how acupuncture might be functional physiologically is yet to be determined. Hypotheses include that the stimulation influences inflammatory markers induces hormonal changes, or even that the pressure itself manipulates loose connective tissue that causes immunomodulation. It is theorized that analgesia results as well from the release of natural opioids at both spinal or supraspinal levels. Functional MRI has shown physiologic changes in the central nervous system while undergoing acupuncture.

Complementary and alternative medicine modalities are often not candidates for randomized controlled trials, which are the foundation of evidence-based medical practices in the United States. Acupuncture is no exception. To perform control acupuncture or “sham” is complicated and mostly relies on non-penetrating needles or the placement of needles at non-acupuncture points.  Another limitation is that acupuncture is an individualized treatment, which makes standardization for a study difficult. Therefore, acupuncturists often do not feel they can adequately treat patients if they are mandated to perform specific points or techniques for the sake of variable control. Methods vary as well by school and style, which have variability as to the locations themselves, the manipulation manner, length of treatment, and the desired response from the patient. Lastly, the theory of health and disease for this modality is not based on Western traditional medical philosophy, which makes the characterization of disease and treatment itself a limiting factor. All of these dynamics intertwine to make it difficult to prove or disprove the efficacy of acupuncture according to Western evidence-based medicine standards.

It is questionable if acupuncture is clinically superior when compared to sham acupuncture.  However, this does not take into the fact both acupuncture and sham are both effective in the reduction of symptoms and improving the function of patients with back pain, headaches, knee pain, and hot flashes.  Both therapies are superior to no treatment at all

**Conditions**

**Low Back Pain**

Pain is one of the most common reasons for people to seek acupuncture treatment.

Low back pain is a ubiquitous problem in the United States with a prevalence of 22% to 48% of the adult population; often, it is refractory to conventional medical treatment. Studies have demonstrated that acupuncture treatment improves functional status and reduced low back pain. Six different randomized control trials focusing on chronic low back pain did show a small benefit to the use of acupuncture in both 1, 3, and 6-month follow-ups

**Osteoarthritis**

Osteoarthritis is also a ubiquitous problem in the United States. Acupuncture, sham, was shown in one study to be more effective than exercise and equal to medical therapy. However, real acupuncture showed no significant benefit. Further studies also showed acupunctures effectiveness in addition to physical therapy, medical management, and exercise.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

Acupuncture does not have any effect on inflammatory markers in rheumatoid arthritis or to reduce myalgia, disease activity, or the use of medications.

**Migraine**

Migraine headaches can cause significant morbidity and are often resistant to pharmaceutical treatment alone. Acupuncture has been shown to reduce headache frequency moderately and to create a small reduction in headache intensity. One study demonstrated a more significant decrease in migraine frequency than prophylactic pharmaceutical treatment. Overall, acupuncture also resulted in fewer adverse effects relative to pharmaceutical therapy

**Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting (PONV)**

Overall, acupuncture is considered as valid as antiemetics for the treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting. The P6 acupoint on the wrist has been identified as the location for this effect.  The antiemetic effect is considered less effective for chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting, but some studies have shown efficacy for this as well.

A thorough Pubmed review will reveal a plethora of studies on the use of acupuncture with many medical conditions and diseases. However, the vast majority have not shown sufficient evidence of efficacy. The requirements outlined above have been examined most closely in regards to the effectiveness of acupuncture.

Even if truly useful, the effects of acupuncture are limited. Acupuncture is often not covered by Medicare or Medicaid or other large, health insurance companies, and thus, represents an added out-of-pocket expense to the patient. However, the risks of this treatment modality are relatively low and, therefore, may be considered an option in the treatment of many refractory and debilitating medical conditions.

Although acupuncture has been commonly used to treat chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting as well as pain control in patients with cancer, the efficacy is lacking, and the studies that have been done are poor quality

**Other Conditions**

Multiple studies have shown the use of acupuncture for pregnancy-induced nausea

Acupuncture has also been used to treat lateral epicondyle tendinopathy.  However, there were mixed results on its efficacy

A meta-analysis of over ten trials shows that acupuncture can help improve patients suffering from cancer-related fatigue