To diagnose hypercoagulability syndromes, the combination of screening tests, confirmation tests, and risk factors all must merit consideration.

Moll et al. suggest the "4P" approach, which is patient selection, pretest counseling, proper laboratory test interpretation, and provision of education and advice. Additionally, they created a risk of recurrence triangle to decide based on risk assessment, how long it would take to achieve anticoagulation. Not every patient requires testing for thrombophilia. Testing is not advisable during the acute thrombotic event (rather schedule for 3-month follow-up) while being on anticoagulation, and patients with provoked thromboembolism.

In patients with a history that brings up suspicion for APS (female, young age, recurrent VTE or fetal loss) unexplained PTT may prompt investigation for APS which are Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing for antiphospholipid antibodies, the diluted Russell venom viper test (dRVVT) and PTT-LA.

As DVT and PE occur in up to 20% of patients with undetected cancer and unexplained VTE in older patients should prompt work-up for malignancy. Screening for cancer includes routine (history and physical examination, ESR, CBC, liver and kidney function tests, urinalysis, and CXR) or extended investigations (tumor markers, CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, mammography in women more than 40 years old, and prostate ultrasound in men older than 50 years, lower endoscopy, Papanicolaou smear, and fecal occult blood test).

Up to 4% of strokes are due to coagulation disorders. The incidence of stroke in young adults is increasing gradually. In patients with hypercoagulability syndromes, there is an increased risk of venous thrombosis than ischemic stroke. In some instances, venous thrombosis can also give rise to arterial strokes by paradoxical embolism, commonly through patent foramen ovale. So, young adults with stroke and a right to left shunt should be checked for venous thrombosis like deep vein thrombosis by ultrasound of lower extremities. The Homocystinuria and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome associated with arterial strokes. Stroke is the most common arterial event secondary to antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Any stroke patient younger than 45 should be screened for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.