In considering metabolic demand and nutritional states in the human body absorptive (fed), postabsorptive (fasting), and starvation, starvation increases gluconeogenesis and proteolysis. In contrast, metabolic substrates, including vitamins and intracellular electrolytes, are depleted.

Phosphorus serves as a critical component of energy storage in humans and is required to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP). As the body continues to experience starvation, existing phosphorous stores are depleted to sustain metabolic activity leading to hypophosphatemia, widely observed in patients with refeeding syndrome. In refeeding syndrome, long-term starvation may have already depleted the body of phosphorous stores. This is often worsened by increasing amounts of insulin, similar to the physiology of potassium. Physiologically, phosphorous also plays a vital role in the maintenance of cardiac conduction.

Hypomagnesemia is also observed in refeeding syndrome; however, its mechanism of involvement in refeeding syndrome is less understood.

Due to cardiac fatalities being directly tied to electrolyte abnormalities, it is important to understand that both hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia may equally contribute to torsades de pointes, a potentially fatal polymorphic ventricular tachycardia associated with QT prolongation.

Thiamine deficiency is another characteristic of refeeding syndrome. Thiamine is an important cofactor for the metabolism of glucose and the conversion of lactate to pyruvate. When the body is replenished following starvation, thiamine requirements increase, and lactate levels can accumulate.

**Summary of Pathophysiology and Associated Clinical Changes 
**

**Electrolyte or Vitamin**

**Pathophysiology in Refeeding Syndrome**

**Clinical Consequence**

**Potassium**

Increased insulin following rising glucose levels after nutritional replenishment drives potassium intracellularly

Cardiac arrhythmias, QT prolongation weakness, fatigue, paralysis, respiratory distress

**Phosphorus**

Body phosphorus stores are depleted in starvation; insulin also rises drive phosphorus intracellularly.

Cardiac arrhythmias, decreased 2,3 DPG production, decreased respiratory muscle function

**Magnesium**

Poorly understood pathophysiology; may exacerbate other electrolyte deficiencies such as hypokalemia

Ataxia, vertigo, paresthesia, convulsions, depression, QT prolongation

**Thiamine**

Thiamine is utilized in the metabolism of glucose and conversion of lactate to pyruvate; nutritional replenishment can increase thiamine requirements.

Cardiac dysfunction, Wernicke’s and Korsakoff syndrome