HSV grows readily in cell culture. Special transport media are available that allow transport to local or regional laboratories for culture. Cytopathogenic effects typical of HSV infection usually are observed 1 to 3 days after inoculation. Methods of culture confirmation include fluorescent antibody staining, enzyme immunoassays (EIAs), and monolayer culture with typing. Cultures that remain negative by day five likely will continue to remain negative.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay often can detect HSV DNA in CSF from neonates with CNS infection (neonatal HSV CNS disease) and from older children and adults with HSE and is the diagnostic method of choice for CNS HSV involvement. PCR may also be used to try to diagnose HSV from skin lesions.  PCR assay of CSF can yield negative results in cases of HSE, however, especially early in the disease course. In difficult cases in which repeated, CSF PCR assay results are negative, histologic examination and viral culture of a brain tissue biopsy specimen is the most definitive method of confirming the diagnosis of HSE. Detection of intrathecal antibody against HSV also can assist in the diagnosis. Viral cultures of CSF from a patient with HSE usually are negative.

To diagnose neonatal HSV infection, the following specimens should be obtained:

- Swab specimens from the mouth, nasopharynx, conjunctivae, and anus (“surface cultures”) for HSV culture and, if desired, for HSV PCR assay;

- Specimens of skin vesicles for HSV culture and, if desired, for PCR assay;

- CSF sample for HSV PCR assay;

- Whole blood sample for HSV PCR assay; and

- Whole blood sample for measuring alanine aminotransferase (ALT).

Positive cultures obtained from any of the surface sites more than 12 to 24 hours after birth indicate viral replication and are, therefore, suggestive of infant infection rather than merely contamination after intrapartum exposure.