A target calyx is selected using either ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance or both. Intravenous or retrograde contrast through a ureteral catheter can be used to help visualize the internal renal anatomy fluoroscopically.

Skin entry point selection is based on the renal anatomy, underlying problem and whether or not other associated procedures, such as PCNL, are being planned.  In general, the entry point should be below the 12th rib to minimize pleural and diaphragmatic trauma.  If too medial a site is chosen, the patient will likely suffer more pain as the paraspinal muscles will tend to kink the nephrostomy tube and make supine positioning more uncomfortable.  Too lateral an access site will increase the chances for accidental trauma to the colon.

A posterior calyx is usually preferred for entry as this will utilize Brodel's line to minimize bleeding. Access through an infundibulum or renal pelvis is discouraged as it increases the risk of a vascular injury.

When PCNL is anticipated, discussion with urology is recommended to optimize placement for stone fragmentation and removal.  The planned PCN approach should allow direct access to the area of largest stone burden with rigid instruments if possible, as this will greatly facilitate later stone fragmentation and removal by urology.  Upper pole access is recommended for complex lower pole stones, calculi in horseshoe kidneys, complete staghorn stones and large proximal ureteral stones.  If an intercostal approach (above the 12th rib) is used, a chest x-ray following the procedure is recommended

The most commonly performed technique for needle insertion is the "eye of the needle" approach.  This uses the C-arm or fluoro placed so that the needle is parralel and pointed directly at the target calyx or stone.  Depth of penetration is determined by rotation or angulation of the x-ray unit.

A one-stick or two-stick technique can be used.  Typically, for PCNL, there is an existing, radio-opaque stone that can be used as a target allowing the one-stick technique.  In the two-stick method, the first needle puncture is used only to opacify the collecting system with contrast so that the final or definitive stick with another needle can be optimally directed.  Since the first stick is just for opacification, a smaller needle is suggested and it can be targeted directly at the renal pelvis.  A small amount of air or carbon dioxide can be injected into the renal pelvis to help visualize the posterior calyces as the gas will preferentially fill them in prone patients providing an obvious target.

A needle (usually 18-gauge or 21-gauge size) is inserted followed by aspiration of renal pelvis urine, contrast (optional) and a guidewire. If a renal stone is present, the needle can be targeted directly to the calculus. An 18-gauge needle can easily transmit a 0.035-inch guidewire. If a 21 gauge needle is used, then a transitional dilator is used to allow for a 0.035-inch guidewire to be passed.  18 gauge needles tuypically track straighter, pass easier through soft tissue and are better visualized using ultrasound   They also do not need further dilation to pass a 0.035-inch guide wire. No increase in significant bleeding complications was noted between 18-gauge and 21-gauge needles when used for PCN access.

The guidewire is directed to achieve stable purchase, ideally in the ureter, but sometimes out of necessity to a different calyx or the renal pelvis. An angled catheter may be used to redirect the guidewire. When the guidewire position is settled upon, sequential, transitional dilators (Amplatz) or a balloon dilator are used to open the track for the eventual nephrostomy catheter, which usually starts at about 8 French.  Transurethrally placed double J stents are usually only 6 or 7 French but they can go up to a maximum of 8 French.