The overall goals in the treatment of PHP are to maintain normal calcium and normal phosphorus, avoid hypercalciuria and lower PTH levels to normal if possible. It is typically not possible to achieve all electrolyte and hormone level goals; however, getting them as close as possible is recommended.

Calcium and phosphorus goals are usually attainable with the administration of calcitriol (active vitamin D metabolite) with or without calcium supplementation. Dosing is adjusted so that calcium remains at the low end of the normal range. In addition to checking serum calcium, 24-hour urine calcium levels should be maintained in the low to mid-normal range to avoid renal calculi and impaired kidney function.

In patients with persistent hypocalcemia, treatment with calcium supplementation is a requirement.

In the acute setting, the recommendation is for intravenous calcium Patients who are symptomatic (spasms, seizure, etc.), those with prolonged QT interval on electrocardiogram, or if corrected calcium is less than 7.5mg/dL, and the patient is considered to be at high risk should receive IV calcium infusion. Initially, 1 to 2 g of calcium gluconate administration should be over a 10 to 20-minute interval followed by a slow infusion of calcium. The slow infusion can be achieved by diluting 1000 mg elemental calcium into 1 L of 5% dextrose or normal saline and running at a rate of around 1 cc/kg/hr. Oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation should start as soon as possible. Oral calcium carbonate 2-8g elemental calcium/day and oral calcitriol 0.25 to 1.0 mcg twice a day are usually sufficient doses and allow calcium infusion to stop within a few hours.

These patients will require permanent active vitamin D supplementation with or without calcium. Calcitriol 0.25 to 1.0 mcg/day should be used (not other forms of vitamin D due to decreased 1 alpha-hydroxylase activity, which converts vitamin D to an active form). Calcium carbonate or calcium citrate should be given 2 to 8 g elemental calcium daily in divided doses to keep calcium at the low end of normal.

PTH levels require monitoring during treatment with the goal of reduction into the normal range or as close as possible. Lowering PTH attempts to minimize skeletal resorption and later development of osteoporosis.

Treatment with parathyroid hormone or parathyroid hormone analogs is not recommended.