MEN1 is a complex syndrome that increases morbidity and mortality by causing multiple aggressive tumors. An interprofessional team should manage these patients in a tertiary care center, including an endocrinologist, endocrine surgeon, gastroenterologist, neurosurgeon, genetic counselor, nursing staff, pharmacist, and patient navigator or advocate for achieving better outcomes.

Clinicians will determine the therapeutic path to be followed and consult with other specialists as the case dictates. Oncology specialized pharmacists can play a crucial role in chemotherapy regimens, checking for appropriate dosing, performing medication reconciliation, and being available for other team members to answer questions about the most effective agents. They can also counsel the patient regarding adverse effects and answer patient questions. Nurses will administer these agents and need to communicate with the ordering clinician and the pharmacist regarding appropriate dosing and administration. Nurses will also play a critical role in surgical management, prepping the patient, assisting during the procedure, and providing post-operative care while keeping clinicians updated on the patient's status.

Everyone on the interprofessional team must maintain meticulous records regarding all patient interventions and interactions so that everyone involved in care can access the same updated data. This interprofessional approach will yield the best patient outcomes with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5]