**Advantages of FNA over other Modalities**

- Cost-effective (declines with inconclusive results/need for repeat biopsies)

- Less invasive/less painful secondary to smaller needle size

- Can be performed in the clinic or office

- Appropriate for patients who are being anticoagulated with low risk of hematoma/bleeding

- Can be used to sample axillary tissue

**Disadvantages**

Lower diagnostic yield than core needle biopsy

- Four percent to 13% of samples found to be inadequate or nondiagnostic

- More difficult to distinguish invasive versus in-situ carcinoma

- May require more experienced cytopathologist for diagnosis

- Non-diagnostic results necessitate repeat biopsy (typically CNB or vacuum-assisted)

**Accuracy**

Certain studies have cited the sensitivity of aspiration cytology for malignancy at 64% for one aspiration sample and 91% in patients with three samples. Specificity was 56% (inadequate or unsatisfactory cytological preparations.

**Follow-up**

If the FNA reveals a non-bloody aspirate and the cyst resolves, no more follow up is required. Some physicians do follow up with an ultrasound to ensure that the cyst has completely resolved. Re-evaluation is usually done 4 to 6 weeks later.

If the cyst persists after aspiration or contains bloody fluid, the patient should be referred to a surgeon for a formal biopsy.

Conservative management is recommended for patients in whom the clinical, sonography findings and aspiration features are pertinent with the diagnosis of galactocele. Therefore, repeated aspiration or surgical management excision is only indicated if the galactocele is bothersome to the mother. Characteristic features of a mass that is hypoechoic, compressable, wider more than tall, with thin echogenic walls, heterogeneous contents with fluid clefts, and without any solid components, are pertinent with galactocele. Fine-needle aspirations usually reveal a thick, creamy material with a dark green tinge.