The presentation of the hydatiform mole is somewhat different in a complete mole versus a partial mole. In fact, most partial moles are diagnosed as spontaneous abortions that are later discovered after a pathology report is obtained from the fetal tissue.

Since the advent of ultrasonography, the diagnosis of complete molar pregnancies has increased in the early stages of pregnancy, mainly during the first trimester. The most common symptom (in one study as high as 84% of patients) of a complete mole is vaginal bleeding in the first trimester, which is normally due to the molar tissue separating from the decidua, resulting in bleeding. The typical buzzword appearance of vaginal bleeding is described as a "prune juice" appearance. This is secondary to the accumulated blood products in the uterine cavity and resultant oxidation and liquefaction of that blood. Another symptom of a complete molar pregnancy is hyperemesis (severe nausea and vomiting), which is due to the high level of the hCG hormone circulating in the bloodstream. Some patients also endorse passage of vaginal tissue described as grape-like clusters or vesicles. Late findings of the disease (after the first trimester around 14 to 16 weeks of pregnancy) including signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, including tachycardia and tremors, again caused by the high levels of circulating hCG. Other late sequelae are pre-eclampsia, which is pregnancy-induced hypertension and proteinuria and/or end-organ dysfunction occurring typically after 34 weeks of pregnancy. When a patient less than 20 weeks pregnant presents with signs and symptoms of pre-eclampsia, a complete molar pregnancy should highly be suspected. In very advanced cases, patients present with severe respiratory distress possible from embolism of the trophoblastic tissue into the lungs.

The presentation of a partial hydatiform mole is usually less dramatic than that of a complete mole. These patients typically present as described before with symptoms similar to a threatened or spontaneous abortion, including vaginal bleeding. Since partial hydatiform moles have fetal tissue, on examination, these patients may have fetal heart tones evident on Doppler.

On physical exam, in more than 50% of cases, uterine size discrepancy and date discrepancy usually takes place. In a complete mole, the uterus is usually larger than the expected gestational date of the pregnancy, whereas, in partial moles, the uterus can be smaller than the suggested date.