Shoulder external impingement should be recognized as a clinical entity that is separate from internal impingement. The most basic clinical differentiation between the former and the latter is defined by the rotator cuff as the anatomic boundary of the external and internal forms. The latter occurs secondary to a repetitive impingement in overhead throwers or manual laborers and constitutes articular-sided rotator cuff pathology, glenohumeral internal rotation deficit (GIRD), and superior labrum anterior posterior (SLAP) tears.

External impingement, often commonly referred to by clinicians and providers as shoulder impingement, is best described as a painful condition of the shoulder that results from the inflammation, irritation, and degradation of the anatomic structures within the subacromial space.

Its anatomic borders define the subacromial space. The acromion and coracoacromial ligament provide the anterior border, the acromioclavicular (AC) joint acts as the superior border, and the humeral head serves as the inferior border.

- Class I: Flat acromion

- Class II: Curved acromion

- Class III: Hooked acromion

During the actions of shoulder abduction, forward flexion, and internal rotation, normal shoulder girdle movement results in narrowing of the subacromial space. This subacromial space, which is normally 1.0 to 1.5 cm in width, narrows with the superior migration of the humeral head, allowing it to approach the anteroinferior edge of the acromion.

Repetitive pathologic compression, degeneration, and fraying of the rotator cuff tendons are known to contribute to the narrowing of the subacromial space, but it is unknown whether or not the inflamed and damaged tendons cause impingement, or if the narrowed subacromial space causes the tendon inflammation.

Shoulder impingement syndrome can be described according to either the location of the impingement, characterized as external or internal, and/or the underlying cause of the impingement, referred to as primary or secondary impingement.

In primary impingement, there is a structural narrowing of the subacromial space. Examples of primary shoulder impingement syndrome include those attributable to abnormal acromion anatomy, such as a hooked class III acromion, or swelling of the soft tissues. Secondary shoulder impingement syndrome is characterized by normal anatomy at rest and onset of impingement during shoulder motion, likely secondary to rotator cuff weakness, permitting uncontrolled cranial translation of the humeral head.

Neer classified shoulder impingement in three categories or stages of severity. In stage I, impingement primarily results from edema, hemorrhage, or both and is classically seen with overuse-type mechanisms. Stage II is characterized by greater fibrosis and irreversible tendon changes. A rupture or tear of the tendon may result from chronic, longstanding fibrosis and is seen in stage III shoulder impingement syndrome.