Patients should undergo a necessary basic metabolic panel (electrolytes, glucose, BUN, hepatic function test) and a complete blood count. An initial hormonal evaluation is essential. Staging should include a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scan of the pelvis and abdomen and a CT of the chest. Another clinical suspicion should think another imaging test (e.g., bone scan for skeletal metastasis).

**Biochemistry**

Biochemical evaluation of the blood and urine includes measuring levels of cortisol, mineralocorticoids, androgens, and estrogens.

The European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumors (ENSAT) suggests a pre-operative hormonal workup for the investigation of a possible ACC (www.ensat.org). In particular, recommendations include the assessment of basal cortisol, ACTH, DHEAS, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, testosterone, androstenedione, and estradiol as well as a dexamethasone suppression test and urinary free cortisol. Recently, it seems more evident that some ACC, previously considered as non-secreting, may also secrete some urine steroid metabolites.

Blood levels of hormones or hormonal symptoms in patients with adrenocortical carcinoma do not bear any correlation to the size of the tumor. In addition to steroidal hormone measurements, it is recommended to exclude a pheochromocytoma when no steroid hormone production is evident.

Pheochromocytoma is measured by measuring 24-hour urine or plasma metanephrine and normetanephrine.

**Imaging**

An adrenal incidentaloma is an unsuspected adrenal mass discovered on cross-sectional imaging performed for another reason.

However, a small percentage of small lesions (less than 4 cm) may also be malignant.

Adrenocortical carcinoma tends to vary in appearance with frequent heterogeneous enhancement because of internal hemorrhage, necrosis, and calcification. Imaging may also reveal metastases to the lung, lymph nodes, or liver. Extension into the renal vein and/or inferior vena cava or adjacent organs may also present.

All patients with ACC must undergo a chest CT scan to detect pulmonary metastases before surgery.  Currently, no single imaging method can characterize a localized adrenal mass as ACC. Regarding traditional imaging, an abdominal CT scan is mandatory if there is suspicion of ACC: many studies have established a threshold of <10 or equal Hounsfield Unit (HU) in unenhanced CT for the diagnosis of a benign lesion. Adrenocortical carcinomas that contain macroscopic fat or areas of intracellular lipid can have greater than 10 HU in portions of the tumor.

In a case with an adrenal mass with a density that is >10UH, the contrast media washout can be used to discriminate the benign adrenal lesions from the ACC.  Absolute adrenal washout is calculated using the density value of an adrenal mass on a non-contrast (non-enhanced) CT, a contrast-enhanced scan with a delay of 60-90 sec (portal venous phase) and a delayed scan at 15 minutes non-enhanced, measured in HU.

- Absolute Adrenal washout

- [Enahanced CT (HU ) - Delayed CT (HU)] / [Enahanced CT (HU ) - Unenhanced CT (HU )] x 100

An absolute adrenal washout over 50% suggests a benign adrenal lesion.

When the CT scan cannot perfectly characterize the adrenal lesion, and there is suspicion of ACC, three major signs on the MRI are useful to confirm ACC: the presence of isointense to hypointense signal on T1-weighted images, a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images and a heterogeneous signal drop on chemical shift.

Positron emission tomography (PET) with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and [11C]metomidate (MTO) or [123I]MTO are useful to confirm the diagnosis of a malignant lesion or establish a tumor of adrenocortical origin. ACC typically presents as a heterogeneous and large mass with intense FDG uptake greater than the liver background. In a study of 77 patients with surgically proven diagnosis of ACA or ACC, [18F]FDG PET/CT could reliably distinguish malignant from benign lesions with a cutoff value greater than 1.45 for adrenal to liver maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) (sensitivity; 100% and specificity; 88%). In the same study with a cutoff value of 3.4 for maximum adrenal SUV, the sensitivity was 100%, and specificity was 70%.

In recent years, a new tracer, metomidate ([11C]MTO) has proven useful to determine the adrenocortical origin because it specifically binds to adrenocortical CP450 11B (CYP11B) enzymes, which catalyze the final steps of steroid synthesis.