**Diagnosing Acute Appendicitis**

When evaluating a patient with suspected acute appendicitis, the medical history, physical examination, laboratory findings, and pertinent diagnostic imaging should be holistically reviewed. Several scoring systems have been designed using these diagnostic pillars to aid in timely decision-making and select the patient population requiring appendectomy. The Alvarado scoring system is a practical tool used to diagnose acute appendicitis and can help reduce the incidence of unnecessary surgery. Still, it is not considered a highly-sensitive measure and should not be used in isolation.

Appendectomy is indicated in several circumstances; the specific considerations for commonly encountered clinical situations are briefly discussed below.

**Uncomplicated Appendicitis**

Appendectomy is indicated in patients with a history, physical examination, and laboratory and imaging findings consistent with acute uncomplicated appendicitis. Uncomplicated or simple appendicitis is defined as an inflamed appendix without evidence of necrosis or perforation.

The efficacy of antibiotics as the primary treatment for acute uncomplicated appendicitis has been extensively researched, yielding mixed and contradictory results and conclusions.

Although the Comparison of Outcomes of Antibiotic Drugs and Appendectomy (CODA) trial offers the option of using antibiotics alone to manage acute appendicitis, it is imperative to exercise caution when considering this approach. Several outcomes of this approach remain uncertain, including the potential of missed malignancies, cases of recurrent appendicitis, and the long-term efficacy of this method.

The Prospective Observational Study on Acute Appendicitis Worldwide (POSAW), an international collaborative study, has confirmed that surgical management remains the main effective option for treating appendicitis.

**Complicated Appendicitis**

Complicated appendicitis is characterized by a peri-appendiceal abscess or phlegmon.

One of two approaches is used in treating complicated appendicitis, operative or nonoperative. The operative approach is an immediate surgical procedure, and the nonoperative approach is initial conservative management followed by a surgical procedure.

The effectiveness of immediate versus delayed appendectomy in managing complicated appendicitis remains unclear. The evidence suggests that immediate open procedures may lead to a longer hospital stay and more time away from regular activities; the quality of this evidence is very low. Similarly, the evidence supporting improved health-related quality of life following immediate laparoscopic appendectomy is of very low quality. Therefore, the limited data makes it impossible to determine whether early or delayed appendectomy has significant benefits or harms.

Immediate surgery should be avoided in patients with phlegmon, abscesses, or prolonged symptoms, as these patients will likely have significant inflammation and dense adhesions, which are associated with higher morbidity.

An emergent appendectomy may be required in cases of perforated appendicitis if there is resulting sepsis or instability, as a rescue appendectomy if initial nonoperative management with antibiotics or percutaneous drainage failed, or immediately if the appendiceal abscess is small or if the abscess is large and inaccessible for percutaneous drainage.

Subcategorizing complicated appendicitis into the following stages can assist with management decisions: gangrenous nonperforated appendicitis, perforated appendicitis with local contamination, perforated appendicitis with periappendiceal phlegmon or abscess, and perforated appendicitis with generalized peritonitis.

Laparoscopic appendectomy is indicated in gangrenous non-perforated appendicitis and perforated appendicitis with local contamination.

**Acute Appendicitis in Patients with Crohn Disease**

Patients with Crohn disease are at significant risk of entero-enteric fistulas. However, less than 2% of all patients presenting with acute appendicitis are later diagnosed with Crohn disease. Therefore, in patients with an established diagnosis of Crohn disease without cecal involvement and evidence of acute appendicitis, appendectomy is indicated.

**Appendiceal Neoplasms**

Appendiceal neoplasms are present in approximately 1% of all appendectomy specimens. However, the exact incidence of these neoplasms is unknown. The classification of appendiceal neoplasms can be complicated, but they typically are classified into four subtypes: colonic-type adenocarcinoma, mucinous neoplasm, goblet cell carcinoma, and neuroendocrine neoplasms.

It is crucial to note that any appendiceal tumor can present as acute appendicitis, making the preoperative diagnosis uncertain. Therefore, the definitive histopathological diagnosis, classification, and the need for additional therapies and surgeries are determined only after the appendectomy. The indications for appendectomy remain similar to non-neoplastic conditions and should be decided according to the physical examination, laboratory, and imaging findings present at the initial presentation.