**An Interprofessional Approach at Domestic Violence**

- Healthcare professionals should document all findings and recommendations in the medical record, including statements made denying abuse

- If domestic violence is admitted, documentation should include the history, physical examination findings, laboratory and radiographic finds, any interventions, and the referrals made.

- If there are significant findings that can be recorded, pictures should be included.

- The medical record may become a court document, so it is critical to be both objective and accurate.

- Healthcare professionals should provide a follow-up appointment.

- Reassurance that additional assistance is available at any time is critical to protect the patient from harm and break the cycle of abuse.

**Reporting**

In cases of acute injury or emergency, contact local law enforcement.

- A 24-hour toll-free domestic violence hotline is available for counseling and information at 800-500-1119. The counselors will refer the victim to a local domestic violence center.

- Florida has several domestic violence centers that will provide referral services, counseling, a 24-hour hotline, emergency shelter, educational services, assessment and referral of parents with children, and local training of law enforcement personnel.

- If child abuse is suspected, contact the Children and Family Services, Department of Social Services, or National Child Abuse Hotline: 1-800-4-A-Child.

- Healthcare professionals play a crucial role in the screening, identification, and reporting of child abuse. Using screening tools in clinical practice can increase the odds that child abuse will be identified.

**Obstacles to Reporting
**

- Attitudes of clinicians

- Belief of unreasonable intrusion

- Concern over being sued for reporting

- Concern over violating privacy

**Legal Considerations
**

It is important to be aware of federal and state statutes governing domestic and family abuse. Remember that reporting domestic and family violence to law enforcement does not obviate detailed documentation in the medical record.

- Failure report child abuse is illegal in most states.

- Failure to report intimate partner and elder abuse is illegal in many states.

- Battering is a crime, and the patient should be made aware that help is available. If the patient wants legal help, the local police should be called.

- In some jurisdictions, domestic violence reporting is mandated. The legal obligation to report abuse should be explained to the patient.

- The patient should be informed how local authorities typically respond to such reports and provide follow-up procedures. Address the risk of reprisal, need for shelter, and possibly an emergency protective order (available in every state and the District of Columbia).

- If there is a possibility the patient’s safety will be jeopardized, the clinician should work with the patient and authorities to best protect the patient while meeting legal reporting obligations.

- The clinical role in managing an abused patient goes beyond obeying the laws that mandate reporting; there is a primary obligation to protect the life of the patient.

- The clinician must help mitigate the potential harm that results from reporting, to provide appropriate ongoing care and preserve the safety of the patient.

- The health professional should remain during the interview if it is desired by the patient and is acceptable to the police.

- The medical record should reflect the incident as described by the patient and any physical exam findings. Include the date and time the report was taken and the officer's name and badge number.