**Prevention**

Preventive measures constitute a major component of the management of hepatitis B. As of 2019, hepatitis B vaccines available in the United States are categorized into either single-antigen hepatitis B vaccines or combination vaccines.

**Management**

Acute hepatitis B infection is self cleared in 95% of healthy adults. Management is supportive in a majority of patients. Patients with severe acute disease (2 of the 3: bilirubin more than 10 mg/dl, INR more than 1.6 and hepatic encephalopathy) and protracted acute severe disease (total bilirubin more than 3 mg/dl or direct bilirubin more than 1.5 mg/dl, INR more than 1.5, hepatic encephalopathy, or ascites) need antiviral treatment.

Management of chronic hepatitis B should include identification of HIV, hepatitis C, and hepatitis D coinfection, hepatitis B virus replication status, and severity of the disease.

FDA-approved medications for chronic hepatitis B include interferons (peginterferon alfa-2a, interferon alfa-2b), nucleoside analogs (entecavir, lamivudine, telbivudine), and nucleotide analogs (adefovir, tenofovir). Entecavir and tenofovir are preferred for acute HBV infection if treatment is warranted, due to their relatively higher barrier to resistance. Entecavir combination drugs have been developed. However, a 2018 meta-analysis based on 24 studies involved with entecavir polytherapy vs entecavir monotherapy determined that entecavir combination drugs were no more effective than entecavir monotherapy.

The counseling of patients on the prevention of transmission is extremely valuable. Lifestyle modifications include reducing intake of agents with potential for liver damage such as alcohol, hepatotoxic medications, herbal medications, and herbal supplements.

The goals of antiviral therapy are:

- Suppression of hepatitis B virus replication

- Reduction of liver inflammation

- Prevention of progression to liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma

Appropriate treatment response is indicated by the following findings:

- Blood tests: normalization of ALT

- Undetectable hepatitis B viral DNA

- Loss of HBsAg and HBeAg with seroconversion to anti-HBs and anti-HBe

- Reduced inflammation on liver biopsy with no worsening of fibrosis

Surgical intervention for hepatitis B is only indicated for fulminant liver disease requiring transplantation.