**Thermoregulation in Neonates**

Neonates are susceptible to hypothermia in the operating room for a couple of reasons. First, premature infants have less brown fat and, therefore, less thermogenesis. Second, neonates are so small that a proportionally more substantial percentage of skin gets exposed in the operative field during most surgeries. Third, general anesthesia inhibits central thermoregulation by interfering with hypothalamic function. It is common for core temperature to drop by 1 to 2 degrees Celsius in the first hour of anesthesia (via convection, radiation, evaporation, and redistribution).

To prevent heat loss in neonates, it is common to warm ORs to 78 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit before patient arrival.  It is also common to use underbody forced-air warmers (set to 38 or 43 degrees Celsius), transwarmers, and warming lights. Hats should also be used to prevent heat loss when the head is not in the surgical field. If available, warm humidification of the ventilator circuit can also help keep neonates warm.  All fluids on the surgical field should be warmed to body temperature, and all blood products transfused with a fluid warmer.  Minimal exposure during transport to and from the ORs with a hat and transwarmer is also common. Isolettes should be plugged in and kept warm in preparation for transport.

**Glucose Management**

Neonates and preterm infants are at risk for impaired glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.

**Positioning**

Neonates have thin skin and relatively little fat stores, thus making positioning and re-checking of position very important. Neonates have soft, flexible skulls (intended for easier passage through the birth canal), which can mold and flatten or take the shape of whatever surface on which they are resting. It is particularly crucial to pay close attention to neonates being placed on a gel horseshoe or other gel headrest, as this can cause pressure necrosis and hair loss in addition to a milder molding/misshapen head problem.

Because of their small size, once neonates are prepped and draped for surgery, going under the drapes to check or fix something will likely interrupt your surgical colleagues and may break the sterile field. Therefore, communication and thoughtful planning, and knowledge of where you have placed lines and monitors are vitally important; this is especially true if there will be a need for intraoperative lab draws for arterial blood gases or glucose checks from a finger.

**Intubation and Airway Management**

There is emerging evidence that infants less than 1 year of age are more at risk for hypoxia and desaturation during intubation attempts than older kids. Unpublished data from The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia indicates that up to 20% of babies under 6 months of age require at least two intubation attempts by anesthesia personnel at all levels. This study suggests that the use of video laryngoscopy may be necessary for primary intubation attempts in all children under 10 kilograms and 1 year of age.

When intubating a neonate, one must be cognizant of the anatomy, including a larger head, floppy epiglottis, and more cephalad position of the larynx.

This study suggests that all neonates over 500 gm weight can undergo intubation with a 3.0 uncuffed endotracheal tube, but common practice in pediatric anesthesia indicates that a 3.0 uncuffed endotracheal tube is used for term neonates as well as all neonates greater than 1 kg weight, and a 2.5 uncuffed endotracheal tube is used for those neonates under 1 kg.

**Respiratory System and Metabolic Oxygen Requirements**

Alveoli maturation is not complete at birth and, in fact, takes up to eight to ten years to fully develop and mature.

**Cardiovascular System**

Neonatal myocardium is less compliant than adult myocardium, making neonatal cardiac output dependent on heart rate.

**Circulating Blood Volume and Blood Loss**

Neonates have a circulating blood volume equal to 90 mL/kg.

**Pharmacology and Drug Metabolism**

There is limited data in neonates regarding the pharmacokinetics of drugs. Neonates are a vulnerable population and, therefore, not usually added to studies by drug companies. Most drugs used in neonates are used off-label, including acetaminophen. It is essential to keep in mind renal and liver maturation and when the metabolism of certain drugs peaks to normal adult levels, which is generally around 6 months of age.