Clinically, lymphangioma circumscriptum appears as multiple, grouped or scattered, translucent or hemorrhagic vesicular papules that resemble frog-spawn. Because the lesions consist of a combination of blood and lymph elements, purple areas can be seen scattered within the vesicle-like papules. In the genital area, the surface can be verrucous, and the lesions may be mistaken for warts. The acquired form is most often found in the axilla, inguinal, and genital areas and there is often coexisting lymphedema. Associated symptoms may include pruritus, pain, burning, lymphatic drainage, infection, and aesthetic concerns.

Cavernous lymphangioma typically presents during infancy as a painless, ill-defined subcutaneous swelling with no changes of the overlying skin that can be several centimeters in size. Rarely, an entire extremity may be affected. Patients may report tenderness upon deep palpation of the area.

Cystic hygromas are lymphatic malformations that are clinically more circumscribed than cavernous lymphangioma and typically occur on the neck, axilla, or groin. On physical examination, they are soft, with varying sizes and shapes, and will typically grow if not surgically excised.  When posterior neck lesions are present, there may be an association with Turner syndrome, hydrops fetalis, or other congenital abnormalities.  These lesions can be visualized in utero with the use of transabdominal or transvaginal sonography. MRI can be useful in determining the extent of anatomical involvement of cystic or cavernous lymphangiomas.