A significant portion of the diagnosis of DVT and phlegmasia is made clinically with a focused history and physical exam, including details regarding onset and duration of symptoms, functional impairment related to the compromised limb, comorbidities, prior venous or arterial interventions, and personal or family history of thrombophilia or hypercoagulability. A thorough pulse exam of proximal and distal pulses in the extremities should be performed to assess arterial inflow. Often edema can make this challenging, and a doppler may be required to evaluate for intact signals. If blistering or skin necrosis, arterial or neural compromise, or venous gangrene are present at the presentation, this is considered emergent, and limb-threatening and immediate efforts to remove the thrombus and increase venous return should be performed.

Laboratory workup should include a complete blood count, standard coagulation profile (international normalized ratio, platelets, and partial thromboplastin time), and a basic metabolic panel to assess renal function and hydration status.

The gold standard for confirming the diagnosis of DVT is contrast venography; however, this is not clinically practical. Venous duplex ultrasonography has instead replaced contrast venography as the preferred imaging modality for diagnosis. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) or computed tomography venogram (CTV) are alternative diagnostic studies particularly helpful in visualizing proximal thrombus in the iliac veins or IVC and identifying anatomical abnormality in the pelvis causing iliac vein compression. However, both imaging modalities have drawbacks. MRV is time-consuming compared to CT and can be limited by motion artifact in patients who present acutely with severe pain. CT inherently exposes the patient to radiation, but also poses the threat of nephrotoxicity with the use of iodinated contrast, particularly in a subset of patients who may be critically ill and in hypovolemic shock. Alternatively, patients who are candidates for catheter-based intervention may have venography performed at that time to further assess the extent and nature of the thrombus and to guide further management.

Ultrasound features suggestive of DVT on ultrasonography are the lack of compressibility, the absence of spontaneous flow through the vessel, enlarged vein diameter, and increased echogenicity present within the lumen of the vessel.