Actinic purpura is a benign condition that does not require specific treatment, particularly since other lesions continue to appear throughout life. The best treatment is preventive and involves protection from excessive sun exposure through the application of sunscreen and wearing long-sleeved shirts. One should apply sunscreens with a high protection index (sun protection factor (SPF) greater than 50) daily to provide sufficient protection against the ultraviolet (UVB and UVA) rays. The sunscreen should be liberally applied to all sun-exposed areas regularly.

The therapeutic possibilities available for the actinic purpura lesions already formed are restricted. Tretinoin or retinoic acid (0.1%) is a derivative of vitamin A, which could theoretically reverse severe skin damage induced by ultraviolet light. Indeed, topical tretinoin is known for its role in the regeneration of dermal collagen and the reduction of the quality of abnormal elastin damaged by solar exposure. However, some authors demonstrate that the developed plaques of actinic purpura do not improve under local treatment with tretinoin.

In 2002, actinic purpura was successfully treated in one patient with tissue-engineered skin; however, no similar cases have been reported. More recently, it has been demonstrated that the human epidermal growth factor may be a viable treatment of actinic purpura. It has been shown to increase the average skin thickness and reduce the number of purpuric lesions when applied twice daily for six weeks. A citrus bioflavonoid blend has been tested for the treatment of actinic purpura. After six weeks, the treated group showed a 50% decrease in purpuric plaques with no reported side effects. Laser therapy, which is widely used for the treatment of aging skin manifestations, is not indicated in actinic purpura. Moisturizing creams may be useful to treat associated skin xerosis.