Chronic pain leads to significantly decreased quality of life, reduced productivity, lost wages, worsening comorbidities, and psychiatric disorders, such as depression, anxiety, and substance abuse disorders. Patients with chronic pain are also at a significantly increased risk for suicide and suicidal ideation. In addition, the clinician has to consider that many medications used to treat chronic pain have potential complications associated with their use.

For example, acetaminophen is a common pharmacological therapy for patients with chronic pain. It is taken either as a single agent or in combination with other analgesics, including opioids. The acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity can occur with doses exceeding four grams per day.

Frequently used adjunct medications such as gabapentin or pregabalin can cause sedation, peripheral swelling, mood changes, and confusion. Respiratory depression can occur when these gabapentinoids are used in elderly patients or patients also using opioids.

Feared complications of opioid therapy include addiction as well as overdose resulting in respiratory compromise. However, opioid-induced hyperalgesia is also a significant concern. Patients become more sensitive to painful stimuli while on chronic opioids.

**Drug Diversion and Drug Seeking**

Unfortunately, due to addiction or financial gain, some individuals seek prescribed opioids for illicit purposes. Prescription opioids may be obtained from a friend or relative, a black market seller, doctor shopping, and theft from clinical sites.

- Aggressively demanding more opioids

- Asking for opioids by name

- Displaying behaviors suggesting opioid use disorder

- Forging prescriptions

- Increasing alcohol use

- Increasing medication dose without provider permission

- Injecting oral medications

- Obtaining medications from nonmedical sources

- Obtaining opioids from multiple providers

- Losing or stealing prescriptions

- Reluctance to decrease opioid dosing

- Resisting medication change

- Requesting early refills

- Selling prescriptions

- Sharing or borrowing similar medications

- Stockpiling medications

- Using illegal drugs

- Using pain medications to treat other symptoms

**Drug Diversion Interventions**

**Prescribers and dispensers can take several precautions to avoid drug diversion. Some approaches include:**

- Communication among providers and pharmacies to avoid "doctor shopping."

- Educate patients on the dangers of sharing opioids.

- Encourage patients to keep opioid medications in a private place.

- Encourage patients to refrain from public disclosure of opioid use.

- Report patient prescribing to the state central database if available.

**If a patient is suspected of drug-seeking or diversion, consider the following actions:**

**Inquire About Prescription and Illicit Drug Use**

- Obtain a urine drug screen.

- Perform a thorough examination.

- Perform pill counting.

- Prescribe smaller quantities of the opioid.

If a patient is abusing prescribed opioids, this is a violation of the treatment agreement. The provider may discharge the patient from their practice. If the relationship is terminated, the provider must do it legally. The provider should avoid patient abandonment, ending a relationship with a patient without considering the continuity of care, and without providing notice to the patient. To avoid abandonment charges, the patient must be given enough advanced warning to allow them to secure another clinician and facilitate the transfer of care.

Patients with a substance abuse problem or addiction should be referred to an addiction specialist. Theft or loss of controlled substances should be reported to the Drug Enforcement Administration. If drug diversion has occurred, the activity should be documented and reported to law enforcement.