**Overview**

Spinal shock patients should be treated in an ICU setting, as many complications can arise due to the injury. Neurogenic shock is different than spinal shock and usually occurs with higher injuries (above the T6 level). Neurogenic shock is the loss of sympathetic tone and unopposed parasympathetic signals. The blood vessels have diminished constriction, and bradycardia occurs without sympathetic signals.

**Initial Treatment of Spinal Cord Injury**

- Circulatory collapse and shock need to be promptly treated. This requires the immediate establishment of large-bore (14-gauge or 16-gauge) IV lines.

- Crystalloid fluid bolus should be started immediately on arrival

- If there is no response to fluid bolus, inotropic therapy will be required.

- Repetitive fluid boluses in established spinal shock can lead to fluid overload and should not be given.

- Bradycardia is a common feature of spinal shock. For isolated and clinically significant bradycardia, atropine can be used.

- Obtain temperature as patients are frequently hypothermic.

**Management of Spinal Shock**

- Corticosteroids are administered to decrease tissue edema and ischemia after injury in some cases.

- Nursing procedures that cause vagal stimulation, such as oral or tracheal suctioning, can exacerbate bradycardia in these patients.

- Hyperoxygenation with the administration of 100% oxygen for two minutes before the nursing procedure is recommended.

- Temperature regulation and monitoring with invasive devices to obtain accurate core body temperature are essential to managing these patients.

- Due to autonomic nervous system dysfunction, patients lose the ability to self-regulate body temperature.

- Maintain a urinary catheter due to expected urinary retention.

- After 72 hours of injury, the indwelling urinary catheter should be discontinued, and intermittent catheterization should be used to minimize the risk of urinary tract infections.

- Constipation is expected in patients with spinal cord injury. They should be maintained on a laxative bowel regimen to prevent complications of prolonged constipation.

- Maintain a nasogastric tube as patients will require enteral nutrition.

- In the initial phase of the injury, patients develop paralytic ileus and often require a nasogastric tube capable of suction to decompress the stomach and bowel.

- Frequently assess and treat the presence of pain.

- Occupational and physiotherapy should be started as soon as possible to optimize functional recovery, prevent contractures, and minimize muscle atrophy.

**Prevention of Complications**

- Patients with spinal injury are at an extremely high risk of developing pressure ulcers as pressure ulcers can occur within hours in immobilized patients.
- Skincare with protocol-based turning and positioning (log-roll) is recommended in all patients with spinal cord injury and shock.
- Backboards should be discontinued as soon as possible as they increase the risk of pressure ulcers. 
- The use of airflow or dynamic alternating mattresses is contraindicated in these patients when spine stabilization has not occurred. A standard mattress or full support mattress is recommended in the initial phase.

- Prevent catheter-associated urinary tract infections and central line-associated bloodstream infections by following sterile techniques for placement of these catheters and protocol-based dressing care.

- Prevent further injury to the spine with appropriate lifting and handling of the patient. Log-rolling is recommended to maintain alignment of the whole spine.

- Prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE) is essential in patients with spinal cord injury.

- VTE and pulmonary embolism can occur within 72 hours of admission in patients with spinal cord injuries who do not receive appropriate prophylaxis.

- All patients with spinal shock should receive gastric stress ulcer prophylaxis for four weeks with a proton-pump inhibitor.