Risk-group classification of required biosafety precautions is ideally a logical approach to minimize laboratory-acquired infections. However, while each laboratory can easily identify and meet the special considerations required, the practicality of the actual day-to-day situation of the laboratory workflow is still more important. Strict adherence to these biohazard levels can be useful and beneficial for some facilities with the capability to comply. In a similar case previously described for TB laboratories, a risk-based approach is more applicable so that safety precautions can "tailor-fit" to the activities of each clinical laboratory. Further studies are still essential to make this a reality on a global scale.

**Biohazard Level and Significance**

- Biohazard Level 1 usually includes viruses and bacteria like Escherichia coli and chickenpox and many non-infectious bacteria. The level of precaution at this level is minimal and usually involves wearing a face mask and no close contact.

- Biohazard Level 2 usually involves microorganisms that are responsible for mild infections in humans and are often difficult to contract via aerosolized particles, like hepatitis A, B, and C, Lyme disease, Salmonella, measles, mumps, HIV, and dengue. Laboratory personnel can carry out diagnostic tests on the specimens but need to wear gloves, facial protection, and a gown. Additionally, standard precautions at this level should be applied when handling clinical samples from the current outbreak investigations of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) caused by the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).

- Biohazard Level 3 includes microorganisms that can be fatal to humans but for which vaccines and other treatments are available. Aside from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, this grouping also includes anthrax, many types of viral encephalitis, hantavirus, Rift valley fever, malaria, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and yellow fever.

- Biohazard Level 4 usually includes dangerous viruses like Ebola, Marburg virus, Lassa fever, Bolivian hemorrhagic fever, and many other hemorrhagic viruses found in the tropics. Only specific persons can work with these viruses, and it requires them to wear a positive pressure personnel suit, with a segregated air supply. There is no treatment available for these viruses, and extreme isolation precautions are mandatory. The CDC has many recommendations on how to manage these viruses. There are no bacteria in this group.

Knowledge of biohazard levels must not be limited to laboratory professionals. All healthcare workers (clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, etc.) need to be aware of the categories of biohazard levels because they have the potential to impact every patient. For instance, signs and symbols should always be posted on medical and nursing floors when dealing with a high-level biohazard.