The pathophysiology of lipoprotein lipase is evident in familial dyslipidemias (specifically type one), or hyperchylomicronemia. Hyperchylomicronemia is an autosomal recessive genetically inherited disease in which there is a significant increase in levels of triglycerides, >1000, such that that the plasma of these patients has a milky appearance. There is also significantly increased levels of chylomicrons in the blood of these individuals.

In both type one familial dyslipidemia or hyperchylomicronemia, there is severe LPL dysfunction; this is because of LPL deficiency and LPL co-factor deficiency, or apolipoprotein C2 deficiency, which is necessary for activation of lipoprotein lipase. LPL normally removes triglycerides from chylomicrons, and if this process does not function, initial triglyceride breakdown cannot take place. Therefore, triglycerides will build up in the serum and chylomicrons will grow very large as they are full of triglycerides, which are not undergoing removal.

Patients with hyperchylomicronemia present with recurrent pancreatitis, enlarged liver, and xanthomas because of lack of triglyceride removal from chylomicrons and consequent increased levels of serum triglycerides and increased chylomicrons. This buildup eventually leads to triglyceride accumulation in the pancreas, in the liver, and deposit on the skin causing these clinical manifestations. Xanthomas occur because of plaques of lipid-laden histiocytes, as macrophages in the bloodstream endocytose excess serum triglycerides. Clinically, xanthomas appear as skin bumps or along the eyelids of patients with high serum lipid levels. Elevated triglycerides can cause acute pancreatitis; this may involve increased chylomicrons in the plasma. These chylomicrons can obstruct capillaries, and this may cause decreased blood flow and ultimately ischemia. When vessel damage occurs, this can cause pancreatic lipases to have access to serum triglycerides. Pancreatic lipases may then break down these triglycerides, leading to the release of triglyceride breakdown products including free fatty acids. This increase in free fatty acids can injure the tissue of the pancreas leading to pancreatitis.

Treatment for type 1 familial dyslipidemia or hyperchylomicronemia is a very low-fat diet. With careful monitoring of diet, patients often have normal lifespans. Additionally, with tight dietary lipid control patients do not have any clear increased risk for atherosclerosis. Orlistat is a medication that can also be used to improve hyperchylomicronemia by decreasing the risk of pancreatitis; it is a pancreatic lipase inhibitor given before meals.