A comprehensive laboratory analysis, including assessment for anemia, iron deficiency, renal dysfunction, and liver dysfunction, is needed to help elucidate the cause and/or severity of heart failure. Cardiac-specific testing and prognostic factors for HF are outlined below.

Serum sodium levels have prognostic value as predictors of mortality in patients with chronic HF. They also play a role in the prediction of short-term mortality for patients admitted with decompensated heart failure. The Outcomes of a Prospective Trial of Intravenous Milrinone for Exacerbations of Chronic Heart Failure (OPTIME-CHF) trial demonstrated a significantly increased risk of in-hospital mortality as well as 30-day mortality in patients with HF who presented with hyponatremia. The mean serum sodium for patients enrolled in the study was 134 mEq/L. The highest mortality risk was seen in patients in the lowest quintile of serum sodium levels on presentation.

Serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal proBNP (NT-proBNP) levels can aid in differentiating cardiac from noncardiac causes of dyspnea in patients with ambiguous presentations. BNP is an independent predictor of increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, and it is used for assessing mortality risk in patients with heart failure. BNP levels correlate with New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification, and the utility is primarily as a marker to assess treatment efficacy. According to the American Heart Association (AHA) and the American College of Cardiology (ACC) recommendations from 2013 and 2017, predischarge natriuretic peptide levels are strong predictors of the risk of death and hospital readmission in patients with HF. In patients with true clinical presentation of HF, natriuretic peptides should not be used to drive treatment plans. It is important to remember that BNP and NT-proBNP levels can be elevated in patients with renal dysfunction, atrial fibrillation, and in older patients. Conversely, BNP levels can be falsely low in patients with obesity, hypothyroidism, and advanced heart failure (due to myocardial fibrosis).

Chest radiographs are used to assess the degree of pulmonary congestion and cardiac contour (to determine the presence of cardiomegaly). Findings indicative of congestive heart failure on chest radiographs include enlarged cardiac silhouette, edema at the lung bases, and vascular congestion. In florid heart failure, Kerley B lines may be seen on chest radiographs. The absence of these findings in patients with clinical features of HF does not rule out CHF.

Echocardiography is the most commonly used test for the diagnosis of HF. It can assess for systolic and diastolic dysfunction and help elucidate the presence of focal wall motion abnormalities or valvular pathology. Traditional 2D transcutaneous echocardiography is the most commonly utilized form of testing. However, in patients with severe obesity, pregnancy, or mechanical ventilation, it may be difficult to obtain adequate acoustic windows. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is an alternative for these patients. Adequate rate control in patients with tachyarrhythmias is necessary to obtain adequate echocardiographic images.

Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in patients with HF are used principally for the diagnosis of congenital cardiac abnormalities. Cardiac MRI is also the gold standard test for evaluating right ventricular (RV) function.

Radionuclide multiple-gated acquisition (MUGA) scan is a reliable imaging technique for the evaluation of left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) function. MUGA scan is, in fact, the most accurate scan to assess for ejection fraction (EF) and is used in patients when there is a disparity of EF measurements from other studies.

Electrocardiogram (ECG)-gated myocardial perfusion imaging is another diagnostic tool for assessing the EF, regional wall motion, and regional wall thickening. EF measurement with this study may be affected in patients with an irregular heart rate, low count density, and extracardiac radiotracer uptake. ECG-gated images are also useful in recognizing artifactual defects seen on SPECT imaging, such as breast tissue and diaphragmatic attenuation.

Iobenguane scanning is scintigraphic imaging using iobenguane I-123 injection. It has been used for cardiac risk stratification in patients with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II to III and an LVEF of 35% or less. Iobenguane I-123 is a norepinephrine analog. The test can show the amount of norepinephrine uptake in the cardiac sympathetic nervous system. Improved reuptake of norepinephrine is associated with a better prognosis.

Other tests used in evaluating patients with HF include cardiac catheterization, stress testing, and electrocardiograms. However, they are used in patients with HF to determine the underlying cause of the disease. They do not play any specific role in the diagnosis of HF or its prognostication. In patients with severe systolic CHF, abnormalities of the electrocardiogram (ECG) are certain. However, in patients with HFpEF, the ECG may be normal.