**Protective Function**

The oral cavity is an environment constantly challenged by the mechanical, chemical, and biological stimuli of our daily activities. The oral mucosa plays an essential role in protecting the underlying tissues from mechanical forces involved in the normal function of mastication (stretching, compression, and abrasion from a hard diet), external antigens, and noxious molecules from the diet. Furthermore, the oral mucosa is also exposed to carcinogenic substances found in alcohol, tobacco, and betel nut, consumed in some regions. The oral epithelium acts as a barrier against these physiological and pathogenic stresses. It functions as a physical and an immune barrier to external aggressions and prevents the penetration of the oral cavity's normal bacterial flora that may cause infection. The oral epithelium achieves this by being composed of multilayers of epithelial cells and cell-cell junctions and maintaining immune responses to antigens thanks to the presence of dendritic cells (DCs) and T helper 17 cells (Th17)

**Secretion**

The main substance secreted by the oral mucosa is saliva, which is released by the ducts of the major and minor salivary glands. The minor salivary glands widely distributed in the oral cavity are included in the submucosa. Still, the major salivary glands, which are the main source of saliva, are located outside the limits of the oral mucosa. However, their excretory ducts open into the oral cavity contributing to the maintenance of the wetness of the tissue.The oral mucosa possesses a less significant amount of sebaceous glands reported on the lips, labial, and buccal mucosa in the majority of the adult population and may be found sporadically in the alveolar mucosa. These glands secret a fatty substance, known as sebum, whose functions have not yet been determined. However, recent studies of skin sebum suggest that it may play a role in immunity

**Sensory Function**

The oral cavity receives its sensory innervation from the three branches of the trigeminal nerve. Three types of sensory endings are mainly present in the oral mucosa, consisting of Merkel’s disks, Meissner’s corpuscles, and free nerve endings, which allow the oral mucosa to perceive and respond to the stimulus of temperature, touch, and pain. Furthermore, it perceives the taste sensations of salty, sweet, sour, bitter, and umami, although it has been recently suggested that there may also be a taste sensation of fat