While investigating men with osteoporosis it is important to inquire about calcium and vitamin D intake, sun exposure, prior fractures and associated mechanism of trauma, and history of height loss.

The physical examination in a patient with primary osteoporosis is usually unremarkable unless if advanced disease when patients can present with kyphosis, and reduced height from prior measured height if previous compression vertebral fractures. A general physical exam should also include evaluation of gait, balance, mobility, overall frailty, and muscle mass.

To aid in finding a secondary and/or reversible cause of osteoporosis, specific information and physical exam findings should be elicited in a systematic way to rule out the following conditions:

- Use of medications such as anticonvulsants, chemotherapeutics, glucocorticoids, cyclosporin, tacrolimus, aromatase inhibitors, GnRH agonists, levothyroxine suppressive therapy (e.g post thyroid cancer), HIV medications, and long term heparin. Long term opioid use can also indirectly cause osteoporosis by provoking hypogonadism.

- Endocrine causes: hyperthyroidism, exogenous or endogenous hypercortisolism, hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, type 1 or type 2 diabetes, vitamin D deficiency or resistance, delayed puberty, androgen insensitivity, and growth hormone deficiency.

- Malabsorption: celiac disease, post-bariatric surgery, inflammatory bowel disease.

- Hematologic causes: multiple myeloma, systemic mastocytosis, chronic hemolytic anemia.

- Connective tissue diseases: osteogenesis imperfecta, Marfan Syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets.

- Miscellaneous: chronic liver disease, chronic kidney disease, hypercalciuria, anorexia nervosa, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, rheumatoid arthritis, malignancy, and organ transplantation.

Lastly, it is mandatory to obtain a full social history inquiring about smoking, alcohol abuse, and a sedentary lifestyle.