C. perfringens causes 80% to 90% of gas gangrene cases, but other species can cause infection. In order of prevalence, they are Clostridium novyi (40%), C. septicum (20%), C. histolyticum (10%), Clostridium bifermentans (10%), Clostridium fallax (5%), and C. sordellii. These organisms are in the soil and organic waste, especially if contaminated with fecal material.

Health care workers should suspect gas gangrene if anaerobic gram-positive bacilli are present in a wound with necrosis of soft tissue and muscle. The organisms produce a gas identifiable on x-ray or CT scans. Only about 5% of the wounds colonized with clostridial organisms will develop an infection. Therefore, host factors and anatomic location of inoculation of the organisms help determine whether the bacteria will develop into a clostridial myonecrosis infection. For example, a deep penetrating wound into muscle tissue in which the host is immunocompromised is more likely to develop an infection, compared to a host with a healthy immune system and good nutritional status. More open superficial wounds are less likely to become infected especially if properly cleaned and dressed compared to deeper penetrating wounds or wounds with crush injury and tissue ischemia.

The clostridial organisms produce alpha and theta toxins that cause extensive tissue damage. The infection can spread quickly, and within a matter of several hours, the patient may develop overwhelming shock, sepsis, and death. A tissue that is better oxygenated with 70mmHg oxygen tension will inhibit the organism's growth because clostridial species are facultative anaerobes. A facultative anaerobe is an organism that makes ATP by aerobic respiration if oxygen is present but can switch to fermentation if oxygen is absent. If the oxygen tension of the tissue is less than 30 mm Hg, then the clostridial organisms will grow more quickly. The infection can develop slowly over weeks or rapidly over hours depending on the oxygen tension of the tissue and the amount of organism inoculated.

The virulence of the organism depends on the exotoxins produced; Clostridium perfringens is the most pathologic with 17 known toxins, with the most toxic being the alpha-toxin, a lecithinase. Alpha toxin is a phospholipase (lecithinase) that breaks down cell membranes triggering platelet aggregation, thrombosis, and histamine release. Also present are collagenase, hyaluronidase, hemagglutinins, and hemolysins. Theta toxins cause direct vascular injury and breakdown of leukocytes causing blunted host inflammatory response to the infection. Collagenase breaks down connective tissue allowing the rapid spread of the organism across tissue planes. This is one of the main reasons that the infection can cross over connective tissue plains, spreading into the deeper muscle tissues.