**Patisiran**

Patisiran is available and distributed as a single-dose vial of 10 mg/5 mL (2 mg/mL). It is a lipid complex injection that should be filtered and diluted before administering. The correct dosage should be calculated and adjusted according to the patient's body weight and administered as an intervenous infusion by a healthcare professional.

Indication: polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis in adults.

- 0.3 mg/kg once every three weeks (weight less than 100 kg)

- 30 mg once every three weeks (weigh 100 kg or more)

Patisiran should be administered immediately if an earlier dose was missed. Patients who are given a dose within the three days from a missed dosage are recommended to follow their original regime. If the patient has missed a dose

Patients receiving treatment with patisiran are advised to receive premedication therapy 60 minutes before administration of the IV infusion to decrease the occurrence of infusion-related reactions (IRRs). Premedication therapies consist of corticosteroid (IV), acetaminophen (oral), H1 blocker (IV), and H2 blocker (IV).

**Givosiran**

Givosiran is available and distributed as a single-dose vial of 189 mg/mL for subcutaneous injection.

Indication: acute hepatic porphyria in adults.

- 2.5 mg/kg once monthly

Givosiran should be administered immediately if a prior dosage was missed and continued monthly thereafter. Patients who have critical elevations in liver transaminases are recommended to decrease their dosage to 1.25 mg/kg every month. Dosing can be increased to 2.5 mg/kg in subjects who do not show a recurring increase in transaminases while receiving therapy at 1.25 mg/kg.

**Lumasiran**

Lumasiran is available and distributed as a single-dose vial of 94.5 mg/0.5 mL for subcutaneous injection. Lumasiran is administered as loading doses accompanied by maintenance doses calculated and adjusted according to the patient's body weight.

Indication: PH1 adult and pediatric subjects.

- Initial loading dose: 6 mg/kg administered once a month for three doses (weight below 10 kg)

- Maintenance dose: 3 mg/kg administered once a month (weight below 10 kg)

- Initial loading dose: 6 mg/kg administered once a month for three doses (10 kg to below 20 kg)

- Maintenance dose: 6 mg/kg administered once every three months quarterly (10 kg to below 20 kg)

- Initial loading dose: 3 mg/kg administered once a month for three doses (20 kg and greater)

- Maintenance dose: 3 mg/kg administered once every three months (20 kg and greater)

Lumasiran should be administered immediately if a prior dosage was missed and continued monthly thereafter.

**Inclisiran**

Inclisiran is available and distributed as a prefilled single-dose vial of 284 mg/1.5 mL (189 mg/mL) for subcutaneous injection.

Indication: reducing LDL-C in subjects with HeFH or ASCVD adjunctive to diet and statin therapy tolerated at a maximum dose.

- 284 mg (initial dose)

- 284 mg (at three months)

- 284 mg (every six months thereafter)

Inclisiran should be administered immediately if a prior dosage was missed. Patients who are given a dosage within three months of a missed dosage are recommended to follow their original regime. If a dose has been missed for more than three months, therapy should be initiated at three months following administration of the missed dosage and every six months thereafter.