Attempting closed reduction of the elbow is the initial management of choice.

Generally, reduction requires appropriate intravenous sedation and relaxation of the patient, often administered by a team in the emergency department. If there is displacement of the elbow in a medial or lateral direction, the displacement first gets translated before the application of longitudinal traction of the forearm. As posterolateral dislocations are most common, the elbow is often extended.

After reduction, elbow stability requires assessment by performing a gentle range of motion in flexion/extension, valgus/varus, as well as pronation/supination.

A repeat neurovascular assessment is then performed to assure no arterial or nerve injuries due to reduction. A brachial artery injury or median nerve entrapment may occur, which can lead to operative management with exploration.

After adequate reduction with a stable joint, patients can proceed with non-operative management with posterior long-arm splinting, usually in 90 degrees of flexion. Follow-up in the outpatient clinic allows for further radiographs to evaluate the maintenance of the reduction and that it remains stable. After two weeks, if the joint is stable, the splint can be removed, and physical therapy is initiated utilizing range of motion exercises to help avoid loss of terminal extension. In a less stable joint, the splint will remain, and the use of extension blocking splints can allow early flexion.

Surgical management is required only in a few situations. If the dislocation is unable to be reduced, closed reduction under anesthesia in the operating room is a possible option, as muscular relaxation is difficult to reproduce with sedation in the emergency department.

Another indication for surgery is if the elbow is unstable with extension during range of motion, exhibited by dislocation once the elbow reaches 50 to 60 degrees of extension.

Surgery is also necessary if there are any associated unstable fractures with a complex elbow dislocation.