Generally, corneal endotheliitis is a clinical diagnosis. Corneal endotheliitis with coin-shaped KPs and overlying corneal edema has a high positive predictive value (90.9%) for CMV endotheliitis.

Based on Japan Endotheliitis Study, typical CMV endotheliitis is diagnosed with corneal endotheliitis with a coin-shaped lesion or linear KPs similar to the rejection line, along with (+) CMV DNA but (-) HSV DNA and (-) VZV DNA; while atypical CMV endotheliitis is defined as corneal endotheliitis with localized corneal edema with KPs associated with two of the following signs including recurrent/chronic anterior uveitis, or ocular hypertension/ secondary glaucoma, or corneal endothelial cell loss, in the setting of (+) CMV DNA but (-) HSV DNA and (-) VZV DNA.

CMV antibodies can also be measured by enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA). The Goldmann-Witmer coefficient (GWc), which is calculated as a titer of antibody in aqueous/titer of antibody in serum, multiplied by total serum globulins/total aqueous globulins, can be used to identify a causative agent.

In addition, non-invasive imaging tests, including anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) and in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM), can assist in diagnosis and monitoring disease progression. By using ASOCT, Kobayashi et al. demonstrated a saw-tooth appearance of protruding structures and high reflectivity of the posterior cornea in CMV endotheliitis, which decreased throughout the course of antiviral treatment. Hashida et al. demonstrated different patterns depending on the causative virus in ASOCT.

A coin-shaped lesion in CMV endotheliitis presents with a quadrilateral and elliptical pattern, compared to HSV endotheliitis having small protrusion with low reflectivity and VZV endotheliitis with larger pigmented KP. Owl's eye morphological features detected with in-vivo confocal microscopy, which is considered to be pathognomonic for CMV endotheliitis, may be helpful as an adjunct. However, there is a report of Owl's eye morphology in HSV Keratitis and longstanding corneal grafts.