In the workup and management of suspected esophageal stricture disease, it is prudent to assess for the concomitant presence of esophageal motility disorders that may influence management. The following conditions are important to consider:

- Diffuse esophageal spasm: with this condition, the esophagus contracts asynchronously, leading to uneven peristalsis. Patients present with mid-chest pain following ingestion of food. They also experience dysphagia, although chest pain is a more common presenting symptom. Esophageal manometry is the most accurate diagnostic test to detect irregular peristalsis. A barium swallow can show abnormal esophageal contractions, and in some cases of the hypercontracted esophagus, also known as nutcracker esophagus, a classic “cork-screw” like appearance may be present.

- Achalasia: in this condition, the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) fails to relax properly due to idiopathic or infectious damage to the myenteric plexus of the esophageal wall. With the failure of LES relaxation, food gets stuck at the lower esophagus, causing dysphagia and halitosis. A barium swallow may show a classic bird beak appearance, and this is diagnostic for achalasia in the absence of any pathological abnormality on endoscopic biopsy.

- Pseudo-achalasia: This is similar to achalasia, except the pathophysiology involves neoplastic tumor cell invasion at a lower esophageal wall. An endoscopic biopsy will help to differentiate it from stricture.

- Esophageal cancer: although malignant stricture can form as a serious complication in local thoracic neoplastic masses, sometimes the tumor itself can cause the obstruction of the lumen and cause dysphagia. Endoscopy will help to distinguish this condition.