It is imperative that the interprofessional team is aware of patient rights and ethical issues. Each physician, nurse, and allied health provider must strive to provide care within these guidelines. In this way, optimum medical outcomes are more likely. Legal or ethical consequences are less likely.

As discussed above, utilizing shared decision-making is a helpful tool for both patients and members of the healthcare team to incorporate elements of patient rights. Working together to arrive at an appropriate plan is helpful to balance between two extremes. On one end is paternalism, in which the patient has no say, and the opposite is when the patient is given an overwhelming amount of information and options then left to decide on their own without an appropriate clinical recommendation. When used appropriately, shared decision-making can encourage the patient rights of beneficence, non-maleficence, patient autonomy, patient-provider trust, and more, particularly as it helps to clarify patient goals for both the patient and the members of the healthcare team. This is becoming increasingly well-documented as studies continue to look at shared decision-making.

In a review of 105 randomized controlled studies that involved over 31,000 participants, Stacey et al Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons also demonstrated shared decision making to increase patient knowledge and satisfaction by empowering them to make decisions that are educated and align with their views