The thymus is located in the superior and anterior mediastinum. Depending on the classification scheme, there can be three or four compartments of the mediastinum. Within the three-compartment scheme, the superior segment is contained within the anterior segment. The rest of the mediastinum includes the middle and posterior segments. The anterior mediastinum is bordered by the sternum anteriorly, the pericardium posteriorly, the diaphragm inferiorly, and a line connecting the angle of Louie to the fourth thoracic vertebra or most superior to the thoracic outlet. Other structures within the anterior mediastinum include mediastinal fat and lymph nodes. The thymus arises from the third pharyngeal pouch. It continues to grow until puberty and then begins to involute, approximately 1 to 3% weight per year, with thymic tissue being replaced by fat. The thymus is made of two lobes and can extend superiorly to the thyroid gland. Ectopic thymic tissue can also occur, most commonly within the anterior mediastinal fat.

The thymus derives its blood supply from the inferior thyroid artery and branches of the internal mammary arteries (also known as internal thoracic arteries) and a small supply from pericardiophrenic and intercostal arteries. Venous drainage is via corresponding veins and a large posterior vein that drains in the left innominate vein. Lymphatic drains follow the parasternal, tracheobronchial, and brachiocephalic nodes. The left brachiocephalic vein and superior vena cava are positioned posteriorly to the thymus. The thymus is covered with a fibrous capsule. The thymus' parenchyma is divided into lobules by extensions of the capsule (septa), composed of a cortex and a medulla. The cortex houses thymic lymphocytes, also known as thymocytes.

The thymus has an immunologic function, participating in cellular immunity. Lymphocytes from bone marrow travel to the thymus to mature into inducer and cytotoxic cells, capable of recognizing non-self antigens and initiating a cell-mediated response. The thymus's most common autoimmune disease is myasthenia gravis, resulting in the most common tumor of the anterior mediastinum, a thymoma. Myasthenia gravis is characterized by autoantibodies to acetylcholine receptors. This results in muscle fatigue (with continued contractions), affecting ocular, facial, oropharyngeal, and limb muscles.