**Mandible**

The mandible consists of a body, rami, coronoid processes, and condylar processes. The mandible can be further subdivided into the angle where the ramus transitions to the body, the body, the parasymphysis located anterior to the mental foramen, and the midline symphysis. Mobility in the mandible allows for its participation in mastication and occlusion.

**Temporomandibular Joint (TMJ)**

The temporomandibular joint is the junction of the mandible and the temporal bone. These are synovial joints, each with an upper and lower compartment divided by an intra-capsular disc. The mandibular condyle articulates with the intra-capsular disc and remains in the mandibular fossa at rest when the jaw is closed. The condyle follows the articular eminence forward during jaw opening.

Condylar movements during mastication are complex.  In total, condylar actions within the temporomandibular joints have 3 basic movements: spin, roll, and slide. Spin describes the condylar head twisting about a vertical axis within the capsule. Roll is the condylar head rocking back and forth with the central portion maintaining contact with the intra-capsular disc. Slide refers to the translation of the condylar head relative to the intra-capsular disc.

Intricate movements within the temporomandibular joint translate to mandibular movements needed for mastication. To allow maximal mouth opening, the condyles move downward and forward over the articular eminence. The closing force begins with the condyle ipsilateral to the food bolus moving back into the mandibular fossa upwards and posteriorly to a position lateral from resting. Through closing, the ipsilateral condyle shifts medially while the contralateral condyle moves upward, posteriorly, and laterally.

**Maxillary and Mandibular Dental Arch**

The permanent, succedaneous teeth in adults consist of 16 teeth in the maxilla and 16 teeth in the mandible. The universal numbering system for permanent teeth assigns numbers to each tooth from 1 to 32. Tooth #1 is the right maxillary third molar followed sequentially by numbers 2-15 across the maxilla until reaching the left maxillary third molar, tooth #16. Numbering continues down to the mandible, with tooth #17 being the left mandibular third molar followed by 18-31 proceeding sequentially across the mandible until reaching the right mandibular third molar, which is tooth #32.

Adult dentition consists of 2 central incisors, 2 lateral incisors, 2 canines, 2 first premolars, 2-second premolars, 2 first molars, 2-second molars, and 2 third molars, both in the maxilla and mandible. The teeth are secured within the alveolar ridges of the maxilla and mandible. Dentition, whether native or restored, is integral to masticatory function.

**Dental Occlusal Anatomy**

The following 5 surfaces of the crown of a tooth allow for discussion of occlusal contacts:

- Facial: oriented toward the lips or teeth and referred to as labial for incisors/canines or buccal for premolars/molars

- Palatal/Lingual: oriented towards the palate for the maxilla and the tongue for the mandible

- Mesial: oriented toward the midline

- Distal: oriented away from the midline

- Occlusal: oriented toward the upper or lower jaw depending on the mandible versus the maxilla

Tooth cusps function to guide erupting teeth into appropriate occlusion with periodontal stimulation informing neural reflexes for jaw closure and mastication

When in occlusion, a lateral view shows a convexity in the maxillary occlusal surface interdigitating with a concavity in the mandibular occlusal surface. The occlusal curve is called the Curve of Spee. Extending the curve while maintaining its arc into a circle centered at the glabella creates the Curve of Monson. In a coronal plane, the mandibular posterior dentition is characterized by a lingual incline, and a buccal incline characterizes the maxillary posterior dentition. The coronal occlusal curve in the posterior dentition is called the Curve of Wilson.

**Mandibular Movements and Dynamic Occlusal Contacts**

The sophisticated movements of the mandible impacting dynamic occlusal contacts are a combination of the 6 primary mandibular movements as well as the condylar movements discussed above. Posselt published his seminal work in the mandibular movement in 1952, including Posselt’s envelope of motion. This depicts the movement of the mandible in a sagittal plane. When the condyle is superior and anterior within the glenoid fossa, the mandible is maximally retruded. In this condyle position, the mandibular opening is referred to as centric relation, and this depends on the rolling (hinge) movement facilitated by the lower synovial cavity in the TMJ. Opening beyond this is dependent on the sliding (translational) movement of the upper synovial TMJ cavity. The first occlusal contact upon mandibular closing, when in centric relation, is referred to as centric occlusion. This is followed by the teeth sliding into the intercuspal position, where maximal intercuspal contacts are made in the occlusion. The Envelope of Motion's anterior arc illustrates mandibular movement into occlusion and opening when the mandible is maximally protruded.

For lateral movement, the mandible is designated into working and non-working sides. The side that the mandible is moving toward is the working side, and that condyle moves laterally. The amount of movement laterally in the condyle is referred to as the Bennett movement. On the non-working side, the lateral movement necessitates downward, inward, and forward positioning of the condyle. The difference between a sagittal plane established through the condyle at rest and a line through the lateral movement's non-working condyle is the Bennett angle, the average being 7.5 degrees.