Nebivolol is a beta-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist that works via beta-1 receptor blockade; hence, it classifies as a cardioselective beta-blocker. It also acts on the vascular endothelium by stimulating nitric oxide (NO) synthase, which induces NO-mediated vasodilation. Nebivolol stimulates NO synthase production from the endothelium via beta-3 agonism leading to a reduction in systemic vascular resistance. Beta-blockers, such as labetalol and carvedilol, also have vasodilatory effects; however, their mechanism is via the blockade of alpha-adrenergic receptors. Patients with diabetes mellitus, erectile dysfunction, and vascular disease may have abnormal endothelial function, and nebivolol is more effective in these populations due to its NO-induced vasodilatory effect.

Nebivolol is chemically composed of a racemic mixture of L-nebivolol and D-nebivolol. It is classified as the third-generation beta-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist, with the highest beta-receptor affinity among all beta-blockers explaining its excellent tolerability in patients with lung disease. Nebivolol is unique in terms of its beta-1 vs. beta-1 and beta-2 selectiveness. At low doses of 10 mg or below and in patients with extensive metabolizers, nebivolol is beta-1 selective. However, nebivolol loses its selectivity and blocks beta-1 and beta-2 receptors at higher doses and in patients with poor metabolizers.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- **Absorption:**Nebivolol reaches a peak plasma concentration after 1.5 to 4 hours. Food does not modify the pharmacokinetics of nebivolol. Therefore, Nebivolol tablets may be administered without regard to meals.

- **Distribution:**Nebivolol is 98 % protein-bound and binds primarily to albumin.

- ****Metabolism:****Nebivolol is primarily metabolized in the liver, via direct glucuronidation and secondarily through CYP2D6. The hydroxyl and glucuronide metabolites are pharmacologically active. It is important to note that nebivolol is metabolized by CYP2D6; hence pharmacogenetic variations can affect the various pharmacokinetics parameters. The active isomer (d-nebivolol) has a half-life of about 12 hours in extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6 and 19 hours in poor metabolizers of CYP2D6. However, clinically it is less relevant as the predominant circulating hydroxyl and glucuronide metabolites also contribute to the beta-blocking activity. The clinical efficacy and safety profiles of nebivolol are similar regardless of poor or extensive metabolism status. Consequently, no dose adjustment of nebivolol is required.

- **Elimination:**Nebivolol is excreted 35 % through urine and 44 % via feces; patients who are poor metabolizers excrete 67 % of the nebivolol in urine and 13 % in feces. Nebivolol is excreted either as oxidative metabolites or glucuronide conjugates.