Every fracture is treated on an individual basis. Skeletal immobilization is the first priority for patients presenting with a periprosthetic distal femur fracture. Immobilization is dictated by displacement, discomfort, and body habitus. A hinged knee brace, knee immobilizer, or long leg splint should be considered for the majority of patients. Emergent provisional stabilization, with an external fixator or skeletal traction, is required in fractures with concern for soft tissue or neurovascular compromise.

Nonoperative management is rarely the recommended treatment option and is reserved for specific patient indications. Patients unfit for surgery account for the majority of periprosthetic distal femur fractures treated nonoperatively. Patients unfit for surgery are often bed-bound and require additional surveillance of their soft tissue surrounding the fracture. Frequent skin checks and extra padding of bony prominences are necessary to avoid dreaded complications. Nonoperative management options include a cast, hinged knee brace, knee immobilizer, or an external fixator. It is critical to inform the patient and the patient's family of the risk of nonunion. Culp et al. found a high nonunion rate displaced periprosthetic fractures treated non-operatively with a high conversion rate to surgery.

The treatment of choice for displaced periprosthetic fractures is operative fixation. Modern technology has revolutionized the treatment options for surgical intervention with the goal of limited dissection and immediate weight-bearing.

Load sharing devices, such as conventional plates and locked plates, are reserved for Su type I-III fracture with a stable prosthesis and implants not amenable to intramedullary nail. Femoral components may not be amenable to intramedullary fixation if a stemmed prosthesis is present, has a closed box system, or implanted in an unfavorable position. Conventional plates were the first plates available for fixation. The addition of locking technology has improved fixation in the osteoporotic bone while allowing a customizable screw trajectory to avoid femoral components and has decreased the risk of nonunion.

Advancements in the load sharing devices with an intramedullary nail have provided an alternative treatment modality that can be performed with less soft tissue dissection and allow for earlier weight-bearing.

Revision total knee arthroplasty is indicated in Su type III or a Lewis and Rorabeck type III with sufficient bone stock. Unstable femoral components should not be stabilized with a load sharing or load-bearing device alone. Revision arthroplasty is key to a successful surgery. Revision of the femoral component with a stemmed prosthesis allows for intramedullary support and reinforced with cable fixation or plate fixation.

Salvage procedures may be necessary for the worst of scenarios. A distal femoral replacement is indicated in those with a Su type III or a Lewis and Rorabeck type III fracture with inadequate bone stock and an unstable prosthesis.