Due to the inherent structural and mechanical integrity of the pelvic ring, the pelvis is a highly stable structure. Therefore, fractures of the pelvis occur most commonly in the setting of a high-impact trauma and are often associated with additional fractures or injuries elsewhere in the body.

The **Young-Burgess classification**system is the most commonly utilized classification system in the evaluation of pelvic ring injuries and is expanded upon in detail below. By correctly identifying the pelvic ring injury, trauma surgeons and emergency physicians can provide adequate initial treatment, as well as convey important information about the anatomy of the injured structures to the orthopedic surgeon managing this patient.

To understand and appropriately utilize the Young-Burgess classification system of pelvic ring injuries, clinicians must have a basic understanding of the pelvic ligamentous anatomy.  On the anterior aspect of the pelvic ring, the **symphyseal ligaments**are present between the right and left pubic symphysis and serve to resist external rotation through the sacroiliac joints posteriorly. Posteriorly the**ligaments of the pelvic floor**and the**posterior sacroiliac complex**provide stability to the pelvic ring. The sacrospinous ligaments and sacrotuberous ligaments of the pelvic floor are anterior structures relative to the sacroiliac joint and resist both shear and external rotation through the sacroiliac joint. The posterior sacroiliac complex is the posterior-most ligamentous structure in the pelvic ring and is the most important structure for pelvic ring stability. The posterior sacroiliac complex is one of the strongest ligaments in the body, and injury to the posterior ligaments reveals a very high energy mechanism of injury.

Due to the high degree of soft tissue disruption associated with pelvic ring injuries, associated vascular, neurologic, and visceral injuries are common and must be ruled out.  The **venous plexus**in the posterior pelvis accounts for the majority of hemorrhage associated with pelvic ring injuries.  The**corona mortis**is an anastomosis between the obturator artery (a branch of the internal iliac artery) and the external iliac artery. Damage to the corona intraoperatively can quickly result in the expiration of the patient due to excessive blood loss within the pelvis.