An interprofessional, team-based approach is always favored when caring for patients with phantosmia. Often patients with phantosmia may see several healthcare providers, such as their primary care provider, otolaryngologist, psychiatrist, neurosurgeon, and neurologist.

Pharmacists, radiologists, nurses, social workers, and several other healthcare professionals may be involved in the care of phantosmia patients. Primary care providers will often play an important role in first identifying and diagnosing phantosmia as well as proper initial workup and referral to other specialists. Therefore, it is important for the primary care provider, as well as all healthcare providers, to recognize the initial signs and symptoms of patients suffering from phantosmia as early as possible.

Otolaryngologists play an important role in diagnosing phantosmia and treating many of its root causes. If a patient presents with phantosmia and is found to suffer from chronic sinusitis, nasal polyps, a sinonasal mass, a skull base mass, or other disease processes that may affect the olfactory epithelium, it is prudent for the otolaryngologist to do a thorough workup through nasal endoscopy and/or imaging studies and then provide treatment as capable. Often otolaryngologists will surgically treat sinonasal disease or work in conjunction with neurosurgery to treat certain skull base masses.

Otolaryngologists would also provide the endoscopic surgical excision of olfactory epithelium for those patients failing medical therapy and seeking that option. Neurologists play an important role in treating many central causes of phantosmia, such as migraines, neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer or Parkinson disease, and temporal lobe seizures.

Finally, psychiatry consultation is indicated in most patients with phantosmia, given the high prevalence of schizophrenia and other mood disorders in this demographic. In summary, a team-based approach is imperative to enhance the long-term outcomes of patients experiencing phantosmia.