INH is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract and diffuses into all the body tissues. Hepatic metabolism of INH produces multiple metabolites which include: hydrazine, monomethylhydrazine, and toxic-free radicals that are involved in the pathogenesis of INH induced hepatitis. INH is metabolized via N-acetyltransferase 2 gene (NAT2) to form the inactive N1-acetyl-N2-isonicotinohydrazide (AcINH), which is then hydrolyzed to form AcHZ and INA. These metabolites are further acetylated to non-toxic metabolites and excreted in the urine. As NAT2 is the primary enzyme involved in the metabolism of INH, its deficiency can cause INH related hepatotoxicity. This is particularly seen in slow acetylators due to the higher concentration of AcHZ. As mentioned above, the incidence of toxic hepatitis increases when INH is used with rifampin, pyrazinamide, or barbiturates as these medications are inducers of the CYP system resulting in increased production of toxic INH metabolites.

INH causes peripheral neuropathy by 2 different mechanisms. First, INH metabolites directly inactivate pyridoxine species. It also acts by inhibiting the enzyme pyridoxine phosphokinase which is a necessary enzyme to convert pyridoxine to its active form of pyridoxal 5' phosphate which is a very important cofactor in many reactions.

As mentioned above, acute INH toxicity can manifest as seizures, and the important mechanism is a deficiency of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter. The pyridoxine deficiency induced by the use of INH leads to reduced production of GABA, as it is usually a product of pyridoxine-dependent decarboxylation reaction. Thus GABA deficiency can manifest as seizures especially in the acute setting of toxicity.