**Familial Alzheimer Disease**

Alzheimer disease is a multifactorial disease with both genetic and environmental components. The condition causes cognitive deficits like memory impairment, language disturbance, disorientation, and even noncognitive issues like personality changes. The most common form is sporadic Alzheimer disease, with no known familial link. While rare, with less than 1% of Alzheimer disease cases, familial Alzheimer disease is believed to be caused by genetic mutations in amyloid precursor protein, presenilin-1, and presenilin-2. About half of the individuals with these mutations develop Alzheimer disease before age 60. Of note, dementia that follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern is autosomal-dominant Alzheimer disease. It makes up less than 1% of all Alzheimer disease cases and has a neuropathogenesis similar to familial Alzheimer disease.

A mutation in the presenilin-1 gene is the most common cause of familial Alzheimer disease. Those affected by presenilin-1 mutations have the youngest onset between the ages of 30 to 50 years. Several cases have been associated with spastic paraparesis, extrapyramidal symptoms, and cerebellar signs. Even rarer are presenilin-2 mutations known to have a wide range of age onset. Mutations are believed to be scattered throughout the presenilin proteins, with most found close to the protein's hydrophobic core, disrupting wild-type gamma-secretase activity.

Regarding pathology case reports, presenilin-1 mutations correlate with the presence of cotton wool plaques, ball-like plaques without dense amyloid cores. These plaques have been correlated with seizures and spastic paraparesis. Additionally, presenilin-1 mutations have been linked to more severe cerebral amyloid angiopathy than sporadic Alzheimer cases. A similarity in sporadic Alzheimer disease and presenilin 1 and 2 mutations includes the presence of Lewy body pathology in the amygdala and neocortex. Given the various phenotypes and pathological expressions within families, other genetic or epigenetic factors are likely at play.