Transfemoral approach: This technique is believed to provide better maneuverability. However, it can be limited by aortic arch anatomy and calcifications. Under ultrasound guidance, the common femoral artery is accessed percutaneously using the micropuncture kit using the Seldinger technique. A femoral angiogram is recommended at this time to identify proper anatomic entry into the common femoral artery and to assess suitability for use of a vascular access closure device at the conclusion of the procedure. A short 6 Fr sheath is then placed over a 0.035 in the wire. The wire is advanced into the aortic arch carefully. Using an angled catheter and a left anterior oblique projection on the fluoroscopic system, the common carotid artery is selectively cannulated and mapped. The guide wire is then advanced into the external carotid artery followed by advancement of the catheter into the external carotid artery. Over a stiffer wire, a shuttle sheath is advanced into the common carotid artery. Dedicated carotid arteriograms are performed in multiple views to identify the lesion. A 0.014 in wire should be used to traverse the lesion followed by placement of embolic protection device. Pre-dilation of the lesion is performed using a small profile balloon. Careful attention should be paid to the patient’s hemodynamics during this maneuver and subsequently. After pre-dilation, an appropriately sized stent is deployed. If significant residual stenosis exists after the deployment of the stent (greater than 30 percent), balloon angioplasty can be performed to rectify this.  Completion carotid and a cerebral angiogram is performed, followed by the removal of catheters and sheaths if the result is satisfactory. A closure device is then used to close the arteriotomy site in the common femoral artery.

Transcarotid  approach: This technique involves direct surgical exposure of the common carotid artery at the base of neck. Duplex ultrasound can be used to plan the surgical incision over the course of the common carotid artery in addition to the use of traditional anatomic landmarks. Dissection is carried through the subcutaneous tissues using bovie electrocautery. The platysma is identified and divided. The common carotid artery is then identified and dissected out circumferentially. A vessel loop or umbilical tape is then placed around the artery. Additional proximal and distal part of the common carotid artery is dissected out as well. Using a micropuncture kit, the common carotid artery is accessed directly, and an angiogram is obtained. A guidewire is then positioned in the common carotid artery, and the arterial part of the flow reversal system is introduced over it. The common femoral vein is punctured under ultrasound guidance using a micropuncture kit, and a 0.035 guidewire is then passed into the femoral vein followed by placement of the venous sheath of the flow reversal system. The venous sheath is then attached to the arterial sheath and reverse flow is established. Carotid angiography is then performed in multiple projections. A guidewire is then used to traverse the lesion, followed by placement of clamp over the proximal common carotid artery. After this maneuver, pre-dilation and stent deployment are performed to treat the carotid artery lesion.  Significant residual stenosis after stent deployment (generally greater than 30%) is treated with balloon angioplasty. Following completion angiography, the wires and catheters are removed. The distal common carotid artery is clamped, and suture-mediated closure of the arteriotomy is performed using prolene suture.  The neck incision is closed in multiple layers. The femoral vein sheath is removed followed by application of manual pressure to achieve hemostasis.