Usually, in Purtscher retinopathy, the patient presents with sudden onset painless visual decline in both eyes within two days after trauma. The severity of retinal involvement does not correlate with the severity of chest trauma.

Also, in the absence of trauma, Purtscher-like retinopathy may be seen in multiple disorders as described in the etiology. A detailed history is of utmost importance; specifically, pancreatitis and systemic lupus erythematosus should be ruled out. The disease is bilateral in 60% of cases.

A diagnostic criterion of Purtscher retinopathy has been suggested.

- Purtscher flecken

- Retinal hemorrhages, low-to-moderate number (1 to 10)

- Cotton-wool spots (typically restricted to the posterior pole)

- Probable or plausible explanatory etiology

- Complementary investigation compatible with the diagnosis

Retinal zones have been used to describe the involvement in Purtscher retinopathy.

- Zone A - This zone horizontally extends four disc diameters on either side of the fovea.

- Zone B - The outer margin is the equator.

- Zone C - This is the outermost zone and extends till the ora serrata.

A broad case definition was part of a large study on Purtscher retinopathy.

(1) An associated contributing illness such as acute pancreatitis, long bone fracture, orthopedic surgery, chest compression, or crush injury(2) Multiple areas of polygonal retinal whitening between the retinal arterioles and venules (Purtscher flecken) and/or superficial cotton wool spots in one or both eyes

- Typically restricted to the posterior pole

- Accompanied by minimal, if any, retinal hemorrhage

- No visible emboli in the large retinal vessels

- No direct ocular trauma

Purtscher flecken is characterized by multiple polygonal patches of intraretinal whitening at the posterior pole and around the optic disc. There is a clear zone of 50 microns on either side of the retinal vessels (arterioles or venules.)

Cotton wool spots are whitish, superficial, mildly elevated lesions of the inner retinal surface that are oriented along with the retinal nerve fiber layer. The margin of these lesions are blurred and are superficial to retinal vessels.

Other features include disc edema, macular edema, macular ischemia/infarction, and arterial occlusion. Serous macular detachment is usually a feature of pregnancy-induced hypertension or other causes of malignant hypertension. Preretinal hemorrhage is a rare feature.

Visual acuity may be 20/20 to the perception of light.