The UGH syndrome is a complication of cataract surgery. The UGH syndrome may occur after uneventful ocular surgery or after an ocular surgery with intraoperative complications resulting in malposition of the implant. Patients usually present with episodes of blurred vision weeks to months after surgery. The blurring of vision may be accompanied by pain, photophobia, erythropsia (apparent reddish hue of the visible objects), and redness in the eyes. The vision is blurred, but complete vision loss is usually not seen unless accompanied by advanced glaucoma. The patient often presents with intermittent white-out of vision or intermittent decreased vision.

There are a few variations of UGH Syndrome, including UGH Plus and IPUGH (Incomplete Posterior UGH) syndrome. UGH Plus includes vitreous hemorrhage with UGH seen with anterior chamber lenses with iris support posterior chamber lenses placed in the sulcus or the capsular bag.

Slit-lamp examination shows conjunctival congestion, anterior chamber cells, and the presence of microscopic hyphema. Sometimes macroscopic hyphema is visible even without a slit lamp. Due to the endothelial touch by an intraocular lens, corneal edema may be noted.

Keratic precipitates may be seen over the corneal endothelium. Transillumination defect in the iris may be seen at the area of repetitive uveal trauma by the implant. C or J-shaped haptics typically create an arcuate transillumination defect. 'Iris transillumination defect and microhyphema syndrome' has been described with implantation of PCIOLs with 'elliptical polypropylene haptics containing a 10 degrees anterior angulation' in the sulcus.

Transillumination defects may also be seen in multiple other disorders causing iris atrophy and may not be a specific sign of the UGH syndrome.

Sometimes neovascularization of the iris can be seen. A poorly positioned optic or haptic of IOL or other implant causing visible mechanical trauma to the uveal tissue is usually observed. Other slit-lamp findings include pigments on the corneal endothelium, posterior synechia, inflammatory deposits over the optic or haptic of the IOL, and pseudophacodonesis. Blood in the angle or within the trabecular meshwork can be visualized with the help of gonioscopy. Gonioscopy can also aid in finding the haptic that may have caused the anterior chamber angle structure erosion and may also help visualize blood in the trabecular meshwork between the attacks. Gonioscopy in dilated pupils may be used to locate the exact location of the haptics of an IOL and to identify areas of uveal touch by the implant.

A slit-lamp examination may also help visualize and quantify anterior chamber cells, flare, vitreous cells, or any deposits over the intraocular lens. PCIOL placed in the sulcus may cause reverse pupillary block characterized by posterior bowing of the iris, transillumination defects of the iris, pigment dispersion syndrome, increased pigmentation of the anterior chamber angle, increased IOP, and uveitis. This is especially seen in axial myopia and vitrectomized eyes.