Tenecteplase is supplied as a lyophilized powder in a 50 mg vial; it is packaged with a separate 10 mL vial of sterile water for reconstitution to obtain a final 5 mg/mL concentration. The reconstituted solution can be refrigerated at 2 °C to 8 °C (36 °F to 46 °F) and must be used within 8 hours.

Tenecteplase is administered as a single 5-second intravenous bolus at weight-based tiered doses of 0.25 mg/kg or 0.50 mg/kg with a maximum dose of 50 mg. Tenecteplase has a half-life of 20 to 25 minutes.

The STREAM trial demonstrated a lower incidence of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) in patients over 75 who received half doses of tenecteplase (0.25 mg/kg) compared to the standard dose of 0.5 mg/kg.

**Myocardial Infarction**

Acute myocardial infarction (MI) is managed with timely thrombolysis or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). While PCI is the preferred approach, thrombolysis remains a crucial primary strategy for patients who cannot receive PCI within the preferred treatment window.

The CAPTIM study demonstrated tenecteplase might be as effective as PCI in treating acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) when administered in the prehospital setting.

Tenecteplase may be used in conjunction with antiplatelet and anticoagulation therapy. The drug can also be used before undergoing PCI. In the case of failed thrombolysis with tenecteplase, rescue PCI should be considered.

The safety and efficacy of tenecteplase before PCI continue to be investigated. The ASSENT-4 trial was prematurely discontinued due to excessive in-hospital mortality in the study group receiving tenecteplase-facilitated PCI.

**Acute Ischemic Stroke**

Several randomized controlled trials for acute ischemic stroke have compared tenecteplase and alteplase. The EXTEND-1A TNK trial showed better reperfusion versus alteplase in lesions with low clot burden.

The TAAIS trial compared doses of tenecteplase in computed tomography (CT) confirmed middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. The trial concluded higher recanalization rates and greater neurological improvement, as evidenced by an improvement in the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) in the 0.25 mg/kg cohort.

The most recently published AcT trial in Canada is a large randomized open-label trial comparing 0.25 mg/kg of tenecteplase and alteplase. This trial demonstrated the non-inferiority of tenecteplase versus alteplase.

From all the available data about tenecteplase in acute ischemic stroke, one can conclude that no clear positive phase 3 trial shows its superiority over alteplase. 0.4 mg/kg of tenecteplase showed no advantage over the 0.25 mg/kg dose. Given its longer half-life so that it can be given as a single bolus dose and its lower cost, tenecteplase is becoming more accepted in most stroke centers in the USA over alteplase.

The 2019 American Heart Association/American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) Guidelines provide the most current recommendations for tenecteplase use in AIS.

**Pulmonary Embolism**

Although tenecteplase is not FDA-approved for use in pulmonary embolism (PE), several studies have evaluated its efficacy and safety in use for acute PE.

The PEITHO study and its long-term outcome evaluation represented the largest trial evaluating the use of thrombolytics in the setting of acute PE. The study showed tenecteplase may improve hemodynamics in patients with PE and evidence of right heart strain but at an increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage compared to placebo (6.3% vs 1.2%).