Ventral cord syndrome results from direct or indirect damage to the ventral spinal cord. A direct injury arises when the spinal cord is mechanically crushed or compressed, as in the case of an enlarging hematoma. Indirect injuries constitute the primary etiology of ventral cord syndrome, and the resultant tissue damage is secondary to the ischemia. The integrity of the aorta is critical for the proper perfusion of the ventral aspect of the spinal cord and knowledge of vascular anatomy is required to understand this concept. The aorta gives rise to subclavian arteries, which in turn give rise to the vertebral arteries. The vertebral arteries give rise to the anterior spinal artery (ASA), which supplies the anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord. Therefore, any condition that compromises the aorta, such as aortic dissection, may cause indirect injuries to the ventral cord. Ventral cord syndrome can also result from iatrogenic damage to the aorta following surgical complications during attempted vascular repairs or with prolonged clamping of the aorta. Other less common causes of infarcts to the ventral cord are intrinsic arterial occlusion due to emboli or atheroma of the ASA or the radicular branches.

The anterior aspect of the spinal cord is particularly susceptible to ischemia because the supplying vessels are end-arteries and typically have no anastomoses. ASA infarction may also occur due to impairment of perfusion via the great anterior radicular artery of Adamkiewicz, which is the major contributor to the caudal two-thirds of ASA in the lower thoracic and upper lumbar region (T5 to L2) of the spinal cord. Other causes of disruption of blood flow in ASA are aneurysms, trauma or syphilitic arteries.