**Capillary Blood Glucose Test**

A blood drop sample is usually collected from a fingertip prick.

Blood samples can also be sourced from alternate sites such as the earlobe, heel, forearm, and palm. Alternate site testing provides similar results to finger-prick testing, especially when fasting and at two-hour post-meal times. Using alternate sites may be less painful for the patient but may need a deeper lancet. Check with the glucometer manufacturer to determine if the machine may be used for alternate site testing.

The equipment used in capillary blood glucose testing includes a lancet to prick the skin, a glucometer, and test strips. Glucometers have a range of features. Modern "smart" machines require a very small sample of blood (from 0.3 to 1 microL) and have Bluetooth capabilities that synchronize data with paired applications (apps) on smartphones. These machines and apps record data and provide trends in glucose measurements. Further, some apps also offer options to record diet, medications used, and type of physical activity undertaken, which may be helpful to the health care practitioner when managing the care plan for the client with diabetes.

Advantages: Small blood sample, range of alternate testing sites, short testing time, prominent display on glucometer, less painful than venipuncture.

Disadvantages: Manufacturers often provide low-cost or subsidized glucometers but sell testing strips and accessories at a significant profit margin. The test strips are expensive, time-limited with short expiry dates, and are affected by a range of variables, including temperature, humidity, size, and quality of blood samples. The clinical presentation of the patient will affect the accuracy of the test result. The reliability of results may vary in clients with hypoglycemia, anemia, altered hematocrit, hypotension, or critically ill patients. Older machines may need calibration with test strips, and results could be compromised if the calibration is not undertaken appropriately.

**Venous (Plasma) Blood Sample**

Venous blood is collected via venipuncture, and the sample is processed in a commercial-grade laboratory with appropriate sophisticated quality control checks.

Advantages: This method provides results superior to the capillary blood glucose test. However, this is dependent on the laboratory meeting established industry standards.

Disadvantages: Painful procedure, risk of local tissue damage, unsuitable for frequent specimen collection.

**Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM)**

Flash blood glucose monitoring (continuous interstitial fluid glucose monitoring) involves applying a water-resistant disposable sensor on the back of the upper arm or abdomen. Depending on the product, the sensor can remain on the patient for 3 to 14 days. The sensor can be scanned with a reader, which displays the current interstitial fluid glucose level and trends over the previous eight hours. CGM machines can store 90 days of glucose data. Data from the CGM device can be shared with family and care providers via a smartphone application; these devices are often capable of sending alarms or alert messages, including during episodes of hypoglycemia. In addition, some CGMs are compatible with insulin delivery devices and can stop insulin delivery if the machine predicts or recognizes a drop in BSL. Some older CGM machines require twice daily finger-prick tests for calibration. However, the more recently introduced devices do not require this calibration.

Advantages: In patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who require intensive insulin therapy or sulfonylureas, flash monitoring has been demonstrated to be cost-effective when compared to CBG self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG). Interstitial glucose measurements are recorded as frequently as every 5 minutes every hour, which has the benefit of monitoring for hypoglycemia during sleep.

Disadvantages: Glucose is present in the blood before it is seen in the interstitial fluid, which the CGM measures. Hence sole monitoring of the interstitial fluid may not always be a reliable indicator of rapidly changing blood glucose levels. The high cost of sensors and machines (approximately $5000 per annum) may not make this a viable option in economically less advantaged clients and communities where health care is not subsidized by insurance or the government.