There are many reasons for performing a small bowel resection (SBR), and common indications are listed below. While the general principles of an SBR are nearly universal, modifications of the surgical technique may be required based on the pathology. Some common indications are listed below, with an abridged explanation of how each pathology needs to be specifically addressed.

- Obstruction not amendable to adhesiolysis

- Malignancy: Suspected malignancies will typically require 8-10 cm margins.

- Non-traumatic perforation: The differential for adult patients includes ulcerative disease and malignancy. SBR may be preferred over the repair to allow for tissue diagnosis by a pathologist

- Traumatic perforation: Defects can be repaired if they encompass less than 50% of the small bowel loop; otherwise, they require resection.

- Ischemic necrosis: This occurs secondary to emboli, thrombus, or low-flow malperfusion. Bowel ischemia is often progressive if the underlying diseases state is not corrected, requiring multiple resections over several days and carrying high morbidity

- Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD): Resection is typically the last treatment choice reserved for strictures not amendable to stricturoplasty or conservative management. The inflammatory nature of IBD increases the risk of complications

- Enterocutaneous fistula not amendable to closure with conservative measures

- Necrotizing enterocolitis with perforation

- Symptomatic Meckel diverticulum or diverticular disease