Detailed knowledge of maxillary anatomy is essential when dealing with the trauma of the midface. The most recognized classification of midface trauma is the LeFort classification for maxillary fractures. French surgeon René LeFort created it in 1901. It divides midface fractures into three categories (LeFort I, II and III) based on the pattern of the fracture lines on the midface.

A fracture is classified as LeFort I when it extends posteriorly, on a horizontal plane from the pyriform aperture through the zygomaticoalveolar crest to maxillary tuberosities into the pterygopalatine fossa. This type of fracture separates the hard palate and alveolar process from the facial skull.

LeFort II fractures are pyramidal in shape. It extends from the nasofrontal suture to the frontomaxillary suture, through the orbital floor and maxillary sinus, extending inferiorly to the zygomaticoalveolar crest bilaterally. Inferiorly, proceeds caudally to the maxillary tuberosities into the pterygoid process. Superiorly, the fractures extend caudally sectioning through the nasal septum. This fracture dissociates the nasal bones, the nasal septum, and maxilla from the cranial skull and the lateral midface.

LeFort III fractures extend from the nasofrontal suture down through the medial wall and orbital floor to the inferior orbital fissure. It proceeds laterally, interrupts the zygomaticofrontal suture and continues inferiorly through the zygomatic arches bilaterally. From the nasofrontal suture, it extends caudally through the ethmoid and perpendicular plate of the palatine bone, fracturing the pterygoid process and vomer, terminating in the palatine fossa. This fracture completely separates the facial skeleton from the cranial skull.