Being triangular, the cubital fossa has three borders:

- Superior (base) - an imaginary line between the medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus

- Medial - the lateral boundary of the pronator teres

- Lateral - the medial border of the brachioradialis

The apex is directed distally and forms from the joining of the two borders.

The floor of the fossa is formed by the brachialis muscle proximally, and the supinator muscle distally — the roof (from superficial to deep) forms from the skin, fascia, and the bicipital aponeurosis.

The cubital fossa is a very narrow space, and the boundaries have to be retracted to see the contents within it. The fossa possesses several vital structures, vital to the function of the forearm and hand. From lateral to medial, these structures are:

- Radial nerve - originating from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus, with contributions from C5-T1 roots. In the cubital fossa, it runs close to the brachioradialis muscle and splits into its deep and superficial branches within.

- Biceps tendon - perhaps the most prominent structure of the cubital fossa, the biceps tendon runs through attaching to the radial tuberosity of the radius.

- Brachial artery - the brachial artery runs through the fossa, just medial to the biceps tendon, branching at the apex into the radial and ulnar arteries.

- Median nerve - originating from the lateral and medial cords of the brachial plexus, with contributions from C6-T1 roots. It can be found most medially within the cubital fossa, running between the two heads of pronator teres in the majority of the population.

While not in the cubital fossa itself, found within the roof is the median cubital vein - forming a communication between the cephalic and basilic superficial veins of the arm. Also seen in the superficial fascia of the roof are the medial and the lateral cutaneous nerves of the forearm.