Given their relative rarity, clinical management of EIs has primarily been extrapolated from accumulated clinical cases and series, many of which also discuss non-trauma etiologies of esophageal injury/perforation. Consequently, the following management strategies commonly applied to esophageal perforation are being generalized to include both penetrating and blunt traumatic EI. As previously stated, the location of injury will play an important role in the treatment of the EIs, with the focus of this review on thoracic EIs.

In general, earlier and more prompt diagnosis and management of EIs results in better patient outcomes. The high risk of mediastinitis leading to severe systemic sepsis/septic shock, impaired future healing, and disruption of the surgical plan(s) underscores the importance of early and proper management. The lack of a serosal layer makes any esophageal repairs far more tenuous than repairs of other portions of the gastrointestinal tract. Definitive closure and drainage are best carried out as soon as possible, although exceptions to these rules do exist. On rare occasions, other life-threatening injuries and/or competing pressing medical conditions may take precedence over the immediate management if EI. In such cases, prioritization of which injury/condition should be approached first must consider the overall risk-benefit equation specific to a particular clinical scenario.

**Non-Operative Management**

Non-operative management of EI may be indicated in patients who have contained leaks, are hemodynamically stable with few signs/symptoms, or those who are moribund and unlikely to survive a major operation. Many patients within this group may have had a significant delay in diagnosis due to a mild clinical presentation. Others may have been found to have a major injury after surviving the initial sepsis and mediastinitis. Assuming that diagnosis has not been missed and that the patient genuinely has a "contained" esophageal injury, the following criteria may warrant non-operative management (all three criteria required): (1) contained leak (2) mild symptoms, and (3) minimal evidence of clinical sepsis.  A contained leak is best described as extravasation of contrast on esophagram, but the contrast “loops back in” after initially extravasating from the esophagus. This is usually a small area not associated with a standing fluid collection, mediastinal inflammation, or pleural effusion. An esophagram can be repeated within several days to document the resolution of the leak before starting an enteral diet. Patients who are not ideal candidates for operative intervention because of severe sepsis or pulmonary compromise should undergo wide chest drainage at the bedside, usually using a greater than one tube thoracostomy.

**Operative Management **

Although there are no prospective studies defining a "safe window" of time within which diagnostic testing can be completed before operative intervention, there is general agreement that EI is a surgical emergency, and pre-operative testing must be expedited to facilitate a timely repair. The severity of concomitant injuries often necessitates a delay of esophageal repair. Literature supports the notion that the degree of inflammation in surrounding tissues (as opposed to the time initial injury) should guide the choice of primary repair versus drainage. It is also known that the degree of soilage correlates with the overall morbidity associated with EI. Surgical repairs can usually be accomplished, even at delayed time periods, in patients with minimal soilage at time of the operation. Because post-repair morbidity and mortality are mainly related (and attributed) to anastomotic failures, every single factor should be considered carefully at the time of initial management strategy formulation.

The location of the injury is another factor that influences both the surgical approach and various surgical repair options. Injuries of the cervical esophagus are best approached from the left neck where the recurrent nerve can be more easily identified and preserved. The incision should be placed at the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and carried down through the soft tissues between the trachea and the carotid sheath. The esophagus can be mobilized using the blunt technique, with careful attention not to injure either the recurrent nerve or the membranous portion of the trachea. Buttressing flaps are discussed in later paragraphs (see below).

Thoracic esophageal injuries are best approached through a right posterolateral thoracotomy. Appropriate patient positioning is critical to proper surgical visualization and surgical repair optimization. The intercostal muscle bundle is of great importance and must be preserved when entering the thoracic cavity. It can be extremely valuable as a potential repair-buttressing flap, providing vascular tissue coverage over the esophageal repair.

The distal third of the thoracic esophagus is best accessible via a left postero-lateral thoracotomy or from the abdomen (after appropriately mobilized). Finally, the abdominal portion of the esophagus is best accessed by an upper midline laparotomy. This should be carried up to the xiphoid process and down to the level of the umbilicus.

**Primary Repair**

Primary repair of an IEs requires attention to several important surgical principles. First, anatomic areas directly involved in the injury must be fully debrided to healthy tissue. Use of necrotic or devascularized tissue will endanger the integrity of the repair. EIs tend to be most extensive at the level of the mucosa. Consequently, simply identifying and repairing the muscular portion of the injury will likely result in an incomplete closure of the mucosal defect. The muscular defect should be carefully extended until the ends of the mucosal injury are identified.

Second, EI repair must be tension free, and mobilization of the esophagus should be minimized because its blood supply is segmental. Overzealous mobilization can render the anastomosis ischemic and result in a postoperative leak. To help strengthen the integrity of the repair, the esophagus should be reapproximated in two-layers, with an inner, running, absorbable suture and an outer, interrupted, non-absorbable suture. Stapled mucosal anastomosis also can be performed, followed by suture approximation of the outer esophageal layer.

Third, repairs should be buttressed with local tissue and muscle flaps, especially if repair is delayed (e.g., greater than 8-12 hours from injury) or if there is another nearby injury or adjacent suture line. For example, injury to both the esophagus and trachea with parallel suture lines should be separated by a tissue flap to tracheoesophageal prevent fistula formation. Muscle flaps also improve the vascular supply in the setting of active contamination. The choice of tissue flap is dictated by the relative location of the injury and the flap's anatomic origin (e.g., vascular supply). Commonly used flap materials include latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior, or intercostal muscles. Pericardium or pleura are secondary choices because they are more fragile and comparatively less vascular. In the chest, the intercostal muscle provides the simplest and most reliable tissue flap. Care must be taken when making the thoracotomy incision to preserve this important muscular complex. Other flap options in the chest include the latissimus dorsi, the rhomboid, and the diaphragm. In the abdomen, a Thal patch (e.g., gastric fundus) or various types of fundoplications can be performed. For cervical EIs, the sternocleidomastoid muscle can be used as a barrier between adjacent structures or to reinforce the repair. Due to its abundant blood supply and location, the sternocleidomastoid is very reliable as a tissue flap. Wrapping the esophagus with the platysma muscle has also been described.

Fourth, appropriate drainage should accompany all esophageal repairs. This reduces the severity of systemic reaction and sepsis in the event of an anastomotic breakdown. It also serves as a diagnostic "early warning system," especially when one considers that an undrained mediastinal collection can lead to severe sepsis and significantly elevates patient mortality. When used appropriately and performed in a timely fashion, primary repair of EIs is the preferred option, with low morbidity and mortality.

**Wide Chest Drainage**

Wide chest drainage alone can be utilized as an option to control contamination in patients who are not candidates for primary repair or surgical diversion. This may be due to other competing clinical priorities, co-morbid conditions, or cases where tissue inflammation and soilage preclude injury repair. Usually, wide drainage can be performed in the setting of close observation, in the intensive care unit. In many such cases, patients may be unstable to withstand a major operation. At the same time, operative placement of drains tends to be more effective.  Beyond initial management, if wide drainage becomes the "primary" management, it may be combined with esophageal diversion and/or exclusion (see below). Because of the inherent patient selection bias, wide drainage alone is associated with exceedingly high mortality.

**Esophageal Diversion & Exclusion **

Esophageal diversion and exclusion facilitate a decreased local flow of oral secretions and reflux of gastric contents at the site of EI.  A diverting cervical esophagostomy should be performed in cases where primary repair is not a viable option and wide drainage is therefore chosen as the treatment approach. Esophageal exclusion (diversion with the closure of the gastro-esophageal junction) can be considered for extensive EIs (or those diagnosed with a delay), especially in the setting of significant tissue contamination and swelling. The involved anatomic locations are most often in the mid-to-distal esophagus.

Patients with a delayed diagnosis of EI can present with marked inflammation of the upper mediastinum that can preclude esophageal mobilization and creation of a proximal loop esophagostomy. In such cases, an end cervical esophagostomy can be created, clearly not a preferred approach that is acceptable only as a temporizing measure for several days while the mediastinal sepsis resolves. If the diverted esophagus is also temporarily excluded, either with absorbable sutures or a stapling device, recanalization of the diverted portion takes place, usually in as little as two weeks. This may present clinically as renewed mediastinal contamination in an otherwise recovering patient. Once the esophageal injury seals off from the pleural spaces and mediastinum, careful attention must be given for the development of the so-called “blind loop" syndrome. Bacterial stasis and overgrowth within the excluded esophagus can result in sepsis. In such cases, CT imaging may show a grossly dilated and enhancing esophagus. After confirming the diagnosis, the "blind loop" syndrome is treated with appropriate drainage procedure(s), usually determined on case-by-case basis.

**T-Tube Diversion**

T-Tube diversion of the esophagus can be used for smaller, usually distal injuries in patients who are not candidates for primary repair and where formal diversion and exclusion may not be required. From a surgical standpoint, the T-tube is placed directly through the injury into the site of EI and kept on constant suction to encourage the formation of a controlled fistula. The tube is kept in place for several weeks to allow a tract to form. This approach is especially useful for small injuries near the gastro-esophageal junction. Placement of large bore mediastinal and pleural tubes should accompany the T-tube. Once stable, the patient will need a gastrostomy tube for decompression and a jejunostomy tube for feeding.

**Esophagectomy**

Esophagectomy is rarely required as therapy for EIs but may be needed if the primary repair fails or cannot be performed after "damage control" maneuvers involving diversion and/or exclusion. Limited, retrospective clinical data suggest that esophagectomy may be the preferred approach for patients diagnosed with delayed EIs. These experiences suggest an acceptable safety profile of this approach, especially in the absence of any further interventions. Associated mortality also may be lower than that for non-operative approaches. If esophagectomy is selected as the optimal approach for a carefully selected patient, it is best performed using the Ivor-Lewis technique because the mediastinum is usually too inflamed to facilitate safe of transhiatal approach. Because of the technical complexity of this operation, especially in the setting of EI, it should optimally be carried out by experienced thoracic or esophageal surgeon(s).

The simplest and most commonly performed repair, characterized by a single anastomosis, is the gastric "pull-up." Because the stomach is usually the conduit of choice, gastrostomy tubes should not be placed in patients with EIs who require resective managment. When the gastric "pull-up" option is not available, post-esophagectomy restoration of luminal continuity can be performed using a colonic interposition (usually transverse colon) or a Roux-en-Y jejunal limb. The decision regarding which conduit to use depends on any concomitant injuries and the availability of a non-injured, well-perfused conduit. Preferred enteral feeding access is via a surgical jejunostomy tube.

**Post-Operative Care**

Post-operative care involves appropriate monitoring, initially in an ICU setting. Early recognition and treatment of cardiovascular complications and/or sepsis is paramount. Adequate nutritional support also plays an important role in optimizing clinical outcomes. Total parenteral nutrition or jejunostomy feeding should be started as soon as possible. Contrast swallow evaluations should take place 5 to 7 days after primary esophageal repair if no clinical signs of leakage are present. All drains should be maintained until contrast radiography confirms healing.

**Complications of Operative Care**

An anastomotic breakdown is unfortunately relatively frequent after EI repairs, primarily due to the multitude of risk factors outlined in previous sections. Depending on the location of EI, these leaks can lead to secondary wound infection, mediastinitis, abscess, empyema, pneumonia, and sepsis. Of all these complications, sepsis carries the highest associated mortality. Thus, the primary goal of postoperative management should be the prevention of sepsis by maintenance or establishment of wide drainage. Early recognition of sepsis is critical in instances where wide drainage fails to control soilage.

Fistula formation between the repaired esophagus and adjacent structures can occur in the immediate post-operative period or in a delayed fashion. The incidence of such fistulae increases when an adjacent structure also requires a concomitant surgical repair. Cutaneous and vascular fistulas have been described, but the most common fistula is a tracheal-esophageal fistula. These fistulae usually form at or just above the carina, and present with coughing after food or liquid ingestion and eventually the development of pneumonia. As previously discussed, the placement of an interposition vascularized tissue flap may help reduce the incidence of this morbidity. Commonly seen longer-term complications include stricture formation and the development of diverticulum around the repair site. Although most anastomotic strictures can be treated with endoscopic dilations, refractory cases may require esophagectomy. Diverticulum formation has also been noted post repair. Treatment of such diverticula depends on their size, location, and global clinical circumstance/context.

**Cervical Esophageal Injury**

In most cases, cervical EIs can be managed non-operatively or by simple retroesophageal drainage, usually combined with nil per os (NPO), antibiotics, and early nutritional support. Provided that any foreign bodies associated with the injury have been removed, such a non-operative approach is generally sufficient to achieve healing of the EI in question. In the continued presence of foreign bodies, surgical removal of the offending object and primary repair seems to be the best option. Surgery also may be required when the non-operative approach fails to result in expected clinical improvement. If other injuries (e.g., vascular or airway trauma) mandate surgical exploration, a primary repair can be effective in both controlling any ongoing contamination and reducing any associated vascular or airway-related complications. Negative pressure wound therapy has also been reported for complicated cases that failed to respond to the aforementioned options.

**Esophageal Stenting**

In patients with significant comorbid conditions, intra-luminal stenting has been described as a means to prevent intraluminal material from contacting the esophageal wall during the tissue healing process. Although this technology is still maturing, it will likely play a greater role in the future. As mentioned briefly in previous sections of this review, esophageal stenting has been used selectively in cases of EI, both primarily and for postoperative anastomotic leaks. Stents have been utilized in the care of thoracic EIs with good results, challenging the existing standard of care. In a recent retrospective study, treatment of esophageal perforation with stents rather than primary repair was associated with lower costs, fewer ICU days, shorter hospitalizations, quicker resumption of oral intake, and equivalent overall mortality. The timing of stent placement (e.g.,  less than 24 hours versus greater than 24 hours post-injury) does not seem to affect outcomes.

Among some of the reported advantage of esophageal stenting are (a) the ability to administer oral hydration and nutrition; (b) the possibility of device removal (e.g., reversibility); and (c) rapid elimination of mediastinal, pleural, and peritoneal contamination. In whatever setting esophageal stenting is used, it is important to remember that contamination must still be controlled and adequately drained. In some cases, a hybrid approach utilizing stenting and thoracoscopic decortication may be indicated. Finally, esophageal stenting is best utilized in the setting of isolated EI, and the presence of concomitant injuries may preclude its use. Consequently, stenting has been employed for iatrogenic and other non-trauma indications far more frequently than EI resulting from trauma.

Despite its clinical attractiveness and ease of placement, stenting of thoracic EIs has some potential downsides, including patient tolerance issues and the risk of stent migration. For the latter reason, stenting is not being performed for cervical or gastroesophageal junction EIs. Stent migration is a concern and may lead to further interventions. Migration of the stent is more likely with nonmetal stents are used.