A balloon-expandable valve is the first transcatheter valve approved for use in humans. Bonhoeffer et al. published the first TPVI experience in humans after prior testing in animal models.

More recently, a second-generation balloon-expandable valve commonly used for aortic valve intervention was approved for use in the pulmonary position in 2016. The larger range of sizes (20 mm, 23 mm, 26 mm, and 29 mm) makes this valve potentially suitable for placement in conduits or large RVOTs (> 22 mm). This device consists of a tri-leaflet valve constructed from bovine pericardial tissue and hand-sutured onto a rigid chromium-cobalt. These valves enable the placement of large-diameter transcatheter valves in large conduits and native RVOTs. The length of the stent frame ranges from 14.3 mm and 19.1 mm for 23 and 29 mm valves, respectively, after implantation to suit RVOT dimensions from 20 to 29 mm.

**Other Equipment**

Stiff wires are used for extra support to deliver the valve to the RVOT, especially in patients with complex anatomies and concomitant pulmonary valve stenosis. A standard pigtail catheter is used to perform angiograms of PAs for good visualization. Medium pressure or high-pressure balloons are used to estimate the RVOT size, assess for coronary artery compression, pre-dilation of RVOT/conduit, and post-dilation of the valve prosthesis. Large sheaths are used for vascular access and for introducing delivery systems to the RVOT. Covered stents are occasionally used to provide a landing zone for the deployment of the prosthetic valve. They reduce the risk of conduit disruption if significant dilation is required due to severe stenosis. In select cases, non-covered stents are used to provide an adequate landing zone. Suture mediated vascular closure devices are routinely deployed before insertion of large sheaths to help optimize hemostasis post-procedure.