Radiological studies play a pivotal role in diagnosing cerebral cavernous angiomas with MRI as the modality of choice.

Computed tomogram (CT) scanning plays only a limited role largely because of its relative lack of specificity. On nonenhanced, CT scan cavernomas may or may not be apparent. If visualized, they usually appear as focal oval or nodular lesions with mild-to-moderate increased attenuation. Lack of mass effect on the surrounding brain parenchyma is common unless a recent hemorrhage is present. CT scan demonstrates calcification in 33% of cavernomas. Surrounding mantle of edema is usually apparent if there is hemorrhage. Older lesions can contain central hypoattenuating non-enhancing areas or cystic cavities from reabsorbed old hematomas. Contrast enhancement can vary from minimal to prominent. Some studies report 70-94% of cavernous angiomas to demonstrate mild-to-moderate post-contrast enhancement which usually has a mottled or heterogeneous appearance. The peripheral rim of decreased attenuation is because of the pseudo capsule of gliotic tissue. Hemorrhagic events particularly those found in relatively young patients ought to be characterized further, and cavernous angioma should be considered among the possible etiologies.  Also because of their propensity to act as an epileptogenic focus CMs should always be considered in the workup of a patient with a seizure disorder, especially if the patient is aged 20-40 years.

MRI establishes the diagnosis. It demonstrates typical, smoothly circumscribed lesions with popcorn-like, mulberry like the pattern of variable signal intensities which are consistent with hemorrhage in various stages of evolution. The heterogeneous core typically is surrounded completely by a low-signal-intensity hemosiderin rim which is most apparent, or blooms, on T2-weighted and gradient-recalled images. Smaller cavernous angiomas are usually not apparent on conventional spin-echo sequences, and these smaller lesions are best-depicted Gradient echo or T2* sequences, or other susceptibility-weighted images (SWI). SWI imaging also plays an important role in identifying the number of lesions in patients with familial or multiple cavernous angiomas. SWI also has high sensitivity in detecting calcification.

If a recent bleed has occurred then surrounding edema or mass effect may be present. The lesions show a variable pattern of enhancement. Contrast-enhanced images help delineate any potential associated developmental venous anomalies. This is critical for preoperative surgical planning as the un-deliberate resection of DVAs may compromise normal cortical venous drainage and thus lead to brain venous infarction. Angiographically these lesions are occult and usually show nonspecific findings like capillary blush or early draining vein.