- Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are rare inborn errors of metabolism. Defective lysosomal enzymes are the chief cause. Other causes include defects in lysosomal enzyme activator, lysosomal membrane proteins, or non-lysosomal proteins.

- They are rare individually, some very rare, but they are much more common as a group.

- The lysosome is no longer the waste recycle-bin of the cell, and subsequent research has shown it has far-reaching roles in cellular metabolism and energy generation.

- The study of this organelle has paved the way for understanding how LSDs affect different organs and the methods to investigate and treat them.

- LSDs presenting early in fetal life, infancy, or childhood are usually severe, while a late-onset disease in adults is mild.

- Organ involvement varies with age; the brain's effects are more profound in the younger age group.

- The substrates accumulate within cells because of a lack of a specific enzyme and cause organ dysfunction.

- The earlier the onset, the more severe the dysfunction.

- There are specific clinical characteristics for the individual LSDs that provide the lead to the diagnosis.

- The first investigation is usually the enzyme levels that are either deficient(mild disease) or absent(severe disease).

- Pseudodeficiency may complicate certain LSDs.

- Genetic testing for the mutated genes coding for those enzymes is available and can confirm the enzyme tests.

- A low enzyme level with appropriate clinical suspicion and the normal gene encoding the enzyme should prompt a search for mutations in the genes for enzyme activator proteins.

- Genetic tests are useful in cases of mild disease when the enzyme tests are borderline.

- Genetic testing is also helpful in detecting carriers and helps in family counseling.

- The prognosis was dismal in the past, but the advent of modern therapy like ERT, HSCT, SRT, VAGT, and SCT has vastly improved lifespan and quality.

- The treatment started early before organ damage sets in will result in maximum benefits from these therapies.

- Newborn-screening programs have been devised and tested, and maybe the answer to detect LSDs early and gain maximum therapeutic advantage from modern treatment techniques.