Golimumab is a tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitor targeting the human TNF-α cytokine protein and further preventing binding with its receptors. The agent is FDA-approved for managing active moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis in sequence with first-line therapy methotrexate, active psoriatic arthritis, active ankylosing spondylitis, and patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis unable to achieve an adequate response to previous therapy, or patients requiring ongoing treatment with steroid. Golimumab recently attained FDA approval in 2020 for its indication in the pediatric population on treating active polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis and psoriatic arthritis in patients aged two years and above.

The care and management of inflammatory and autoimmune disease patients require care coordination from the interprofessional team of healthcare professionals. Immediate clinical examination and diagnosis can further result in efficient treatment plans, which can mitigate debilitating symptoms and further increase the quality of the patient's life. The interprofessional treatment team comprises a primary care physician (PCP), a rheumatologist, a gastroenterologist, mid-level practitioners, nurses, a physical therapist (PT), and a pharmacist.

Continuous interaction between the prescribing specialist and PCP should be maintained to be up to date with their patient's care. The treatment team should also be regularly updated with the latest guidelines on their patient's disease management. The interprofessional team should thoroughly educate and counsel their patients on their disease and management with golimumab. Patients should be aware of any potential adverse effects that may occur and be advised to report any new onset unsuspected symptoms. Golimumab administration should be done in a health care setting where the interprofessional care team is fully equipped for any immediate adverse effects such as hypersensitivity reactions (hives, pruritus, dyspnea, nausea, angioedema, urticaria, anaphylaxis). In the event of any severe events such as anaphylaxis, the treatment should be immediately stopped, and appropriate management should be initiated.

While treating patients with golimumab, the healthcare team should monitor the patients' complete blood count, liver enzymes, and TB test before initiating the treatment and routinely afterward. TB screening with a tuberculin skin test (TST) or interferon-γ release assay (IGRA) should be performed on all patients. Patients who present a positive TB test should receive management for TB before initiating treatment with golimumab. Patients with a history of HBV and who receive golimumab should routinely be monitored for HBV reactivation and discontinue therapy if reactivation does ensue. The treatment team should discuss the boxed warnings of golimumab and all potential benefits and risks of treatment with all patients planning to start therapy.

Patients should be advised of the boxed, labeled warning of increased risk of potentially severe infections and malignancy. Patients are to immediately report any new onset constitution symptoms indicative of severe infections to their PCP to prevent complications, hospitalization, and potential mortality. Intercommunication is vital amongst the interprofessional team while treating with golimumab as it can further increase medication compliance, decrease potential adverse effects, improve disease course and quality of life.