If suspicion of Wilson disease is high, order a ceruloplasmin level. It will be less than 20 mg/dL (normal 20 mg/dL to 40 mg/dL). Urinary copper levels will be raised more than 100 mcg/dL. These two lab findings with Kayser-Fleischer rings are usually enough for diagnosis, but if there is the possibility of an alternate diagnosis, order a liver biopsy for liver copper levels; this the most accurate test for Wilson disease. Note low levels of ceruloplasmin may be seen in any protein deficiency disorder.

A positive result is a copper level greater than 250 mcg/g of dry liver tissue. An MRI is helpful to check for brain involvement. Liver function tests are deranged with elevated AST and ALT levels.

Wilson disease should be suspected if symptoms consistent with the disease are present or if a relative has been found to have the disease. Most had slightly abnormal liver function tests and raised aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, and bilirubin levels. If the liver damage is significant, albumin is decreased as a result of the inability of damaged liver cells to produce this protein; likewise, the prothrombin time is prolonged as the liver is not producing proteins known as clotting factors. Alkaline phosphatase levels are low in those with Wilson-related acute liver failure. If there are neurological symptoms, MRI of the brain may show hyperintensities in the basal ganglia in the T2 sequence. MRI may demonstrate the characteristic "face of the giant panda" pattern.

The ECG may reveal ventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmias and non-specific changes in T waves and ST segments.

The presence of Kayser Fleischer rings in the presence of neuropsychiatric symptoms is suggestive of Wilson disease.

There is no completely reliable test for Wilson disease, but levels of ceruloplasmin and copper in the blood, as well as copper excreted in urine during a 24-hour period, are used to form an impression of the amount of copper in the body. The gold standard is a liver biopsy.

First and second-degree relatives need to be screened for Wilson disease.