X-rays of the affected extremity at the elbow and wrist should be obtained to rule out any osseous deformity that may cause nerve entrapment, as well as cervical spine radiographs that may reveal sources of radiculopathy or first rib involvement. Finally, a chest x-ray should be obtained to rule out compression of the medial chord by an apical lung or Pancoast tumor, particularly in a patient with a positive history for smoking.

X-rays of the elbow may reveal congenital abnormalities, post-traumatic changes, or valgus alignment of the elbow that can result in neuropraxia at the elbow. X-rays of the wrist should include carpal tunnel and oblique views to assess for hamate fractures, which is a common cause of ulnar nerve compression symptoms in the hand. If there is high clinical suspicion for a hook of the hamate fracture, a CT scan can better assess for pathology, as x-ray has a low sensitivity for detecting such fractures.

MRI is an imaging modality that can be further used to confirm clinical suspicions of cervical radiculopathy in the neck, or of a ganglion or other space-occupying lesions in the wrist.

Ultrasound of the nerve at the elbow and wrist can be used to measure the size of the ulnar nerve compared to controls, as well as to identify a thrombosis of the ulnar artery that can lead to ulnar nerve symptoms originating in Guyon's canal.

Electromyography is also commonly used in the diagnosis of compression neuropathy with muscle denervation. Compressive neuropathies result in increased distal latency and decreased conduction velocity. Thus in patients with cubital tunnel syndrome, one is likely to identify a slowing of conduction in the ulnar nerve segment crossing the elbow.