The vagus nerve is commonly tested clinically in conjugation with the glossopharyngeal nerve because of their apparent effects that are oftentimes reliant upon another. A patient is often asked to open their mouth and say ‘ah,’ this should cause elevation of the uvula. If there is a lesion, the uvula shifts away from the paralyzed side. Gag reflex should not be used as a clinical exam as there can be a bilateral loss of the gag reflex in a healthy patient. If a patient is noted to have hoarseness during the physical exam, this should show the need to test the vocal cords in the patient; if there is hoarseness with a normal gag reflex and palatal elevation, this indicates a lesion of the recurrent laryngeal nerve.

Vagus nerve stimulation was created as a means to reach a centrally located neurological structures by minimally invasive means. In the conventional vagus nerve stimulation technique, a device is implanted surgically under the skin in the chest, and electrical wires connect to the left vagus nerve (left used more often than right, as the right vagus nerve is more likely to have branches to the heart). Vagus nerve stimulation is approved to treat epilepsy and depression; however, with the wide distribution of the vagus nerve throughout the body, stimulation is being explored for other purposes such as the treatment of obesity.

Stimulation of the larynx provides reflexes including cough, apnea, and effects on the cardiovascular system such as bradycardia and hypotension.

Central lesions of the vagus nerve can cause dysphagia, dysarthria and hoarseness; uvula deviation (towards the opposite side of the lesion); and transient parasympathetic effects.

Lateral medullary syndrome (posterior inferior cerebellar artery infarction) leads to the destruction of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, the nucleus ambiguous, the solitary nucleus, and the spinocerebellar tracts.