The management of airborne infections is with an interprofessional team aided by hospital guidelines and rules. All healthcare workers, including the nurse, have a vital role in preventing airborne infections. An interprofessional team approach involving clinicians and nurses will produce the best results in preventing the spread of infections. The following principles should apply:

- Mostly, antibiotics or antiviral drugs are not usually prescribed to prevent or control infections caused by viruses. However, antibiotics may be prescribed to a patient with the flu to control or prevent secondary bacterial infections.

- Recommendations from the CDC for the public include maintaining careful hygiene and sanitation protocols and getting vaccinated against the organisms associated with airborne infections.

- If the number of negative pressure rooms is limited, set priority for use. For example, infectious tuberculosis is the highest booty followed by measles, then variceal disseminated zoster, and finally extensive localized zoster.

- In emergencies, when there is no airborne isolation room, at least pull the privacy curtains and require all personnel to wear an N95 respirator. Ask visitors and other patients to leave the area.

- One may also use UV air purification devices that are EPR certified, and FDA approved to inactivate a wide range of airborne infectious disorders.

- All health care workers must be aware of their immune status. Individuals who have problems with immunity or have not been vaccinated should not be allowed to take care of patients with vaccine preventive airborne infections like chickenpox or measles.