Patients will present acutely with varying degrees of swelling and deformity.  Pain and limited range of motion (ROM) are the expected presentation.  A comprehensive physical examination includes examination from the shoulder to the hand of the ipsilateral extremity in question.  Case reports in the literature highlight the not uncommon presentation of some combination of the forearm, elbow, and humeral-based fractures.  One such report included the presence of an ipsilateral elbow dislocation, humeral shaft fracture, and shoulder dislocation following high energy trauma.

- Skin integrity

- Critical when assessing for the presence of an open fracture and/or traumatic arthrotomy

- Presence of swelling or effusion

- Comprehensive neurovascular examination

How the patient carries their arm may give clues to the diagnosis.

**Bony injuries**

- Supracondylar fracture

- Flexion type

- Patient supports injured forearm with other arm and elbow in 90º flexion
- Loss of olecranon prominence


- Extension type

- Patient hold arm at side in S-type configuration

**Soft tissue injuries**

- Elbow dislocations:

- Posterior: abnormal prominence of olecranon
- Anterior: loss of olecranon prominence

- Radial head subluxation

- Elbow slightly flexed and forearm pronated resists moving the arm at the elbow

**Sensory and motor testing of the Median and Ulnar nerves:**

Median

- Test for sensory function

- Two-point discrimination over the tip of the index finger.

- Test for motor function

- “OK” sign with thumb and index finger and abduction of the thumb (recurrent branch)

Ulnar

- Test for sensory function

- Two-point discrimination of the little finger

- Test for motor function

- Abduct index finger against resistance

**Compartment Syndrome**

Acute compartment syndrome can usually develop over a few hours after a serious injury. Some symptoms of acute compartment syndrome are:

- A new persistent deep pain

- Pain that seems greater than expected for the severity of the injury

- Numbness and tingling in the limb

- Swelling, tightness and bruising

Beside acute compartment syndrome, chronic compartment syndrome may develop. Symptoms of chronic compartment syndrome include worsening pain or cramping in the affected muscle within a half-hour of starting an exercise. Symptoms typically go away with rest, and muscle function remains normal.

Clinical features of acute compartment syndrome (ACS)

The initial suspicion of a diagnosis of ACS is mainly clinical. There are some classic features, including pain, pallor, pulselessness, pressure, paraesthesia, poikilothermia, and paralysis. If the patient has all the features, this could indicate a late diagnosis and irreversible damage because some features such as paralysis occur very late in the pathogenesis of ACS. Therefore, it is highly suggested to do a serial assessment to detect a more catastrophic clinical state rather than at one point in time.

Research has taken on the predictive values of the cardinal features. To calculate the predictive value, Bayes used the following features of ACS: pain, paraesthesia, paresis, and pain on passive movement. All features were more specific than they were sensitive: mean specificity is 0.97 (range 0.97 to 0.98) and mean sensitivity 0.16 (range 0.13 to 0.19). The positive predictive values ranged from 0.11 to 0.15, and all negative predictive values were 0.98. The low positive predictive value suggests that these symptoms on their own are poor indicators of ACS.

Once ACS is suspected, definitive diagnosis involves obtaining the intracompartmental pressure. The assessment could be with direct, invasive monitoring. When obtaining intracompartmental pressures, a catheter is placed within 5 cm of the fracture level, with the transducer secured at the level of the measured compartment. It is important to keep the catheter tip outside of the actual fracture site. If placed within the fracture, levels will be falsely high. Failure to place the transducer at the same height of the catheter tip will cause a falsely high or low, depending upon the position. When the first pressure is normal, but ACS is suspected, a compartment recheck is needed, with another pressure assessment.

Although beyond the scope of this review, heightened suspicion is appropriate during the assessment of pediatric patients and infants.  Due diligence should be performed to rule out child abuse when applicable.