Indications for open repair include an unstable patient, a large rapidly expanding mediastinal or zone 1 of the neck hematoma, a penetrating injury to the chest, or failure of endovascular repair.

These patients should undergo median sternotomy with an extension of the incision toward the right side of the neck if needed for distal control. Innominate artery injuries are often found at the proximal aspect of the vessel. For better exposure of the brachiocephalic artery, the brachiocephalic vein can be ligated. As with any vascular injury, the first goal is to obtain proximal and distal control of the artery. Each injury and its repair should be individualized to each case. Depending on the location of the injury to the innominate artery, the cerebral perfusion pressures may dictate if cardiopulmonary bypass may be needed.

The primary repair of the innominate artery requires full exposure of the entire length of the artery. After adequate exposure, you must expose the proximal aspect of the artery and open the pericardium to fully gain control of the aortic arch where the innominate arises. Once you have control, systemic heparinization is given, and the artery can be clamped via a partial occluding vascular clamp. Once the clamp is applied, you can perform debridement and establish the need for an interposition graft. An end-to-end or end-to-side anastomosis of the proximal aspect of the graft can take place. Once the innominate artery injury is identified, the final graft length and the appropriate type of graft, such as straight graft versus a y graft, can be chosen. At times a y graft is needed to obtain distal flow to the right carotid and right subclavian arteries separately. The anastomotic areas may need to be oversewn using pledgeted sutures for better strength and seal of the anastomosis.

Depending on the extent of the injury and the age of the patient, the collateral flow to the brain must be understood, and the risk of ischemia taken very seriously. If the distal brachiocephalic is clamped, perfusion can be maintained through the right carotid via retrograde flow through the right subclavian artery. There are multiple techniques for cerebral monitoring with cerebral protection. The recommended carotid stump pressure for shunting is 45-50 mmHg. Cardiopulmonary bypass, circulatory arrest with hypothermia, and carotid shunting are all options for cerebral protection for the patient. If concomitant vein injury is noted, you should place a pericardial patch between the newly placed graft and the vein repair to help avoid fistula formation or erosion into the graft.

Patients presenting with bleeding from their tracheostomy site after placement of a tracheostomy must have careful consideration that it may be a ‘sentinel bleed.’ Tracheoinnominate fistula must be high on the differential as this is often a fatal complication of a tracheostomy placement. If rupture of the innominate does occur due to trach placement, the patient should undergo emergent treatment with endovascular graft placement in a hybrid operating room in case open repair is needed.

Indications for endovascular repair include a hemodynamically stable patient with pseudoaneurysm or dissection of the innominate artery.

Endovascular repair of an injured innominate artery is becoming more popular as endovascular imaging, and graft techniques are gaining use throughout the world. Using an endovascular approach requires knowledge of the landing zones for the adequate seal of the stent-grafts. The approach for placement of the stent-graft can be made via access to the femoral artery in the groin or the brachial artery. The primary limitation is a distal landing zone for placement of the graft before the innominate artery branches. If necessary, the right subclavian artery can be excluded, and a carotid subclavian artery bypass can be performed if ischemia is present.

The usual technique for stent-graft placement with endovascular approach usually involves an angiogram for measurement of the injured area with measurement of the landing zones. After the proper measurement, an embolic-protective device is placed into the right common carotid artery, and the covered stent graft can then be placed. Post-stent deployment balloon angioplasty can then be performed with a balloon to match the vessel diameter. A completion angiogram can be done to exam for any further extravasation or filling defects at the injured segment.