The wrist joint is represented by the distal radioulnar joint, the radiocarpal joint, and the intercarpal joint.

The distal radioulnar joint is a pivot joint that articulates the head of the ulna with the ulnar notch of the distal radius. It works together with the proximal radio-ulnar joint to produce pronation and supination of the forearm. Lister's tubercle is a bony prominence located on the distal radius and can be palpated on the dorsal aspect of the wrist. It serves as a pulley for the extensor pollicis longus tendon and also as a surgical landmark.

The radiocarpal joint is an ellipsoid joint formed by the distal end of the radius and the proximal row of carpal bones. The carpal bones on the ulnar side only make intermittent contact with the ulna in ulnar deviation of the wrist. The capsule of the radiocarpal joint is lax and thin on the dorsal surface and is continuous with the midcarpal joints. It is straightened by numerous ligaments, which include the palmar and dorsal radio-carpal ligaments, as well as the radial and ulnar collateral ligaments.

There are 8 carpal bones organized in 2 carpal rows. The proximal row is represented from lateral to medial by the scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum, and pisiform. The pisiform bone does not articulate with the radius. The distal carpal row is made from lateral to medial by the trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, and hamate. The distal row of carpal bones articulates with the metacarpal bones.

The space of Poirier is a central weak area of the wrist, which is located on the floor of the carpal tunnel at the level of the proximate aspect of the capitate bone. It is delimited by the radioscaphocapitate ligament and the volar long radio-lunate ligament. It disappears in wrist flexion, and it is accentuated in wrist extension, and this space is where the lunate bone can dislocate in lunate dislocations.

The bony anatomy is completed further by a large number of ligaments, flexor tendons which pass through the carpal tunnel and ulnar tunnel on the volar aspect of the wrist, extensor tendons which pass through 6 extensor compartments on the dorsal aspect of the wrist, the radial, ulnar and median nerves with their branches as well as the radial and ulnar arteries with their anastomotic arches.

There are three axes of motion within the wrist joint:

1. Flexion-extension: flexion is produced 40% by the radiocarpal joint and 60% by the mid carpal joint while extension is produced 66% by the radiocarpal joint and 33% by the mid-carpal joint.

2. Radial-ulnar deviation: the radial deviation is produced 90% by the mid carpal joint while the ulnar deviation is produced 50% by the radio-carpal joint and 50% by the midcarpal joint.

3. Pronation-supination which is produced at the proximal and distal radio-ulnar joints.

The distal radius bears 80% of the load of the wrist while the distal ulna bears 20% of the load of the wrist.