**Sequential Method of IM Injection**

- Thoroughly clean the hands and wear gloves.

- 70% isopropyl swab for 30 seconds and allow the skin to dry.

- Use of filter needle and change the needle prior to injection under aseptic precautions.

- To prevent bent or dulling of the needle due to coring by the rubber, insert the needle in the bevel up fashion.

- When withdrawing the injectate, the container should be held down and avoid withdrawing the last drops.

- If medication drips on the needle, wipe it off with a sterile gauze pad.

- Drawing up an air bubble is not recommended.

- The 'z-track' technique is recommended.

- Insert the needle at an angle of 90 degrees.

- Quick darting movement while inserting the needle.

- Insure intramuscular positioning of the needle via confirming restricted side-to-side movement of the needle as opposed to when the needle is in the subcutaneous plane.

- Aspirate for at least 5 to 10 seconds during dorsogluteal injections prior to injecting the medication.

- Slow injection (10 seconds per milliliter) allows stretching of the muscle fibers for retention of the drug, which minimizes the risk of leakage along the needle track.

- Wait for 10 seconds to allow the drug to diffuse within the muscle bulk.

- Withdraw the needle with a smooth and steady movement.

- ‘Scoop method’ of replacing the needle cap to prevent inadvertent prick injuries.

- Safe disposal of the needles and other wastes.

- Assessment of the injection site for probable early and late complications.