In the landmark NETT trial, the cut-off for stopping the protocol was greater than an 8% 30-day mortality rate for patients enrolled in the treatment arm of the study. This included monitoring the subgroups of patients undergoing LVRS. The NETT Research Group found that, after randomization, patients with an FEV1 less than 20% predicted and either a diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of less than 20% predicted or the presence of homogenous emphysema, had a 30-day mortality rate of 16% in the LVRS arm (69 patients) compared to 0% medical therapy alone arm (70 patients). Even those who survived surgery had similar quality of life and only small improvements in functional tests. This particular subgroup of LVRS patients was defined as those with:

- A low FEV1 (less than 20% predicted) AND

- A DLCO of less than 20% predicted OR

- Homogenous emphysema on computed tomography (CT) scan

This subgroup of patients was more likely to be harmed than to benefit from surgical intervention for the treatment of severe emphysema, with a higher risk for death after LVRS (high-risk group).

The non-high-risk patients were then subdivided into four groups based on their disease pattern and exercise capacity. Patients in the non-high-risk subgroup with primarily non-upper lobe emphysema and low exercise capacity did not gain any increased survival with LVRS compared to medical therapy. Among patients in the non-high-risk subgroup with high exercise capacity and primarily non-upper lobe emphysema, LVRS increased mortality compared with medical therapy and did not improve exercise capacity.