Prevention is the best way to manage frequent and recurrent temper tantrums. Fatigue, hunger, illness, injury, and frustration are common triggers of tantrums.

- **C**ommunicate well. Model excellent communication skills and avoid yelling and arguing in front of the child. Ask the child about their feelings. Adults can provide examples of feeling words such as "angry," "sad," "tired," or "hungry." Offering facial depictions of feelings (such as a sad face, angry face, and happy face) allows toddlers to select the picture that best describes their feelings. Teach older children to express emotions verbally.

- **A**ttend to the child’s needs. Give the child positive attention. Examples of positive attention include reading to the child, playing games, and including the child in routine activities such as cooking and cleaning. Caregivers can also avoid frustration by childproofing the home and offering age-appropriate toys that distract the child away from exploring unsafe or undesirable objects. Parental expectations of behavior should be age-appropriate. Limit childhood exposure to violent television viewing, which predicts adolescent and adult aggression.

- **L**et the child share their feelings and listen. Allow the child to control decisions by offering choices that would be acceptable to the caregiver. Avoid saying "no," too often. Unless it pertains to a health or safety issue, the caregiver may choose to let the child make a decision that may not be the preferred choice, such as wearing mismatched clothing. The child's or another's safety should not be put at risk by permitting the child's request.

- **M**ake naptimes and mealtimes a daily routine as much as possible. If the toddler is away from home or misses their usual mealtimes, have simple, healthy snacks such as dried fruit or crackers available. Prepare children with expectations such as when bedtime will occur, or when there will be a change in activities.