Pathophysiology from C. perfringens is through toxin-mediated tissue necrosis. Most toxins are pore-forming, causing an influx of solute and water, leading to cellular swelling and cell death. A hallmark of C. perfringens infection is the production of histotoxic gas through glucose fermentation.

Toxins produced by C. perfringens

- CPA is an enzyme that can break down phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin on the cell membrane, inhibit both migration and maturation of neutrophils, and activate arachidonic acid metabolism leading to vasoconstriction and platelet aggregation.

- CPB is a pore-forming toxin known to bind endothelial cells and have neurotoxic properties through the release of substance P. Furthermore. The toxin has been shown to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of necrotizing enterocolitis.

- CPE is a pore-forming toxin that binds to claudin receptors on the cell surface, forming a hexamer complex that allows an influx of calcium. This toxin is the major culprit causing food poisoning and non-foodborne diarrhea. Calcium influx is dose-dependent and leads to activation of calpain and, ultimately, cell death.

- ETX is associated with hemorrhagic enteritis and enterotoxaemia in sheep. The toxin is activated by enteric proteases and increases intestinal permeability by disrupting tight junctions and the lamina propria. It causes perivascular edema with rapid cellular swelling and is found to accumulate in the kidney and brain, but the mechanism has remained elusive.

- ITX is a binary toxin produced as two distinct proteins, Ia and Ib. Ib binds to a cell surface receptor and associates with Ia. The complex is then endocytosed. Ia will pass to the cytosol through a membrane channel created by Ib and then depolymerize the actin cytoskeleton via ADP-ribosylation.

- NetB is a pore-forming toxin identified in avian necrotic enteritis that has been shown to have a 38% sequence similarity with CPB. Its discovery created the type G classification but has not been linked to human pathogenicity.

- Perfringolysin O (PFO) is a pore-forming toxin shown to have synergistic effects with CPA and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of gas gangrene.