Double J stents have been used for more than 25 years and have become a staple of the urological endoscopic armamentarium. They are used mainly for stabilization of the ureter after surgery and to provide drainage through a ureter that may be obstructed, leaking, dysfunctional, or strictured. They are often used after extracorporeal shockwave stone surgery to minimize blockage from steinstrasse (multiple stone fragments that can clog and obstruct a ureter after lithotripsy), to bypass a larger immovable ureteral calculus, or to help identify the ureter radiologically or surgically.

Stents are also used as gentle ureteral dilators. If a tortuous, narrowed, or strictured ureter is encountered during ureteroscopy, placement of a double J stent will gradually dilate the lumen allowing for much easier ureteroscopy at a later date.

Or as one of the early pioneers in endourology, Dr. Arthur Smith, famously said, "When the going gets tough, the tough leave a stent and go home!"

The American Urological Association (AUA) guidelines suggest that a double J stent may be omitted after ureteroscopic lithotripsy when "there is no ureteral injury, no anatomical obstacle to fragment clearance and a normal contralateral kidney" but it fails to give any additional guidance on this subject.

A summary of their algorithm for double J stent omission after ureteroscopic lithotripsy follows:

- Abnormal contralateral kidney, renal failure (GFR<30), collecting system anatomical abnormality, or second stage procedure planned: Stent Suggested.

- None of the above, a pre-procedure double J stent was NOT placed prior to ureteroscopy, but an access sheath was used: Stent Suggested.

- Same as above but access sheath was NOT used: More than a single, uncomplicated distal ureteral or renal stone was treated: Stent Suggested.

- All cases not covered above may consider the omission of the stent.