# Introduction

The measurement of accurate renal function is vital for the routine care of patients.

**Glomerular Filtration Rate**

The GFR in the measurement of volume filtered through the glomerular capillaries and into the Bowman’s capsule per unit of time.

GFR = [UrineX (mg/mL)] * urine flow (mL/min)/ [PlasmaX (mg/mL)], where X is a substance that is completely excreted.

**GFR approximation using Creatinine Clearance**

Creatinine is a breakdown product of dietary meat and creatine phosphate found in skeletal muscle. Its production in the body is dependent on muscle mass.

**Cockcroft-Gault formula: Estimated creatinine clearance rate (eCCR)**

Creatinine clearance can be estimated using serum creatinine levels. The Cockcroft-Gault (C-G) formula uses a patient’s weight (kg) and gender to predict CrCl (mg/dL).

eCCr = (140 – Age) x Mass (kg) x [0.85 if female] / 72 x [Serum Creatinine (mg/dL)]

**Formulas used in the prediction of GFR**

Formulas derived using variables that influence GFR can provide varying degrees of accuracy in estimating GFR. The widely used Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group (MDRD) employs four variables, including serum creatinine, age, ethnicity, and albumin levels.

Other formulas used for GFR calculations and their employed variables to estimate GFR include Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) formulas.

In current clinical practice, the use of creatinine derived from the KDIGO clinical practice guidelines recommend CKD-EPI formula for the estimation of GFR.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Serum and urine samples are required. The serum collection must be within 24 hours of urine collection.

**Blood specimen**

A blood sample of 1 mL (minimum 0.5 mL) in a labeled tube, preferably stored at refrigerated or frozen temperature.

**Urine specimen**

A 24-hour urine sample is collected from the patient to measure creatinine clearance.  A plastic collection container is used to collect urine. The collection starts with an empty bladder. At the start, the patient urinates into the toilet and flushes. The date and time get recorded at the start of the collection. For the next 24 hours, the patient will collect urine and store it in a container at room temperature. The total urine collected for 24 hours gets sent to the laboratory for analysis. The patient is required to drink at least 8 cups of liquid on the day of urine collection.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

A physician may require a creatinine clearance test from patients when routine blood creatinine levels or the estimated GFR are not within normal ranges. Patients with signs and symptoms of deteriorating kidney function are candidates for the CrCl test.

# Diagnostic Tests

Elevated serum creatinine levels and a decreased CrCl rate are usually indications of abnormal renal function. For these patients, it is recommended to perform a thorough history, physical exam, renal ultrasound, and urinalysis.

# Testing Procedures

The normal range of CrCl is 110 to 150mL/min in males and 100 to 130mL/min in females.

- Creatinine 1 mg/dL is the baseline for a given patient with normal GFR

- Creatinine 2 mg/dL is a 50% reduction in GFR

- Creatinine 4 mg/dL is a 70 to 85% reduction in GFR

- Creatine 8 mg/dL is a 90 to 95% reduction in GFR

Alteration of serum creatinine values can occur as its generation is subject to influence by muscle function, activity, diet, and health status of the patient.

# Interfering Factors

Results obtained from a 24-hour urine collection depend on accurate timing and completion. Improper urine sample collection leads to an underestimation of creatinine excretion; therefore, incorrect GFR. A significant limitation of CrCl measurement is an age-related increase in the tubular secretion of creatinine that results in an overestimation of GFR

Creatinine clearance is affected by sex and race. Women have less muscle mass and a lower rate of creatinine production in comparison to men. Latinos produce lower clearance values, while blacks produce higher values, indicating greater muscle mass in blacks.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

It is essential to determine CrCl and serum creatine levels when there is suspicion of renal dysfunction. A common complication that results in increased serum creatine levels is acute kidney injury (AKI).

Persistently elevated levels of serum creatinine and severely reduced GFR are indicative of chronic kidney disease. CKD occurs through multiple pathologic mechanisms of injury and affects several compartments of the kidney.

# Clinical Significance

Routine blood tests for serum creatinine levels, among other substances, can prevent future complications of renal disease. Patients with a chronic diagnosis of uncontrolled diabetes and hypertension are especially vulnerable to kidney disease.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

The results of CrCl and its estimation of GFR allow for the assessment of the excretory function of the renal system. The CrCl test is used to monitor the progression of renal disease.