- Absence epilepsy is primary generalized epilepsy.

- It is classified as a typical or atypical absence, depending on seizure characteristics and EEG patterns.

- Absence seizures are characterized by behavioral arrest and EEG showing 3-Hertz spike-and-wave discharges. Episodes usually occur multiple times per day.

- Absence seizures are seen in several generalized epilepsies, including childhood absence epilepsy, juvenile absence epilepsy, and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.

- Episodes of behavioral arrest should be called “staring spells” until an EEG evaluation is performed. Patients can only be diagnosed with absence epilepsy if they have characteristic seizure semiology and EEG findings.

- Staring spells can be epileptic or non-epileptic, with the majority being non-epileptic. When episodes are epileptic in nature, they may be due to absence seizures or focal seizures with impaired awareness (complex partial seizures)

- The first-line treatment for absence seizures is ethosuximide. Other therapies include valproate, lamotrigine, and topiramate. Second-line medications that can be used as adjunct therapy include zonisamide and levetiracetam.

- Carbamazepine, phenytoin, gabapentin, vigabatrin, and other medications with similar mechanisms of action can worsen absence epilepsy.

- Approximately 60% of patients with childhood absence epilepsy eventually achieve seizure freedom.

- Lack of response to ethosuximide and the presence of generalized tonic-clonic seizures have been associated with a lack of seizure remission and life-long epilepsy.