The cause of hypokalemia is evident from the patient’s history. Therefore, questioning should focus on the presence of GI losses (vomiting, diarrhea) and underlying cardiac comorbidities, as well as, a thorough review of medications (insulin, beta agonists, diuretic use). Clinical manifestations mainly involve the musculoskeletal and cardiovascular systems. Hence, the physical exam should focus on identifying neurologic manifestations and cardiac dysrhythmias.

Clinical symptoms of hypokalemia do not become evident until the serum potassium level is less than 3 mmol/L unless there is a precipitous fall or the patient has a process that is potentiated by hypokalemia. The severity of symptoms also tends to be proportional to the degree and duration of hypokalemia. Symptoms resolve with correction of the hypokalemia.

Significant muscle weakness occurs at serum potassium levels below 2.5 mmol/L but can occur at higher levels if the onset is acute. Similar to the weakness associated with hyperkalemia, the pattern is ascending in nature affecting the lower extremities, progressing to involve the trunk and upper extremities and potentially advancing to paralysis. Affected muscles can include the muscles of respiration which can lead to respiratory failure and death. Involvement of GI muscles can cause an ileus with associated symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal distension. Severe hypokalemia can also lead to muscle cramps, rhabdomyolysis, and resultant myoglobinuria. Periodic paralysis is a rare neuromuscular disorder, which is inherited or acquired, that is caused by an acute transcellular shift of potassium into the cells.  It is characterized by potentially fatal episodes of muscle weakness or paralysis that can affect the respiratory muscles.

Hypokalemia can result in a variety of cardiac dysrhythmias. Although cardiac dysrhythmias or ECG changes are more likely to be associated with moderate to severe hypokalemia, there is a high degree of individual variability and can occur with even mild decreases in serum levels. This variability is dependent on concomitant factors such as magnesium depletion, digitalis therapy, among others. Moreover, characteristic ECG changes do not manifest in all patients. The ECG changes that occur are T-wave flattening initially, followed by ST depression and the appearance of a U wave that can be difficult to distinguish from the T wave. The U wave is often seen in the lateral precordial leads of V4 to V6. Prolongation of the PR and QT interval can also occur. Risk of arrhythmias is highest in older patients, those with heart disease and those receiving digoxin or antiarrhythmic drugs. Administration of anesthesia in the setting of hypokalemia is also a risk for dysrhythmias and impaired cardiac contractility but more so with acute rather than chronic hypokalemia.

Hypomagnesemia often occurs with and may worsen hypokalemia especially in the presence of chronic diarrhea, alcoholism, genetic disorders, diuretic use and chemotherapy. Both promote the development of cardiac dysrhythmias. The combination of hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia are associated with an increased risk of torsades de pointes, particularly in individuals receiving QT-prolonging medications. Additionally, hypomagnesemia can increase urinary potassium losses thus lowering the serum potassium level, as well as, prevent urinary potassium reabsorption thereby impeding potassium repletion.

Lastly, prolonged hypokalemia can cause structural and functional changes in the kidney that include impairing concentrating ability, increased ammonia production, altered sodium reabsorption and increased bicarbonate absorption. Hypokalemia can also result in glucose intolerance by reducing insulin secretion.