- Entamoeba coli is one of many non-pathogenic protozoa found in humans.

- It is transmitted through fecal-oral contact.

- Typically, mature cysts are ingested from contaminated water and food sources.

- The highest prevalence occurs in areas with inadequate sanitation, typically in rural areas.

- Entamoeba coli has three distinct morphological forms: trophozoite, pre-cystic stage, and cystic stage.

- The most distinguishing feature is the eight-core nuclei, which develops as the cyst begins to mature.

- The cyst is hard due to its strong cell wall and can survive up to weeks in an external environment.

- Trophozoites found in the stool outside the body are rapidly destroyed, and if ingested, would not survive the gastric environment.

- Most patients with Entamoeba coli infestation remain asymptomatic, and often protozoan is discovered incidentally.

- Patients may rarely show gastrointestinal symptoms such as loose stools, colicky abdominal pain, and flatulence.

- Ova and parasite testing can be completed to help distinguish between different amoebae species.

- It is essential to distinguish between Entamoeba coli and the pathogenic amoeba, Entamoeba histolytica.

- Stool samples should be taken at different times to ensure adequate specimens for testing.

- Reverse line hybridization assay is the fastest and most specific method of DNA analysis.

- Treatment is not indicated for Entamoeba coli infection.

- If the patient is symptomatic and no other organism or causes are found, treatment may be indicated.

- Patients can reduce the chances of getting parasitic infections such as Entamoeba coli by maintaining proper hand hygiene.