A thorough history taking for potential risk factors should be obtained. The typical presentation of HP is recurrent bouts of acute pancreatitis in the form of abdominal pain radiating to the back concomitant with melena which is considered a pathognomonic feature for diagnosis. It classically presents as symptoms of intermittent Upper and/or lower GI bleeding, such as melena (dark, tarry stools) which is the most salient feature, hematochezia (bright color bleeding), hematemesis is less frequent and rarely presents as rupture into the abdominal cavity or/and retroperitoneum leading to a life-threatening condition. The bleeding is usually non-severe despite its arterial origin. Occasionally, HP presented acutely as a severe hemorrhage in the shape of severe hematemesis and hypovolemic shock.

Moreover, patients typically present with abdominal pain, mainly at the epigastric area or the uppermost part of the abdomen, which usually radiates posteriorly. The pain is not severe enough to make patients hemodynamically unstable. The pain usually has an "Up and down" pattern, which means it changes in intensity over time, that phenomenon attributed to the transient closure of pancreatic ducts. Patients with tumors of the pancreatic head might present with obstructive jaundice. Percentages of patients who develop signs and symptoms of acute or chronic anemia. HP is highly correlated with heavy alcohol consumption.

Other clinical symptoms include vomiting, jaundice due to thrombus occluding the pancreaticobiliary reflux, and/or weight loss. A palpable pulsatile with a thrill murmur in case of an aneurysm could be noticed on physical examination.