The management of traumatic dental injuries to the primary dentition aims to prevent damage to the developing permanent tooth germ, alleviate pain, and minimize possible complications, such as infection.

The child's cooperation in an emergency, the time for natural exfoliation of the tooth, and the impact on the occlusion are all important considerations that influence treatment. A conservative approach involving observation is often the most appropriate option.

There is no evidence for the recommendation of systemic antibiotics to manage luxation injuries in the primary dentition. However, a clinician may wish to consider antibiotics in TDIs associated with soft tissue injuries, where surgical intervention may be necessary, or after considering the child's medical status. A tetanus booster may be needed if environmental contamination of the injury has occurred, and liaison with a medical practitioner would be recommended within 48 hours.

If splint placement is indicated to manage the TDI, The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) guidelines recommend using a flexible splint. A flexible splint (e.g., titanium trauma splint, composite and wire splint) allows functional movement in contrast to a rigid splint (e.g., composite splints) where the injured teeth are immobilized.

It is vital to instruct the caregiver and young patients regarding the care of the injured tooth at home for optimal healing. This includes advice regarding analgesia, a soft diet, meticulous oral hygiene, cleaning the area with antibacterial mouth rinses such as alcohol-free chlorhexidine gluconate 0.12%, and avoidance of further injuries.

Treatment options specific to the type of injury are listed below, in line with The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) guidelines for managing TDIs in primary dentition.

**Hard Tissue Injuries**

**Enamel Fractures**

The clinician can consider smoothing any sharp edges. No clinical or radiographic follow-up is recommended.

**Enamel-Dentine Fractures (uncomplicated crown fracture)**

Managing an enamel dentin fracture with no pulpal exposure involves covering all exposed dentine with glass ionomer or composite. Follow-up clinical examination is recommended after 6 to 8 weeks; a radiographic examination is indicated only when clinical findings suggest pulp infection.

**Crown Fractures With Exposed Pulp (complicated crown fracture)**

The treatment aims at preserving the pulp by partial pulpotomy. Local anesthesia is required, and a non-setting calcium hydroxide paste is applied over the pulp and covered with glass-ionomer and composite. For more extensive pulpal exposures, a cervical pulpotomy is indicated.

Follow-up clinical examination is recommended after one week, six to eight weeks, and one year, with a radiographic examination at one year following pulpotomy.

**Crown-Root Fractures**

The immediate management is to remove the loose fragment, often under local anesthesia, and assess if the crown can be restored. If the tooth is restorable and has no pulpal exposure, cover the exposed dentine with glass ionomer. If the tooth is restorable, but the pulp has been exposed, perform a pulpotomy or root canal treatment depending on the root development stage and fracture level.

If the tooth is unrestorable, extract all loose fragments taking care not to damage the permanent successor, leave any firm root fragment in situ, or extract the entire tooth. When the tooth has been retained, a follow-up clinical examination is recommended after one week, six to eight weeks, and one year. A radiographic examination should be done one year following pulpotomy or root canal treatment.

**Root Fractures**

If the coronal fragment is not displaced, no treatment is required. If the coronal fragment is displaced and is not excessively mobile, leave the coronal fragment to reposition spontaneously, even if occlusal interference is present. A clinical follow-up examination is recommended after one week, six to eight weeks, and one year. Continue clinical follow-up yearly until the eruption of the permanent successor.

If the coronal fragment is displaced, excessively mobile, and interfering with occlusion, there are two options: a) extract the loose coronal fragment only, leaving the apical fragment in place to be reabsorbed; or b) gently reposition the loose coronal fragment. If the fragment is unstable in its new position, stabilize it with a flexible splint attached to adjacent uninjured teeth for four weeks.

If the coronal fragment has been repositioned and splinted, a clinical follow-up examination should be done after one week, four weeks (for splint removal), eight weeks, and one year. A clinical exam after one year is recommended if the coronal fragment has been extracted. Radiographic follow-up is only indicated where clinical findings are suggestive of pathosis.

**Alveolar Fractures**

Administer a local anesthetic, reposition any displaced segments that are mobile or causing occlusal interference, and stabilize with a flexible splint to the adjacent uninjured teeth for four weeks.

A clinical follow-up examination is recommended after one week, four weeks for splint removal, eight weeks, and one year. Further follow-up is recommended when the child reaches the age of 6 to monitor the permanent tooth eruption.

Radiographic examination is recommended at four weeks and one year to assess the impact on the primary tooth and the permanent tooth germs in the line of the alveolar fracture.

**Periodontal Injuries**

**Concussion Injuries**

No treatment is required. A clinical follow-up examination is recommended after one week and 6-8 weeks. Radiographic examination is only required if there are clinical signs of pathosis.

**Subluxation Injuries**

No treatment is required. A clinical follow-up examination is recommended after one week and six to eight weeks. If an unfavorable outcome is likely, yearly clinical follow-up is recommended until the permanent tooth erupts. Radiographic examination is only required if there are clinical signs of pathosis.

**Extrusive Luxation Injuries**

Treatment decisions are based on the degree of displacement, mobility, occlusal interferences, root formation, and the child's cooperation.

If the tooth is not interfering with the occlusion, leave it to reposition spontaneously. If the tooth is excessively mobile or extruded >3 mm, extract it under local anesthesia.

A clinical follow-up examination is recommended after one week and six to eight weeks. If an unfavorable outcome is likely, yearly clinical follow-up is recommended until the permanent tooth erupts. Radiographic examination is recommended only if there are clinical signs of pathosis.

**Lateral Luxation Injuries**

If there is minimal or no occlusal interference, the tooth should be allowed to reposition spontaneously, usually within six months. If the tooth is severely displaced and there is a risk of ingestion or aspiration, the tooth should be extracted under local anesthesia.

Alternatively, for severe displacement, gently reposition the tooth, and if unstable in its new position, apply a flexible splint for four weeks attached to the adjacent uninjured teeth. Clinical examination is recommended after one week (four weeks for splint removal if used), six to eight weeks, six months, and one year.

If an unfavorable outcome is likely, yearly clinical follow-up is recommended until the permanent tooth erupts. Radiographic examination is recommended only if there are clinical signs of pathosis.

**Intrusive Luxation Injuries**

The tooth should be allowed to reposition spontaneously, irrespective of the direction of the displacement. Spontaneous improvement in the position of the intruded tooth usually occurs within six months but can take up to one year in some cases.

Clinical examination is recommended after one week, six to eight weeks, six months, and one year. Further follow-up when the child reaches the age of six is recommended for a severe intrusion to monitor the eruption of the permanent successor. Radiographic examination is recommended only if there are clinical signs of pathosis.

**Avulsion Injuries**

The primary tooth should not be replanted. A clinical follow-up examination is recommended after 6-8 weeks and when the child reaches the age of 6 years to monitor the eruption of the permanent tooth.

Radiographic examination is recommended only if there are clinical signs of pathosis. In cases of early loss of an upper central incisor, it is important to consider the impact on the child regarding aesthetics and loss of function. A removable appliance may be indicated if the primary molars have erupted and there is a risk of developing speech disorders or tongue interposition.