A multidisciplinary team approach is essential to perform regional anesthesia blocks, including the TAP block.

- The informed consent should be ethically obtained beforehand by the health care provider, who should explain to the patient the risks, benefits, alternatives, possible side effects, and complications of the TAP block.

- An appropriate time-out has to be performed before the start of the procedure. This should be done by the nurse with the presence of the anesthesiologist, surgeon, if possible, OR personnel, and patient listening if awake. The time out should consist of confirming out loud the patient's name, medical record number, date of birth, allergies, block to be performed, laterality, and dose/amount of LA to be injected (especially for pediatric patients).

- The team-based proposal must consist of the surgeon, anesthesiologist, nurses, pharmacist, surgical assistant, and the rest of the OR personnel.

- It is very important to maintain interpersonal communication with all the team members, especially with the surgeon to evaluate the suitability of the block that we are planning to perform, the location and size of the incision and, discussions about when performing the block before induction of anesthesia (with an awake patient) after induction or before emergence. After the block is performed, it is imperative to notify the surgeon and all the team members how much LA was injected to avoiding extra local infiltration of LA by the surgeon to prevent an episode of LAST and enhance patient safety.
- The pharmacist will prepare the local anesthetic concentration and dose as the clinician ordered, ensure providing a safe-dose below the maximal dose per weight, have intralipid emulsion available in case the LAST episode, and being available if there are any medication-related questions by the team. 
- Nurses will perform the pre-procedure time-out and assist during the procedure (additional nursing duties are outlined below).

- If the block is going to be done on an awake patient, the patient should be aware of the possible sensations he/she might feel, and the operator should maintain verbal contact with the patient at all times throughout the procedure, to monitor any complications such as potential nerve injury, visceral perforation, or LAST. During the procedure, patient vital signs should be monitored in real-time.

- The operator and assistance should take extreme caution when handling sharps one another as accidental needle sticks may occur. Disposal of needles should be done in designated sharp-bins in the procedure area.

- Documentation of the procedure should include informed consent, date, time, procedure location, block technique, LA used, volume and concentration of injectate, equipment used, ultrasound images, and documentation of any complication.

Following all these measurements will enhance patient care, improve the procedure outcomes, patient safety, and will enhance team performance.