Hypersensitivity to Dronabinol or Sesame Oil: Clinical staff should monitor patients for signs of hypersensitivity reactions. Reported signs include lip swelling, hive, rash, oral lesions, skin burning, and throat tightness.

Other Adverse Effects: The most common adverse reactions (≥3%) include abdominal pain, dizziness, euphoria, nausea, paranoid reaction, somnolence, abnormal thinking, and vomiting. Please also see the 'Toxicity' section below.

Other concerns include:

- Neuropsychiatric Reactions: Dronabinol can precipitate psychiatric and cognitive changes (may need to be avoided in those with psychiatric history). It may also result in mental or physical impairment. Patients should not operate heavy machinery or motor vehicles until one is certain that the drug does not impair their ability to operate.

- Hemodynamics: Dronabinol can cause hemodynamic instability in patients with existing cardiac disorders. As such, they may experience decreased or increased blood pressure, syncope, or rapid heart rate. Monitor for these changes after beginning treatment and changing doses. Avoid drugs that also affect hemodynamics.

- Seizures: Dronabinol can cause seizures or similar events in patients with a prior medical history of seizures. These patients also require close monitoring, and therapy should stop if a seizure occurs.

- Substance abuse: As with any controlled substance or drug with abuse potential, patients should be monitored and assessed for drug misuse risk (especially in those with substance abuse history).

- Paradoxical Nausea and Vomiting: Consider stopping or reducing the treatment dose with dronabinol if the patient experiences a paradoxical increase in nausea and vomiting.