When discussing the etiology of male breast cancer, one must uncover the potential genetic or environmental risk factors. It is also important to be mindful that the majority of males diagnosed with MBC have no identifiable risk other than increasing age (average age of diagnosis of 71 years).

Similarly to women, males have a higher risk of breast cancer if they have a first- or second-degree relative with breast cancer. Studies have shown that an affected sibling or parent of either gender may increase the risk of breast cancer in either the males or females in the family. Bevier et al. (2012) noted in their study that the relative risk (RR) of breast cancer was similar in either offspring when the father or mother was affected (RR = 1.73 and 1.74, respectively), but the risk was slightly higher in the females when the brother is affected as opposed to when the sister is affected (RR = 2.48 and 1.39, respectively). BRCA mutation appear to have increased risk for breast cancer as well. Although rare for a male to have a BRCA mutation, those with BRCA2 carrier mutation have a 6% increased risk and BRCA1 with a 4% risk of developing the disease.PTEN tumor suppressor gene), Li-Fraumeni syndrome (TP53), Lynch syndrome (PALB2 and mismatch repair genes).

The alterations in estrogen to androgen ratios is important to note when discussing the etiology of male breast cancer. Estrogen, which stimulates ductal development in breasts, has also been implicated as a potential risk factor for MBC similarly to women. Klinefelter syndrome, as previously mentioned, may increase the risk of MBC through excess estrogen stimulation. Other potential triggers have also been identified and include obesity, marijuana use, hepatic dysfunction, thyroid disease, and estrogen-containing medications.

Lastly, environmental factors have also been implicated in the possibility of increasing the risk of male breast cancer. As with women, previous radiation therapy has been noted as a potential risk factor. Of note, radiotherapy has been used to treat gynecomastia, but these patients have been found to have a 7-fold increase in the risk of MBC.