Orthostasis, from the Greek orthos (upright) and histanai (to stand), is a normal physiological response of the sympathetic system to counteract a fall in blood pressure when a person is laying down and assumes the upright position. This compensatory response of the autonomic nervous system reveals the evolutionary adaptation of the human being to meet the needs of an erect posture, a unique characteristic that distinguishes humans from other species.

**Physiology**

When one stands up, gravity causes a shift of 500 to 800 mL of blood volume from the upper body to the lower body and the splanchnic circulation. This redistribution of blood decreases the venous return and the right atrium’s pressure, reducing the stroke volume and eventually a fall in arterial blood pressure.

For this change in position, the body has 4 compensatory mechanisms:

- Irregular distribution of blood in the venous system (there are pools of blood located in the central circulation, that can be used when hypotension is detected)

- Non-uniform distensibility (small vessels are more rigid than large vessels. Thus, small veins prevent a large accumulation of blood in the lower body and help to maintain a relative upward flow of blood)

- Muscle pumps (increase the venous return)

- Autonomic reflexes

Out of these, autonomic reflexes are the most important mechanism.

There are baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and in the aortic arch which play an important role in regulating blood pressure by sensing the grade of distension of the vessels. When there is a fall in blood pressure, tension on the vessel walls decreases and the afferent baroreceptor nerves decrease their firing rate to the medullary cardiovascular center (nucleus tractus solitarii in the medulla). This synapsis will inhibit the parasympathetic response (vagal) and stimulate the sympathetic response, causing generalized vasoconstriction, increased heart rate, and contractility. Baroreceptor activation also causes the activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the release of vasopressin by the pituitary gland. It results in sodium and water reabsorption by the kidney, increasing the plasma volume, and arterial vasoconstriction through angiotensin II type 1 receptor and V1 receptors in arterial blood vessels. Normally, an adequate response increases heart rate by 10 to 15 bpm, maintains the systolic pressure and elevates the diastolic pressure about 10 mm Hg.

Pulmonary baroreceptors and atrial low-pressure baroreceptors play a small response, causing renal vasoconstriction the last one, with no significant contribution to increasing the blood pressure.

**Clinical Relevance**

When the autonomic compensatory mechanism is affected, there is a significant decrease of the central blood pressure, and symptoms of hypoperfusion can appear, e.g., dizziness, lightheadedness or syncope. This is called orthostatic hypotension.

Orthostatic hypotension (OH) is a clinical finding defined by a fall in systolic blood pressure over 20 mmHg or a fall of in diastolic pressure over 10 mm Hg within 3 minutes of standing.