Diagnosis can occurs in two settings – prenatal and postnatal. Prenatal diagnosis involves testing of the mother and fetus.

Universal screening for CMV in pregnancy is currently not a recommendation due to a lack of tests with high enough sensitivity and specificity, as well as limited options for intervention.  However, in certain circumstances, testing is advisable.  Such circumstances include mononucleosis-like illness in pregnancy, exposure to an individual with CMV infection, occupational exposure (health or childcare worker) or fetal ultrasound suggestive of congenital CMV infection such as the presence of ventriculomegaly, hyperechogenic bowel, intracranial calcifications, and hydrops.

Maternal testing involves determining the maternal antibody status.  A definitive diagnosis of primary CMV infection is obtained if there is seroconversion from a previously negative antibody status to an antibody positive status.

Fetal diagnosis is achieved via amniocentesis for amniotic fluid PCR with or without viral culture.  Replication of the virus in the fetal kidney, leading to shedding in the urine, occurs at least 5 to 7 weeks after infection.  Thus, the optimal time for performing this test is after 21 weeks gestation and 7 weeks after maternal infection.

Unless there is a high index of suspicion, CCMV often goes undetected at birth since most infected newborns are asymptomatic. Testing involves isolation of virus from urine or saliva via culture or DNA PCR within the first 3 weeks of life. After 3 weeks, it is not possible to determine the timing of infection – congenital vs. intrapartum or postnatal from breast milk or blood transfusion. Intrapartum or postnatal disease are not usually associated with long term sequelae.