Many important neurovascular and musculoskeletal structures in the neck embryologically derive from the pharyngeal arches, which are outgrowths on the lateral sides of the head of the embryo. There are six pharyngeal arches, but the fifth one disappears almost immediately after it forms. Each pharyngeal arch gets separated by an ectodermal pharyngeal groove and an endodermal pharyngeal pouch. Each arch contains endoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm, and neural crest cells.

- **Pharyngeal arch 1**develops into the anterior belly of the digastric muscle, mylohyoid muscle, mandible, and mylohyoid branch of the trigeminal nerve.

- **Pharyngeal arch 2**develops into the cervical branch of the facial nerve, posterior belly of the digastric muscle, platysma muscle, stylohyoid muscle, and the lesser horn of the hyoid bone.

- **Pharyngeal arch 3**develops into the greater horn of the hyoid, stylopharyngeus muscle, glossopharyngeal nerve, common carotid artery, and the proximal section of the internal carotid artery.

- **Pharyngeal arch 4**develops into the thyroid cartilage, pharyngeal constrictor muscles, cricothyroid muscle, levator veli palatine muscle, and the superior laryngeal nerve.

- **Pharyngeal arch 6**develops into the cricoid cartilage, intrinsic muscles of the larynx, and the recurrent laryngeal nerve.

- **Pharyngeal pouch 3**develops into the inferior parathyroids, while**pharyngeal pouch 4**develops into the superior parathyroids and the ultimobranchial body. The ultimobranchial body eventually becomes the parafollicular cells of the thyroid.

The pharyngeal arches, pouches, and grooves develop into other structures in the head as well but they are beyond the scope of this article. Please see the relevant articles in  StatPearls.