Careful documentation of patient history including the timeline of symptoms, plausibility of alternative diagnoses should be obtained and serial neurologic exams to document onset, nadir, and recovery of neurologic function are essential.

While clinical presentation varies by the affected vessel and topography of cord ischemia, the classic acute presentation is painless paraplegia and urinary retention. A rapid decline of function (within 12 hours of onset) with a severe neurologic deficit is characteristic; gradual onset of symptoms is highly suggestive of alternative etiology.

The most common neuroanatomic manifestation of ASCI is ASA syndrome which is characterized by injury of the ventral two-thirds of the cord with sparing of the PSA-supplied dorsal columns. Full ASA syndrome comprises flaccid paraplegia, loss of spinothalamic pain and temperature sensation, and autonomic dysfunction of bowel and bladder. Injury of the anterior horn neurons, when present, results in lower motor signs such as absent hyperreflexia and abnormal electromyography (EMG).

Focal ASA ischemia restricted to smaller distributions can present with characteristic loss-of-function germane to the affected level. Injury involving the lower cervical levels (C3 to C5) may result in diaphragmatic paralysis. Cervical ASA syndrome may also present with quadriparesis and may correlate with loss of dorsal column function due to medial lemniscus involvement in which case, light touch, and proprioception are also affected in contrast to lower forms of ASA syndrome.

Brown-Sequard syndrome (BSS) is the eponymous description of spinal cord hemisection, most frequently associated with trauma. BSS may occasionally be seen in ischemia/infarction with an injury to the sulcocommisural perforator which can result in ipsilateral hemiparesis and contralateral loss of pain and proprioception.

A subset of patients present with stuttering, repetitive symptomatic episodes, termed spinal cord transient ischemic attacks (STIA).

A rare but highly specific syndrome known as “surfer’s myelopathy” has been described in novice surfers presumably due to prolonged prone positioning which invokes a tension/avulsion mechanism of cord devascularization.