Selegiline is an irreversible inhibitor of monoamine oxidase (MAO), an enzyme that catabolizes norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine. The blockage of this enzyme prevents the reuptake of these neurotransmitters in the CNS, conferring increased levels of the biologically active monoamines at the synaptic cleft. With lower doses, selegiline exhibits selective B-type monoamine oxidase (MAO-B) inhibition. Loss of dopamine-containing neurons in the substantia nigra of the midbrain and resultant depletion of dopamine in the striatum is the cause of Parkinson disease. Therefore, the selective inhibition of MAO-B is desired for the treatment of Parkinson disease because MAO-B primarily metabolizes dopamine.

In contrast, selective inhibition of MAO-B is not the desired outcome when using selegiline to treat MDD. Inhibition of MAO-A and MAO-B is implicated as selegiline's effective mechanism of action when used to treat MDD. The monoamine hypothesis of depression predicts the underlying pathophysiologic basis of depression as a depletion in serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine levels in the central nervous system.

As with most psychotropic medications, the mechanism of action of selegiline is not fully understood. Although the above-proposed mechanisms are widely accepted, other proposed mechanisms may contribute to selegiline's clinical efficacy. There is a hypothesis that selegiline's metabolites, including amphetamine, may play a role in its mechanism of action by augmenting the release of monoamine neurotransmitters.