**Carotid Endarterectomy**

Carotid endarterectomy is performed to excise atherosclerotic thickening of the intima within the internal carotid artery in an effort to reduce strokes in patients with significant carotid artery stenosis (typically greater than 70 to 80% stenosis +/- symptoms). The opening incision is made, and the sternocleidomastoid muscle is retracted. At this point, it is important to visualize the carotid sheath, for this is where the structure vital to the procedure is located. The carotid artery lies on the medial side of the internal jugular vein, and the vagus nerve is situated posteriorly. Superiorly, the carotid sheath may also contain the hypoglossal nerve, the glossopharyngeal nerve, and the accessory nerve. These structures pass horizontally and cross the internal carotid artery. It is important to identify these structures before incising any structure. The surgeon opens the carotid sheath to gain exposure to the common carotid bifurcation, as this is the most common site for atherosclerosis due to non-laminar blood flow. Once access is gained to the carotid sheath, and the carotid bifurcation is located, the surgeon removes any atherosclerotic plaque and repairs the vessel. Possible complications include air embolism and laceration of the internal jugular vein or carotid artery.

**Penetrating Neck Trauma**

An ongoing debate among trauma surgeons is over a no-zone approach, which leans heavily on multidetector CT angiography versus a zoned approach to surgical exploration.

**Zones of the Neck**

The neck is divided into three zones. These become important when assessing and managing trauma in those with penetrating neck injuries.

Zone I - cricoid cartilage to the sternal notch: trachea, lung, esophagus, thoracic duct, vertebral arteries, the origin of the common carotid artery, and subclavian vessels, spinal cord, thoracic duct, thyroid gland

Zone II - cricoid cartilage to the angle of the mandible: carotid sheath and its components (carotid artery, internal jugular vein, vagus nerve), trachea, esophagus, spinal cord, larynx, pharynx

Zone III - the angle of the mandible to the base of the skull: distal portion of internal carotid artery, vertebral arteries, jugular veins, pharynx, spinal cord, sympathetic chain, CN IX, X, XI, XII

The decision to surgically explore these areas is based on hard and soft signs. Regardless of the zone, surgical exploration is the best course of management if the patient becomes unstable.

**Soft Signs**

- History of arterial bleeding

- Tracheal deviation

- Nonexpanding large hematoma

- Apical capping on chest radiograph

- Stridor

- Hoarseness

- Vocal cord paralysis

- Subcutaneous emphysema

- Facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) injury

- Unexplained bradycardia (without CNS injury)

**Hard Signs**

- Hypotension

- Active arterial bleeding

- Diminished carotid pulse

- Expanding hematoma

- Audible bruit or palpable thrill

- Neurologic deficit

- Hemothorax greater than 1000 mL

- Air bubbling of wound

- Hemoptysis

- Hematemesis

If the patient presents with hard signs, then emergent management is needed (i.e., airway and circulation management, immediate decompression, and repair of the injured vessel). If soft signs are present, then serial physical examination and non-emergent imaging may be appropriate.