The corticospinal tract controls primary motor activity for the somatic motor system and is a major pathway for voluntary movements. The lateral corticospinal tract can be injured in a number of ways. The most common types of injury include central cord syndrome, Brown-Sequard syndrome, and anterior spinal cord syndrome. Improved patient outcome measures may be facilitated by prompt diagnosis and management of spinal cord trauma. Physical therapy and occupational therapy are highly suggested to help patients preserve and regain motor function. This activity describes the evaluation and management of cortical spinal tract lesions and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.
Steroids are a medication used in the treatment and management of corticospinal lesions within the first eight hours to reduce swelling and pressure on the spinal cord. However, steroids should not be administered to patients with Brown-Sequard syndrome because it can lead to infection. This activity reviews the indications, contraindications, and activity of steroids pertinent for the members of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with corticospinal tract lesions and related conditions.
Decompression surgery can be performed in patients with a traumatic injury or with cord compression resultant from a tumor or abscess. This activity outlines and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients who undergo decompression surgery.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the types of spinal cord injuries that can influence the corticospinal tract.
- Describe the type of radiological result you would expect to observe in a patient with Brown-Sequard syndrome.
- Outline specific tests that can be performed to examine the motor function and coordination for patients with suspected spinal cord lesions.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving coordination of patient care to improve corticospinal lesion patient outcome measures.