Baroreceptors in the aortic arch and carotid sinus have significant clinical significance. For example, carotid massage can occur when there is increased pressure on the carotid artery. Increased pressure on the carotid artery leads to increased signaling of stretch fibers, which causes increased electrical signaling of the baroreceptors from the increased stretch. The carotid sinus detects this increased firing of afferent signals via the glossopharyngeal nerve, leading to a misinterpretation of the existence of hypertension. To compensate for this, efferent signals to the nucleus solitarius will cause venous dilation, arterial dilation, decreased heart rate with increased atrioventricular node refractory period, and ultimately reduced blood pressure. This sudden decrease in blood pressure can cause syncope, which often presents in patients who have a history of syncope while shaving or buttoning their shirts, activities which cause increased pressure on the carotid artery.

In contrast, during carotid occlusion, there is no blood flow to the carotid sinus. Decreased blood flow to the carotid artery leads to decreased signaling of the stretch fibers, which causes lower levels of electrical signaling of the baroreceptors from the reduced stretch. The carotid sinus detects this decreased firing of afferent signals via the glossopharyngeal nerve, incorrectly appearing to be hypotension. To compensate for this, efferent signals to the nucleus solitarius will cause venous constriction, arterial constriction, increased heart rate, and ultimately increased blood pressure. Carotid occlusive disease, or carotid stenosis, can present in patients with ischemic stroke.

The Cushing reaction is another clinically significant application of the baroreceptor mechanism. This reaction is a triad of bradycardia, hypertension, and respiratory depression. In the Cushing reflex, increased intracranial pressure causes arterioles to constrict, which leads to cerebral ischemia, which leads to an increased pCO2 and decreased pH, leading to increased sympathetic in perfusion pressure, or hypertension. Hypertension causes and increases sympathetic afferent signal because of increased total peripheral resistance and increased arterial pressure. This hypertension leads to increased stretch signals, which leads to increased electrical signals of baroreceptor firing. This increased peripheral baroreceptor activity then leads to compensatory reflex bradycardia.