Sexually transmitted infections are a worldwide concern and issue. Untreated patients often suffer disastrous effects, including health issues, financial burdens, psychological disorders, and physical damage. Vaccines and prophylactic therapy (PrEP) should be recommended for all appropriate patients. Data collection for STIs is limited by country and geographical area. Access to a national and international data collection service can help identify the prevalence and incidence of certain STIs to better allocate limited community resources directed towards prevention and treatment.

Treatment will be headed by a clinician (MD, DO, NP, or PA), but depending on the disease and its progression, it may involve specialists in infectious disease or other organ systems affected. Nurses will assist in patient examinations and counseling and serve as liaisons for all interprofessional team members. Pharmacists can verify the appropriateness of antimicrobial therapy, check dosing, monitor for adverse events, counsel patients on their medications and compliance with the regimen, and answer patient questions; advanced cases may require an infectious disease specialty pharmacist. Psychological and mental health professionals may also need to weigh in on these cases. Open communication channels are essential in STI cases so that any team member can reach out to other practitioners on the case to voice concerns or report any issues. Meticulous record-keeping goes hand-in-hand with open communication so that every care team member can access the same updated patient information on which to base their decisions and interventions. The interprofessional model will lead to optimal patient care. [Level 5]

The World Health Organization and similar groups can help an interprofessional team and care coordinators to provide these services.