Evaluation of maple syrup urine disease requires prompt identification of clinical characteristics by a physician. In addition to the clinical features, biochemical testing and molecular testing play a significant role in disease phenotype evaluation.

**Clinical Characteristics**

Clinical characteristics depend on the underlying metabolic phenotype of MSUD. It is important to note the following manifestations:

- Maple syrup odor in cerumen is the first detectable clinical sign within the first 12 hours after birth.

- 2 to 3 days of age: Irritability, ketonuria, and poor feeding

- A worsening course of encephalopathy presenting as apnea, opisthotonus, and lethargy. Furthermore, fencing and bicycling movements can also develop by the age of 4 to 5 days.

- Coma and respiratory failure by the age of 7-10 days.

- Milder forms of the disease can present later in infancy/childhood as anorexia, stunted growth, and delayed milestones. Such cases will only develop encephalopathy and ketonuria during metabolic decompensation during an acute illness.

**Diagnosis**

Children and newborns should be tested for MSUD if the following are present:

- Sporadic encephalopathy and ketoacidosis

- Intermittent encephalopathy and ketoacidosis

- Encephalopathy and ketoacidosis during an underlying illness

- Encephalopathy and ketoacidosis following trauma or fasting

- Encephalopathy and ketoacidosis with a negative newborn screening result

**Prenatal Diagnosis**

Diagnosis requires the measurement of BCKAD enzyme activity in cultured chorion villus cells or amniocytes using mutational analysis. Branched-chain amino acid concentrations can also be measured in amniotic fluid. Pre-implantation diagnosis requires the identification of familial pathogenic variants. The preferred diagnostic method is molecular analysis.

**Newborn Screening and Biochemical Evaluation**

Since 1964, routine newborn screening has been performed for MSUD. The screening is performed in all 50 United States and is best performed within 24-48 hours after birth. It is performed with tandem mass spectrometry amino acid profiling (MS/MS). The process examines the fisher ratio and concentrations of leucine-isoleucine as a standard measure.

Plasma amino acid testing is the most important diagnostic test for MSUD. It is used to assess elevated levels of BCAAs and allo-isoleucine. Elevated allo-isoleucine levels (> 5 micromols/L) confer high specificity and sensitivity for diagnosis. Even with elevated leucine levels, allo-isoleucine levels are not detectable until the age of six days. The urinary organic acids can be detected using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, dinitrophenylhydrazine tests, and urine test strips. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry detects branched-chain ketoacids, which further support the diagnosis of MSUD. Branched-chain ketoacids usually follow after BCAA elevation and are detected 48-72 hours after birth.

**Molecular testing:**

Molecular testing is available for three biallelic pathogenic gene variants. These include:

- BCKDHA gene: Encodes the E1-alpha subunit of the BCKAD enzyme complex (MSUD Type 1A).

- BCKDHB gene: Encodes the E1-beta subunit of the BCKAD enzyme complex (MSUD Type 1B).

- DBT gene: Encodes the E2 subunit of the BCKAD enzyme complex (MSUD Type 2).

Genetic testing allows for a better understanding of the prognosis and genetic counseling of the family. Furthermore, it allows for accurate assessment of the deficient BCKAD subunit. This helps determine the individualized therapies. There are over 190 pathogenic variations in BCKAD enzyme subunits. All detected variants are homozygous or compound heterozygous

**Diagnostic Strategies**

**Adult with symptoms of MSUD:**

- DNPH testing can be used to alpha-ketoacids in the urine.

- The most informative test is the identification of allo-isoleucine using plasma amino acid analysis.

- Branched-chain ketoacids and other organic acids can be detected using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.

**Newborn with signs and symptoms and a positive screening test for leucine, isoleucine, and valine or unexplained ketonuria:**

- If infants are older than 48 to 72 hours, screening tests such as DNPH and urine ketone test strips can be used.

- Plasma amino acid analysis to detect elevated BCAA and allo-isoleucine.

- Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry is used to analyze the urine for ketoacids.

- Newborns and infants should not be challenged with higher than normal protein intake.

**Newborn with an affected sibling:**

- If familial pathogenic variants are known, isolated blood from the umbilical cord can be used for a pathogenic variant detection by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), advanced sequencing, and melting analysis.

- If pathogenic variants are unknown, obtain blood from the umbilical cord to allow for pathogenic variant detection. The first diagnostic sign is the presence of maple syrup odor in the cerumen of a newborn. Therefore, inquire for a maple syrup smell 12 to 24 hours after birth. Allow protein intake to measure serum amino acid levels between 18 to 24 hours of life. If the results are vague, repeat the test between 24 to 36 hours of life. Amino acid profile indicative of MSUD should initiate dietary therapy. Furthermore, molecular testing and urine organic acid analysis should follow. It is important to remember that DNPH can't be used as a screening test until the age of 48 to 72 hours.