There is a key distinction in statistical significance versus clinical significance. Statistical significance determines if there is mathematical significance to the analysis of the results. Clinical significance means the difference is important to the patient and the clinician. In our study, the statistical significance would be present as the p-value was less than the pre-specified alpha. The clinical significance would be the 10 mmHg drop in systolic blood pressure.

Two studies can have a similar statistical significance but vastly differ in clinical significance. Let us use a hypothetical example of two new chemotherapy agents for treating cancer. Drug A was found to increase survival by at least ten years with a p-value of 0.01 and alpha for the study of 0.05. Thus, this study has statistical significance (p-value less than alpha) and clinical significance (increased survival by ten years). A second chemotherapy agent, Drug B, is found to increase survival by at least 10 minutes with a p-value of 0.01 and alpha for the study of 0.05. The study for Drug B also found statistical significance (p-value less than alpha) but no clinical significance (a 10-minute increase in life expectancy is not clinically significant). In a separate study, those taking Drug A lived on average eight years after starting the medication versus living for only two more years on average for those not taking Drug A with a p-value of 0.08 and alpha for this second study of Drug A of 0.05. In this second study of Drug A, there is no statistical significance (p-value greater to or equal alpha).