**Methods of Cardiac Stress Testing**

**Exercise Tolerance Testing**

- Uses a standardized exercise protocol, most commonly the 7-staged Bruce protocol

- The Bruce protocol involves incremental increases in walking speed and incline on a treadmill every 3 minutes until 85% of the maximal predicted heart rate is achieved (maximal predicted heart rate = 220-patient age)

- EKG telemetry rhythms, hemodynamic changes, and clinical responses to exercise are monitored before, during, and after exercise

**Stress Echocardiography (Echo)**

- Stress is induced with either exercise or pharmacologically with dobutamine.

- 
              
- Up titrate dobutamine from 5 to 10 mcg/kg/min, increasing by 10 mcg/kg/min every 3 min to a total of 40 to 50 mcg/kg/min until 85% of maximum predicted heart rate is achieved (220-age)
              
              
- Side effects: chest pain, nausea, vomiting, flu-like symptoms, arrhythmias

- Baseline echo is obtained and used as rest images.

- Exercise stress echo is obtained immediately after achieving the patient’s goal heart rate, ideally within 1 minute.

- Pharmacologic stress echo is obtained during the infusion of dobutamine.

**Stress Myocardial Perfusion Imaging (MPI)**

- Stress is induced with either exercise or pharmacologically with regadenoson.

- 
              
- 0.4mg IV push over 10 seconds
              
              
- Side effects: bronchospasm, flushing, headache, nausea, chest discomfort

- Isotope options include thallium-201 (Tl-201), technetium-99 sestamibi (Tc-99m), or technetium-99 tetrofosmin

- Images are obtained before, during, and after stress (each scan takes about 20minutes).

- 
              
- Obese patients may need a 2-day test, with stress and post-stress rest images each accompanied by a low-dose tracer injection.

- Imaging may be obtained by SPECT or PET scan.