The implementation of normal saline is standard during resuscitation, and administration can be at various concentrations. In most clinical settings, normal saline is the choice of fluid for many indications for fluid resuscitation, maintenance, or as a solvent for medication delivery.

Without proper management, the consequences of adverse effects increase. Therefore, the clinician and nursing staff must perform monitoring and reassessment of the patient and coordinate the reporting of abnormal findings. The following are objective findings that the provider and nursing staff must review:

- Ordering basic metabolic laboratory values, specifically identifying any elevations in electrolytes (e.g., sodium, chloride, bicarbonate)

- Urinary output (keep output over 0.5 mL/kg/hr)

- Physical examination findings that may indicate fluid status (e.g., peripheral edema, lung crackles, dry or moist oral mucosa)

- Patient composition (e.g., body weight, mass)

- Continuous assessment of the patient and their requirements for normal saline

The management of normal saline requires evaluation alongside the patient’s clinical status. Clinicians, including nurses, must recognize the indications on when to implement this IV solution and when there is a potential for untoward side effects from over-hydration. Due to normal saline's well-known side effects, there have been concerns regarding its use in critically ill patients. Thus nursing reporting to the clinical team unexpected findings is paramount. Hyperchloremia was significantly associated with increased mortality.

Despite its ubiquity in clinical scenarios, normal saline requires an interprofessional approach to dosing and administration among physicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists, all working collaboratively as an interprofessional team to optimize patient outcomes. [Level 5]