Treatment of endometriosis mainly consists of hormonal medications or surgical treatment. Milder forms of endometriosis are treatable with oral contraceptive pills, various forms of progesterone (oral pill, intrauterine device), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists (such as leuprolide), or androgens (such as danazol).

Surgical treatment of endometriosis can range from more conservative approaches to more radical approaches based on the patient’s symptoms and desire for future fertility. Conservative surgery consists of the destruction of endometrial lesions (typically with laser or cautery), drainage of the endometrioma, and removal of the cystic capsule.

Surgeries, especially more conservative options, are typically completed laparoscopically. In surgical resection of an endometrioma, it is important to strip the cyst wall during the procedure instead of simply draining the cyst. This has been shown to decrease recurrence rates.

The main issue with surgical endometrioma resection, especially in women experiencing infertility and considering in-vitro fertilization (IVF), is whether it affects the amount of ovarian reserve. Women have been shown to have a lower AMH (anti-mullerian hormone) level after cystectomy, which is a hormone used by fertility specialists to measure ovarian reserve.

After surgery, some providers place patients on medical therapy to attempt to prevent a recurrence. There have been studies that show a 6-month course of oral contraceptive pills helps to prevent a recurrence. However, this treatment option again depends on the patient and whether or not they are trying to conceive.