In addition to a detailed history, physical exam, and medication reconciliation, a punch biopsy that includes a pustule and blood tests is useful to aid in diagnosis and to evaluate for systemic involvement.

The presence or absence of other symptoms and hemodynamic stability of a patient will dictate the urgency and setting (outpatient versus inpatient) in which this workup occurs. Suppose a patient's clinical presentation overlaps with other severe cutaneous adverse reactions, such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis. In that case, they may require an evaluation and care at a specialized burn unit.

A scoring system published in 2001 by Sidoroff et al., often called the EuroSCAR criteria or AGEP validation score, includes clinical information, lab results, and histopathologic findings. These criteria stratify cases into the likelihood that AGEP is the underlying diagnosis.

According to these metrics, a score of 0 or below rules out the possibility of AGEP. A score of 1 to 4 cannot rule out AGEP, whereas a score of 5 to 7 indicates that AGEP is probable. A score of 8 to 12 is considered to diagnose AGEP definitively. These criteria are shown.

**Exanthem Features**

- No pustules or unable to determine (0), Pustules present and equivocal (+1), Pustules present in significant number, nonfollicular, and minuscule/"pinhead" < 5 mm size, can be confluent (+2).

- No erythema or unable to determine (0), Erythema present and equivocal (+1), Erythema present and widespread as a base upon which the pustules are located (+2).

- Unable to determine distribution pattern (0), Distribution pattern equivocal (+1), Distribution begins in intertriginous regions or face with rapid spread to trunk and limbs (+2).

- No post-pustular desquamation or unable to determine (0), Post-pustular desquamation (+1).

**Other Features**

- Mucosal involvement (- 2), no mucosal involvement (0).

- Onset > 10 days (-2), onset <= 10 days (0).

- Resolution > 15 days (-4), resolution <= 15 days (0)

- Temperature < 38 degrees C (100.4 degrees F) (0), Fever >- 38 degrees C (100.4 degrees F) (+1).

- WBC < 7,000 cells/mm^3 (0), WBC >= 7,000 cells/mm^3 (+1)

**Histologic Features**

- Consistent with another diagnosis (-10).

- Not representative or no histology (0).

- Peripheral neutrophil exocytosis (+1).

- Non-spongiform subcorneal and/or intraepidermal or nonspecified pustules with papillary edema (+2), Spongiform subcorneal and/or intraepidermal or nonspecific pustules without papillary edema (+2).

- Spongiform subcorneal and/or intraepidermal pustules with papillary edema (+3).

In addition to clinical evaluation and biopsy, attempting to confirm the culprit medication may be appropriate in cases of polypharmacy. Any diagnostic tests that involve symptom provocation should not be attempted until at least six weeks after the complete resolution of symptoms. Patch testing is the preferred approach, with intradermal or prick tests potentially useful if patch testing is negative and the benefits outweigh the risks.

Ex vivo tests such as the lymphocyte transformation test (LTT) and enzyme-linked immunospot assay (ELISpot) have potential utility but currently are limited in their clinical use. One potential benefit is that these tests do not rely on re-creating the patient's symptoms and may be more desirable for patient comfort. Drawbacks of these tests include lack of availability at many healthcare facilities, the requirement for well-preserved and viable T-lymphocytes from the patient, and wide variation in sensitivity for delayed hypersensitivity reactions. The reported sensitivity is between 27% and 74% for LLT and 35% to 85% for ELISpot.