The adverse effects seen with adrenergic drugs are broad. The most common side effects are changes in heart rate and blood pressure.

Selective agonist binding to the alpha-1 receptor can lead to hypertension. Certain drugs that bind to the alpha-1 receptor, such as phenylephrine, may cause reflex bradycardia.

Drugs that selectively bind to alpha-2 receptors may cause hypotension, dry mouth, and sedation. At higher doses, respiratory depression and somnolence may occur. These effects are most pronounced with clonidine and similarly acting drugs.

Selective binding to beta-1 receptors commonly causes tachycardia, palpitations, and hypertension. Tachyarrhythmias and anxiety can also be common. High doses may induce dangerous arrhythmias. An example of a selective beta-1 receptor agonist is dobutamine.

Beta-2 receptor agonists can cause tremors, tachycardia, palpitations, and anxiety. Common examples are the various bronchodilator drugs such as albuterol and salmeterol.

Non-selective binding to the adrenergic receptors can cause different side effects that vary based on the specific agent as well as the dosage. The common non-selective agonists are norepinephrine, epinephrine, and isoproterenol (isoprenaline). Common side effects are tachycardia, hypertension, arrhythmias, palpitations, and anxiety. Norepinephrine is less likely to cause arrhythmias than some of the other pressor medications, probably because it is more alpha-1 receptor-selective as compared with the beta-1 receptor.