At face value, the use of lights and sirens by prehospital emergency medical personnel does not seem to be an area of high-value research or controversy. Drivers are all quite used to seeing emergency vehicles at work on the streets, lights flashing, and sirens wailing.  Both lights and sirens are, and for a long time have been, standard components of EMS vehicles. They are used both to decrease the time it takes emergency medical personnel to respond to the location of an accident, illness, or injury, as well as the time it takes to transport the patient to a definitive care center. They are also used to keep medical providers safe while on the scene of an incident. The judicious and safe use of lights and sirens is a topic that has been well-researched recently

**History**

During the early years of EMS response, the use of lights and sirens mirrored their use in the older and more established fire service. The typical thinking was that a fire could potentially spread very quickly; the earlier that firefighters arrived, the more likely that lives and property could be spared. That logic was appropriate for EMS providers as well. The quicker that a patient could be transported to a hospital, the higher the likelihood of a better outcome. In fact, very early "ambulance drivers" were just that. They had little to no formal medical training, and in most instances, did not even travel with the patient in the rear of the vehicle. Lights and sirens were used to get the patient to trained medical personnel as quickly as possible.

Over the ensuing years, there began scrutiny of EMS protocols regarding the routine, unquestioned use of lights and sirens, looking at both the response phase of the call, as well as the transport phase. As the training of EMS providers began and improved, EMS agencies rightfully started to see themselves as the prehospital adjunct to hospital-based emergency medicine. As such, they were subject to the same questioning of methods, and research to evaluate those methods, that emergency medicine physicians have come to expect and embrace. That research, performed mainly over the last 30 years, looked at the use of emergency lights and sirens with very specific questions in mind: did they make EMS vehicles more conspicuous? Did they save time in EMS response and transport?  Did the time make a difference in the medical outcome of the patient?  These questions were asked and studied, all within the relative context of the risks that lights and sirens present to EMS workers as well as the public

Without evidence-based research, the continued routine and unquestioned use of lights and sirens by EMS providers would certainly be subject to time-honored and emotionally-driven opinions on the subject by those who use them. The most deeply held belief is that using lights and sirens saves time, and that time, in medical emergencies, is of paramount importance. Indeed, medical professionals still teach the public, as well as medical personnel at all levels of training, that "time is muscle/brain." There are expectations of the public that play a role as well, in that if their lights and sirens were not employed, then the EMS agency involved was not providing the urgency that a patient or family believes is warranted in their situation. There are also those who would believe that the lights and sirens were a part of the attraction of new members to the job, and recruiting would be damaged by any decrease in their usage. The companies that insure EMS agencies played a role as well, believing that the routine use of lights and sirens made EMS vehicle and personnel safer, and their use was required for insurance purposes. If these views were to be questioned, protocols and attitudes toward the use of lights and sirens changed, then quality research was needed.