# Introduction

The gluteal region plays a pivotal role in the stability of the lower limb and pelvis and contains various key neurovascular structures. The musculature is formed principally by the three gluteal muscles: Maximus, medius, and minimus. The Gluteus medius and minimus work together as hip abductors and are vital to normal locomotion.

# Structure and Function

The gluteal region, colloquially known as the buttock, lies posterior to the bony pelvis and is defined superiorly by the iliac crest and inferiorly ends at the gluteal fold. The muscles of the region consist of the gluteus maximus, medius, and minimus, as well as the piriformis, obturator internus, superior and inferior gemellus, and quadratus femoris.

The gluteus medius lies between the gluteus maximus and gluteus minimus. Its posterior third is covered by the gluteus maximus, while the anterior two-thirds is superficial, covered only by a strong layer of deep fascia.

The gluteus medius is a primary hip abductor, assisted by the gluteus minimus and the tensor fascia lata. Both gluteus medius and minimus act from the pelvis to abduct the thigh and rotate it internally. The anterior fibers help with the internal rotation of the thigh, while the posterior fibers help with lateral rotation when the knee is in extension. Gluteus medius acts from the femur to stabilize the pelvis and maintain the trunk upright when standing on one leg, running, and walking when one leg is off the ground. With one foot being off the ground, the body weight tends to make the pelvis sag downwards on the unsupported side. The gluteus medius and minimus of the supported side counteract this force by powerful traction on the hip bone. The pelvis is prevented from sagging downwards and may even be raised a little on the unsupported side. The force produced by hip abductor muscles to maintain stability during single-limb support accounts for most of the compressive force generated between the acetabulum and femoral head.

# Embryology

The lower limb bud forms at around four weeks, corresponding to embryonic stage 14. By stage 17, the lower limb has a flattened footplate with an identifiable hip joint but no true knee. During stages 20 to 23, the digits separate, and the toes are clearly defined by stage 23, corresponding to the end of week eight. Like other skeletal muscles, the gluteus medius is formed by cells derived from somites present at the level of the lower limb bud. These cells demyelinate from the hypaxial edge of the dermomyotome. They subsequently migrate into the limb bud and proliferate there. With the expression of myogenic determination factors, they eventually differentiate into the gluteus medius muscle.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The superior gluteal artery supplies the gluteus medius muscle. It is the largest branch of the internal iliac artery. The artery travels posteriorly between the first sacral ramus and the lumbosacral trunk.

The superior gluteal artery rarely arises from the internal pudendal artery. It occasionally arises with the inferior gluteal artery directly from the internal iliac artery. Internal iliac nodes surround the branches of internal iliac vessels, which receive the lymphatic drainage of the gluteal region. The common iliac nodes receive lymphatic drainage from the internal iliac nodes, which lie around the common iliac artery. The common iliac nodes empty into the lateral aortic nodes.

The superior gluteal vein (SGV) drains blood from the gluteal region through two branches: a superficial branch and a deep branch. The superior gluteal vein runs together with the upper gluteal artery, enters the pelvis through the large ischial foramen in the supra-pyriform canal, and ends in the internal iliac vein. The superior gluteal vein anastomoses with the inferior gluteal vein.

The inferior gluteal vein (IGV) drains the posterosuperior region of the thigh and buttock. It originates from double branches that converge in a single trunk that runs together with the lower gluteal artery. The inferior gluteal vein anastomoses with the medial circumflex veins of the femur and the superior perforating vein, which are tributaries of the deep femoral vein. The inferior gluteal vein enters the pelvis through the lower part of the large ischial foramen and flows into the distal portion of the internal iliac vein.

# Nerves

The gluteus medius receives nerve supply from the superior gluteal nerve. The superior gluteal nerve originates from the dorsal branches of the L4, L5, and S1 nerve roots of the sacral plexus

The superior branch accompanies the upper branch of the deep division of the superior gluteal artery to innervate the gluteus minimus and gluteus medius. The inferior branch travels with the lower ramus of the deep division of the superior gluteal artery to innervate the gluteus minimus and medius, terminating in the tensor fascia lata muscle.

# Surgical Considerations

The gluteus medius and its supplying artery and nerve suffer damage due to hip fracture, hip dislocation, and hip arthroplasty. In a direct lateral approach during hip arthroplasty, the gluteus medius is surgically divided to gain access to the hip joint; therefore, this approach has the highest chance of nerve damage.

Gluteus medius tears can present as chronic trochanteric bursitis resistant to medical treatment, requiring surgical management. Identification of this pathology is in the first instance, typically following clinical examination, but MR imaging is also of value, demonstrating a high-intensity T2 signal secondary to the inflammation of the affected area.

# Clinical Significance

The gluteus medius and minimus can be tested together in a clinical setting by internal rotation of the thigh against resistance, with the hip and knee flexed while in a supine position. However, the presence of gluteus medius tears can be individually identified by performing an internal counter-resistance rotation test.

In cases of gluteus medius and minimus paralysis, patients will have a characteristic lurching gait known as Trendelenburg gait. If these two muscles and their innervations are intact, paralysis of other muscles acting on the hip joint will have little impact on walking or running. Greater trochanteric pain syndrome (GTPS) is attributable to tendinopathy of the gluteus medius and/or minimus with or without coexisting bursal pathology.

# Other Issues

Owing to the close proximity of the musculature and emerging neurovascular structures in the gluteal region, there have been case reports of compression syndrome occurring following trauma to the gluteus medius muscle, compressing the regional vascular system.

Gluteus medius syndrome (GMS) is a less common cause of lower back pain or leg pain and is similar but not the same as the greater trochanteric pain syndrome. GMS is associated with degeneration of the lumbar vertebrae and osteoarthritis at the level of the hips or the knee; it can correlate with failed back surgery syndrome.