**Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma (MTC)**

Virtually, all patients with MEN2A and MEN2B develop MTC. The disease is usually bilateral and multicentric including its precursor neoplastic C-cell hyperplasia. The disease in MEN2B may be more aggressive than MEN2A. The aggressiveness of the disease in each syndrome depends upon the type of mutation.

For the patients with a predisposition to MEN2B, total prophylactic thyroidectomy with lymph node dissection is indicated at 1 year of age as the metastatic disease have been reported in such patients soon after age 1. The lymph nodes are removed even when there is no evidence of involvement.

For the patients with high-risk mutations of MEN2A, total thyroidectomy with lymph node dissection is indicated at age 5.

For the patients with moderate-risk mutations, the surgery can wait until late childhood or early adulthood. The treatment aims to remove the thyroid gland before it becomes inoperable. Total thyroidectomy is the only way considering bilateral and multicentric nature of the hereditary forms of MTC. Before doing the surgery, it is compulsory to rule out the presence of pheochromocytoma, and if present, it should be removed first.

**Pheochromocytoma**

Nearly 40% of the patients with MEN2A and 50% with MEN2B develop pheochromocytoma which is also likely to be bilateral and multicentric than its sporadic forms. Bilateral adrenalectomy is recommended in patients who have bilateral pheochromocytoma or if there is unilateral disease, but there is a history of an aggressive bilateral tumor in one of the family members.

The patients with unilateral pheochromocytoma and normal-appearing contralateral glands, unilateral adrenalectomy is recommended because in patients who have undergone unilateral adrenalectomy and developed a contralateral tumor, later on, the chances of metastatic pheochromocytoma were found minimal and no death has even been reported due to catecholamine crisis in patients with MEN2.

Prior to unilateral or bilateral adrenalectomy, patients should be treated with alpha-blockade preoperatively; the patient should receive glucocorticoid stress coverage while awaiting transfer to the surgery.

**Primary Hyperparathyroidism**

Primary hyperparathyroidism has only 10% to 25% association with MEN2A, and it does not occur at all in MEN2B families. Prophylactic parathyroidectomy is not recommended in asymptomatic patients as the disease is usually mild, appears late, and is often clinically obscure. Surgery is reserved for the patients who develop worsening hypercalcemia, bone loss, and renal impairment. So, instead of removing the gland, the patient is monitored with serum calcium, creatinine, and bone density every 1 or 2 years. The disease is usually multiglandular, and parathyroidectomy is done only when the disease becomes clinically apparent and progressive. Again, the patient should be screened for concurrent pheochromocytoma, and if present, adrenalectomy is done before parathyroidectomy.