The challenge faced by emergency department practitioners in evaluating and referring patients for this novel therapy is multifactorial. It requires a thorough evaluation of the patient's clinical presentation and underlying risk factors as well as coordination with outpatient centers to provide the treatment. Clinical assessment and decision-making pathway for patients presenting to the emergency department with COVID-19 infection are outlined below.

**Patient Evaluation in the Emergency Department**

An assessment of underlying risk factors is essential to the evaluation of a patient with COVID-19 infection. Established risk factors for severe COVID-19 infection include age ≥ 65 years, chronic kidney disease (CKD), pregnancy, diabetes mellitus (DM), immunosuppressive disease, immunosuppressive therapy, a body mass index (BMI) ≥ of 35 kg/m^2, cardiovascular disease, or hypertension or COPD/other chronic respiratory diseases, aged between 12 to 17 years and have a BMI ≥ 85 percentile for that age and gender-based on CDC growth charts, sickle cell disease, congenital or acquired heart disease, neurodevelopmental disorders, dependence on a medical-related technology device (e.g., tracheostomy, gastrostomy, or positive pressure ventilation ) unrelated to COVID-19, asthma, reactive airway, or chronic respiratory disease that requires daily medication for control.

Another important step in evaluating patients with COVID-19 in the emergency department (ED) is the determination of illness/symptom onset. Particularly, evaluation of dyspnea severity and its onset must be determined at the index evaluation in the ED. This should be followed by the determination of oxygen saturation and an overall assessment of illness severity. According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel, patients evaluated in the emergency department that meet the following criteria should be referred to hospitalization and inpatient management of COVID-19:

- Oxygen saturation < 94% on room air

- Respiratory rate >30 breaths/minute

- PaO2/FiO2 < 300 mmHg

- Lung infiltrates present in >50% of the lung fields

The guidelines define mild illness with COVID-19 infection as constitutional symptoms such as fever, cough, sore throat, malaise, headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or loss of taste and smell without dyspnea or abnormal imaging. Moderate illness is defined as evidence of lower respiratory tract disease during clinical assessment or imaging, with oxygen saturation ≥ 94% on room air.

Appropriate evaluation and risk stratification of patients with COVID-19 in the emergency department is required to improve clinical outcomes. This is because treatment options vary drastically for the severity of illness and are indicated for specific patient populations.

**ED Work-up for Patients with COVID-19**

Several previously established serum markers have been used to document COVID-19 severity. They include alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin, ferritin, D-dimer, and fibrinogen. An evidence-based approach to COVID-19 management in the ED recommends obtaining these markers at the time of initial evaluation in the ED in patients with moderate to severe disease.

Radiographic imaging is not recommended in all patients with COVID-19. Guidelines for chest imaging in patients with mild disease recommend limiting imaging to only those with risk factors for disease progression.

The above diagnostic testing is non-specific, and any test in isolation should not be used to derive the decision-making pathway. The utility of these tests is best when used together and in association with the clinical presentation.

**Novel Prognostic Biomarkers for Risk Stratification in the Emergency Department**

A recent study evaluated patients who presented to the emergency department with COVID-19 infection to determine prognostic indicators that predict the risk of hospitalization and oxygen requirement. They reported that a soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells (sTREM-1) had high prognostic accuracy for 30-day intubation/mortality. They also reported that interleukin (IL) 6 measured at presentation to the ED had high accuracy for predicting 30-day oxygen requirement. Combining respiratory rate and sTREM-1 predicted 30-day intubation/mortality with 94% sensitivity. An IL-6-based algorithm with respiratory rate had 98% sensitivity for 30-day oxygen requirement. They concluded that sTREM-1 and IL-6 could be used as early triage tools in the emergency department to predict patient outcomes in addition to the clinical assessment. Further research regarding these markers is ongoing.

**Treatment Plan Based on Clinical Presentation and ED Workup**

- Patients with COVID-19 who present to the ED with mild disease severity and do not have laboratory/radiologic data that portends a poor prognosis and do not have any risk factors for progression to severe disease can be discharged home with outpatient follow-up within 72 hours.

- Patients with mild disease severity and at high risk for disease progression due to risk factors can be discharged from the ED and referred to outpatient neutralizing monoclonal treatment centers.

- There is no indication for glucocorticoid therapy in patients with mild disease severity who can maintain adequate oxygen saturation and are discharged home.

- Patients with mild disease and a high risk of disease progression should receive monoclonal antibody treatment even if initial laboratory and radiologic data are unremarkable regardless of their vaccination status.

- Patients with moderate disease severity and mildly abnormal laboratory/radiologic data with risk factors for disease progression would benefit from discharge home and referral to outpatient monoclonal antibody treatment centers.

- Patients with moderate disease and mild hypoxia (92% to 94% oxygen saturation on room air) would benefit from oxygen supplementation and discharge home with dexamethasone and outpatient follow-up within 24 hours.

- Patients with severe clinical disease on presentation to the ED should be hospitalized and do not qualify for neutralizing monoclonal antibody treatment; however, they may be candidates for anti-IL-6 receptor monoclonal antibodies.

**Follow Up After Discharge from the Emergency Department**

In a recently published study out of the UK, looking at patient outcomes after discharge from the emergency department, they reported a substantial number of patients developing severe disease after being discharged from the ED.

**Referral to Outpatient Infusion Centers**

Patients who meet the criteria for monoclonal antibody treatment to prevent disease progression should be referred to outpatient treatment centers. COVID-19 neutralizing monoclonal antibody infusion centers are typically affiliated with large university hospitals or other local tertiary care hospitals. They all have online referral applications, typically consisting of a short questionnaire regarding patient characteristics and clinical presentations. The referrals are sent via fax or to a secured email which is monitored 7-days a week. The infusion center then reaches out to the patient and schedules an outpatient appointment for therapy. ED clinicians must remember that this novel treatment needs to be administered within ten days of symptom onset. Referral to the nearest or patient preferred infusion center should be made expeditiously to improve clinical outcomes for these high-risk patients. A Mayo Clinic study reported lack of transport, especially for patients residing in long-term care facilities, as a major cause for decreased utilization of this treatment (13% usage amongst those who meet criteria for therapy).