Metolazone is an oral agent, available in 2.5 mg, 5 mg, and 10 mg tablets. A dose of 5 to 20 mg once daily is recommended as the initial to treat edema associated with congestive heart failure or kidney disease. The dose should be titrated to the patient's response, then continued at the lowest dose needed to maintain diuresis. For the treatment of hypertension, 2.5-10 mg once daily is recommended initially, with titration to the response.

Metolazone is recommended to be taken in the morning due to its prolonged absorption and duration of action. According to guidelines, metolazone should be administered two to five hours before loop diuretic so that peak drug levels of metolazone are attained with the loop diuretic administration and maximum blockade of distal sodium reabsorption is accomplished.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment is required for patients with hepatic impairment

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is required for patients with renal impairment or with concurrent use of hemodialysis. Older patients are more likely to have decreased renal function; thus, care should be taken in dose selection, and renal function should be monitored.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Metolazone is former FDA category B.  Metolazone crosses the placenta. Monitor for volume depletion to ensure adequate placental perfusion. The risk of exposure to the infant should be weighed against the benefit of treatment for the mother.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Metolazone is also excreted in breast milk, so the potential for adverse reactions in nursing infants exists.