Generally, B-cell is a key regulatory cell in the immune system; it acts by producing antibodies, antigen-presenting cells, supporting other mononuclear cells, and contributing to inflammatory pathways directly. However, to understand the nature, function, and subsequent dysfunction of b-cells, b-cell development will be discussed briefly.

B lymphocytes arise from hematopoietic stem cells that are considered as the precursor of B-cell lineage. Early development took place in fetal liver and bone marrow after birth, and throughout life hence bone marrow is the primary lymphoid organ in humans and many mammals. B-cell's continuous differentiation ensures that B cell repertoires are continuously replenished for limitless antigens recognitions. Non-lymphoid cells called stroma make up the matrix of the bone marrow providing essential molecules for cell production like Interleukin (IL-7), cytokines, and adhesion molecules that are critical for B-cell survival and differentiation. Major developmental stages of B cells result in cells that undergo a negative selection process to eliminate self-reactive cells to prevent autoimmunity. Those B cells which survive negative selection will be carried through the circulation to peripheral lymphoid organs waiting for antigens to react against and ultimately become antibody-secreting cells or plasma cells. However, B cells undergo program cell death if it did not encounter antigens.

Tolerance to self-antigens must include all self-antigens. However, not all self-antigens present in the bone marrow. Therefore, another tolerance mechanism ensures that B cells do not cause autoimmunity. Generally, mature B cells require T cells help to produce antibodies. B cells that encounter antigen and do not receive help from T helper cells that are specific to that particular antigen will undergo anergy or clonal deletion. However, a subset of mature B cells have developed another mechanism to respond to antigens without the help of B cells; this population is called thymus independent B cells (T-independent B cells).

Lymphoid follicles present in secondary lymphoid organs and provide a specialized environment to concentrate antigen for proper B cells function. It contains follicular dendritic cells to display antigens to naïve B cells. Secondary lymphoid tissue trapped antigens from different sources according to their location and related environment, (1) spleen collects blood-borne antigens, (2) lymphatic nodes collects antigen trapped in the lymphatic system, (3) mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) acquires antigens from the surrounding mucosal epithelium.

B cells are responsible for mediating the production of antigen-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) directed against invasive pathogens (antibodies). B cells recognize antigens via a membrane-bound b-cell receptor (BCR) along with accessory cell surface receptors. B cells are capable of recognizing a variety of structural motifs (epitopes) on antigens that rely on the enormous sequence and structural diversity of BCR repertoires, due to Genetic rearrangement in V(D)J segments responsible of the variable regions (heavy and light chains) of BCR. Stimulated B cells mature into plasma cells after antigen stimulation leading to the synthesis of five different antibody immunoglobulins classes that synthesize large amounts of antibody Immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, IgD, IgM, and IgE). Once activated, the B cell undergoes mitotic division after activation to produce a clone of cells that the ability to produce immunoglobulin of the same antigen specificity. Theses cells will mature mostly into plasma cells. The primary immune response is generated when B-cell encounters antigens for the first time. However, a few subsets of this clone will mature into memory cells that respond rapidly upon subsequent exposures to that particular antigen and generate a secondary immune response. the secondary immune response is of high magnitude, occurs much more rapidly, and produces IgG rather than IgM. This phenomenon is the key concept om lifetime immunity and vaccines.

In addition to their crucial role in humoral immunity, B cells also mediate/regulate many other functions essential for immune homeostasis. Experimental studies showed that depletion of B-cells during mice development leads to severe consequences and congenital abnormalities within the immune system (etc., generalized decrease in number and diversity of T-cells, an absence of Peyer patch organogenesis and defects within dendritic cells). Moreover, B-cell is necessary for immune system maintenance. For example, b-cell releases immunomodulatory cytokines that influence immune cells function like T-cells and dendritic cells, regulate lymphoid tissue organogenesis, wound healing, and transplanted tissue rejection. Furthermore, regulatory B-cell has been discovered as a critical cell that regulates T cell-mediated inflammatory responses by producing IL-10.

B cells proliferate rapidly after antigenic stimulation in germinal centers rating about one division every 6 hours. Germinal center is a lightly stained region within lymphoid follicles made up of FDCs. During the proliferation process, point mutations are introduced at a high rate without repair into immunoglobulin genes; this unique process is referred to as somatic hypermutation. Moreover, Ig class switching is a crucial step in B-cell development in the germinal center, up to the end of B cell maturation it has IgM and IgD surface immunoglobulins but only capable of secret IgM. In many situations like mucosal infection were IgA is the cornerstone in fighting antigens, IgM is not enough; therefore, class switching is necessary to allow B cells to secret all classes of antibodies. Ultimately mature B cells encounter antigens and differentiate into plasma cells that secrets large amounts of antibodies and memory cells that rapidly respond to antigens upon subsequent exposers.

**B-cell Activation**

Activation of a B cell by a protein antigen requires B cell to function as an APC, presenting the protein epitopes on MHC II to helper T cells hence the name T- cell-dependent activation is given to this mechanism. However, polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides, and other non-protein antigens are considered as T-independent antigens because they can activate B cells without antigen processing and presentation to T cells.

- T Cell-independent activation of B cells:

- 
              
- This type of activation happens when B cells interact with T-independent antigens—the activation process composed of two signals. The first signal is, cross-linkage of multiple BCRS with repetitive epitope unites on the antigen surface. The second signal is the interaction of toll-like receptors with PAMPs or interactions with factors from the complement system. After B cell activation, B cells undergo clonal proliferation and ultimate differentiation of daughter cells into plasma cells. Ultimately, B-cell receptors will disappear. However, plasma cells will dominate in antibodies production of IgM type with the same specificity as BCRs (Pentameric IgM). This process is of short life and its lakes the ability of memory cell production.

- T Cell-Dependent Activation of B cells:

- 
              
- This process happens in response to T-dependent antigens (protein material either free or associated with intact pathogens). Free antigen interaction will result in internalization directly. However, interaction with intact pathogens will result in antigen separation and extraction from the intact pathogen. Eventually, the antigen will be presented on MHC class 2 on B-cell's external membrane that is recognized by T helper cells specific to that antigen (figure 3). Linked recognition between T helper cells and B cells will happen, which explained as TCR of T helper cells recognizes the antigen presented on b cells and CD4 molecule interaction with MHC-II on B cells. Several cytokines secreted by TH2 cells will stimulate B cells to proliferate and differentiate into plasma cells and memory cells.