Treatment of primary headaches in the emergency department should be focused on reducing symptoms and providing supportive care. Often, primary headaches are recurrent, and follow-up with a neurologist or primary care physician should be recommended for preventive and abortive management options. The goal of medical management of headaches centers on achieving fast and long-lasting analgesia with little to no side effects. Headaches are frequently associated with nausea and vomiting, so medications should be administered parenterally when possible. Treatment should also include managing patient expectations. Headache recurrence is common, and patients should understand both what to do for a headache that recurs at home and when to return to the emergency department.

Medication options with favorable outcomes include:

- Fluid rehydration

- IV fluids have not been shown to provide pain relief; however, rehydration is essential in patients with nausea and vomiting who may not be able to tolerate oral intake.

- Antidopaminergic agents such as prochlorperazine, chlorpromazine, promethazine, and metoclopramide

- These medications provide both analgesic and antiemetic effects. Extrapyramidal symptoms are a possible side effect of these medications; this can be treated with diphenhydramine, which is often given contemporaneously to metoclopramide.

- Acetaminophen

- This medication has been shown to provide good short-term relief, but recurrence rates remain high.

- NSAIDs such as ibuprofen, ketorolac, naproxen, and diclofenac

- Excellent analgesic effect. Generally well-tolerated, but caution is necessary for patients at risk of bleeding. These agents inhibit cyclooxygenase, thus reducing platelet function, which could exacerbate bleeding. Side effects of these medications include GI irritation and nephrotoxicity when used over time.

- Triptans such as sumatriptan

- These medications have been shown to provide good long-term relief and are often used to prevent and abort migraine headaches, but their side effect profile causes them to be prescribed primarily in the outpatient setting, where follow-up is more easily facilitated. Side effects of triptans are primarily vascular, including chest pain, shortness of breath, and flushing.

- Corticosteroids such as dexamethasone

- Steroids have been shown to decrease headache recurrence, particularly for migraines, which have lasted more than 72 hours.

Cluster headaches benefit from high flow oxygen administration.

Opiates should be avoided, as they increase ED visit frequency, decrease the efficacy of other medications, and carry a high addiction burden.

Another treatment modality increasingly utilized in the ED is administering a noninvasive intranasal sphenopalatine ganglion nerve block, in which topical local anesthetic is applied intranasally via a long cotton-tipped applicator. In a 2015 trial by Schaffer et al., it was found that patients with an acute headache not attributable to secondary pathology reported at least a 50% reduction in headache severity with the administration of 0.3 mL 0.5% bupivacaine solution compared with placebo.

Treatment of a secondary headache depends on identifying and treating the underlying pathology.