Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) plays a central role in the pathogenesis of several inflammatory conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA). TNF is made intracellularly, mainly by activated macrophages. The precursor TNF is converted to soluble TNF after proteolysis by the TNF-converting enzyme. This soluble TNF then oligomerizes and forms the biologically active homotrimer TNF. There are two types of TNF, which are very closely related, TNF-alpha and TNF-beta. The activities of both TNFs are mediated through binding to the TNF receptors I and II (TNFRI and TNFRII), which are present on almost all cell types (except erythrocytes).

The binding of TNF to TNFRI and TNFRII activates several signaling pathways, including transcription factor activation (nuclear factor-κB), proteases (caspases), and protein kinases (c-Jun N-terminal kinase, MAP kinase). This signaling leads to activation of the target cell leading to the inflammatory and immune response by releasing several cytokines and apoptotic pathway initiation. Thus, the biological effects of TNF include activation of other cells (macrophages, T-cells, B-cells), proinflammatory cytokine production (IL-1, IL-6), chemokine production (IL-8, RANTES), expression of adhesion molecule (ICAM-1, E-selectin), inhibition of regulatory T-cells, RANK-ligand expression upregulation, matrix metalloproteinase production and induction of apoptosis. The differences in structure and mechanism of action of various anti-TNF agents appear in the second table accompanying this article.