Interprofessional treatment teams consisting of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), oncology specialists, nurses, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and clinicians in different specialties need to be knowledgeable regarding the use and potential adverse events of oxaliplatin. This interprofessional team approach ensures proper administration, management, monitoring, and limitation of the adverse effects. When a patient is on a chemotherapeutic regimen, it is strongly advised to utilize a board-certified oncology specialty pharmacist who can examine the treatment regimen (including pre and post medication), communicate possible drug interactions, and the recommended therapeutic dosage to the clinician.

The assigned nursing staff must monitor the IV site, be cognizant of the adverse effects of the drug, and relay them to the clinician and/or pharmacist. As with pharmacy, having oncology-certified nurses involved in the pre-and post-administration care, in addition to performing administration, can optimize patient outcomes. These nurses will report to the ordering clinician any issues or concerns they see so remedial action (dose adjustments, additional medication, etc.) can be implemented.

Lastly, the clinician must have enough information to determine if the patient is a candidate to receive a drug like oxaliplatin depending on the patient's medical history; here again, consulting with an oncology pharmacist can prove invaluable.

The interpersonal healthcare team is responsible for the following:

- Complete blood count, liver function tests, renal function tests, pregnancy test

- Proper administration of the drug and monitoring of the IV site

- Monitoring toxicity

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of CINV, peripheral sensory neuropathy, infection, GI disturbances

- Consult with the pharmacist and toxicologist regarding dosing

- Consult with the radiologist, pathologist, and surgeon regarding the spread of cancer

The prevention and management of oxaliplatin-induced neurotoxicity start with the patient limiting exposure to cold environments, ensuring proper protection, and staying away from cold food and beverages.

WIth an interprofessional team approach to oxaliplatin therapy, patients stand to achieve the best possible outcomes with this drug while minimizing potential adverse effects. [Level 5]