Branchial cleft anomalies form due to the incomplete involution of branchial cleft structures. Around the fourth week of gestation, neural crest cells migrate into the future head and neck region, where the 6 pairs of branchial (pharyngeal) arches begin to develop. The mesoderm is covered externally by ectoderm and internally lined by endoderm. Normally there are 5 branchial arches, with the arches are separated by depressions known as clefts on the ectodermal surface and corresponding pouches on the endodermal surface, yielding four pharyngeal clefts. The second arch develops caudally and then covers the third and fourth arches. These buried clefts become ectoderm-lined cavities that normally involute completely by 7 weeks of gestation. If the clefts do not involute or incompletely involute, these pathological remnants will form cysts, sinuses, or fistulae in predictable locations according to their branchial cleft of origin.

- **First Branchial Cleft Cyst**
- First cleft cysts make up approximately 5% to 25% of all branchial cleft anomalies and are subclassified via the Work classification system. Work type I contain ectoderm only and on physical exam show preauricular masses or sinuses that track anterior and medial to the external auditory canal. These typically present lateral to the facial nerve and end within the external auditory canal or connect to the umbo of the middle ear, essentially as a duplication of the external auditory canal. Work type II cysts are more common and contain both ectoderm and mesoderm. These classically present at the angle of the mandible or within the submandibular region. They can be course either lateral or medial to the facial nerve and pass superficial (57%), deep (30%), or between (13%) branches of the facial nerve.

- **Second Branchial Cleft Cyst**
- This is the most common branchial cleft cyst, representing approximately 40-95% of branchial anomalies.  The external punctum is found anterior and medial to the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) on the neck skin. Bilateral second branchial cleft cysts can be associated with branchio-oto-renal syndrome. The course of a second branchial cleft sinus is as follows: the external opening is located on the neck skin as described above, with the fistula traveling deep to platysma then passing in between the internal and external carotids, coursing superficial to both glossopharyngeal and hypoglossal nerves before connecting to the tonsillar fossa. Cysts or sinuses of the second branchial cleft can exist anywhere along this course.

- **Third Branchial Cleft Cyst**
- Third branchial cleft cysts are estimated to represent 2-8% of all branchial cleft anomalies. When present, the external skin opening is seen over the middle to lower third of the anterior SCM. The third branchial cleft sinus course is as follows: from the skin opening described above, the tract courses deep to platysma and course posterior to the internal carotid artery. It will pass between the glossopharyngeal and hypoglossal nerves and may be intimately associated with the superior laryngeal nerve (classically coursing superior to it). It then connects to the pyriform sinus in the larynx.

- **Fourth Branchial Cleft Cyst**
- Fourth cleft cysts are extremely rare, representing approximately 1% of all branchial cleft anomalies. They are reported more commonly on the left, with the skin opening near the medial lower border of the SCM. The exact course of the fourth branchial cleft remnant is not as well characterized owing to its rarity. However, it classically passes deep to the common carotid and can loop around either the aortic arch (in a left-sided anomaly) or the subclavian (in a right-sided anomaly). These run superficial to the recurrent laryngeal nerve and hypoglossal nerve, terminating in the apex of the pyriform sinus in the larynx.