Lumateperone's mechanism of action involves simultaneous modulation of dopaminergic, serotonergic, and glutamatergic neurotransmission.

At dopamine receptors, lumateperone's activity is unique through its activity at D2 receptors compared to first-generation and other recently introduced second-generation antipsychotics.

First-generation antipsychotics block D2 receptors both pre-and post-synaptically. Pre-synaptic inhibition of D2 receptors results in positive feedback and a subsequent increase of dopamine in the synaptic cleft. Only post-synaptic receptor blockade is sufficient in this context. Other agents that are second-generation antipsychotics, such as aripiprazole and brexipiprazole, are D2 receptor partial agonists and allow low dopamine D2 receptor neurotransmission. In both cases, there are unwanted increases in dopaminergic activity and, more importantly, the requirement for higher D2 receptor occupancy. Specifically, they are known to require a 60-80% occupancy of D2 receptors to achieve clinical efficacy in reducing symptoms of schizophrenia. This is thought to result in a higher risk of extrapyramidal side effects.

In contrast, lumateperone's pre-synaptic partial agonist activity prevents positive feedback at D2 receptors while simultaneously blocking dopaminergic neurotransmission at the post-synaptic D2 receptor. This dual action at D2 receptors prevents an increase in dopamine in the synaptic cleft while simultaneously blocking post-synaptic D2 receptors. It is thought that this is responsible for the fact that lumateperone requires D2 receptor occupancy as low as 40%, an uncommon characteristic in antipsychotics.

Like other second-generation antipsychotics, lumateperone is a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist. The antagonism of 5-HT2A receptors, in addition to the antagonism of D2 receptors, is the defining characteristic of all second-generation antipsychotics. 5-HT2A receptor antagonism, when paired with D2 receptor antagonism, results in a reduced risk of extrapyramidal side effects. The exact mechanism is unknown; however, the 5-HT2A receptor is known to influence dopaminergic activity in the brain.

Importantly, lumateperone exhibits 60x greater affinity for 5-HT2A receptors than D2 receptors. This is thought to be significant in lumateperone's gradient of clinical effects, which provides lumateperone with a potentially more extensive range of clinical use.

Lumateperone also has other serotonergic modulatory activity acting in addition to being a potent 5-HT2A receptor antagonist. Specifically, it is an inhibitor of the serotonin reuptake transporter, which is the mechanism of action of SSRI antidepressants, resulting in potential antidepressant activity and efficacy against the negative symptoms of schizophrenia (i.e., depression).

Lumateperone is unique among other antipsychotics in that it targets the glutamatergic system in the brain. Recently, there has been increasing interest in the role of the glutamatergic system in the neurobiology of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia has been associated with dysregulation of the glutamatergic system in the brain. Unlike dopamine which is restricted to distinct anatomical pathways in the brain, glutamate is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter. As a result, dysregulation of glutamate in the brain may have widespread implications on total brain functioning and is thought to be important to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.

The NMDA receptors are ionotropic glutamate receptors that are thought to play a role in schizophrenia. Furthermore, it has been proposed that dysregulation of glutamate transmission may be involved in the cognitive deficits associated with negative symptoms of schizophrenia.

Lumateperone has been found to augment the activities of NMDA and AMPA receptors in the prefrontal cortex. Although the exact mechanism is unknown, it has been found that this is partly through a D1-receptor-mediated mechanism that results in the phosphorylation of GluN2B subunits of NMDA receptors in the mesolimbic pathways of the brain.