Nursemaid's elbow is one of the more common pediatric elbow injuries in children aged 6 months to 5 years.  Also called radial head subluxation, it is usually caused by an abrupt pulling force on the hand or lower arm when the arm is outstretched, resulting in a displacement of the annular ligament.  The annular ligament is responsible for holding the radius and ulna in close proximity and the proximal radioulnar joint. In this type of injury, neither the bone nor the ligament is necessarily damaged but instead have slipped out of their normal positioning. Upon injury, the patient will be in severe pain that will typically subside quickly.  Children will hold their arm on their lap or close against their body and refuse to use it.  Treatment for elbow subluxation is non-invasive and can usually be done in an outpatient office by reducing the joint.  There are two ways this is typically done.  The first method is the supination flexion method. This is done by stabilizing the elbow with one arm while flexing the child’s arm to the shoulder and supinating the arm simultaneously.  You should feel the joint reduce with the stabilizing hand.

Olecranon Bursitis occurs when there is trauma or prolonged pressure to the olecranon bursa.  Bursitis can affect any bursa in the body and is quite common.  The olecranon bursa is known to be one of the most commonly affected bursae in the human body.  The olecranon bursa is superficial, lying just underneath the skin and rests on the triceps tendon and olecranon.  Olecranon bursitis may also sometimes be referred to as student’s elbow.  Prolonged pressure on the elbows such as in situations where a student leans on their elbows for prolonged periods of time, may cause inflammation of the olecranon bursa.  Olecranon bursitis may also idiopathic or septic. Septic bursitis is most often caused by trauma. The best way to diagnose a septic bursitis is aspiration and culture of bursal fluid.  Treatment of olecranon bursitis is initially conservative, with NSAID’s, rest, compression, ice, and needle aspiration, which can be both therapeutic and diagnostic. If conservative management fails, operative treatment may be necessary.  Olecranon bursectomy is reserved for chronic cases that interfere with function.

Elbow dislocations occur more frequently in athletes than in the general population, and the elbow is the second most dislocated large joint after the shoulder. Simple dislocations should be treated early with range-of-motion exercises and return to the sport, even with high-level athletes.  Patients who experience post-injury instability or have more complex dislocations where fracture or ligamentous damage occurs may require surgery. Posterior elbow dislocations often are the most severe, resulting in more ligamentous damage. If a patient experiences a dislocated elbow, it is recommended to obtain both AP and lateral radiographs before and after reducing the joint unless there is neurovascular compromise noted.  That said, a dislocated elbow should be reduced as soon as possible.