Out of all the factors that influence health, including genetic disposition, socio-behavioral-environmental factors, and access to health care, behavioral and social circumstances contribute most to premature death.

The lifestyle medicine approach in the primary care setting benefits the whole patient, with evidence supporting both positive mental and physical health effects. Coronary artery disease may be significantly reversed in 1 year with sufficient adherence to a lifestyle medicine plan. A prospective, randomized, controlled trial showed that 82% of the experimental group who had a low-fat vegetarian diet, stopped smoking, received stress management training, and partook in moderate exercise experienced disease regression, as evaluated by 91% having less angina. Average total cholesterol decreased by 24%; average low-density lipoprotein decreased by 37%. Significantly, 195 of their coronary arterial lesions were also significantly reduced when analyzed by quantitative coronary angiography. There was also a strong dose-response in that the participants with the strictest adherence also significantly improved their coronary artery disease.

A much larger European prospective study from 2009 investigated the relative risk of developing major chronic diseases in patients who adhered to healthy lifestyle factors of never having smoked, having a BMI <30, having a healthy diet (high intake of fruits, veggies, and whole grains; low intake of meat) and >3.5 hours of exercise per week over eight years.

This data is strong evidence for treating and preventing chronic diseases through adherence to the pillars of Lifestyle Medicine, which are essential to physical and psychological well-being.