The most frequently reported adverse events with SGLT-2 inhibitors are female genital mycotic infections, urinary tract infections, increased urination, nausea, and constipation.

**Genital Mycotic Infections:**Genital mycotic infections include vulvovaginal mycotic infections, including candidiasis, vulvovaginitis, vulval abscess, and bacterial vaginitis. Female sex and a previous history of recurrent genital mycotic infections (3 or more per year) are associated with the most significant risk. Prevention strategies include reducing modifiable risk factors, such as optimizing diabetes care and maintaining personal hygiene. Infections are usually mild and resolve quickly with appropriate treatment; therefore, discontinuing SGLT2 inhibitors is not required in most cases. Infection can be managed by treatment with oral antifungal medications, such as fluconazole, or the application of a topical antifungal cream(miconazole or clotrimazole), for 1 to 3 days.

**Urosepsis and Pyelonephritis:**Serious urinary tract infections (UTI), including urosepsis and pyelonephritis, are associated with SGLT2 inhibitors. SGLT2 inhibitors inhibit glucose reabsorption in the proximal tubules, leading to glucosuria and an increased risk of UTI. Meta-analysis of 52 RCTs showed that dapagliflozin had a dose-response relationship with UTI.

One possible rationale for the absence of evidence of increased UTI, despite glucosuria and favorable conditions for bacterial growth, is the increased urinary flow due to osmotic diuresis and natriuresis induced by SGLT2 inhibitors. Clinicians should exercise caution when prescribing SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with abnormal urinary flow or bladder outlet obstruction. A case report describes acute pyelonephritis associated with dapagliflozin use in a patient with bladder outlet obstruction. Evaluate and treat as indicated.

**Lower Limb Amputation:**Factors increasing the risk of amputation are peripheral vascular disease, neuropathy, history of diabetic foot ulcer, and previous history of amputations. Discontinue SGLT2 inhibitors in case of ulcers and infection of the lower limb. Canagliflozin is especially associated with an increased risk of lower-limb amputation than empagliflozin. Dapagliflozin has a high risk for toe amputation.

Pooled Analysis of Phase 3 RCTs demonstrated that ertugliflozin was also associated with a slight increase in toe amputation. However, all the patients had a history of peripheral neuropathy and peripheral artery disease.

**Diabetic Ketoacidosis:**SGLT-2 inhibitors are associated with an almost 3-fold increased risk for diabetic ketoacidosis. Assess patients with clinical features for ketoacidosis. If suspected, discontinue the SGLT2 inhibitor, and evaluate and treat promptly. Before initiating an SGLT2 inhibitor, consider risk factors for ketoacidosis. Clinicians should consider temporarily discontinuing SGLT2 inhibitors in clinical situations that may predispose the patients to DKA. The risk for diabetic ketoacidosis is highest for canagliflozin, followed by empagliflozin and dapagliflozin.

**Euglycemic DKA:**Euglycemic DKA is a triad of increased anion gap acidosis, the presence of ketosis, and serum glucose < 250 mg/dL. SGLT-2 inhibitors appear to be associated with euglycemic DKA, possibly due to their noninsulin-dependent glucose clearance, hyperglucagonemia, and volume depletion. Ertugliflozin and canagliflozin have been associated with euglycemic DKA. However, other SGLT-2 inhibitors also have a risk for euglycemic DKA.

**Acute Kidney Injury:**AKI may occur with the initiation of SGLT2 therapy due to intravascular volume contraction. Before initiating an SGLT2 inhibitor, evaluate and correct volume status, especially in elderly patients receiving diuretics and those with renal impairment. A recent pharmacovigilance study conducted FDA's Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database revealed that canagliflozin had a significant association among SGLT2 inhibitors for acute kidney injury. Patients aged >65 were also identified as a high risk for developing AKI.

**Hypoglycemia:**The risk of hypoglycemia is increased with SGLT2 concomitant administration of insulin secretagogues such as sulfonylureas or insulin. Physicians should reduce the dose of the insulin secretagogue or insulin when combined with SGLT2 inhibitors. Study indicates that the risk of hypoglycemia is higher in elderly patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors. Use with caution.

**Fournier Gangrene:**Fournier gangrene is a rare but life-threatening necrotizing fasciitis of the perineum demanding urgent surgical intervention. Cases have been reported in males and females. Clinical features include fever, pain, tenderness, and swelling in the genital or perineal region. Serious outcomes are hospitalization, surgeries, and death. Risk factors include pre-existing diabetes, alcohol use, hypertension, advanced age, obesity, smoking, liver failure, immunocompromised conditions (HIV, inflammatory bowel disease, malignancy), end-stage renal disease, and radiotherapy. Iatrogenic procedures in the genital area, piercing, implants, and IV drug use can be a portal of entry for microorganisms.

Most FG infections are polymicrobial; therefore, an antibiotic cocktail should cover streptococcus, MRSA, pseudomonas, coliforms, Bacteroides, and Clostridium. Fungal superinfection requires appropriate coverage with amphotericin B and other antifungal agents. Emergent surgical debridement, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and resuscitation with IV fluids and vasopressors are the cornerstones of treatment.

**Hypersensitivity Reactions:**Erythema, rash, pruritus, and angioedema have been reported. Discontinue the SGLT2 inhibitor and monitor until signs and symptoms resolve.

**Bone Fracture:**SGLT2 inhibitors are associated with an increased bone fracture. Increased fracture risk has been observed with canagliflozin, occurring after 12 weeks of treatment initiation.

**Bladder Cancer:**Statistical analysis of 22 RCTs indicates that dapagliflozin is associated with bladder cancer. The use of dapagliflozin is not advised in patients with active bladder cancer. However, the meta-analysis revealed that SGLT2 inhibitors were not significantly associated with an elevated cancer risk compared with comparators.

**Hyperkalemia:**Canfliglozin is associated with an increased risk of hyperkalemia, especially when combined with ACE inhibitors or ARBs in patients with renal impairment.

**Dyslipidemia:**A small increase in LDL-C and HDL levels can occur with SGLT2 inhibitors; monitor lipid profile.

**Drug-Drug Interactions and Drug/Laboratory Test Interference**

- The risk of hypoglycemia increases when SGLT2 inhibitors are combined with an insulin secretagogue (eg, sulfonylurea) or insulin. Therefore, clinicians should reduce the insulin/insulin secretagogue dose to decrease the risk of hypoglycemia.

- SGLT2 inhibitors, including empagliflozin, decrease sodium-glucose and lithium-glucose reabsorption in the proximal connecting tubules, thereby increasing the renal excretion of sodium, glucose, and lithium. Concurrent use of an SGLT2 inhibitor with lithium can reduce serum lithium concentrations.

- Canagliflozin increases the plasma maximum plasma concentration (Cmax:36%) and area under the curve (AUC:20%) of digoxin. Given the narrow therapeutic index of digoxin, therapeutic drug monitoring of digoxin is recommended.

- UGT enzyme inducers, such as rifampin, phenytoin, ritonavir, and phenobarbital, reduce canagliflozin exposure(AUC) which may reduce the effectiveness of canagliflozin. Consider increasing the dose of canagliflozin when used with UGT enzyme inducers.

- False positive urine glucose test: The sodium-glucose cotransporter SGLT2 in the proximal tubule is the pathway for renal glucose reabsorption. Inhibition of SGLT2 increases urinary glucose. Monitoring glycemic control in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors with urine tests is not advised in patients with diabetes.

- 1,5-Anhydroglucitol (1,5-AG) structurally resembles glucose. Monitoring glycemic control by measuring 1,5-AG assay is unreliable in evaluating glycemic control in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors.

- Non-selective beta-blockers may mask the symptoms of hypoglycemia, and SGLT2 inhibitors are known to cause hypoglycemia, as discussed above. Concurrent administration of beta-blockers with SGLT2 inhibitors requires caution.