The evidence-based literature for the treatment of chronic pelvic pain is limited. For nonspecific chronic pelvic pain, the focus of treatment is often directed at symptomatic pain relief.

The first step in the treatment of a patient with chronic pelvic pain with an unknown source of their pain is over-the-counter analgesics (acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs). These pain relievers are typically well-tolerated. If there is adequate pain relief, no further pain management is needed at this time. If there is inadequate pain relief and a cyclical component to the patient's pelvic pain, hormonal replacement therapy is recommended (either oral contraceptive pills, depot medroxyprogesterone, or an intrauterine device). If hormonal treatment is ineffective, or the patient's pain was not cyclical, or their pelvic pain is suspected to be neuropathic, it is essential to evaluate the patient for an underlying mood disorder. If a mood disorder is presumed, antidepressant therapy (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) is recommended. If a patient with suspected chronic pelvic pain secondary to neuropathic pain does not have an underlying mood disorder, various treatment options exist. Depending on the patient's preference and their various comorbidities, the patient may benefit from tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), pregabalin, gabapentin, or serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) such as venlafaxine, or duloxetine. If pain is uncontrolled with these various treatment options, it is recommended to refer to a pain medicine specialist and consider a trial of opioid analgesics.

Adjunct, non-pharmacological treatment should also be offered. Pelvic floor physical therapy may be beneficial in chronic pelvic pain. Its effectiveness aids in the diagnosis of a musculoskeletal origin of chronic pelvic pain.

If a local steroid injection is successful, either radiofrequency ablation, peripheral nerve blocks, or neuromodulation with a spinal cord stimulator may be a viable treatment option.