Serum bicarbonate, BUN/creatinine, and CBC should be checked before initiating Zonisamide treatment and periodically thereafter. Signs and symptoms of depression and behavior change should be monitored closely in patients taking zonisamide. Monitoring of serum levels is recommended for all patients to ensure appropriate dosing. Serum levels may not correlate with the dose because it has concentration-dependent erythrocyte binding. The patient response usually correlates well with serum level.

**Special Populations**

- **Children:**- It appears to have a similar volume of distribution but more rapid clearance in children. Children seem to require higher doses of zonisamide, based on body weight, to achieve similar plasma concentrations as those in adults.

- **Pregnancy:**Zonisamide is a pregnancy category C drug. Women of childbearing age should use effective birth control when taking zonisamide as it rapidly crosses the placenta. Risks and benefits must be weighed when using zonisamide during pregnancy. Dose during pregnancy is increased. Serum concentrations of zonisamide should be closely monitored during pregnancy, and appropriate dosage adjustments should be made.

- **Lactation:**It appears in breast milk at similar levels to maternal plasma concentrations.

- **Hepatic impairment:**No dosage adjustment is provided in the manufacturer's labeling; however, slow titration and frequent monitoring are recommended.

- **Renal Impairment:**Caution is advised, with slow titration and frequent monitoring in these patients. Use is not recommended for severe renal impairment (CrCl less than 20 mL/minute).