As healthcare providers, we have certain ethical and legal obligations related to care delivery. Ethical dilemmas arise regarding palliative care, organ procurement, religious beliefs, cultural considerations, assisted suicide, informed consent, and the disclosure of medical conditions. The American Nurses Association (ANA) provides a Code of Ethics for Nurses with 9 provisions.

Provision 3 offers information on the protection of patient rights related to the critical issues; i.e., privacy and confidentiality, human participation in research, nursing while impaired, performance standards, acting on questionable practice, and professional responsibility in promoting a safety culture. Provision 4 discusses authority, responsibility, and accountability. Delegation and assignment of tasks fall under this provision. Clinical judgment and decision making are vital components of this provision. Provision 5 focuses on personal health promotion and well-being, integrity preservation, and continual professional growth.

Provision 6 explores environmental moral virtue and ethical obligations. Responsibility for the healthcare environment plays a role in this provision. Provision 7 profiles contributions through scholarly inquiry, research, professional practice standards and development, and policy development. Provision 8 examines health as a universal right and obligations to human rights in a variety of settings. Provision 9 looks at the integrity of the profession and integrating social injustice.

In 2017, a Gallup poll ranked nurses as the most trusted profession. This distinctive honor comes with a moral and ethical responsibility to practice within the laws and rules of the Nurse Practice Acts of one's state or territory. Often, aspects of the Code Of Ethics for Nurses provide a framework for nursing laws, codes, and rules. A nurse has a responsibility to know the essential elements of these laws as they relate to and guide safe nursing practice. The Florida Department of State's Administrative Code will further assist nurses in this knowledge.