Lymphocytic hypophysitis continues to be a diagnosis of exclusion, and histopathology with tissue biopsy is needed for a definitive diagnosis.

The hormones that need to be measured include prolactin, adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, IGF-1, growth hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone. Diabetes insipidus should also be evaluated by obtaining electrolyte levels, anti-diuretic hormone, serum, and urine osmolality, and water deprivation testing if needed.

About 20% to 50% of those with lymphocytic hypophysitis have been shown to have other autoimmune conditions.

Gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the pituitary is the imagining of choice, and it is important to distinguish lymphocytic hypophysitis from a pituitary adenoma. With a pituitary adenoma, MRI shows asymmetrical pituitary enlargement, with the pituitary stalk being deviated as well. However, in lymphocytic hypophysitis, the pituitary gland and the pituitary stalk is symmetrically enlarged, but there is no stalk deviation. MRI also shows a homogeneously intense pituitary with dura enhancement, also referred to as a dural tail along with arachnoid enhancement in lymphocytic hypophysitis.

In those with a pituitary adenoma, there is no enhancement of the dura or arachnoid. Despite these findings, radiological imaging cannot always distinguish between an adenoma and lymphocytic hypophysitis so easily, and in fact, at one point, 40% of patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis were misdiagnosed as having pituitary macroadenomas.

In response to the high number of misdiagnosis, a scoring system, known as the Gutenberg scoring, was developed to correctly identify lymphocytic hypophysitis. This scoring system looks at various MRI features in an attempt to diagnose this disease prior to any surgical procedure.

The scoring system and scoring are as follows:

- Age less than or equal to 30 receives a score of -1

- Current pregnancy or being less than or equal to 6 months postpartum receives a score of -4

- An increased stalk size receives a score of -5

- Increased gadolinium enhancement receives a score of -1

- Loss of pituitary bright spot receives a score of -2

- Pituitary volume greater than 6cmreceives a score of +2

- Sphenoid mucosal thickening receives a score of +2

- Heterogeneous gadolinium enhancement receives a score of +1

- Asymmetrical sellar enlargement receives a score of +3

A total score greater than 1 is suggestive of a pituitary adenoma, while a score of zero or less is suggestive of lymphocytic hypophysitis with a specificity of 99%, a sensitivity of 92%, and a positive and negative predictive value of 97%.