**Establishing Chronicity**

When an eGFR of less than 60 ml/min/1.73m is detected in a patient, attention needs to be paid to the previous blood and urine test results and clinical history to determine whether this is a result of AKI or CKD that has been present but asymptomatic. The following factors would be helpful.

- History of long-standing chronic hypertension, proteinuria, microhematuria, and symptoms of the prostatic disease

- Skin pigmentation, scratch marks, left ventricular hypertrophy, and hypertensive fundal changes

- Blood test results of other conditions like multiple myeloma, systemic vasculitis would be helpful.

- Low serum calcium and high phosphorus levels have little discriminatory value, but normal Parathyroid hormone levels suggest AKI rather than CKD

- Patients who have very high blood urea nitrogen (BUN) values greater than 140 mg/dl, serum creatinine greater than 13.5 mg/dl, who appear relatively well and still passing normal volumes of urine are much more likely to have CKD than acute kidney disease.

**Assessment of Glomerular Filtration Rate**

For patients in whom the distinction between AKI and CKD is unclear, kidney function tests should be repeated in 2 weeks of the initial finding of low eGFR below 60 ml/min/1.73 m.

If previous tests confirm that the low eGFR is chronic or the repeat blood test results over 3 months are consistent, CKD is confirmed.

If eGFR based on serum creatinine is known to be less accurate, then other markers like cystatin-c or an isotope-clearance measurement can be undertaken.

**Assessment of Proteinuria**

KDIGO recommends that proteinuria should be assessed by obtaining an early morning urine sample and quantifying albumin-creatinine ratio (ACR). The degree of albuminuria is graded from A1 to A3, replacing previous terms such as microalbuminuria.

Some patients may excrete proteins other than albumin and urine protein-creatinine ratio (PCR) may be more useful for certain conditions.

**Imaging of Kidneys**

If an ultrasound examination of kidneys shows small kidneys with reduced cortical thickness, increased echogenicity, scarring, or multiple cysts, this suggests a chronic process. It may also be helpful to diagnose chronic hydronephrosis from obstructive uropathy, cystic enlargement of the kidney in ADPKD.

Renal ultrasound Doppler can be used in suspected renal artery stenosis to evaluate the renal vascular flow

Computerized tomography: A low dose of non-contrast CT is used to diagnose renal stone disease. It is also used to diagnose suspected ureteric obstruction which cannot be seen by ultrasonography.

Renal angiography has its role in the diagnosis of polyarteritis nodosa where multiple aneurysms and irregular areas of constriction are seen.

Voiding cystourethrography is mainly used when chronic vesicourethral reflux is suspected as the cause of CKD.

Renal scans can give sufficient information about the anatomy and function of kidneys. They are used predominantly in children as they are associated with lesser radiation exposure compared to CT scan. Radionuclide renal scans are used to measure the difference in function between the kidneys.

**Establishing an Accurate Diagnosis**

An accurate cause of CKD needs to be established such as when there is an underlying treatable condition that requires appropriate management, for example, lupus nephritis, ANCA vasculitis, among others. In addition, certain diseases carry a higher frequency of recurrence in the kidney after transplantation and accurate diagnosis will influence later management. A kidney biopsy is used to diagnose the etiology of CKD, and it also gives information about the extent of fibrosis in the kidney.