As family-based interventions have proved successful and sustainable in managing pediatric obesity, educating families about healthy eating and exercise is a primary determinant of outcomes. Families should be encouraged to consume healthy foods by minimizing processed and high-calorie sugary snacks and increasing fruits and vegetables to at least five servings daily. The importance of creating a positive food environment should be stressed. Healthy habits include eating breakfast daily, regular family meals, and infrequent meals and snacks outside the home. Parents should be discouraged from using food as a reward.

Families should engage in fun physical activities tailored to the child's ability. Involving caregivers in setting goals related to diet and physical exercise improves efficacy. They can choose food options based on their cultural traditions and their child's food preferences.

Financial difficulties may force parents to work multiple jobs to support their families, which is an obstacle to family-based interventions. Food insecurity may result in purchasing higher-calorie, less nutritious foods. Unsupervised children are likely to consume more processed or fast foods, enjoy more screen time, and engage in less physical activity. Some neighborhoods are unsafe for outdoor play and physical exercise. Clinicians must understand the child's home environment and potential barriers to following medical recommendations for a patient-centered approach to managing pediatric obesity.