Treatment options are tailored to the patient, and the best approach is based on local versus systemic measures. Due to the few randomized trials, there are no standard therapies for HHT. Management of HHT focuses on supportive care, preventing complications, and reducing symptom severity.

**Epistaxis**

Epistaxis prevention is the primary goal for HHT-related nosebleeds. Preventative measures include the use of topical moisturizers and emollients, nasal hygiene with humidifiers and nasal saline irrigations, and avoidance of triggers and blood thinners.

Other medical interventions targeting the molecular biology of the disease have been used – many of which have gained and lost favor. The goals of these medical treatments are to reduce the frequency, volume, and severity of nosebleeds and improve quality of life. These topical and oral agents include estrogen agents (tamoxifen, raloxifene, and estriol ointment), tranexamic acid, thalidomide, beta-blockers (timolol or propranolol), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors (bevacizumab).

Oral tranexamic acid is a possible option for treating HHT-epistaxis refractory to moisturizing topical therapies.

Surgical interventions focused on prevention and reducing severity include electrosurgical plasma coagulation, potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser photocoagulation, and sclerotherapy with sodium tetradecyl sulfate (STS).

After the surgery, there is a reduction in epistaxis for at least two years, though the problem typically recurs with time as telangiectasias affect the graft. This procedure has lost favor among many. Young’s procedure, which is technically reversible, involves the closure of one or both nostrils using mucocutaneous flaps, resulting in complete obstruction of airflow through the nose and resolution of epistaxis.

**Anemia and Anticoagulation**

All patients with iron deficiency and anemia require iron replacement, either orally or intravenously, if the oral form is not absorbed or well-tolerated. Oral replacement starts with 35 to 65 mg of elemental iron daily, taken either 2 hours prior or 1 hour after meals. For refractory or severe anemia, IV iron infusions may be required regularly, starting at 1 gm in a single dose or divided infusions.

Anticoagulation is permissible in HHT patients.

**GI Bleeding**

Patients with mild to moderate HHT-related GI bleeding can be managed with iron replacement. For severe cases, hemoglobin can be managed with scheduled iron replacement and transfusions. For patients with moderate to severe GI bleeding refractory to iron replacement and transfusions, there is moderate evidence for intravenous bevacizumab or other systemic antiangiogenic therapy and inadequate evidence for oral antifibrinolytics. Endoscopic argon plasma coagulation is an option to address bleeding and non-bleeding lesions during upper GI endoscopy; however, the evidence for this is low.

**Pulmonary AVMs (PAVMs)**

Detection and treatment of asymptomatic PAVM are recommended due to associated neurological risks, including brain abscesses and paradoxical embolic strokes. The mainstay treatment of PAVMs is transcatheter embolization with embolic material such as metallic coils and Amplatzer vascular plugs.

A CT chest is recommended 3 to 6 months after the procedure to ensure recanalization of the occluded feeding artery did not occur. Surgery is reserved only for life-threatening hemorrhage. Similarly, lung transplantation is limited to patients with diffuse bilateral disease refractory to other treatment modalities.

There is an association between oral microorganisms and PAVM-associated brain abscesses.

**Hepatic AVMs (HAVMs)**

Management of HAVMs is based on the symptoms and type of complications. HHT patients with HAVMs may have high-output cardiac failure, portal hypertension, or cirrhosis, which are managed medically. High-output cardiac failure is treated with blood transfusions for anemia, salt and fluid restriction, beta-blockers, and diuretics. Intravenous bevacizumab can be considered for patients with high-output cardiac failure who fail initial management. Portal hypertension and cirrhosis are treated with salt and fluid restriction, diuretics, and paracentesis. Liver transplantation is reserved for those with symptomatic HAVMs who are refractory to medical management.

**Cerebral AVMs (CAVMs)**

HHT-related CAVMs are low-grade, usually small, and cortically located with superficial venous drainage. Patients who are symptomatic from CAVMs should be referred to a center with neurovascular expertise. The natural history of CAVMs associated with HHT is slightly more favorable than sporadic AVMs, with a yearly rupture rate of 1.3% vs. 2.2%.

As such, conservative management should be considered for CAVMs in HHT patients. Furthermore, although there are advances in interventional therapies for CAVMs, these benefits appear to still be outweighed by the risks. The ARUBA trial evaluated interventional versus medical therapy for 223 non-HHT patients with CAVMs and found the risk of stroke or death to be three times higher (30.7% vs. 10.1%) in the interventional arm.

For HHT patients with symptomatic CAVMs or risk factors, such as a family history of cerebral hemorrhage, treatment options are embolization, microsurgery, stereotactic radiation, or a combination of these modalities. Microsurgery for low-grade lesions (Spetzler-Martin grade I or II) can be effective. Spetzler-Martin grading scale estimates the risk of open surgery for cerebral AVMs. A grade 1 AVM describes a small, superficial lesion located in a non-critical area of the brain and is considered low risk for surgery. A grade 6 AVM is non-operable.

Gamma knife surgery also has a similar risk profile with 100% obliteration rates for lesions < 1 mL in volume. For CAVMs that are poor surgical candidates, stereotactic radiosurgery can be considered but has a lower cure rate for larger lesions.