The diagnosis of Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) is usually made clinically by the slit lamp exam. It may be supported by high-frequency ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM), in-vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM), optical coherence tomography of the anterior segment (AS-OCT), or corneal topography and tomography. Slit-lamp exam reveals nodules that are typically smaller than 2mm, but as large as 4x2.5 mm.

Another common pattern is the 3 and 9 o'clock location of the nodules in patients with a history of contact lens wear.

In one study, each nodule was associated with an adjacent neovascular anterior stromal pannus that did not enter the nodule.

Typical findings have been noted with the use of diagnostic tests. UBM of peripheral nodules in a post-LASIK patient differentiated epithelium, Bowman layer, and LASIK flap, localizing of the nodules to within the margin of the flaps and revealing the destruction of the underlying Bowman layer.

Biometric values acquired through corneal topography are impacted by the presence of SND, resulting in inaccurate intraocular lens (IOL) calculations as high as 3.2 D in one study.

AS-OCT is a non-invasive imaging modality that can be helpful in the diagnosis, management, and follow-up of SND. AS-OCT shows bright, hyperreflective, subepithelial deposits above the Bowman layer that is covered by an abnormally thin layer of epithelium. AS-OCT can perform non-invasive "optical biopsies" that have been shown to correlate with the histopathology of the disease.

Utilizing IVCM allows morphological and quantitative analysis of the microstructure of Salzmann nodules. Normal epithelial cells imaged show a honeycomb-shaped arrangement with bright borders and dark bodies. The overlying epithelium nodules are shown by IVCM to have irregular morphology, consisting of elongated, polygonal cells of varied sizes.

Corneal stroma within the nodule appeared unstructured, with an increase in the hyperreflective extracellular background.