A MIP may be performed under general anesthesia or with a superficial cervical block and sedation. Proper positioning of the patient involves their neck in an extended, “semi-Fowlers” position. This may be achieved by placing a roll beneath the shoulders. Neck hyperextension should be avoided.

There are several forms of minimally invasive therapy, including open approaches (open minimally invasive parathyroidectomy [OMIP]), minimally invasive radio-guided parathyroidectomy (MI-RP), video-assisted parathyroidectomy (VAP), and purely endoscopic parathyroidectomy (EP).

Open MIP is the most common of the minimally invasive techniques. It is performed through a 2.5 to 3 cm central incision. Alternatively, a lateral incision may be used that is made over the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle on the side of the affected gland. As with a conventional parathyroidectomy, the platysma is divided, and strap muscles are separated to reveal the thyroid. The gland is then gently medially rotated to visualize the adenoma. The blood supply is carefully ligated, and the adenoma is separated from surrounding tissue and removed.

With minimally invasive radio-guided parathyroidectomy, a gamma probe is utilized to permit intraoperative localization of the diseased gland. The patient is injected with technetium-99m sestamibi 2 to 4 hours prior to surgery, and the site with the highest counts are explored. After removal of the adenoma, the neck is again scanned. No more than 20% radioactivity of the adenoma should remain in the neck.

In video-assisted MIP, a small (1.5 to 2 cm) transverse incision is made 2 cm above the sternal notch. Once dissection has allowed one to rotate the thyroid medially and strap muscles laterally, a 30-degree, 5-mm endoscope along with dissection instruments are inserted through the single incision. No trocars are used. Advantages of this technique include a small incision and central access that permits further parathyroid or thyroid resection if necessary. Limitations include the need for 2 assistants and an adenoma size less than 3 cm.

Endoscopic MIP can be carried out through an anterior or lateral approach. In the anterior approach, a trocar is used to pass a 5-mm endoscope through a small central incision, with CO2 insufflation utilized. Two or 3 additional trocars are placed for instrumentation. Dissection is carried out beneath the platysma to develop an operative plane, and the strap muscles are then retracted to visualize the thyroid. In the lateral approach, a 12 mm incision is made along the anterior sternocleidomastoid, 4 cm above the sternal notch. Once a dissection plane has been developed above the prevertebral fascia, two 2.5-mm trocars are placed 4 cm above and below the initial incision to aid in further dissection. The skill required and the long learning curve for each of these approaches are limitations to this procedure.