Mammary duct ectasia is frequently asymptomatic or only have subtle changes in breast texture that may go unnoticed until a nipple discharge is noticed. In breast clinics, nipple discharge is the third most common complaint and reason for medical consultation, after mastalgia and a palpable lump in the breast.

Approximately 80% of women experience mammary discharge during their fertile lifetime, and most of these are due to benign conditions. MDE is one such benign conditions and may be responsible for anywhere between 6-59% of patients presenting with nipple discharge.

The nipple discharge in MDE is variable, ranging from thick to thin, serous, dirty white, yellow, or green and may fluctuate. It is usually unilateral, emanating from a single duct, though bilateral cases have been reported. If the discharge is bilateral, it is more likely to be due to fibroadenocystic disease, especially if it demonstrates a cyclical frequency. This variable presentation is part of the diagnostic challenge, as the traditional definition of pathological nipple discharge is defined as unilateral and spontaneous, and frequently occurring from a single duct.

Essential elements of clinical assessment of nipple discharge include inquiry regarding discharge frequency, amount, color, whether it is spontaneous or provoked laterality, and single duct sourced or more (if able to be determined). Ideally, they can demonstrate the discharge during the examination, and the nipple can be observed under magnification.

Occasionally, patients with MDE present with small ovoid well defined subareolar or periareolar tender masses associated with discomfort and erythema caused by dilated ducts filled with thick secretions and cellular debris. Upon pressing over the mass, nipple discharge appears from one duct opening. The nipple may be inverted in severe cases. Skin necrosis and ulceration are much more common in granulomatous lobular mastitis (GLM), a condition that may be associated with mammary duct ectasia. Still, the palpable mass in GLM tends to extend away from the nipple-areola complex. If secondary bacterial infection occurs, this can lead to the formation of a subareolar infection or abscess. It can become difficult to distinguish MDE from periductal mastitis PDM or inflammatory carcinoma (which accounts for 1% to 6% of breast cancers) in this setting. A trial of antibiotics with very close clinical follow-up is reasonable in this situation.

With repeated episodes of infection, or with scarring from previous treatments or drainage attempts, more fibrosis is formed in the nipple-areola complex that can potentially lead to nipple distortion or retraction. New-onset nipple retraction is a sign that must be investigated intensively, especially in a previously unknown patient. Assessment must exclude underlying malignancy, particularly when chronic pathologic changes lead to the formation of microcalcifications behind the areola on the mammogram. Biopsy examination must be done to exclude carcinoma in these cases.

A clinical assessment of both breasts and axillae is required to determine the presence of lumps or lymphadenopathy, and a meticulous examination of the nipple-areola complex must be done. In the presence of active infection, a palpable tender axillary lymph node may be present.

MDE is rarely reported in neonates and childhood, and should be low on the differential in these patients, but can be a cause of nipple discharge, which tends to be bloody. The diagnosis is confirmed by an ultrasound study. This should not be confused with the physiologic nipple discharge that is due to maternal hormonal exposure.

In children, MDE tends to resolve spontaneously within two weeks, though it can take longer, and is best managed conservatively. If the discharge continues for several months, surgical intervention is required in the form of a biopsy. Older children and adolescents should undergo a careful assessment to exclude the very rare juvenile secretory carcinoma and phyllodes tumors of the breast. It must be emphasized that any mass seen besides MDE must be biopsied.