For a standard EPS, a standard number of four catheters is necessary. Depending on the center, the operator can also use three diagnostic catheters during EPS. Every diagnostic catheter has two or multiple electrodes, and for each pair of consecutive electrodes, a distinct intracardiac electrogram gets recorded.

Fig.1. Electrograms displayed during standard four-catheter EPS in sinus rhythm. Three surface ECG leads display results (I, III, V1). ODH - a bipolar catheter records high right atrium electrogram; HIS- atrial electrogram, His electrogram and ventricular electrogram displayed simultaneously and recorded from the AV junction by a quadripolar or hexapolar catheter, VD- electrogram recorded from the right ventricular apex by a bipolar diagnostic catheter, SCP- proximal coronary sinus, SCM- medium coronary sinus, SCD-distal coronary sinus; all the coronary sinus bipoles record a sharp atrial electrogram and a smaller ventricular electrogram- usually recorded by a hexapolar or decapolar catheter.

**Measurements and stimulation protocols**

The specific intervals measured during sinus rhythm are:

- **PA**- time for activation to travel into the right atrium between the region of the sinus node and the region of the atrioventricular node. This interval gets measured between the P wave onset and atrial electrogram recorded by the His bundle catheter. The standard value is considered 25 to 55 ms

- **AH**- time for activation to travel over the AVN; is measured between atrial electrogram recorded on His bundle catheter and His electrogram. The normal value is 55 to 125 ms

- **H**- the duration from the beginning to the last component of the His bundle electrogram. The standard value is under 30 ms

- **HV**- is the conduction time over the specialized ventricular conduction system; it gets measured between the His bundle electrogram and the earliest ventricular activation. The standard value is 35 to 55ms.

**Sinus node recovery time**(SNRT)- is time taken for the sinus rhythm to resume after 30 seconds of overdrive atrial pacing at several cycle lengths (800, 700, 600, 500, 450, 400 and 350 ms). The normal values of the SNRT must be less than 1500ms. The corrected SNRT is the difference between the SNRT and the sinus cycle length; the normal value is below 550 ms.

**Atrial extra-stimulus testing**consists of a drive train of 8 paced beats at a constant cycle length (600 and 400ms) followed by an extra-stimulus delivered on the same catheter, on the same site. The drive train and the extra stimulus with a progressive decrescent value are repeating until there is a loss of atrial capture. The atrial extra stimulus testing serves for evaluation of the anterograde conduction over the AVN, atrial refractoriness, and induction of specific arrhythmias.

**Ventricular extra-stimulus testing**is similar to the atrial ventricular pacing. The stimulation is made at the right ventricular apex conventionally. Ventricular extra-stimulus testing is used for the evaluation of the retrograde conduction over the atrioventricular node (concentric atrial activation), presence of the accessory pathways (eccentric activation), ventricular refractoriness, and induction of specific arrhythmias. Multiple extra-stimuli are available for arrhythmia induction.

**Incremental atrial pacing**supposes stimulation on the high atrial catheter at a cycle length that progressively decreases. Between each decreasing step of the stimulated cycle length, the rhythm is observed several seconds. One of the most valuable observations during this pacing protocol is the Wenkebach cycle length, the stimulated cycle at which the 1:1 atrioventricular conduction over the atrioventricular node stops.

**Incremental ventricular pacing**is similar to the ventricular pacing. The pacing is delivered from the right ventricular apex. The minimum cycle length of ventricular pacing is 300ms. The observations during incremental ventricular pacing are the assessment of the retrograde Wenkebach cycle length and the pattern of retrograde atrial activation.

Pacing at other sites than the usual ones (high right atrium and ventricular apex) may reveal the accessory pathways. The use of isoproterenol and atropine is widely used for tachycardia induction during the EPS.