After informed consent, prophylactic antibiotics are administered, and general anesthesia is induced. An Esmarch bandage is used to exsanguinate the leg, and a tourniquet is applied to either 150 mmHg above systolic blood pressure or 350 mmHg. All pressure points should be padded carefully because of the long duration of the case. Ideally, two teams work simultaneously to decrease operative time, one at the recipient site and the other at the harvest site.

**Recipient site surgery****:**Recipient site surgical dissection depends upon the diagnosis. For example, the extent of bone resection required in cases of pseudarthrosis or the amount of debridement and curettage for chronic osteomyelitis. Resection and reconstruction can be performed as a single procedure or can be done in 2 stages as in osteomyelitis (eradication of infection followed by free fibula transfer) or oncologic resection (ablation of tumor and lymph node dissection followed by fibula transfer after negative margins have been confirmed). It is critical to select and isolate appropriate recipient vessels for vascular anastomosis and to communicate the size of the defect to the fibular harvest team to ensure a graft of adequate length.

**Donor site surgery:**The****lateral surgical approach is the most commonly used, with a longitudinal incision made along the lateral lower leg. The central portion of the fibula is harvested for most indications, as the distal 5 cm is important for ankle joint stability. The proximal 5 cm of bone is also left in place in order to protect the peroneal nerve. Bony cuts are made proximally and distally. Some surgeons consistently harvest the entire fibula between the proximal and distal 5 cm, planning to shorten the bone as necessary after harvest; some harvest only what length is needed to reconstruct the defect. Care is taken to avoid injury of the peroneal artery and its accompanying 2 venae comitantes. If a longer vascular pedicle is required, the use of the distal fibula will provide up to 15 cm in length. In some cases, a graft 2 to 3 cm longer than the bony defect may be required, as overlapping the graft on the osteotomy site may be necessary for fixation.

Begin with incision around the anterior aspect of the skin paddle, coming through the subcutaneous fat and fascia, heading deep and anteriorly toward the fibula. Identify but do not dissect out the perforating blood vessels. They may run in the posterior intermuscular septum, but more likely will run through muscle. Follow the posterior intermuscular septum onto the lateral aspect of the fibula. Separate the peroneus brevis from the lateral fibula, which will expose the entire lateral fibula. Leave the periosteum inact between the planned osteotomy sites. Continue dissecting anteriorly until the anterior intermuscular septum is reached; divide the septum. Separate the extensor digitorum longus from the anterior fibula. Continue anteriorly/deeply until the interosseous membrane is encountered; divide the interosseous membrane. Avoid dissecting too deep, because the anterior tibial artery, with its veins and the deep peroneal nerve, can be injured. Make the posterior skin paddle incision and continue between the flexor hallucis longus and soleus, taking care not to injure the previously identified perforators; taking a cuff of soleus muscle with the flap will help to keep the vessels safe. Gently incising along the fascia of the flexor hallucis longus with a #15 blade will allow the posterior tibial artery with its veins and tibial nerve to release somewhat and drop back away from the surgical field. This is known as the O'Leary maneuver. Dissect closely around the deep aspect of the superior fibula at the osteotomy site with a large right angle clamp. Pass the Gigli saw with the clamp and make the superior osteotomy over a malleable retractor to protect the underlying tissue. Dissect closely around the deep aspect of the inferior fibula at the osteotomy site with a large right angle clamp. Pass the Gigli saw with the clamp and make the inferior osteotomy over a malleable retractor to protect the underlying tissue. Distract the fibula laterally and identify the inferior aspect of the pedicle. Ligate the inferior pedicle with 2-0 silk ties. Divide the remaining muscular attachments on the fibula: the tibialis posterior and the flexor hallucis longus. Identify and ligate the superior pedicle after the fibula has been liberated from all of its other attachments. Close in layers over a suction drain. If the skin paddle is narrow or non-existent, primary closure may be possible, but a split-thickness skin graft is usually required.

**Fixation of graft:**Fixation may be accomplished with a plethora of different techniques, depending on the type of reconstruction. Intramedullary nails, compression plates, and the Ilizarov fixator are all options. Hardware should not be changed once vascular anastomosis is complete, and care should be taken when placing the screws as they can compromise the blood supply to the graft.

In cases of mandibualr reconstruction, a novel approach is the "jaw in a day" concept, in which dental implants are placed into the fibula under the same anesthetic as the flap transfer, substantially expediting the patient's return to oral feeding.