Immediate post mortem changes have clinical significance in diagnosing death. Loss of voluntary movement and insensibility are seen in cases of narcosis, catalepsy, fainting attacks, drowning, and electrocution. Cessation of respiration may be observable in cases of drowning, electrocution, in newborn infants, and due to Cheyne-Stokes breathing. Doctors need to be wary of these differential diagnoses while declaring an individual dead.

Suspended animation is the state in which the signs of life are absent, due to either cessation or decrease in life-supporting functions. In cases of suspended animation, the rate of metabolism of the individual declines to such an extent that the oxygen requirements are satisfied through the use of dissolved oxygen of the biological fluids. Individuals who are in the state of suspended animation can be resuscitated. Suspended animation can be voluntary, as in cases of ascetics who pass into a trance through meditation, or involuntary as in cases of electrocution, drowning, narcotic poisoning, shock, or hypothermia, etc. It is imperative for doctors to rightfully diagnose the difference between systemic death and suspended animation as animated people have been wrongly declared dead on multiple occasions.

Early and late post mortem changes are a sure indication that death has occurred. The post mortem changes can be used to estimate the time since death (TSD) or post mortem interval (PMI). PMI is a crucial aspect of medicolegal investigation as it helps in determining when a crime has been committed. Based on this estimated time, alibis of suspected individuals may be verified, and conviction or acquittal of a suspect may be determined. The medicolegal expert needs to be extremely careful while opining about the PMI since a variety of factors affect the post mortem changes. An estimate of ‘time since death’ should always be given, rather than a specific ‘time of occurrence.’ Besides, PMI, specific postmortem changes can provide information on the cause and manner of death, position/ change in position of the body, identification, etc. Medicolegal experts can determine the existence and location of external injuries, if any, on a cadaver in advanced stages of putrefaction.

The human body undergoes sequential changes after death due to a combination of internal and external factors. These changes primarily serve in estimating the post mortem interval. Besides, these provide other useful information relating to the cause and manner of death too. The post mortem changes depend on multiple intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Thus, the experts should be prudent while giving their opinion after taking into consideration the various factors modifying changes after death. This caution is especially necessary as the nature and direction of the investigation may vary depending on the description of postmortem changes and its correct interpretation.