**Standard Precautions**

Standard precautions apply to the care of all patients, irrespective of their disease state. These precautions apply when there is a risk of potential exposure to (1) blood; (2) all body fluids, secretions, and excretions, except sweat, regardless of whether or not they contain visible blood; (3) non-intact skin, and (4) mucous membranes. This includes hand hygiene and personal protective equipment (PPE), with hand hygiene being the single most important means to prevent transmission of disease.

Personal protective equipment serves as a barrier to protect the skin, mucous membranes, airway, and clothing. It includes gowns, gloves, masks, and face shields or goggles.

The following list of standard precautions is not all-inclusive and contains some of the most commonly used recommendations for healthcare workers.

**Hand Hygiene**

Handwashing with soap and water for at least 40 to 60 seconds, making sure not to use clean hands to turn off the faucet, must be performed if hands are visibly soiled, after using the restroom, or if potential exposure to spore-forming organisms.

Hand rubbing with alcohol applied generously to cover hands completely should be performed, and hands rubbed until dry.

Hand Hygiene Indications

- Before and after any direct patient contact and between patients, whether or not gloves are worn.

- Immediately after gloves are removed.

- Before handling an invasive device.

- After touching blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, non-intact skin, and contaminated items, even when gloves are worn.

- During patient care, when moving from a contaminated to a clean body site of the patient.

- After contact with inanimate objects in the immediate vicinity of the patient.

Gloves

Must be worn when touching blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, mucous membranes, or non-intact skin. Change when there is contact with potentially infected material in the same patient to avoid cross-contamination. Remove before touching surfaces and clean items. Wearing gloves does not mitigate the need for proper hand hygiene.

Mask, Goggles/Eye Visor, and/or Face Shield

Wear a mask and eye protection or face shield during procedures that may spray or splash blood, body fluids, secretions, or excretions.

Gown

Wear to protect skin or clothing during procedures that may spray or splash blood, body fluids, secretions, or excretions.

Needles and Other Sharps

Do not break, bow, or directly manipulate used needles. Recapping is not recommended, but if necessary, “use a one-handed scoop technique only.” Discard all used sharps in appropriate puncture-resistant containers.

**Transmission-based Precautions**

**Airborne Precautions**

These precautions are used in patients with known or suspected infection with pathogens that are spread by airborne transmission, i.e., “airborne droplet nuclei (small-particle residue {5 um or smaller in size} of evaporated droplets that may remain suspended in the air for long periods of time) or dust particles containing the infectious agent.”

Patient Placement

Patients should be placed in a negative pressure isolation room that allows a minimum of 6 to 12 air changes per hour. For patients with active infection with the same pathogen and no other infection, it is permissible to place patients in the same room together (cohorting). Doors to the room must remain closed at all times. “When a private room is not available, and cohorting is not desirable, consultation with infection control professionals is advised before patient placement.”

PPE

Respirators that filter at least 95% of airborne particles must be worn over the nose and mouth, i.e., N95 respirator or powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR) with a high-efficiency particular air (HEPA) filter.

Transport

When necessary, patients being transported out of their rooms should wear a surgical mask.

**Droplet Precautions**

These precautions are used in patients with known or suspected infection with pathogens spread by droplet transmission. “Droplets are particles of respiratory secretions +/- 5 microns. Droplets remain suspended in the air for limited time periods. Transmission is associated with exposure within three to six feet (one to two meters) of the source.”

Patient Placement

Private rooms are preferred; however, they may be placed in a semi-private room with another patient having the same active infection and no other infection (cohorting). When a private room or cohorting is not available, the infected patient should be placed at least 3 feet away from other patients and visitors. The doors to the room may be left open, and no special air handling is required.

PPE

Surgical masks should be worn while within 6 feet of the patient.

Transport

When necessary, patients being transported out of their rooms should wear a surgical mask.

**Contact Precautions**

These precautions are used in patients with known or suspected infection or colonization with pathogens spread by direct and indirect patient contact. Indirect patient contact occurs when physical contact is made with items or surfaces in the patient’s environment.

Patient Placement

Private rooms are preferred; however, they may be placed in a semi-private room with another patient having the same active infection and no other infection (cohorting). “When a private room is not available, and cohorting is not achievable, consider the epidemiology of the microorganism and the patient population when determining patient placement. Consultation with infection control professionals is advised before patient placement.”

PPE

Gloves and gowns should be donned before entering the patient's room and removed before leaving. Hand hygiene should be performed immediately afterward. Care should be taken not to touch any potentially contaminated surface upon leaving the room.

Transport

Maintain contact precautions at all times.

Patient Equipment

When possible, patients should have dedicated equipment that remains in the room with them, e.g., a single-patient-use blood pressure cuff. If single-patient-use items are not available, they should be cleaned and disinfected before use on another patient.