**External genitalia:
**Also known collectively as the vulva, the external genitalia comprise the accessory structures of the female reproductive and urinary systems that are external to the vagina.

**Vagina:**A passageway that connects the cervix and the external genitalia.

**Cervix:**The most inferior portion of the uterus. The cervical canal, with boundaries at the external cervical os and internal cervical os, connects the uterus to the vagina.

**Uterus corpus:**The body of the uterus, located deep in the pelvis in females, posterior to the urinary bladder and anterior to the rectum.

**Broad ligaments:**Sheet of pelvic peritoneum that overlies the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries anteriorly and posteriorly and extends bilaterally to the lateral pelvic sidewalls.

**Round ligaments:**Attached to the uterine cornu and travels through the inguinal canal to connect to the labia majora and mons pubis. Contains the artery of Sampson.

**Cardinal ligaments:**Forms the inferior border of the broad ligament and attaches to the lateral cervix on either side. Contains the uterine artery and veins.

**Infundibulopelvic ligaments:**Peritoneal fold that extends from the ovary to the lateral pelvic walls on either side. It contains the ovarian artery and vein, ovarian nerve plexus, and lymphatic vessels.

**Uterosacral ligaments:**Fibrous bands extending dorsally along the rectal sidewalls to reach the sacrum. Suspend the cervix and vaginal tube, ensuring the craniodorsal orientation of their long axis.