Melanoacanthoma is acquired, almost always solitary, pigmented lesions of the skin that appear in adulthood. In most patients, they are asymptomatic and progressively enlarge slowly.

The duration that the melanoacanthoma was present prior to biopsy-confirmation of the diagnosis was provided for 29 individuals. It ranged from 5 weeks to 40 years. The investigators for two of the individuals provided descriptive durations: "as long as he could remember" in a 40-year-old man with multiple melanoacanthomas on his left upper eyelid and "since childhood" in a 56-year-old woman with a melanoacanthoma on her abdomen.

The skin lesion was present for more than 10 years in 28% (8 of 29) of the patients, and between 6 to 10 years for 24% (7 of 29) of the patients. For 35% (11 of 29) of the patients, it was only present for less than 3 years. Overall, the median duration of the melanoacanthoma was present before establishing its diagnosis was 6 years.

The size of the melanoacanthoma was described for 36 patients. The greatest diameter ranged from minute to 2 millimeters to 15 centimeters. Five of the lesions (14%) were greater than or equal to 10 centimeters; they were characterized as being 'giant.'

The color of the melanoacanthoma can mimic that of melanoma; it was specified for 28 patients. Nine of the patients' melanoacanthoma were composed of 2 colors. In addition, it was described as either pigmented or hyperpigmented for an additional 8 individuals.

Half of the lesions (14 of 28) were black.

The melanoacanthoma color in one study was not able to accurately be interpreted based on the information provided. The 8 melanoacanthomas evaluated had either 1, 2, or more colors. The most common colors were either light brown (5 patients) or dark brown (4 patients); black, blue-gray, and pink melanoacanthoma were each observed in 1 patient.

The appearance of a melanoacanthoma often mimics that of melanoma.

The melanoacanthoma location was specified for 52 patients. The head and neck (46%, 24 of 52) or the trunk (30%, 16 of 52) were the most common sites. Most of the remaining 24% of melanoacanthomas were located either on an extremity (12%, 6 of 52) or the genitals (6%, 3 of 52: either inguinal or penis or scrotum in 1 patient) or the buttock and hip (4%, 2 of 52).

The head and neck melanoacanthoma were most commonly located on the scalp (28%, 6 of 21). Other sites included the ear (19%, 4 of 21), the eyelid (19%, 4 of 21), the face (19%, 3 of 21 on the preauricular area and 1 of 21 on the nose) and the neck (15%, 3 of 21). The specific location on the head and neck was not stated in 3 patients.

A 58-year-old woman had multiple slowly growing melanoacanthomas of 10-years duration (2%, 1 of 52). Her lesions were located on the neck, trunk (chest, abdomen, and back), extremities (proximal arms and legs), and buttocks. Several of her lesions (particularly those on her left buttock and periumbilical region) were horn-like cutaneous nodules. Also, one of the melanoacanthomas on her trunk became ulcerated.

Jain et al. also summarized the features of another patient (described by Shenoy et al.) with multiple genital and perianal melanoacanthomas; the man's lesions were located not only on his trunk (lower abdomen) and extremity (left inner thigh) but also on his penile shaft and perianal skin. Multiple melanoacanthomas were also reported on the left upper eyelid of a 40-year-old man. In contrast to patients with cutaneous melanoacanthoma in whom multiple tumors are seldom observed, multiple lesions are not uncommon in individuals with oral melanoacanthoma.

Rarely, a melanoacanthoma presents as a cutaneous horn, mimicking a verruca or a squamous cell carcinoma. The buttock and periumbilical lesions on the woman with multiple melanoacanthomas morphologically appeared as cutaneous horns. Also, the melanoacanthoma on the left upper eyelid of a 45-year-old man developed into a horn-like cutaneous nodule that grew downwards and extended to below his lower eyelid.