Early prostate cancer is usually asymptomatic. However, it may sometimes cause symptoms similar to benign prostatic hyperplasia, including frequent urination, nocturia, difficulty starting and maintaining a steady stream, hematuria, and dysuria.

Prostate cancer may also be associated with problems involving sexual function and performance, such as difficulty achieving an erection or painful ejaculation.

A family history of prostate cancer is certainly a risk factor. African American ethnicity also increases the risk. A history of positive germline mutations, such as BRCA1 or BRCA2, would suggest an increased risk of prostate cancer and possibly some other malignancies. This germline mutation is suggested if there is a family history of early breast cancer in female family members or close relatives.

A family history of colon cancer might suggest Lynch syndrome, which is associated with both prostate cancer and urothelial malignancies.

The most common positive physical finding of prostate cancer is a firm or hard nodule on digital rectal examination. There might also be some asymmetry or general firmness on the exam. A rock-hard prostate would be very suggestive of at least locally advanced disease.

Prostate cancer can result in spinal cord compression, causing tingling, leg weakness, pain, paralysis, and urinary and fecal incontinence.

Metastatic prostate cancer can cause severe bone pain, often in the back (vertebrae), pelvis, hips, or ribs. Spread into the femur is usually to the proximal part of the bone.