Modern ureteroscopes can be semi-rigid or flexible. The semi-rigid ureteroscopes are most useful for distal ureteral interventions. They are available in sizes of 7 to 12 Fr and have large, often dual, 3 to 6 Fr working channels for better irrigation and larger accessory instruments like baskets and lasers. Compared to the flexible instrument, the semi-rigid ureteroscope has the added benefits of lower cost, greater durability, larger and/or dual working channels, and easier maneuverability resulting in shorter operating times – an additional driver of reduced cost.

An important accessory to flexible ureteroscopy is ureteral access sheaths. These are available in sizes of 9 to 16 Fr and facilitate multiple passages of the ureteroscope into the ureter and kidney without the need for a guidewire or the risk of distal ureteral injury from repeated insertions. The benefits of the sheaths are two-fold: repetitive trauma to the distal ureter and ureteral meatus is avoided, and there is better drainage of irrigation fluid, enabling enhanced visualization and lower intraluminal pressures. There is a small risk that the sheath may cause ureteral wall ischemia, urothelial mucosal tears and subsequent strictures as well as ureteral and renal pelvic perforations; however, the placement of ureteral double pigtail stents in the post-operative period minimizes these risks to levels comparable to flexible ureteroscopy without access sheaths.

Instruments that can be inserted through the working channel of the ureteroscope include wire baskets, biopsy forceps, balloon catheters, cold knife, and electrocautery. Instruments specifically designed for ureteroscopic lithotripsy include ultrasound, electrohydraulic and pneumatic probes as well as laser fibers. The ultrasound probe allows for continuous, simultaneous suction with stone ablation to reduce calculi retropulsion, but is considered the least effective option overall. Pneumatic probes may only be used through rigid and semi-rigid ureteroscopes and, while effective, they must be in direct contact with the stones to work. Laser fibers are the most versatile and have the smallest diameter (at less than 1 Fr). They come in several sizes but are generally from 200 to 360 microns (larger sizes are available for use in the bladder). Smaller laser fibers are more flexible and are usually preferred for use in the renal pelvis. Lasers, particularly the holmium:YAG laser, are highly effective for lithotripsy of all stone types as well as tissue ablation, coagulation, excision, incision, and vaporization.

The most significant advances in ureteroscopy over the last two decades related to the miniaturization of the scopes and accessories. A key development contributing to miniaturization is the evolution from fiberoptic to digital video optical systems. Unlike fiberoptics with direct-viewing lenses, the digital video optical system uses a charged coupled device (CCD) camera chip mounted to the tip of the ureteroscope and connected to a monitor display through a single cable. This achieves a higher quality image, is more durable and flexible than fiberoptic cables, as well as being thinner, allowing for a larger working channel. Future developments may see the addition of a second CCD camera chip to allow for three-dimensional imaging, as in robotic surgery.

Another advance is the commercial introduction of disposable flexible ureteroscopes by several manufacturers. These allow for improved or at least new mechanics while avoiding wear and tear on the more valuable, reusable ureteroscopes. Optics are not yet equivalent to the standard, reusable, digital video ureteroscopes. They are ideal for emergencies where demand for ureteroscopes exceeds the available supply. They may even be cost-effective, as well.

All of these advances have contributed to the development of ureteroscopes with multiple working channels. Dual working channels allow for simultaneous visualization, accessory function, and continuous irrigation. These advanced features were first developed in rigid and semi-rigid ureteroscopes, whose larger caliber channels allowed for additional functionality. Eventually, these features become incorporated into flexible scopes as well. Optical systems, accessories, and lasers continue to advance and become more compact; for example, there are now flexible dual-channel ureteroscopes under 10 Fr available commercially.