Two main thoracic HVLA techniques are performable on a patient with a thoracic somatic dysfunction. There is the seated method and the supine method (also called Kirksville Crunch). Descriptions of both techniques will follow, but it is ultimately provider preference and overall comfort level, which will ultimately dictate the choice of the technique.

After diagnosing somatic dysfunction, the physician will position the dysfunctional segment such that all restrictive barriers are engaged. This process occurs by reversing all three planes of motion of the dysfunctional segment. For example, if the thoracic segment T7 has demonstrated the somatic dysfunction ERSr (extended, rotated, and side-bent right), then the segment would be placed in flexion, rotated, and side-bent to the left until motion is felt; this is called the restrictive barrier. A short quick thrust is then applied, and the patient then undergoes reassessment.

There are two different variations to performing thoracic HVLA: seated and supine. The steps for performing these various maneuvers appear below.

**Seated Position Technique**

- The clinician stands behind the patient with their hands clasped behind their head.

- The clinician places their epigastric area behind the posterior transverse process of the dysfunctional segment.

- The clinician reaches under the patient's arms and holds the forearms. The patient is then instructed to take a deep breath, and during exhalation, the clinician pulls the elbows together and extends the trunk.

- The clinician should then push their abdomen into the posterior transverse process.

- At maximal exhalation, a short quick thrust is applied by the clinician's abdomen into the patient's posterior transverse process. The patient should then be rechecked after the manipulation.

**Supine Position Technique (so-called "Kirksville Crunch")**

- The clinician stands opposite the side of the thoracic rotation.

- The patient crosses their arms with elbows together. From the clinician's perspective, the patient's arm opposite where they are standing should be on top; this is referred to as opposite over adjacent. From the patient's perspective, the arm on the side of the thoracic rotation should be on top. For example, if the patient has a somatic dysfunction at T5 that is flexed, rotated, and side-bent to the right, the patient's right arm would be on top of the left arm.

- The clinician reaches their caudad arm across the patient and places their thenar eminence behind the posterior transverse process.

- The clinician leans their epigastric area into the patient's crossed elbows. The clinician's other hand then lifts the patient's head and trunk until pressure from leaning on the elbows is felt by the hand on the posterior transverse process.

- The patient is asked to take a deep breath as the clinician leans into the elbows during exhalation.

- At maximum exhalation, the clinician applies a short quick thrust from their abdomen onto the patient's elbows to mobilize the joint. The patient should then be rechecked after the manipulation.