TSH binds to and activates the TSH receptor (TSHR), which is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) on the basolateral surface of thyroid follicular cells. TSHR is coupled to both Gs and Gq G-proteins, activating both the cAMP pathway (via Gsa) and the phosphoinositol/calcium (IP/Ca2+; via Gq) second messenger signaling cascades. The Gs pathway activates iodide uptake, thyroid hormone secretion, and gland growth and differentiation. The Gq pathway is rate-limiting for hormone synthesis by stimulating iodide organification. A gain in function mutation of the TSH receptor results in hyperthyroidism, while a loss in function mutation results in hypothyroidism.

Understanding the role of TSH in stimulating T3 and T4 secretion requires knowledge of the thyroid hormone synthesis pathway. The two main components of T3 and T4 are iodine and tyrosine. Iodine (I2) forms through oxidation of iodide (I-) after thyroid follicular cells actively take up iodide (I-) from the bloodstream against its concentration gradient. Tyrosine, on the other hand, comes from thyroglobulin, a tyrosine-rich protein synthesized by thyroid follicular cells. Following iodide uptake and oxidation, iodine binds tyrosine residues on thyroglobulin to form monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT). Triiodothyronine, or T3, forms when an MIT mixes up with DIT. Likewise, the coupling of two DITs creates tetraiodothyronine (T4), or thyroxine. The process of iodide oxidation, thyroglobulin iodination, and MIT and DIT coupling is catalyzed by an enzyme called, thyroperoxidase. TSH stimulates thyroid hormone secretion through enhancing iodide uptake, thyroglobulin synthesis, and thyroperoxidase activity. Additionally, TSH also increases blood flow to the thyroid gland and stimulates hypertrophy and hyperplasia of thyroid follicular cells to exert growth effects on the thyroid gland.