The globus pallidus (GP) is a subcortical structure of the brain. It is a triangular mass of cells located medial to the putamen. Its name originates from the Latin 'pale globe,' owing to its pale appearance due to the myelinated axons that make up the structure; this contrasts with the neighboring unmyelinated structures (putamen and striatum), which appear darker. The medial medullary lamina of the white matter divides the GP into globus pallidus internus (GPi) and globus pallidus externus (GPe).

The globus pallidus, putamen, and caudate nucleus are intimately related to the lateral ventricles. The caudate nucleus lies directly laterally adjacent and nestled within the concave contour of the lateral ventricle, whereas the putamen lies inferior and within the concavity of the head and body of the caudate nucleus. The globus pallidus lies at the medial aspect of the putamen, bordered further medially by the curve of the internal capsule (best appreciated in an axial section).

The primary function of the globus pallidus is to control conscious and proprioceptive movements. The GPe is the intrinsic nucleus, whereas the GPi is the output nucleus. The intrinsic nucleus acts as a relay for information. The output nucleus primarily sends information to the thalamus.

**Direct pathway**

The 'direct pathway' promotes movement. The SNPc excites the striatum by secreting dopamine (nigrostriatal projections) to activate the D1 striatal receptors. The excited D1 receptors activate the striatum, sending more inhibitory signals to the GPi. A few inhibitory signals transmit simultaneously to the substantia nigra pars reticularis (SNPr). As a result, the GPi and SNPr experience inhibition. The GPi and SNPr lose their inhibitory influence on the thalamic nuclei (ventral anterior thalamic nucleus and ventral lateral thalamic nucleus). This loss of influence means that the thalamic nuclei are no longer inhibited and can send excitatory signals to the motor cortex via corticospinal projections. Ultimately, the excitation of the motor cortex allows the required movement to occur. It is important to note that GPi secretes an opiate known as substance-P, which may regulate the nigrostriatal pathway.

**Indirect pathway**

The 'indirect pathway' limits motor function so that excessive and erratic movements do not occur. The SNPc inhibits the striatum by secreting dopamine (nigrostriatal projections) to activate D2 striatal receptors, which means that the inhibited D2 receptors send fewer inhibitory signals to GPe. The GPe is in a relatively excited state. Therefore, it sends more inhibitory signals to the subthalamic nucleus. The inhibited subthalamic nucleus can no longer inhibit the GPi and the SNPr. The GPi and the SNPr are, therefore, able to inhibit the thalamic nuclei. Ultimately, the thalamic nuclei inhibit movement. In recent experiments, it has been elucidated that the GPe secretes an opiate called enkephalin.

These pathways, therefore, explain how the GPe and the GPi differ in their functions.