The EBUS scope is passed through the oral cavity and oropharynx. The epiglottis is identified, and the scope is passed through the vocal cords to access the trachea. Bronchoscopic visualization of the carina and bronchial tree to the sub-segmental bronchi level is usually then made with a fibreoptic bronchoscope.

Operators should have a good understanding of thoracic nodal and mediastinal anatomy to orientate themselves and safely sample lesions in this area. Nodal stations are identified numerically from 1 to 14 based on anatomical position as defined by the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) with ‘L’ and ‘R’ used to denote laterality, left and right (see table 1).

Table 1.

**Station**

**Anatomical position**

**Accessible for EBUS-TBNA?**

Stations 1L + 1R

Supraclavicular, cervical

No (accessed by ultrasound fine-needle aspiration)

Stations 2L + 2R

Upper paratracheal

Yes

Stations 3a + 3p

(anterior and posterior)

3a: Prevascular



3p: Retrotracheal

3a: No (proximity to superior vena cava)

3p: Yes

Stations 4L + 4R

Lower paratracheal

Yes

Stations 5L + 5R

Subaortic

No (obscured by aorta, accessed by extended cervical mediastinoscopy)

Stations 6L + 6R

Paraaortic

No (proximity to the aorta, accessed by extended cervical  mediastinoscopy)

Stations 7

Subcarinal

Yes

Stations 8

Paraesophageal

No (accessed by endoscopic ultrasound)

Stations 9

Pulmonary ligament

No (accessed by endoscopic ultrasound)

Stations 10L + 10R

Hilar

Yes

Stations 11L + 11R

Interlobar

Yes

Stations 12-14

Lobar to subsegmental

No (limited by scope dimensions)

EBUS is used in diagnosing and staging lung cancer to guide nodal staging in combination with positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT).

Anatomical landmarks are identified with the ultrasound transducer and include the aorta, pulmonary arteries, aortopulmonary window, and lymph nodes. These are correlated with endobronchial landmarks, including the trachealis muscle, indicating the posterior tracheal wall and the carina.

The side-viewing ultrasound probe is used to guide sampling and provides a view across the bronchial wall layers and out into the peribronchial space and mediastinum.