Job syndrome is characterized by clinical signs of immunological and non-immunological order.

**Immunological Features**

These mainly include chronic eczematoid eruptions, recurrent skin and pulmonary bacterial infections, and mucocutaneous candidiasis. The skin manifestations usually appear very early, a few weeks after birth. They include a pruriginous eczematoid rash affecting the scalp and face, that is rapidly superinfected with Staphylococcus aureus, resulting in weeping, crusty, and follicular infectious lesions. Recurrent cold staphylococcal skin abscesses that are associated with little or no inflammation are seen in these patients. Candida infections are common; they affect the skin, mucous membranes, and nails.

Recurrent pneumonia is typical, predominately due to S. aureus, and less frequently due to Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus. It can get complicated with the development of recurrent lung abscesses, bronchiectasis, and pneumatoceles. These pneumatoceles can get colonized with Aspergillus and Pseudomonas. Superinfection with Pneumocystis carinii

Cryptococcosis and histoplasmosis can manifest outside the lung. Other infectious manifestations such as sinusitis, bronchitis, otitis externa, gingivitis, dental abscess, septic arthritis, and osteomyelitis can be seen.

**Non-immunological Features**

Patients with Job syndrome have characteristic facial features that appear in early adolescence or earlier in late childhood, for example, facial asymmetry, prominent forehead, deep-set eyes, broad nasal bridge, wide fleshy nasal tip

Musculoskeletal abnormalities are common. They include hyperextensibility of the joints, scoliosis, and osteopenia. Hyperextensibility(noted in about 68% of the patients) may result in the early onset of degenerative joints disease. Bone density is decreased and is the source of multiple pathological fractures that occur in approximately 50% of patients (long bones and ribs). Scoliosis of variable severity is observed in approximately 60% of patients.

Anomalies of dentinogenesis are possible manifestations. Decreased resorption of the roots of the deciduous teeth may result in prolonged retention of the deciduous teeth, preventing the appearance of definitive teeth. About 70% of the patients with Job syndrome have been reported to retain three or more primary teeth.

Vascular manifestations include tortuosity or dilatation, coronary, cerebral and aortic aneurysms, and congenital coronary artery abnormalities.

Ocular complications include xanthelasmas, chalazions, strabismus and retinal detachment.