There are several **TAP block techniques**on how the TAP block compartment is identified:

- The original landmark-guided TAP block at the level of the Petit triangle (described above)

- The ultrasound-guided TAP block that can be found anatomically in the subcostal, lateral, and posterior approach

- The surgeon may perform a laparoscopic-guided TAP block visualizing from inside of the abdominal cavity and feeling 2 "pops" or loss-of resistance with the needle from outside of the abdomen during surgery.

The ultrasound-guidance technique is considered the gold standard in TAP blocks because it is easy for the operator to acquire ultrasound images and safe for the patient to perform the procedure under direct visualization of the needle before the injection of LA. For these techniques, the patient should be positioned supine for most of these approaches, except for slight lateralization for the posterior approach in some cases. A high-frequency linear or curvilinear ultrasound transducer should be used [5] and placed in the abdomen with gel for adequate contact and transmission of the ultrasound waves.

In the ultrasound image visualized (Image 5), the most superficial layer is skin and subcutaneous fat, then there are three muscular layers, from superficial to deep: external oblique, followed by the internal oblique, and lastly, the transversus abdominis muscle. The internal oblique muscle is usually the thickest muscle layer in the majority of patients, while the transversus abdominis muscle is the thinnest. If uncertain of the layer borders, increase the depth of the ultrasound to confirm bowel beneath the transversus abdominis muscle. Scanning posteriorly, the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles show the two layers come together to form the thoracolumbar fascia. Scanning medially, the aponeurosis of the three muscle layers come together to form the rectus sheath. Upon identifying the TAP compartment with the ultrasound probe, infiltrate the patient's skin using lidocaine (if the patient is awake), penetrate the skin with the block needle using an in-plane technique, making sure to visualize the needle tip on ultrasound throughout its entire trajectory. Upon entering the plane between the internal oblique and the transversus abdominis muscles, and after negative aspiration of blood, the LA is slowly injected. The TAP compartment will begin to separate, hydrodissect, or "unzip" as the LA is injected, pushing the transversus abdominis muscle down. Usually, an injection of 15 to 20 ml of LA is recommended for each side for an adult patient. The dose and volume depend on the patient's weight as well as the concentration of the LA. The spread of LA along the TAP compartment is responsible for the success of the block. Studies had shown that the efficacy of the block is improved when injecting 15 ml or more.

There are three**approaches for ultrasound-guide****d TAP block**to target the compartment anatomically:

- **Subcostal approach:**Targets the TAP compartment in the anterior abdominal wall, beneath the costal margin. The high-frequency probe should be located in the lower margin of the rib cage between the xiphoid process and the anterosuperior iliac spine at the level of the anterior axillary line. The objective is to deposit the LA in the plane among the transversus abdominis muscle and the posterior rectus sheath. The needle should be inserted above the rectus abdominis muscle and advanced it until it is positioned between the anterior edge of the transversus abdominis muscle and posterior rectus sheath [2]. This area is covered by T6-T9 dermatomes, blocking the anterior cutaneous nerves. The anterior approach is used to provide analgesia for open or laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries. (Image 2)

- **Lateral approach:**Targets the TAP compartment in the lateral abdominal wall. The high-frequency probe should be located in the midaxillary line between the bony prominences of the subcostal margin and the iliac crest. The three muscular layers in the abdominal wall muscles should be visualized. The objective is to deposit the LA in the plane among the transversus abdominis muscle and the internal oblique muscle. The needle should be inserted and advanced until it reaches the TAP plane. This area is covered by T10-T12 dermatomes, blocking the anterior cutaneous nerves. The lateral approach is used to provide analgesia for most abdominal surgeries, including laparoscopic surgeries, open appendectomy, ventral hernia repair, umbilical hernia repair, exploratory laparotomies, colostomy closures, cesarean delivery, hysterectomy, bariatric surgery, and radical retropubic prostatectomy among others. (Image 3)

- **Posterior approach:**Targets the TAP compartment at the level of the lumbar triangle of Petit or the anterolateral aspect of the quadratus lumborum muscle. The high-frequency probe should be located in the midaxillary line and then displaced lateral and posteriorly to the end limit of the three muscular layers. The objective is to deposit the LA in the plane among the transversus abdominis muscle and the internal oblique muscle but in the posterior end limit of the TAP plane.

**Other blocks:**

TAP block vs. Rectus Sheath Block: The rectus sheath block targets the compartment between the rectus abdominis muscle and the posterior rectus muscle sheath. The high-frequency probe should be placed in a transverse orientation below the costal margin on the lateral edge of the rectus abdominis muscle at the upper 1/3 of the rectus muscle, where the transversus abdominis muscle extends medially and provides a layer of safety between the compartment and the peritoneum to prevent peritoneal injection of LA. In the ultrasound image should visualize the rectus muscle, the posterior rectus sheath, and the transversus abdominis muscle below the rectus sheath. The LA should separate the sheath from the muscle body, the rectus muscle should be displaced upward, and the transversus abdominis muscle downward. The LA should extend in both directions, cephalad and caudal, within the sheath. The rectus sheath block is used to provide analgesia for midline vertical or paramedian abdominal incisions such as exploratory laparotomy incision, umbilical surgeries, and for umbilical port incisions for laparoscopic surgery.

TAP block vs. Ilioinguinal and Iliohypogastric block: The ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric block targets these two nerves that are located within the TAP compartment above the inguinal ligament. The high-frequency probe should be placed cephalad and medial to the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) in the direction of a line between the umbilicus and the ASIS. Get the US picture of the three layers of abdominal muscles. In the TAP compartment may or may not be visible the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves as echogenic structures along with the deep circumflex iliac artery. This is a block that requires less volume of LA, approximately 5 to 10 ml. The ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric block is used to provide analgesia for inguinal hernia surgeries.

TAP block vs. Quadratus Lumborum block: The quadratus lumborum (QL) block targets the fascial plane in the posterior surface of the QL muscle. There are three types of QL blocks, and each one targets a fascial plane defined by different muscles. Compared to the TAP block, the QL block covers more dermatomes with better cephalad and posterior spread. QL blocks provide both visceral and somatic analgesia, probably due to paravertebral and epidural spread. For this block, a curvilinear probe should be located in an axial position at the level of the umbilicus and the anterior axillary line. Visualize the three layers of abdominal muscles and trace laterally until the internal oblique muscle and the transversus abdominis muscle merge, becoming the transversalis fascia (TF). The QL muscle is deep to the transversalis fascia. The fascia extends posteriorly as the thoracolumbar fascia (TLF). The needle should be inserted in-plane with the curvilinear probe at the level of the posterior axillary line in between the costal margin and the iliac crest bony prominences.

- The QL1 block targets the superficial anterolateral corner of the QL muscle, where the TF meets the QL muscle; after injection of LA, the QL muscle should displace downwards. This block covers T12-L1 dermatomes only, blocking the subcostal, iliohypogastric,  and ilioinguinal nerves. The QL1 block is used to provide analgesia for abdominal surgeries below the umbilicus.

- The QL2 block targets the superficial posterolateral corner of the QL muscle, posterior to the QL muscle but outside the middle layer of the TLF; after injection of LA, the QL muscle should displace downwards. This block covers the area from T4 to T12-L1 dermatomes, blocking the anterior and lateral cutaneous nerves. The QL2 block is used to provide analgesia for abdominal surgeries either above or below the umbilicus.

- The QL3 block targets the compartment between the QL muscle and the psoas major muscle. The needle should go through the QL muscle, and it is also called transmuscular QL block; after injection of LA, the QL muscle and psoas muscle should hydrodissect and separate. This block covers the area from T4 to T12-L1 dermatomes, blocking the anterior and lateral cutaneous nerves. The QL2 block is used to provide analgesia for abdominal surgeries either above or below the umbilicus.