Sympathetic blocks are complex and exact procedures requiring the use of imaging equipment and potent medications to ensure optimal outcomes. Thus coherence and closed-loop communication among team members are paramount. Risks, benefits, alternatives, expectations, and possible complications of the procedure must be explained to the patient and/or healthcare proxy. Consent must be obtained and appropriately documented. Timeout involving all members of the interprofessional team and the patient is another important step to ensure the correct procedure on the correct anatomic location will be performed; if sedation is to be used, two timeouts should be performed. One prior to sedating the patient while the patient is alert and oriented, and a second just prior to performing the procedure. It is standard of care to perform sympathetic blocks under direct visualization, with fluoroscopy, ultrasound, and CT-guidance being used commonly. Providers must be familiar with signs of arising complications and must have the means and knowledge to treat them. Implementation of protocols and pre-made supplies/medication carts (i.e., crash carts) have shown to be very efficacious. New techniques continue to be described. However, data comparing procedural effectiveness usually evolves at a slower pace. Providers should critically evaluate whether or not a new approach is suitable for the treatment of the condition and conforms to the anatomy of the individual patient, and whether or not new approaches offer any potential benefits over the established standards.