Acanthamoeba trophozoites are frequently sensitive to a variety of medications, including antibiotics, antiseptics, antifungals, and antiprotozoals. However, Acanthamoeba is resistant to most of the listed treatments in the cystic form, thereby allowing for prolonged infection.

Diamidines exert their therapeutic effect by altering the structure and permeability of the cell membrane, causing denaturation of cytoplasmic contents. Propamidine-isethionate, hexamidine-diisethionate, and dibromopropamidine are diamidines used for the treatment of acanthamoeba keratitis at 0.1% concentration.

Biguanides similarly cause alterations in cytoplasmic membranes, leading to loss of cellular components and inhibition of enzymes necessary for cell respiration. Polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) and chlorhexidine are the two biguanides most widely used for the treatment of AK. PHMB is traditionally started at a concentration of 0.02% but may increase to 0.06% for AK that is unresponsive or severe at the initial presentation. Likewise, chlorhexidine is usually initiated at a concentration of 0.02% but can be increased to 0.2%, if indicated.

Most modern treatment regimens call for initiation of combination therapy of a biguanide and a diamidine, though there is some newer research to suggest that PHMB 0.08% monotherapy is as effective as combination PHMB 0.02% and propamidine 0.1%.Acanthamoeba cysts. Premature discontinuation of treatment could allow for any remaining dormant cysts to differentiate into trophozoites. Clinicians should tailor treatment regimens to the individual case to minimize risks of epithelial toxicity.

Neomycin was once used as a first-line treatment of acanthamoeba keratitis due to its anti-trophozoite activity but does not appear to achieve cysticidal levels in vitro.

Approximately 39% of patients with acanthamoeba keratitis fail initial therapy. Individuals with more clinically severe disease or a history of corticosteroid use before diagnosis are more likely to fail initial treatment.

The therapeutic value of antifungals appears to be limited. Among all antifungals, only newer generation azoles (voriconazole and posaconazole) appear to achieve cysticidal levels in vitro

Epithelial debridement may allow for improved penetration of topical medications.

At the time of writing, several promising novel therapeutic approaches remain on the horizon. A case series of four patients treated with photorefractive surgery resulted in excellent visual outcomes and no disease recurrence.Acanthamoeba castellanii, especially when conjugated to silver nanoparticles.Acanthamoeba species when compounded with chlorhexidine in vitro.

The development of extra corneal manifestations such as scleritis or limbitis indicates a worse outcome and warrants treatment with anti-inflammatory medications. Most cases of extracorneal inflammation are manageable with oral flurbiprofen 50 to 100 mg, two to three times daily.

Topical corticosteroid use in acanthamoeba keratitis is controversial and discouraged by many physicians. Though topical steroids are usually not required in early disease, their use may be necessary when there is significant anterior segment inflammation.