Not all infectious colitis requires antibiotic therapy; patients with mild to moderate C. jejuni or Salmonella infections do not need antibiotic therapy because the infection is self-limited. Treatment with quinolinic acid antibiotics is reserved for patients with dysentery and high fever suggestive of bacteremia. Also, patients with AIDS, malignancy, transplantation, prosthetic implants, valvular heart disease or extreme age will require antibiotic therapy. For mild to moderate cases of C. difficile infection metronidazole is the preferred treatment. In severe cases of C. difficile infection oral vancomycin is recommended. In complicated cases, oral vancomycin with intravenous metronidazole is recommended. Cytomegalovirus colitis is treated with valganciclovir; the duration of treatment should be individualized depending on the clinical picture and laboratory parameters.

5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) drugs are the standard treatment in ulcerative colitis for induction and maintenance of remission of mild and moderate cases. The place of 5-ASA in the management of Crohn disease is controversial. Immunomodulators including azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, and methotrexate, are the mainstay of treatment in maintenance therapy for patients with mild to moderately severe Crohn disease and frequently relapsing ulcerative colitis where 5-ASA drugs failed. Biological therapies, tumor necrosis factor-oe, such as infliximab, adalimumab, and certolizumab are available for the management of Crohn disease, to get the disease under control and long-term maintenance. Corticosteroids are effective in reducing remission in inflammatory bowel disease and are cheap. However, they are not recommended for maintenance therapy and are associated with serious side effects. Surgery is recommended in patients not responding to medical therapy.

In microscopic colitis, discontinuation of any offending medication and smoking cessation are vital. While anti-diarrheal medications, bismuth subsalicylate or cholestyramine may help, budesonide is effective in inducing remission and should be the first medication to start.

Patients with ischemic colitis without peritoneal signs, medical management may be safely employed including intravenous fluid resuscitation, optimizing cardiac output, use of supplementation of oxygen, placing the bowel on rest, parenteral nutrition, the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics to cover both aerobic and anaerobic coliform bacteria and close monitoring. Failure of medical management and the development of peritoneal signs or intestinal perforation necessitates surgical intervention and bowel resection.

Anti-tuberculous treatment comprising isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for 2 months is recommended in tuberculous colitis followed by isoniazid and rifampin for 7 months. The duration of treatment is nine months, and patients should be regularly followed up for assessing their response to the treatment.