Acute rhinosinusitis is a clinical diagnosis. The clinician most commonly needs to distinguish between VRS and ABRS, which is crucial to ensure the responsible usage of antibiotics. Local resistance patterns and prevalence of penicillin non-susceptible S. pneumoniae requires elucidation.

Conventional diagnostic criteria for rhinosinusitis in adults is the patient having at least two major or one major plus two or more minor symptoms. The criteria in children are similar except that there is more of an emphasis on nasal discharge (rather than nasal obstruction).Major symptoms:

- Purulent anterior nasal discharge

- Purulent or discolored posterior nasal discharge

- Nasal congestion or obstruction

- Facial congestion or fullness

- Facial pain or pressure

- Hyposmia or anosmia

- Fever (for acute sinusitis only)

Minor symptoms:

- Headache

- Ear pain or pressure or fullness

- Halitosis

- Dental pain

- Cough

- Fever (for subacute or chronic sinusitis)

- Fatigue

ABRS can be differentiated from VRS using the following clinical guidance

- Duration of symptoms for more than ten days

- High fever (over 39 C or 102 F) with purulent nasal discharge or facial pain that last for 3 to 4 consecutive days at the beginning of the illness

- Double worsening of symptoms within the first ten days

Routine laboratory assessment is generally not necessary. Evaluation for cystic fibrosis, ciliary dysfunction, or immunodeficiency are considerations for intractable, recurrent, or chronic rhinosinusitis.  There is some evidence that an elevated ESR and CRP may be associated with a bacterial infection.

The culture of endoscopic aspirates with greater than or equal to 10 CFU/mL is considered the gold standard. However, this is not necessary for diagnosis and not done for the vast majority of cases of ABRS. Nasal and nasopharyngeal cultures are of low utility due to their poor correlation with endoscopic aspirates. Referral for endoscopic aspiration can be useful for refractory cases or patients with multiple antibiotic allergies.

Imaging for **acute**sinusitis is not necessary unless there is a clinical concern for a complication or alternative diagnosis. Sinus plain films are generally not useful in detecting inflammation. They may show air-fluid levels. However, this does not help differentiate viral versus bacterial etiologies. If a complication or alternative diagnosis is suspected, or if the patient has recurrent acute infections, then sinus CT imaging should be obtained to assess for bone, soft tissue, dental, or other anatomical abnormalities or the presence of chronic sinusitis. These should be obtained at the end of an appropriate treatment course. Sinus CT may show air-fluid levels, opacification, and inflammation. A thickened sinus mucosa over 5 mm is indicative of inflammation.  It can also effectively assess bony erosion or destruction. However, these findings are also not helpful in differentiating viral versus bacterial etiologies. MRI offers more detail than sinus CT to evaluate soft tissue or help elucidate a tumor. Thus, MRI may be helpful to determine the extent of complications in cases such as an orbital or intracranial extension.