**First Trimester Antepartum Care (0-14 6/7 weeks)**

First trimester antepartum care most commonly begins with an initial prenatal visit, after the development of symptoms, a positive pregnancy test, and confirmed intrauterine gestation via sonography. Patients with early pregnancies may present with any combination of signs and symptoms or might be completely asymptomatic. The most common presenting complaint of patients is an abrupt cessation of the menstrual cycle in previously healthy women of reproductive age with regular menstrual cycles. Although this is a common presenting complaint, menstrual cycle variation among women of varying ages or underlying gynecologic conditions also means amenorrhea cannot reliably be utilized as the only method of diagnosis of pregnancy. Patients may also present with complaints of breast pain or swelling, often less commonly reported by multiparous patients.

Sonography, specifically transvaginal sonography, plays an essential role in identifying and establishing gestational age and confirms the location of the pregnancy. Intrauterine pregnancies are confirmed by the presence of a gestation sac within the endometrial cavity, typically identified at 4 to 5 weeks gestation, along with a visualization of a yolk sac, typically seen by 5 weeks gestation. With this confirmation, and at about 6 weeks gestation, cardiac activity may be noted.

Several major tasks must be accomplished during this initial visit, including establishing the baseline medical condition of the patient and fetus, proper gestational age and dating, and planning the intended course of obstetric care with the patient. Within the first visit, a complete history should be taken, including a detailed history of past medical problems that may be of concern during pregnancy, previous surgeries, and detailed past obstetric and gynecologic history for foreseeable complications. Current issues and complaints should also be addressed.

A complete physical examination should also be performed, including complete vital signs, maternal weight, and pelvic/cervical examination, fundal height, and fetal heart rate. Laboratory tests should also be collected and completed during this first visit. These include a complete blood count (CBC), complete metabolic panel (CMP), blood type and Rh factor testing with antibody screen, urine analysis, urine culture, pap smear screening, rubella serology, syphilis serology, gonorrhea, and chlamydia screening, Hepatitis B serology, and HIV serology. These results should be followed up promptly so as to begin necessary adjustments to prenatal care, repeat laboratory testing, or initiate treatment or a higher level of care.  During the first trimester, fetal nuchal translucency sonography and fetal aneuploidy screening may be performed between 11 and 14 weeks gestation and again during the second trimester depending on the modality of fetal aneuploidy testing utilized.

**Second Trimester Antepartum Care (15 0/7 - 28 6/7 weeks)**

In the second trimester, antepartum care consists of updated histories with each visit, including reviewing current pregnancy-related issues and a review of newly occurring issues. This includes assessing possible symptoms such as headaches, altered vision, abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting, vaginal bleeding, leakage of fluid, or dysuria. During early second trimester gestations, patients may begin to endorse the perception of fetal movement. This is typically found at around 16 to 18 weeks gestation, or even up to 20 weeks gestation, in primigravida patients and varies in the detection based on maternal factors such as body habitus.

Care also includes repeat blood pressure recordings, maternal weight, fundal height, and fetal heart rate. Fetal heart rates can be detected via Doppler ultrasound, in nonobese patients, at as early as 10 weeks gestation. Because the second trimester encompasses a vast majority of the rapid fetal growth period, several essential screening and laboratory tests are collected during this trimester. Earlier in the second trimester, the second portion of combined-trimester fetal aneuploidy testing or single-test quadruple maternal screening is collected between 16 to 20 weeks gestation. In addition to this, fetal sonography for the anatomic survey is performed during 18 to 20 weeks gestation.

Gestational diabetic screening is also an essential component of second-trimester testing via a 50-gram glucose tolerance test. This is typically collected between 24 to 28 weeks of gestation. Tdap vaccinations are also routinely administered during this timeframe. If patients have a known Rh-negative status, Rhogam is administered at 28 weeks. Patients during this trimester are also counseled at around 28 weeks gestation to begin self-monitoring of fetal movements equating to 10 movements within 2 hours, also known as “fetal kick counts.”

**Third Trimester Antepartum Care (29 0/7- 41 6/7 weeks)**

The third trimester of antepartum care consists of the final preparations, screenings, necessary treatments, and counseling to facilitate safe and timely delivery and improved maternal and fetal outcomes. As with second-trimester visits, antepartum care in the third trimester consists of updated histories with each visit, reviewing current pregnancy-related issues and reviewing newly occurring issues. Review of new symptoms such as headaches, altered vision, abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting, vaginal bleeding, leakage of fluid, or dysuria should be discussed. If present, appropriate physical examination or laboratory testing should be completed. And, as performed in other visits, blood pressure recordings, maternal weight, fundal height, and fetal heart rate should be obtained.

Between 36 to 37 weeks gestation, third-trimester laboratory testing is typically collected in uncomplicated prenatal care. These include repeat complete blood count to address and correct anemia or thrombocytopenia prior to delivery, Hepatitis B surface antigen testing, gonorrhea and chlamydia screening, HIV screening, and Group B Streptococcal screening. During late third trimester visits, patients typically return for weekly visits to assess for signs of early labor, fetal distress, or maternal complaints.

Patients may also require a physical examination, including cervical examination, sonography to assess for estimated fetal weight and amniotic fluid index, or nonstress tests to examine fetal status. If there are abnormalities, other pregnancy-related, or maternal-related medical conditions present, patients may require induction of labor or imminent delivery depending on the circumstance and severity.