The initial assessment of the patient presenting with jaundice depends on whether hyperbilirubinemia is the result of unconjugated or conjugated bilirubin. A urine test positive for bilirubin indicates conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Conjugated bilirubin is soluble in water; therefore, it can be excreted via urine but not unconjugated bilirubin due to water insolubility. Further, first-line laboratory testing should include measurement of the serum total bilirubin levels with fractionation (direct with indirect obtained by subtraction from total), followed by serum aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) levels, complete blood count (CBC) with an examination of the smear, a reticulocyte count, a direct Coombs test, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and haptoglobin levels.

A complete blood count is a beneficial test for the determination of hemolysis, which is characterized by the presence of damaged red blood cells and increased reticulocytes on the smear. In patients, when the serum total bilirubin levels exceed 3.0 mg/dL, jaundice becomes clinically apparent. Hyperbilirubinemia is unconjugated when the conjugated bilirubin level is less than 15% of the TB. While in conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, conjugated bilirubin level is high and more than 20% of the total bilirubin. Generally, patients with carotenemia also present yellow skin but have no elevation in serum bilirubin levels. During the physical examination, carotenemia due to excess carotene intake, e.g., carrots, peaches, etc., can be distinguished from jaundice due to the absence of scleral icterus in carotenemia and with the pigmentation of soles and palms and other areas. Computerized axial tomography (CT) and ultrasonography scanning are useful tools in differentiating cholestasis (intra-hepatic and extra-hepatic) from hepatocellular disease in the assessment of a patient with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, which is not the focus of the review.