**Immune Reconstitution Syndrome (IRIS)**

Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome is a clinical phenomenon that occurs after the initiation of antiretroviral therapy. It represents a paradoxical worsening of preexisting infectious processes following improvement in immune response and a subsequent state of elevated inflammatory response.  The preexisting infections can be subclinical (e.g. Toxoplasmosis) or previously treated infections (Tuberculosis). The clinical presentation depends on the location and severity of inflammation.

IRIS has been found to occur in up to 30 % of HIV/AIDS patients receiving ART. Low CD4 cell counts or high HIV RNA load at the time of initiation of ART has been thought to be important risk factors for IRIS.

There are no universally accepted diagnostic criteria for IRIS, but the presence of the following features is thought to be highly suggestive:

- Presence of AIDS with a low pretreatment CD4 count (often less than 100 cells/mm3). However, IRIS secondary to preexisting M. tuberculosis infection may occur in individuals with CD4 counts greater than 200 cells/mm3.

- Patients should have no evidence of resistance to ART or lowered therapeutic efficacy due to drug interactions.

- Temporal association initiation of ART and the onset of illness. There must be evidence of immunological response to antiretroviral therapy with improving CD4+ cell count.

- Presence of clinical manifestations consistent with an inflammatory condition, such as:

- CMV associated IRIS: painless floaters, blurred vision, ocular pain.

- MAC associated IRIS: Fever and tender lymph node enlargement.

- Cryptococcal infection-associated IRIS: fever, neck rigidity

5. Other causes of clinical deterioration such as drug allergies (e.g. with abacavir), new opportunistic infections must be considered and ruled out.

The most common pathogens that are commonly associated with IRIS are Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium complex, Cytomegalovirus, Cryptococcus neoforman, Pneumocystis jirovecii, Herpes simplex virus, Hepatitis B virus, Human herpesvirus 8.