Evaluation should include a detailed clinical history, physical exam, and appropriate testing, including:

- Evaluation of risk factors: Record risk factors for stroke such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, smoking history, and heart disease. History of neck pain, trauma, or headache, particularly in younger patients, may suggest vertebral dissection.

- Complete neurological examination: LMS remains a clinical diagnosis based upon a characteristic history and constellation of physical findings.

- Routine blood investigations, including blood glucose, and serum electrolytes, etc

- Electrocardiogram (EKG) to rule out atrial fibrillation

- Echocardiography (ECHO) and carotid Doppler

- Swallowing evaluation: Clinical and instrumental swallowing evaluations carried out by videofluoroscopy and fiber-endoscopic examination.

- 
**Diagnostic Imaging tests:**

Computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain: Brain CT is typically the initial imaging test for lateral medullary syndrome patients. CT gives suboptimal visualization of the posterior fossa structures due to obscuration by artifacts (bony structures), and early ischemic changes may not be visible.

Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):  MRI provides better visualization of the soft tissue structures as compared to CT scan. MRI aids in diagnosis by improved visualization of the medullary infarction. For example, by the use of imaging protocol fluid attenuation inversion recovery sequences (FLAIR) in the evaluation of infarction.

Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI): can detect infarct early.

- 
**Neurovascular Studies:**

Computed tomography angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) examination are advanced imaging studies. They identify the exact location of the lesion.