The patient usually presents with a history of painful recalcitrant ulcers and whitish scars near the ankles, which are associated with a painful burning sensation. The prodrome of this burning pain is a pathognomonic feature in history. Usually, pure livedoid vasculopathy is a skin limited manifestation hence, no systemic symptoms are expected. However, lesions akin to livedoid vasculopathy are seen in autoimmune connective tissue diseases, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, and inherited thrombophilias hence, a detailed history focusing on these associated diseases must be elucidated.

Livedoid vasculopathy is characterized by punched out ulcers in the peri-malleolar area surrounded by lacy, reticular, reddish to violaceous streaks, also known as livedo reticularis. These ulcers heal forming porcelain white scars surrounded by telangiectasias and represent the vestiges of cutaneous infarction due to disturbed capillary microcirculation. These scars are known as atrophie blanche/capillaritis alba, and they are not specific for livedoid vasculopathy. Ulcers characterize the active stage of disease while livedo reticularis and livedo racemosa (broken net pattern) are precursors to ulceration. The acronym PPURPLE (painful, purpuric, ulcers, with reticular, pattern, of lower extremities) sums up the entire clinical spectrum of this condition. Retiform or stellate purpura is considered a hallmark lesion.

The commonest site is the peri-malleolar area, but they can also be seen on the lower leg and foot. The disease is bilateral in most cases.