**Current Florida law on AIDS and its Impact on HIV Testing**

**Legislative Intent**

The Florida legislature designs laws regarding HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases to provide patients with privacy, confidentiality, and dignity.

**Informed Consent**

Informed consent for HIV testing must include an explanation to the patient regarding confidentiality, mandatory reporting, and opportunity for anonymous testing. Florida statutes maintain that in a healthcare setting, a patient must be notified of a planned HIV test, and they have the right to refuse the test, which will be documented in the patient’s chart. A legal guardian may provide informed consent if a person is incompetent, incapacitated, or a legal minor.

**Confidentiality**

Information regarding a person’s HIV status must be kept confidential, except when:

- The patient gives consent

- Given for statistical purposes and excluding identifying information

- Made to mandatory reporting to medical personnel, state agencies, or mandated court jurisdiction

- Disclosed during a medical emergency, only sharing relevant information for the patient’s care

If confidentiality is violated, the person commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, which is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 and up to one year in prison. Any person who spreads information about an individual with HIV or another sexually transmitted disease for monetary gain or with malicious intent commits a felony in the third degree. This is punishable by a fine of up to $5,000 or imprisonment of up to five years.

**Reporting Results**

The Florida Department of Health will keep information confidential and private. The diagnosis of HIV or AIDS must be reported to the Florida Department of Health within two weeks of the positive test result. Any positive HIV or AIDS results must be reported using the system developed by the CDC or an equivalent system to ensure confidentiality. The Department of Health may fine anyone who fails to report HIV or AIDS up to $500 for each offense, and a regulatory agency will be informed of the violation.

[See Florida State Statutes, Title XXIX Public Health, Chapter 381 Public Health: General Provisions]

**Preliminary and Confirmatory Testing**

In 2014, the CDC updated testing guidelines. They recommend screening with an HIV-1/2 antigen/antibody test. If it is non-reactive, no further testing is required. If it is reactive, an HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation test is recommended. If the differentiation test is non-reactive or indeterminate, then a qualitative HIV-1 RNA test is suggested to confirm the results.