The management of inflammatory diseases such as psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and inflammatory bowel disease is complex and associated with a high-cost burden. The rational and cost-effective use of biological medications, such as ustekinumab, is a key component in managing these diseases. To achieve the desired outcome, an interprofessional healthcare team approach is necessary. Internal medicine clinicians (including mid-level practitioners such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants) may work with specialists, including rheumatologists, gastroenterologists, or dermatologists, to confirm the diagnosis and decide on a treatment course. Nurses facilitate the preparation and administration of medications, as well as monitoring patients after use; they should immediately report any concerns to the ordering/prescribing clinician. Pharmacists can ensure no relevant drug-drug interactions exist, evaluate the relevance of contraindications to treatment, verify dosing is correct (especially inasmuch as ustekinumab utilizes weight-based dosing regimens), and ensure the appropriateness of prescriptions. All clinical personnel need to participate in patient counseling, educate the patient regarding potential adverse events, signs of therapeutic failure, and provide access to resources and points of contact should they need to reach out to the interprofessional team. Social workers identify barriers to compliance and provide resources to patients. Each member of the interprofessional team's contributions can provide expertise from their discipline to help drive a positive outcome for patients with potentially fewer adverse events and improve the effectiveness of the broader healthcare system. [Level 5]