Measurement of the post-void residual volume (PVR) immediately after voiding is crucial for an accurate result, with delays of as little as 10 minutes from bladder emptying to PVR determination potentially causing clinically significant overestimation of the volume.

Measurement of the PVR determines the quantity of urine remaining in the bladder shortly after a voluntary void; this measurement can be obtained using a portable dedicated bladder scanner, a formal bladder ultrasound examination, or by directly measuring the urine volume via urinary catheterization.

Urinary catheterization is the gold standard for measuring the PVR but is invasive and has several other disadvantages compared to ultrasound.

**Portable Dedicated Bladder Ultrasound Device**

A portable dedicated bladder ultrasound device, commonly known as a bladder scanner, uses ultrasound to measure the three-dimensional volume of urine in the bladder. It is a simple, noninvasive approach to measuring the PVR and is usually the preferred approach when available. In addition, the technique is simple to learn and takes only a few minutes to perform.

The device is easily portable on a movable stand, and a single instrument can serve an entire office or department. However, the device must be calibrated periodically, and the initial financial outlay may be significant. Nevertheless, while moderately expensive, the device has proven cost-effective over time and facilitates patient care in primary care facilities and specialist offices.

The technique of PVR measurement using a bladder scanner is straightforward. With the patient supine, ultrasound gel is placed on the suprapubic area. The probe is placed on the gel and directed toward the bladder. A simple button is depressed, which initiates the examination of the bladder volume. The result is displayed on a screen for the operator to see. The process can be repeated to optimally align the bladder in the center of the display. The largest bladder volume is recorded.

Different bladder scanner machines may have slightly different procedures, but the basics of the technique are similar across devices.

Bladder scanning is unsuitable for patients with severe abdominal scarring, prolapse of the uterus, or if currently pregnant.

**Formal Bladder Ultrasound**

Conventional ultrasound is used to visualize the bladder directly, using either a transabdominal or transvaginal approach. The PVR is measured using the ultrasound machine's internal volume calculations or the mathematical equation below. Transvaginal ultrasound appears especially accurate for measuring low bladder volumes.

For transabdominal bladder volume evaluation, the probe is placed over the suprapubic area while the patient is prone. Bladder images are recorded in both the sagittal and transverse planes. The greatest transverse (width), anteroposterior (depth), and superior-inferior (height) distances are recorded.

For transvaginal bladder volume evaluation, an intracavitary transvaginal probe with frequencies between 7 to 9 MHz is used. Ensure the probe is clean, has a probe cover, and has gel placed onto the end of the probe. The patient should be supine with the legs in stirrups or a pad under the pelvis. The probe is inserted into the vagina, and bladder identification is in the sagittal plane. Measurements are from the longest anteroposterior dimension and the craniocaudal dimension. The probe is then rotated 90 degrees to measure the width or axial dimension.

Most ultrasound machines have a function to automatically calculate volumes from the measurements used with the ultrasound calipers. The volumes can be calculated using the prolate ellipsoid formula if this function is unavailable. There are multiple mathematical methods to calculate volume, and the prolate ellipsoid formula below is one accepted method.

-  Volume = length x width x height x 0.52

The prolate ellipsoid formula has more than one acceptable correction factor. The bladder is measured at its maximal transverse (width), longitudinal (length), and anterior-posterior (height) diameters. This method is recommended as the standard calculation because it is fast and easy.

Data on the accuracy of transabdominal ultrasound for determining the PVR is mixed. Although most studies demonstrate high accuracy using transabdominal point-of-care ultrasound or bladder scanners with automated measurement of bladder volume, other recent studies have questioned the accuracy of these methods.

For most practical purposes, an absolutely accurate measurement is not necessary for clinical decision-making, and a rough estimate is generally sufficient.

**Urethral Catheterization**

Urethral catheterization directly measures the PVR and is considered the gold standard of measurement. Varying the size and type of catheter used may result in variable results.

While accurate, the technique has some significant disadvantages. First, it takes time and supplies. Second, it is an invasive technique that requires a trained professional to perform. Third, it is often uncomfortable for the patient and risks a urinary tract infection or possible injury to the urethra. Fourth, unexpected difficulty in placing the catheter may be encountered, causing bleeding or other complications. Finally, catheterization may not be possible in uncooperative individuals, babies, or children. However, it may be the optimal method when urinary retention is suspected or when noninvasive ultrasound equipment is unavailable or cannot be reliably used, as in patients with ascites or during the later stages of pregnancy.

While male and female anatomy each requires a different technique for inserting a urethral catheter, the overall procedure and sterile technique are similar. The steps in the technique are:

- Perform hand hygiene and place the patient in an accessible position; a female patient should be placed in the frog-leg position while males can remain supine.

- Sterile drapes should cover the genitals with the urethral meatus exposed, and sterile gloves should be worn.

- The non-dominant hand should hold the penis at a 90-degree angle toward the ceiling, and for females, the labia should be separated and held to expose the urethral meatus.

- The urethral meatus and glans penis for males or perineum for females should undergo prepping with an antiseptic solution using a sterile technique.

- Injection of 20 mL of a local anesthetic gel, such as lidocaine, into the urethra can help diminish patient discomfort during the procedure.

- Insert a well-lubricated catheter (usually 14 or 16 French in size) into the urethral meatus with the dominant, sterile-gloved hand. For male patients, pulling the penis downwards towards the feet while advancing the catheter will tend to straighten the natural anterior curve of the bulbous urethra and facilitate passage into the bladder.

- Observe for a spontaneous return of urine to confirm catheter tip placement in the bladder.

- To obtain a urine sample or PVR, allow the bladder to drain completely into a graduated container, measure the volume, then remove the catheter.

If permanent drainage is desired or the need appears likely, use a Foley catheter and inflate the balloon with sterile water after satisfactory placement.

Special techniques and procedures exist for difficult or complicated urethral catheterizations.

Urethral catheterization has known complications. Common traumatic complications include urethral trauma, the creation of a false urethral passage, stricture formation, and inadvertent balloon inflation in the urethra. The precursor of catheter-associated urinary tract infection is bacteria, which develops at an average rate of 3% to 10% per day of catheterization. The commonly studied incidence of infection relates to indwelling catheterization and not in-and-out catheterization, which would be used to identify a PVR or to obtain a sterile urine sample.

**Comparison of Methods**

While no statistically significant difference in PVR results was found when measured using the bladder scanner or urinary catheterization, the average time to perform the bladder scan was 45 seconds. In contrast, the average urinary catheterization time was 293 seconds.

Portable bladder scanning for PVR measurement is convenient, noninvasive, accurate, cost-effective, and carries no risk of urethral trauma or urinary tract infection.