**Medical Treatment**

Surgery remains the definitive treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism, but non-operative surveillance may be the appropriate option for some, particularly for patients who are elderly with mild hypercalcemia and no significant complications. Medical treatment with bisphosphonates and/or cinacalcet can be extremely useful in selected patients. The decision of whether to recommend surgery is based on age, the degree of hypercalcemia, and the presence or absence of complications due to hyperparathyroidism, as well as patient comorbidities and surgical/anesthesia risk.

Patients who are not surgical candidates may benefit from medical management of primary hyperparathyroidism. Calcium intake should not be restricted as this could further stimulate PTH production.

Long-term outcomes in hyperparathyroid patients who do not undergo surgery are available out to 15 years.

Current guidelines for monitoring hyperparathyroid patients being treated medically now recommend annual serum calcium and creatinine levels.

Medical therapy in non-surgical hyperparathyroid patients is designed to treat osteoporosis or hypercalcemia (defined as >1 mg/dL above the normal range) but usually not both. If both entities require treatment, combination therapy is recommended.

- Oral phosphates can reduce serum calcium levels up to 1 mg/dL. They reduce intestinal calcium absorption by direct phosphate binding, lower vitamin D levels, and reduce bone resorption.

- Estrogen therapy for postmenopausal women with primary hyperparathyroidism has shown a benefit in increasing bone mineral density, particularly in the lumbar spine, but with no change in serum PTH or calcium.

- Oral bisphosphonates and denosumab (a rank ligand inhibitor) are anti-resorptive agents and can increase bone mineral density in hyperparathyroid patients with osteoporosis or osteopenia and help control hypercalcemia.

- Agonists to the calcium-sensing receptor, such as cinacalcet, will significantly lower serum PTH and calcium in hyperparathyroid patients but not increase their bone density.

- The use of combination therapy with a calcium-sensing receptor medication along with either a bisphosphonate or rank ligand inhibitor is reasonable to control serum calcium and increase bone mineral density, but there are only limited studies on this approach.

**Surgical Therapy**

Surgery is the treatment of choice for those with recurrent kidney stones or decreased bone mineral density.

Since 1990, several workshops have developed guidelines to assist physicians in managing asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism. Surgical and medical experts, internationally recognized for their experience in managing patients with hyperparathyroidism, reviewed the evidence-based medical literature, and a consensus of their opinions was disseminated to the medical community. The most recent guidelines were published in 2014.

The current guidelines recommend surgery for all symptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism patients.

- Age younger than 50 years

- Serum calcium is more than 1 mg/dL above the upper limit of normal

- Osteoporosis on DEXA scan (T-score <-2.5 at any site)

- History of fractures

- Vertebral compression fracture on imaging

- GFR less than 60 mL/min

- Hypercalciuria with urine calcium greater than 400 mg/24 hours

- Evidence of renal calcifications, nephrocalcinosis, or urinary stones

- Electively for all hyperparathyroid patients, even if they do not meet any of the above criteria and have no medical contraindications.

Surgery should optimally be done by experienced parathyroid surgeons who perform these surgeries frequently and are knowledgeable about preoperative localization. Success rates exceed 95% in such hands.

Preoperative localization studies are recommended in patients undergoing surgery, especially if a minimally invasive technique is being used. Imaging studies are not recommended for diagnosis due to poor sensitivity and specificity, with a false-positive rate as high as 25%.

The use of intraoperative parathyroid hormone measurements is recommended to verify the efficacy of the surgery. The half-life of parathyroid hormone is only about 4 minutes, so the PTH level should drop by at least 50% from the preoperative level in 10 to 20 minutes after successful excision and should normalize within 30 minutes.

Left untreated, many patients with primary hyperparathyroidism have progressive loss of cortical bone while successful surgery leads to a substantial increase in bone mineral density, an effect that can persist for up to 15 years.

Radiofrequency ablation of isolated parathyroid adenomas has been successfully reported with minimal complications in small series.

Nephrolithiasis patients who undergo surgery tend to have fewer stones, but other chemical promoters of kidney stones are possible, so 24-hour urine testing is recommended in such patients after recovery from parathyroid surgery.

For patients where observation is the selected course of action, periodic monitoring of serum and urine calcium levels, renal function, and bone densitometry is required. Blood testing of calcium and parathyroid hormone every six months, as well as annual 24-hour urine measurements and DEXA scans, are suggested.

**Hungry Bone Syndrome (Bone Hunger)**

Immediately following the surgical correction of primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism, a period of profound, severe, and prolonged hypocalcemia may ensue, which is called hungry bone syndrome or bone hunger. While there is no definitive consensus, most sources will define hungry bone syndrome as persistent low serum calcium of <8.4 mg/dL present for more than four days after definitive parathyroid surgery.

The likelihood of hungry bone syndrome increases as the duration and severity of hyperparathyroidism rise. It is also more commonly seen in older patients with radiographic bony changes, osteitis fibrosa cystica, obesity, a larger volume of parathyroid tissue removed at surgery, preoperative vitamin D deficiency, presurgical elevated alkaline phosphatase levels, and high numbers of osteoclasts on bone biopsy.

Hungry bone syndrome may also occur after correction of secondary hyperparathyroidism, thyrotoxicosis, vitamin D supplementation in calcitriol deficient patients, or treatment of malignant tumors, including prostate cancer, that affect calcium metabolism.

Symptoms of severe hypocalcemia would include seizures, paresthesias, numbness, arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and laryngospasms. Physical signs would include evidence of recent parathyroid or thyroid surgery or hyperexcitability of nerves as in a prominent Chvostek or Trousseau sign.

Treatment generally includes high oral doses of supplemental calcium and vitamin D. However, if the serum calcium is below 7.6 mg/dL, if there are symptoms from hypocalcemia, or if there are related EKG changes such as QTc prolongation, intravenous calcium supplementation is indicated (Calcium gluconate is usually preferred over calcium chloride due to easier administration as no central line is needed).

**Treatment Summary**

Criteria for surgery include any parathyroid or hypercalcemic-related symptoms.

- Medical therapy for hypercalcemia is primarily with a calcium-sensing receptor (calcimimetic) drug such as cinacalcet, which typically has little effect on bone density.

- Medical treatment for low bone density is mainly bisphosphonates and rank ligand inhibitors with minimal effect on hypercalcemia.

- Combined therapy is necessary to manage both hypercalcemia and low bone density.

- Medical therapy is intended only for patients unable or unwilling to undergo surgery.

- Surgical treatment is always preferred over medical therapy whenever possible.

- Many patients will do quite well for years without symptoms, but they will require routine monitoring and may develop symptoms over time.

- Surgery cures the underlying condition and allows for better reductions in nephrolithiasis and improved bone densities.

- Localization studies are intended only for possible surgical patients. Such studies include neck ultrasound and Sestamibi scans. If these are negative or equivocal, 4D CT scanning or selective parathyroid venous sampling can be done.

- Referral to an experienced parathyroid surgeon is recommended when surgery is selected.

- Be aware of the possibility of hungry bone syndrome (severe, prolonged hypocalcemia) immediately after parathyroidectomy surgery.