The pathogenesis of CLL/SLL is a two-step process that leads to the clonal replication of malignant B lymphocytes.  The first step is the development of MBL cells secondary to multiple factors such as antigenic stimulation, genetic mutations, and cytogenetic abnormalities.  The second step is the progression of MBL to CLL/SLL by the further insult to the B-cell clone, either due to additional genetic abnormalities or changes in the bone marrow microenvironment. B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) expression induces antigen-independent cell-autonomous signaling, which is an important step in the pathogenesis of CLL.

In CLL, CD5+ B cells are continuously activated by mutations leading to MBL. The accumulation of genetic abnormalities in more mature B cells causes a clonal division of the neoplastic B-cell within the lymph nodes. In CLL/SLL, the most common abnormal physical examination findings are lymphadenopathy, which is seen in 50 to 90% of patients. Cervical, supraclavicular, and axillary lymph nodes are the most commonly affected sites. These increased B-cell lymphocytes eventually spill into the peripheral blood leading to the detection of lymphocytosis on a CBC.

These neoplastic B cells escape apoptosis and continue to divide over time within the lymph nodes. They then infiltrate the spleen and bone marrow, causing splenomegaly and hypercellular bone marrow (on bone marrow biopsy).  The splenomegaly leads to increase sequestration of RBCs and platelets, leading to anemia and thrombocytopenia by decreasing the RBCs and platelets.  Patients are more susceptible to autoimmune hemolytic anemia (positive Coombs test) and autoimmune thrombocytopenia. These B cells eventually spread throughout the body, causing systemic symptoms such as fever, night sweats, unintentional weight loss, fatigue, and early satiety.  Lack of functional B cells decreases the body's ability to produce antibodies for immune responses leading to hypogammaglobinemia, which eventually leads to an increased risk of infection.

Skin is the most commonly affected nonlymphoid tissue in patients with CLL.  Leukemia cutis (skin lesions) mainly involves the face and manifests as papules, macules, plaques, ulcers, blisters, or nodules.  Skin biopsy can help confirm the diagnosis of CLL.  Nonspecific secondary cutaneous lesions may occur due to bleeding, vasculitis, and infection.  Exaggerated reactions to insect bites have been reported in patients as well.