During the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW) in 2011, the STRAW+10 staging system was established. Since then, this system has become the gold standard in the staging of menopause. Its principal criteria rely on the menstrual cycle (with supportive criteria being lab work) and divide the female reproductive cycle into 3 categories: reproductive, menopause transition, and post-menopause.

**Reproductive**

During the reproductive stage, the menstrual cycle is regular. There may be variability earlier on following menarche, as well as slight changes to flow (lighter or heavier) and duration (shorter or longer) before entering the next stage. Supportive lab work may be done during the late reproductive stage and typically conveys low to variable levels of FSH when blood is drawn between days 2 and 5 of the cycle.

**Menopausal Transition**

The menopausal transition stage is where perimenopause primarily occurs. Earlier on in this stage, the menstrual cycle undergoes variability in its duration, such that the length of time between menstruations differs by 7 or more days each cycle. As this stage progresses, women typically experience amenorrhea for a period of 60 or more days. Once this occurs, women are in the late menopausal transition, which takes place for 1 to 3 years. Supportive lab work may show a variable elevated FSH level earlier on in the menopausal transition stage and an elevated FSH greater than 25 IU/L later on. The FSH greater than 25 IU/L is due to the decline of estrogen. At this stage, women may likely experience vasomotor symptoms.

**Post-Menopause**

During the post-menopause state, menstruation has ceased. Perimenopause continues until there has been no menstruation for 1 year. Then early post-menopause continues for another year. Supportive lab work conveys that this interval of time is characterized by an elevated FSH level greater than 40 IU/L, in which women are more likely to experience vasomotor symptoms. As the post-menopause stage progresses, lab work indicates that FSH levels stabilize and antral follicle count is very low. After 3 to 6 years, women enter into late post-menopause, in which they may experience more symptoms of urogenital atrophy.