Systemic vasculitides are clinically heterogenous, so it is not possible to outline a single algorithm for evaluating patients suspected of vasculitis. A thorough medical history, a complete physical examination, and laboratory testing would be helpful as vasculitides are rare, but the potential exists for severe organ damage or death. Vasculitis should be a consideration in patients who present with systemic or constitutional symptoms in combination with evidence of single or multiorgan dysfunction. Suspicious findings in history include fevers, unexplained weight loss, nasal crusting, epistaxis, upper airway disease, ocular inflammation, acute foot drop or wrist drop, limb claudication, unexplained hemoptysis, hematuria, and a history of hepatitis. Suspicious findings on the physical exam include sensory or motor neuropathy, palpable purpura, nasal septal perforation, absent, diminished, or tender pulses, bruit, and blood pressure discrepancies.

Specific clinical abnormalities that, when present alone or in combination, should suggest a diagnosis of vasculitis. These include palpable purpura, pulmonary infiltrates and microscopic hematuria, chronic inflammatory sinusitis, mononeuritis multiplex, unexplained ischemic events, and glomerulonephritis with evidence of multisystem disease.

In this activity, the discussion will focus on GCA and ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV).

Most common clinical manifestations for patients with GCA include fevers, weight loss, malaise, headaches, visual symptoms like amaurosis fugax, unilateral or bilateral vision loss, diplopia, jaw claudication, vertigo, and scalp tenderness. Atypical manifestations include throat pain, large artery disease, aortic dissection, neurologic signs like peripheral neuropathy, transient ischemic attack, stroke, myocardial infarction, delirium, etc.

AAV can affect any organ system, and symptoms usually depend on organ system involvement with different types of vasculitis. With GPA, patients can present with inflammation of the upper airway, epistaxis, sinus inflammation, and inflammation of the trachea or nasal cartilage, leading to saddle nose deformity. Eye and orbital inflammation are common in GCA and MPA as well. Pulmonary involvement in GCA, MPA, and CSS can present as causing hemoptysis, nodules, pleuritis, and alveolar hemorrhage. Neurologic manifestations in patients with AAV include peripheral neuropathy, sensorineural hearing loss, and CNS vasculitis. Glomerulonephritis (GN) can present early in the disease in about half of the patients with AAV.