Platelets are responsible for the formation of thrombus after endothelial injury, which is vital in maintaining normal hemostasis. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GP IIb/IIIa) inhibitors prevent platelet aggregation by blocking glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors; thus, they found application in the management of coronary artery disease (CAD). The available GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors include tirofiban and eptifibatide. These agents, along with aspirin, are used in patients with unstable angina with PCI within 24 hrs. Tirofiban and eptifibatide are non-antibody receptor inhibitors. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had approved GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors for the management of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) such as unstable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial infarction requiring percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) within 24 hrs. GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors were the drug of choice in ACS patients during the plain balloon angioplasty era when complications secondary to post-procedure acute thrombosis were frequent.

Currently, the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association recommends the use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors in ACS when the patient is allergic or cannot tolerate P2Y12 inhibitors (Class I) or in patients who are undergoing PCI have received P2Y12 inhibitors but at higher risk for thrombus and in those who are allergic to aspirin (Class IIa). Before the advent of stents and the use of dual antiplatelet therapy, a prolonged infusion (12 to 24 hours) of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor was the recommendation for ACS patients. However, currently, a short-duration infusion or bolus-only methods are recommended to avoid bleeding complications.