Several adjuncts can be used to identify a splenic injury.

**Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST)**

The focused assessment with sonography for trauma (**FAST**) examination can rapidly identify free intraperitoneal fluid in patients with blunt abdominal trauma. The FAST examination is particularly useful in the evaluation of hemodynamically unstable patients.

This examination consists of four acoustic windows (pericardiac, perihepatic, perisplenic, pelvic). FAST is considered positive if the fluid is identified as an anechoic band or a (black) rim around the spleen. Ultrasound is a sensitive modality to identify hemoperitoneum. However, it is important to remember that an intraperitoneal hemorrhage is not always present, especially when the splenic capsule remains intact. Up to 25% of splenic injuries do not exhibit intraperitoneal hemorrhage. Hemodynamic instability in the presence of free fluid on FAST examination requires rapid surgical evaluation and immediate laparotomy.

Certain injuries, such as intraperitoneal injuries involving bowel and mesentery and retroperitoneal organ injuries, may not be identified by the FAST exam due to the presence of hemoperitoneum.

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

The CT scan is the diagnostic modality of choice for detecting solid organ injuries. CT scans may show disruption in the normal splenic parenchyma, surrounding hematoma, and free intra-abdominal blood. CT scan is also useful in identifying solid organ vascular injuries. A contrast-enhanced CT scan should be obtained to determine the density difference between the splenic parenchyma and hematoma. This will also identify associated injuries. It is important to obtain good imaging as the suboptimal scan may result in a missed diagnosis of subtle splenic injuries.