**Antigen Avoidance**

The cornerstone of treatment is prompt diagnosis and eradication of the causative agent from the patient’s environment. The condition is typically reversible if diagnosed early in the course of the disease and complete antigen avoidance can be achieved. This is often very difficult due to social, economic or occupational reasons. Using respiratory protective equipment has been associated with a reduction of specific IgG antibodies but has not been shown to be an effective strategy in preventing chronic HP. Complete antigen avoidance should be advised by whatever means necessary to prevent progression of disease and fibrosis.

**Glucocorticoids**

There have been no controlled trials for the treatment of HP, but glucocorticoids have been shown to hasten initial recovery particularly in patients with severe symptoms, abnormal lung function tests or extensive radiographic involvement. Glucocorticoid treatment has not shown any benefit for long-term outcomes. Inhaled steroids have not shown to be effective as a replacement for systemic glucocorticoids. Patients are usually started on 0.5 to 1 mg/kg per day (up to a maximum of 60 mg per day). Usually treated with a high dose for 1 to 2 weeks and then tapered over 2 to 4 weeks with the goal of using the lowest dose and shortest duration of glucocorticoids.

**Alternative Agents**

Patients with chronic HP and in progressive cases, adjunctive agents are used. Azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil have been used as steroid-sparing agents and also in resistant cases. They have been shown to improve pulmonary function testing when used in patients with chronic HP with persistent symptoms despite antigen avoidance and glucocorticoid therapy. Rituximab and leflunomide have also been reported in small studies to be of benefit. In cases of chronic HP with progressive fibrosis, antifibrotic agents have been suggested.

**Lung Transplantation**

Lung transplantation has been shown to have excellent medium-term survival in patients with advanced lung disease due to HP when compared to patients with UIP/IPF. There is some evidence that patients with chronic HP are less susceptible to bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS).