**Medical Management**

In infants, the mainstay of treatment is supportive to help reduce pulmonary vascular resistance and hypoxemia. In symptomatic infants with either heart failure or cyanosis, inhaled nitric oxide can help reduce pulmonary vascular resistance.

Heart failure symptoms are treated with loop diuretics and guideline-directed medical therapy. Patients with supraventricular tachyarrhythmias can be managed with rate-control medications such as beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, or if ineffective, class I or III antiarrhythmic such as procainamide (class I), or sotalol or amiodarone (class III) to treat paroxysmal atrial fibrillation when present. However, most of these patients usually need definitive ablative therapy for supraventricular arrhythmias

**Surgical Management**

Newborns with Ebstein anomaly are usually observed initially, as the PVR decreases. If surgery is required, a systemic to-pulmonary artery shunt is commonly used to relieve cyanosis and secure adequate pulmonary and systemic circulations. Due to high periprocedural mortality surgery is usually delayed and avoided in newborns unless they meet specific indications.

Indications for surgery in neonates with Ebstein include:

- Right heart failure due to severe tricuspid regurgitation

- A cardiothoracic ratio > 80%

- Severe cyanosis with dependency on PGE1

- Mechanical ventilation dependency

In children and adults with Ebstein, indications for surgery include:

- Heart failure symptoms

- Evidence of RV dysfunction or progressive RV dilatation

- Evidence of paradoxical emboli

- Arrhythmias refractory to medical treatment

- Cyanosis with saturations < 90%

- Severe tricuspid regurgitation

Surgical therapy consists of tricuspid valve repair along with patch closure of the atrial septal defect. For atrial arrhythmias in these patients, catheter ablation carries risks of paradoxical emboli, given the high incidence of interatrial shunts. As a result, the recommendation is to undergo a surgical bi-atrial Maze procedure while getting surgical repair of the tricuspid valve.

Multiple surgical approaches have been described for the treatment of Ebstein anomaly. The da Silva cone reconstruction, which is the currently preferred surgical approach in young children and adults, consists of mobilizing the anterior and posterior leaflets from their anomalous attachments, rotating the detached edges of these leaflets clockwise, and suturing them to the septal edge of the anterior leaflet at the level of the tricuspid valve annulus.

**Catheter Interventions**

In patients whose tricuspid valve is still functional and thus, are not candidates for surgical valve repair but have a secundum atrial septal defect amenable to transcatheter device closure, and/or tachyarrhythmias due to atrial tachycardia or supraventricular tachycardia, can be treated in the cardiac catheterization laboratory.

**Prophylactic Management**

Infective endocarditis antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for patients with Ebstein anomaly and cyanosis and following surgical repair with prosthetic cardiac valves; prior to dental procedures.

Experts suggest using oral anticoagulation for patients with Ebstein anomaly and atrial fibrillation or evidence of paradoxical embolus.