Alveolar macrophages also are found in higher numbers higher in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) collected from the lungs of patients who smoke and those with COPD. The macrophage count obtained by lavage is found to be four to six times greater in smokers than nonsmokers. Apart from this, alveolar macrophages are morphologically different and contain a higher amount of harmful pigment and free radicals in smokers than in non-smokers.

Alveolar macrophages are involved in interstitial pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), a condition in which lung tissue is replaced by fibrotic tissue. Fibroblasts are absent in healthy lung tissue but have been found in the BAL fluid of the IPF.

In some studies, fibroblasts are considered a subset of alveolar macrophages as they express the same monocyte surface markers such as CD11b and CD14. Surfactants are phospholipids produced by pneumocytes that prevent the collapse of alveolar walls during expiration. Another function of alveolar macrophages is to remove excess surfactant and thus maintain homeostasis. Alveolar macrophages require stimulation from a signaling molecule known as granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) to clear excess surfactant. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a spectrum of autoimmune diseases in which antibodies are formed against GM-CSF, halting the function of alveolar macrophages thus building up excess surfactant. A hereditary form of PAP is a rare condition that presents in children between the ages of one and 10 years, resulting from the mutation of GM-CSF receptors on alveolar macrophages