The diagnosis of hydrocephalus is usually made using a combination of clinical signs, radiological imaging, and CSF pressure readings. Clinical features of hydrocephalus are influenced by the patient’s age, cause, location of the obstruction, duration, and rapidity of onset.

Acute hydrocephalus is a life-threatening condition and can result in brain herniation, transtentorial herniation of temporal lobe or herniation of the cerebellum into the foramen magnum, with the clinical picture of a dilated and nonreactive ipsilateral pupil, autonomic dysfunction, loss of brain stem reflexes and coma. It requires immediate neurosurgical intervention to relieve the pressure.

Congenital hydrocephalus is usually present at birth. An unusually large head is a significant sign of congenital hydrocephalus. There are many more symptoms associated with congenital hydrocephalus like tense and bulge fontanelle, a disjunction of sutures, thin and shiny scalp with prominently visible veins, stiff arms, and legs prone to contractions, “the setting sun” outlook (pupils of the eyes may be close to the lower eyelid), breathing difficulties, poor feeding, the unwillingness of the infant to bend or move their neck or head, delayed developmental stages. A “cracked pot” sound on percussion of the skull is the so-called Macewen sign.

Patients may present with delayed growth and sexual maturity, high-pitched cry, irritability or drowsiness or both, possible vomiting and seizures. Failure of upward gaze is due to pressure on the tectal plate and is of supranuclear origin. In severe untreated forms of hydrocephalus, other elements of dorsal midbrain syndrome (Parinaud syndrome) may be seen.

Acquired hydrocephalus can occur at any age. Symptoms include headache, neck pain, nausea, explosive vomiting, drowsiness, lethargy, irritability, seizures, confusion, disorientation, blurred vision, diplopia, urinary and bowel incontinence, gait instability, balance problems, lack of appetite, personality changes, and memory problems.

The classic Hakim triad of NPH consists of gait problems, dementia, and urinary incontinence. Signs and symptoms of NPH may take months or years to develop. The classic gait impairment consists of a wide-based gait. With disease progression, it may lead to the point of apraxia; patients may not know how to take steps. Muscle strength is usually normal, but reflexes may be increased with or without Babinski response. Frontal release signs may be present at late stages, including sucking and grasping reflexes.