Platelet transfusion can be associated with complications. These complications can be immune-mediated, such as febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reaction (FNHTR), allergic/anaphylaxis, TAGvHD, transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI), post-transfusion purpura, transfusion-related immunomodulation (TRIM), platelet refractoriness or non-immune mediated such as transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO), physical injury, sepsis, viral infection transmission, hypotensive reaction.

**Febrile Non-Hemolytic Transfusion Reaction (FNHTR)**

FNHTR is a relatively common complication with a frequency of 4% to 30%. It is characterized by a temperature rise of 1°C or more within the first 4 hours of transfusion, which resolves within 48 hours, there can be associated with nausea, vomiting, dyspnoea, and hypotension.

**Allergic and Anaphylaxis**

An allergic reaction is similar to FNHTR, and its frequency is between 0.09% and 21%. It manifests as pruritus, urticaria, or systematically as bronchoconstriction and is seldom associated with fever. Pathogenesis is heterogeneous in origin ranging from proteins, antibodies, and cytokines to BRM released during storage.

Anaphylaxis can occur when the patient is IgA deficient and has antibodies against it, and receives IgA-containing platelets, and this occurs 1 in 50,000 transfusions. Diagnosis is made clinically, and it is an emergency. It can be prevented by giving washed platelets or platelets obtained from IgA-deficient donors.

Allergic reactions can be minimized by depleting plasma in platelets.

**Transfusion-associated Graft vs. Host Disease**

This a rare but fatal complication characterized by fever and multiple systemic manifestations such as skin, gastrointestinal tract, liver, and others. It is caused by the transfusion of viable lymphocytes that get a favorable environment in the recipient, where they engraft and proliferate, subsequently attacking the host tissues. It can occur between 1 to 6 weeks from transfusion and occurs in an immunocompromised host, those with congenital T-cell defects, a population with low genetic diversity (homozygous HLA), or first-degree patient relatives. Symptoms involve multiple organs such as skin, the intestine, liver, and suppression of bone marrow. Diagnosis is that of exclusion and requires molecular methods of testing apart from microscopic features seen. This can be prevented by the irradiation of platelets.

**TRALI**

TRALI is another rare complication associated with the development of respiratory failure after ruling out other possible causes. Mainly caused by the transfusion of antibodies in the plasma from the donor against HLA or human neutrophil antigens. An example is a platelet donated by a multiparous woman. TRALI occurs within 6 hours of transfusion. These patients develop acute worsening respiratory symptoms with characteristic features such as hypoxemia: PaO/FIO 300 mmHg or more with oxygen saturation of less than 90%. All other causes of acute lung injury are ruled out before considering TRALI. It can be minimized by reducing plasma in platelets transfused, such as the use of PAS.

**Post Transfusion Purpura**

A rare syndrome with a sudden drop in platelet count within 1 to 21 days of platelet transfusion, it is a self-limiting condition associated with wet purpura. Believed to be caused by autoantibody formation as a complication of platelet transfusion.

**Transfusion-related Immunomodulation**

The presence of leukocytes and biologic response modifiers released during storage have been implicated in immunomodulation. TRIM leads to a modified response of TH1/Th2 T-cells, which predisposed the patient to infection and delayed recovery from surgery. This can also be prevented by prestorage leukoreduction and depleting plasma from platelets.****

**Platelet Refractoriness**

This occurs when post-transfusion platelet recovery is not as expected. Though multiple causes can be there, ranging from immune to non-immune, a multi-transfused patient can develop antibodies against specific HPA(human platelet antigens) or HLA antigens. These antibodies are implicated in platelet refractoriness.

**Transfusion Associated Circulatory Overload**

This adverse reaction is more likely in the pediatric group and patients with cardiac insufficiency. Slow transfusion with close monitoring in the risk group is recommended

**Physical Injury**

This is possible at the site of intravenous access, which can cause complications like hematoma or nerve injury.

**Sepsis and Bacterial Infection**

Platelet concentrates are stored for up to 5 days at temperatures 22 to 24 degrees C. This temperature is favorable for the growth of bacteria like Staphylococcus aureus and gram-negative bacteria. Possible sources of infections can be improper cleansing of the donor phlebotomy site or if a donor has asymptomatic bacteremia. The risk of infection to the patient ranges from 0.14% to 1.41% with platelet transfusion. Pathogen reduction technology has been used to minimize infections in plasma and platelets.

**Transmission of Viral Infection**

All blood donations are screened for HIV, HCV, and HBV, with other virus screening depending on the region. There remains a residual risk of transmission, as not all donors in the window period are detected. There is a possibility of transmission of infection by other viruses that are not routinely screened in the blood bank, more so of emerging infections. Pathogen reduction technology has been used to reduce this risk, but it’s not effective against all types of viruses.

**Hypotensive Reaction**

Patient on ACE inhibitors who receive bedside leukoreduction is at risk of hypotension. Exposure of the blood component to the negatively charged surface of the filter produces vasoactive bradykinin-related peptides, and this occurs within 5 minutes of transfusion. With ACE inhibitors present in the patient, these peptides are not metabolized, leading to hypotension. A proper history of medications before transfusion is important.