Patients typically present with symptoms of Dressler syndrome 1 to 6 weeks following the initial damage to the pericardium. The most commonly encountered symptoms include

- fever

- malaise/generalized weakness,

- pleuritic chest pain

- irritability

- decreased appetite

- Palpitations/tachycardia

- dyspnea (with or without hypoxia)

- arthralgias

Though most patients tend to present with a temperature between 100.4 F and 102.2 F (measured orally), occasional reports of temperatures as high as 104 F have been noted. Not all patients will appear concomitantly ill, and the fever generally will subside within 2 to 3 weeks.

Children with Dressler syndrome may complain of chest pain that is worse with inspiration or while lying down. Emesis often occurs in children with Dressler syndrome who have a risk of impending cardiac tamponade.

On physical examination, patients with Dressler syndrome are often tachycardic with a pericardial friction rub heard on auscultation. This characteristic pericardial friction rub may disappear. This can be secondary to either improvement in or worsening of accumulation of pericardial fluid and, therefore, cannot be used predictively. Additionally, patients may present with pulsus paradoxus (greater than 10 mmHg decrease in blood pressure with inspiration and decreased pulse amplitude palpated on the radial artery).

Finally, some patients with Dressler syndrome may exhibit signs of pneumonitis (e.g., a cough, decreased oxygen saturation, fever). The pulmonary component to symptoms ranges from minimal with no pulmonary complaints to significant respiratory distress with large pulmonic effusions.