Once the diagnosis of pneumothorax is suspected, airway, breathing, and circulation should be secured according to standard EMS protocol. Emphasis should be focused on placing the patient on high-flow oxygen, as it relieves hypoxia and decreases the size of the pneumothorax. Through the administration of high-flow oxygen, a nitrogen gas pressure gradient helps to reabsorb some of the intrapleural air.

If the patient is hypotensive or showing signs of hypoperfusion, then providers should initiate temporizing treatment for tension pneumothorax. Open chest wounds should have a sealable dressing placed over them with a one-way air valve to prevent air buildup. This one-way valve can be created by applying an occlusive dressing and taping on three sides. The EMS provider should perform needle decompression on the chest wall to release encased air. Also, patients presenting with cardiac arrest or pulseless electrical activity with suspected pneumothorax should be needle decompressed by the emergency provider. Needle decompression should be performed in the second or third intercostal space, just superior to the rib in the midclavicular line using a 14 gauge needle in adults or an 18-gauge needle in children. Also, needle decompression can be attempted in the fourth or fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line. The location of the intercostal blood supply is located just inferior to each rib, so this area should be avoided. Inserting a needle medial to the midclavicular line increases the chances of injuring the mediastinal vessels.