Any suggestion of early-onset sepsis (qSOFA or SIRS criteria) should initiate the acquisition of blood, stool, and wound cultures, as well as samples for complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, lactic acid, coagulation panel, and arterial blood gas. Appropriate fluid resuscitation, vasopressor support, and invasive monitoring should not be delayed pending testing and definitive diagnosis. Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) can complicate V. vulnificus infection early. Elevated WBC with a left shift and the presentation of early band forms are indicative of acute infections and may be markers for sepsis. Abnormal clotting studies, decreased platelets, increasing creatinine may presage MODS. Elevated CPK is seen with muscle necrosis. Decreased WBC (<4000) or decreased core temperature (<36 C) may indicate severe sepsis.

Clinical suspicion or history of underlying hepatic disease, diabetes, malignancies, AIDS, or other immunosuppressive syndromes should trigger the ordering of targeted lab studies. CT or MRI imaging is useful in identifying underlying necrotizing fasciitis and myonecrosis. These may show swollen tissues, foci of an abscess, or fluid collections. These studies may also be used for guided drainage procedures.

Recently a rapid stool PCR assay was introduced, which can identify all three Vibrionaceae (cholera, parahaemolyticus, and vulnificus) as well as a multitude of other known enteric pathogens. Norovirus, Rotavirus, Astrovirus, Sapovirus, Clostridia difficile, Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, E. coli, including EPEC and ETEC, Yersinia, Cryptosporidium, Giardia lamblia, Entamoeba histolytica, and Cyclospora are all included in this multiplex PCR panel. A recent multicenter evaluation of the QIAstat GIP found a sensitivity of 98% (CI 96% to 99%, p<0.05) in detecting pathogens.

Skin lesions, abscesses, bullae, and necrotic ulcers should be cultured and gram-stained. V. vulnificus will stain as a gram-negative rod.

Real-time PCR testing of blood samples and wound exudate for V. vulnificus has shown almost 100% sensitivity and specificity in detecting the bacillus.  Also, elevated real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for V. vulnificus DNA loads in the blood is predictive of increased mortality. Elevated TNF-alpha levels on admission blood were also correlated with higher mortality.