The workup for vasomotor rhinitis should include skin testing and/or serum-specific IgE antibodies. As a diagnosis of exclusion, vasomotor rhinitis will typically have a negative skin test and serum antibodies for relevant allergens. Nasal cytology can provide information about cell types composing the mucosa and helps to identify the presence of inflammatory markers. Scrapings from the inferior turbinate, nasal lavage, or nose blowing can provide epithelial cells for analysis. The presence of 5 to 25 eosinophils in high-powered fields is compatible with the diagnosis of nonallergic rhinitis with eosinophilia syndrome (NARES), a subset of nonallergic rhinitis.

Distinguishing vasomotor rhinitis from allergic rhinitis can be challenging. Symptomatology and physical exam findings are often very similar. Allergic rhinitis is a nasal disorder associated with an allergen exposure that induces an IgE-mediated inflammatory response. The timing of symptoms provides clues into differentiating between non-allergic rhinitis and allergic rhinitis. Seasonal peaks of pollen, places with pet dander and/or mold spores, geographical relocation leading to symptoms can point to a diagnosis of allergic rhinitis. The patient’s history provides essential information for diagnosis. Allergy testing is a clinically useful tool to identify a specific allergen and treat the condition. Allergy testing alone can be nonspecific, but in conjunction with a thorough history and physical exam is valuable in distinguishing between vasomotor rhinitis and allergic rhinitis.

A detailed history will often elucidate an infectious process from an allergic or nonallergic one. Infectious rhinitis also presents with similar symptomatology to nonallergic rhinitis: nasal purulence, postnasal drip, facial pressure and pain, fever, sore throat, etc. The three cardinal symptoms of infectious rhinitis include purulent nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, and facial pressure, and are often present for ten days or longer. A fever may or may not be present depending on the acuity of the infection, and is only 50% sensitive and specific.