The safety of treating more than four headaches in a month has not been studied. Sumatriptan adverse reactions are dose-dependent. Individuals with nausea and vomiting can receive a subcutaneous injection compared to oral; however, subcutaneous administration correlates with increased adverse events.

Sumatriptan oral tablets might cause non-coronary vasospastic reactions, such as gastrointestinal vascular ischemia and infarction (presenting with abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea), peripheral vascular ischemia, splenic infarction, renal infarction, and Raynaud's syndrome. Sumatriptan can cause adverse central nervous system events outside migraine attacks. It can cause mild sedative effects such as sleepiness or fatigue. It also causes a significant increase in the EEG alpha power compared with the placebo. In a study measured by the Yale-Brown Scale, sumatriptan worsened patients' symptoms with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Sumatriptan can also cause a transient rise in blood pressure, but the increase in blood pressure is the same as anticipated during moderate exercise.

Subcutaneous injection administered by the physician results in transient stinging at the injection site in most subjects; however, toleration is better when the subjects use the auto-injector. Sumatriptan can induce angle-closure glaucoma, but this is a rare event and should receive correct and prompt treatment to prevent visual loss. A common adverse drug reaction of subcutaneous sumatriptan includes injection site reaction (bleeding, bruising, erythema). In addition, intranasal sumatriptan leads to dysgeusia and nasal discomfort.

Sumatriptan works earlier and more completely compared to a combination of caffeine and ergotamine, but sumatriptan is associated with a higher rate of recurrent headaches. Rothner et al. reported a case of facial nerve palsy in a teenager using sumatriptan nasal spray. Hossein et al. described a recurrent paresis of the superior division of the oculomotor nerve occurring after subcutaneous administration of the drug. A thorough evaluation is necessary for patients with acute onset of a severe headache, and sumatriptan requires careful administration since it could precipitate RCVS (reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome) or aggravate cerebral vasoconstriction. Vascular imaging should be performed after several days if sumatriptan-induced reversible vasoconstriction syndrome is suspected. Sumatriptan can also cause sensations of tightness, pain, pressure, and heaviness in the precordium, throat, neck, and jaw of non-cardiac origin.