**Monro-Kellie Doctrine**

According to the Monro-Kellie theory, the cranial compartment is incompressible and its contents (blood, CSF, and brain tissue) are in an internal milieu of volume balance; thus, an increase in one must be offset by a reduction in the other two components. The Monro-Kellie hypothesis is based on a pressure-volume relationship that tries to keep the non-compressible aspect of the skull in a steady state.

**Historical Perspective**

Alexander Monro Secundus mentioned in his 1783 monograph that the brain tissue volume and the blood volume remained constant and emphasized the necessity to egress blood equal to any foreign liquid injected inside the skull. George Kellie reinforced the assumption that the total amount of blood flowing within the skull remains constant. John Abercrombie was primarily responsible for propagating this doctrine across the medical world. However, they were unable to finish the hypothesis owing to the lack of information about the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system during that period. They disregarded the CSF's involvement, if not its mere existence, in ICP control. In his book 'On the disorders of the cerebral circulation,' Burrows disputed the conception of the skull as a perfect sphere and the concept of invariability of blood volume and claimed a significant function of the CSF in the control of ICP. He mentioned that cerebral blood volume could change, but only to the benefit or harm of the brain and CSF volumes.

Harvey Cushing established the clinical and physiological significance of this doctrine in the twentieth century by confirming Burrows' findings of the CSF's role in intracranial dynamics and the existence of three volumes that operate as compensators for volume depletion or insertion inside the skull.

**Role of the Doctrine in Intracranial Hypertension**

According to Monro and Kellie's 1783 pressure-volume equations, when intracranial pressure (ICP) rises, vascular blood and CSF are moved as part of a dynamic counterbalance to maintain normal pressure inside the inelastic skull, while brain tissue stays unaffected. Under pathological circumstances, if one of these compartments expands or a fourth one forms (as a result of a mass-effect lesion such as a tumor or hematoma), one or more of the other components must contract to prevent any subsequent rise in ICP. Since the parenchymal compartment is incapable of compensating for a rapid increase in ICP, CBV and CSF are responsible for this process. CSF is the primary buffer mechanism; it migrates into the perimedullary subarachnoid area until displaced brain structures obstruct its flow. The vascular compartment's capacity to correct for ICP is activated later and consists of lowering the CBV through jugular drainage.

**Role of Doctrine in Intracranial Hypotension**

In individuals with intracranial hypotension, a decrease in CSF volume may result in a compensatory increase in brain and/or intracranial blood volume. Since the amount of brain tissue is typically regarded constant, compensation would occur through an increase in blood volume, notably venous blood, because veins are more adaptable than arteries.

**Interaction Between Cerebral Volume and ICP**

Cerebral compliance is defined as the volume required to produce a specific change in pressure. Thus, cerebral compliance may be defined as the cranial vault's adaptive ability to increase volume.

- **Initial stage**(phase 1): This stage is characterized by a high level of brain compliance and a low ICP. Despite the volume rise, there is no evidence of a subsequent increase in ICP (CSF and CBV nullify the increase in volume).

- **Transition stage**(phase 2): This stage is characterized by poor brain compliance and a low ICP, although the latter gradually increases.

- **Ascending stage**(phase 3): This stage exhibits poor or non-existent compliance with elevated ICP (beginning decompensation). Compensatory processes become inactive, and tiny volume changes result in significant pressure increments.

**Limitations of the Doctrine:**

- No mention of the role of CSF in the brain's adaptive physiology

- No mention of the effect of gravitation on the volume and pressure inside the skull

- It does not hold up in children with open fontanels.