There are different types of modifications that exist, such as methylation and acetylation. In methylation, a methyl group (CH3) gets added to a specific nucleotide sequence. Acetylation involves adding an acetyl group (CH3CO) to a specific nucleotide sequence. These modifications can be either activating or repressing for a particular gene, depending on where the alterations occur.

There are regions upstream of transcription start sites on the promoter regions of DNA called “CpG islands,” which are a collection of cytosine and guanine dinucleotides. The cytosine molecule is the site of DNA methylation. After methylation, a transcription factor that usually binds to that specific promoter will be unable to recognize the sequence that it normally binds to since the modification conceals it. Therefore, DNA methylation turns off transcription of specific genes by acting at the promoter region.

On the other hand, chemical modifications of histones cause conversation of chromatin from euchromatin to heterochromatin states and vice versa. Each histone is a protein with an N terminus (the amino end) and a C terminus (the carboxy end). These histone tails protrude from the surface of the chromatin and comprise about 25 to 30% of the mass of the histone, providing a greater surface area for chemical modifications to occur on. Both of these tails contain many lysine amino acids, which are the primary sites of histone methylation and acetylation. Histone methylation, in which a methyl group gets added to a lysine, is generally repressive and supports the heterochromatin state. Histone acetylation, in which the mechanism is the addition of an acetyl group to a lysine, is activating and supports the euchromatin state.