# Introduction

The putamen, combined with the globus pallidus, forms the lentiform nucleus; and with the caudate nucleus, it shapes the striatum, which is a subcortical structure that forms the basal ganglia. The putamen is involved in learning and motor control, including speech articulation, language functions, reward, cognitive functioning, and addiction.

# Structure and Function

The basal ganglia are a group of deep brain nuclei that divide into the putamen, caudate nucleus, nucleus accumbens, and globus pallidus. The putamen, caudate, and nucleus accumbens collectively form the striatum. Different parts of the striatum receive afferent input from different cortical regions and project their efferent output to the cortex through the thalamus.

The striatum plays a significant role in various brain functions, including motor control and learning, language, reward, cognitive functioning, and addiction through the functional cortico-striato-thalamocortical neural pathways.

The putamen is also involved in modulating the sensory as well as motor aspects of pain.

# Embryology

From cephalic to caudal, the primary three primitive brain vesicles differentiate to the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain). By the end of the fifth week of gestation, the prosencephalon differentiates to the telencephalon (cerebral hemispheres) and the diencephalon.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The putamen receives its vascular supply from the perforating branches of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and middle cerebral artery (MCA), also known as the lenticulostriate arteries, with variations of the predominance of either ACA or MCA supply.

- Perivascular drainage pathways

- Glymphatic system

- Meningeal lymphatic vessels, olfactory/cervical lymphatic drainage route and their association with CSF circulation

- The connection among different components of the brain lymphatic drainage system

The putamen, as a portion of basal ganglia, has a similar drainage system as the whole brain with structural differences in perivascular spaces compared to the cerebral cortex.

# Nerves

The putamen, situated in the striatal/dorsal portion of the basal ganglia, functions in harmony with the cortex through a complex cortico-basal ganglia network to perform and produce complex behaviors. It appears to be the coordination between separate functional channels and integration across a function that directs a coordinated behavior to exhibit and also be modified based on external and internal stimuli.

# Physiologic Variants

Volumetric changes of the putamen have been linked to different neurologic and psychiatric disorders. Researchers have conducted large imaging meta-analyses to establish the physiologic variation of the putamen to make it comparable to its pathologic condition and determine its physiological state. It has been proven in almost all studies that the volume of putamen declines in size in both genders by aging.

# Surgical Considerations

The putamen, as a common structure affected by a hypertensive cerebral hemorrhage, elicits a large range of presentations based on the magnitude of the initial blood extravasation.

There are different surgical approaches chosen based on the hematoma size and position, the patient's hemodynamical stability, underlying etiology, resource availability, and the surgeon's preference.

Despite all the disagreements over the timing of surgery and appropriate surgical approach (craniotomy, stereotactic or endoscopic) for hematoma evacuation, the most important factor to keep in mind is fast decompression to control the intracranial pressure, not the complete evacuation.

# Clinical Significance

The putamen is a common site for hypertensive bleed as well as infarction. The corkscrew pattern of lenticulostriate vessels (increases intraluminal pressure), as well as the formation of Charcot-Bouchard aneurysm secondary to fibrinoid necrosis, predisposes to its rupture.

Bilateral putaminal hemorrhages, though rare, can occur in cases of bleeding disorders, methanol intoxication, metastatic lesions, and amyloid angiopathies.

There can be a multispectral presentation in cases with small putaminal strokes, and these can categorize as follows

- Mixed motor and sensory

- Pure motor

- Pure sensory

- Ataxic hemiparesis

- Dysarthria with clumsy hands

- Hemiballism and hemichorea

There can be aphasia due to putaminal bleed in the dominant hemisphere, whereas spatial and hemineglect occur in right putaminal bleeds.

The putamen correlates with a broad spectrum of movement disorders and psychiatric diseases. The most well-known movement disorder related to putamen is Parkinson disease, which is the result of dopamine depletion in the posterior putamen and presents with rigidity, tremor, ataxia, and impairment of balance. Changes in putamen volume link to a large number of diseases.

# Other Issues

Interesting findings regarding the involvement of the putamen in various physiological states

- Studies have demonstrated that the total volume of bilateral putamen in bilinguals is greater compared to monolingual individuals.

- A recent neuropsychological study evaluated the volumes of subcortical structures regarding the ability to recognize facial expressions of emotions. The results elicited the putamen volume inversely correlated with the recognition of the fearful face.

- The putamen, along with some other brain regions, mainly orbitofrontal cortices in the left and right hemispheres, is involved in the recognition of a mother’s own infant versus other infants, demonstrating the significant role of striatal structures in maternal behavior and love.