More common adverse effects include drowsiness, dizziness, diarrhea, grogginess, and decreased ability to concentrate. Other less common adverse severe events include abnormal thoughts and behavior, including aggressive behavior, confusion, agitation, hallucinations, worsening of mood issues including worsening depression, suicidal thoughts, memory loss, and severe allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis.

Most Z-drugs appear to have a dose-dependent effect on anterograde amnesia, supposedly explained by the agonistic action on the GABAA receptors. Zaleplon is less likely than zolpidem and zopiclone to cause anterograde amnesia.

Patients have reported adverse effects of parasomnia, amnesia, and hallucinations associated with Z-drugs.

Given this, the FDA has further issued a contraindication for the use of Z-drugs in patients who have previously experienced these kinds of behaviors while on these medications. There is also a concern since most of the patients on these medications already have a lower threshold, and these Z- drugs can exacerbate those symptoms.

Psychomotor effects of the Z-drugs are a significant concern in the elderly as their impact becomes exaggerated secondary to altered pharmacokinetics. They are listed in the Beers List for medications to avoid in the elderly. Nocturnal awakening, which is common in the elderly, also predisposes them to balance issues, and an increased risk of falls may get pronounced when they are on these drugs. The residual psychomotor effects from Z-drug use include dizziness, postural instability, ataxia, and falls. Falls can occur at higher than usual dosages or when mixed with other psychoactive substances.

Psychomotor impairment during midnight awakening is more pronounced with Z-drugs with a longer half-life like zopiclone and zolpidem, rather than with zaleplon. Zaleplon has not shown this impairment with doses up to 10 mg at bedtime.