Injury to the flexor digitorum profundus tendon distal to the lumbrical origin by rupture or amputation can cause lumbrical plus finger, which manifests as a paradoxical extension of the interphalangeal joints when attempting to flex the finger.

Since the flexor digitorum profundus tendons to the small, ring, and long fingers have a common muscle belly, the tendons may not be able to move independently if they are interconnected with the separate tendon that runs to the index finger. This condition is known as quadrigia, in which one set of tendons will not have full excursion if the other set of tendons becomes shorter. Quadrigia results in the patient not being able to make a full fist and an associated weak grasp.

Rupture of the flexor digitorum profundus tendon from the distal attachment insertion at the base of the distal phalanx is known as jersey finger. Jersey finger is a zone 1 flexor tendon injury that involves the ring finger in 75% of cases. The flexor digitorum profundus muscle belly is in maximal contraction during forceful distal interphalangeal joint extension. Classification of a flexor digitorum profundus tendon avulsion injury is based on the Leddy and Packer classification, which stratifies the injuries based on the level of tendon retraction and presence of a fracture.  Patients presenting with jersey finger may complain of pain and tenderness over the volar distal finger with no active flexion of the distal interphalangeal joint. At rest, the affected finger lies in slight extension relative to the other fingers, and the proximally retracted flexor tendon may be palpated along the flexor sheath. Jersey finger is a common cause of quadrigia, in which a greater than 1 cm advancement of the flexor digitorum profundus tendon increases the risk of distal interphalangeal joint flexion contracture.

In anterior interosseous nerve injury, the patient will be unable to perform an “OK” sign with the thumb due to paralysis of the flexor pollicis longus and the flexor digitorum profundus muscles to flex the DIP joint.