- Hyaluronic acid

- Botulin toxin

- Modified lip repositioning

- Gingivectomy

- Orthodontic treatment

- Orthognathic surgery

The treatment modalities vary according to the etiology of the gummy smile - the key is accurately recognizing the cause of the pathology. In some cases, the gummy smile results from more than one factor, e.g., vertical maxillary excess and hypermobile lip, and a combination of techniques can be implemented. Less invasive treatment options include botulin toxin injection and a newer alternative: hyaluronic acid injection; the surgical management ranges from gingivectomy, modified lip repositioning, and orthognathic surgery, which is reserved for severe VME as it carries high rates of morbidity and requires hospitalization.

**Gingivectomy**

Crown lengthening with or without bony resection, called gingivectomy, removes the excessive gingival tissue and reinsert the attachment apparatus.

The decision of performing only gingivectomy or gingivectomy with osseous resection depends on the amount of biological width. A gingivectomy is sufficient to resolve a gummy smile when there are adequate osseous levels and attached gingiva, and the gingival tissue from bone to gingival crest is more than 3 mm.

**Lip Repositioning Surgery**

Lip repositioning surgery aims at narrowing the vestibule and reducing the gingival display by restricting the muscle pull.

Lip repositioning surgery is indicated in mild VME and upper hypermobile lip.

**Hyaluronic Acid Infiltration**

In 2018, Diaspro et al.

The infiltration point corresponds to the most cranial part of the nasolabial fold, at around 3 mm lateral to the wing of the alar cartilage (the same anatomical site where it is commonly recommended to inject botulin toxin).

Hyaluronic acid infiltration is a valid technique that can be an alternative to botulin toxin injection, although it is not appropriate for all cases of excessive gingival display.

**Botulin Toxin A Injection**

Botulin toxin induces muscle paralysis by inhibiting the presynaptic release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction.

The toxin infiltrates into the levator labii superioris alaque nasi (LLSAN) muscles and levator labii superioris on both sides of the face.

**Orthognathic Surgery**

Dentoalveolar or orthognathic surgery becomes the only alternative in some severe cases of vertical maxillary excess: LeFort osteotomy, or maxillo-mandibular reposition, combining LeFort and Obwegeser mandibular osteotomy and surgical orthodontic treatment.