**FDA-labeled Indications**

**Angina**

Nadolol has approval for long-term use in angina pectoris. Nadolol showed significant symptomatic improvement in exercise tolerance and exercise duration and was more effective than propranolol in slowing heart rate at rest and during exercise.

**Hypertension**

Nadolol is a second-line agent in the treatment of hypertension. Nadolol should not be used as the first line in treating hypertension in the absence of indications to start beta-blockers. Nadolol can reduce blood pressure significantly with minimal cardio-depressant effect.

**Non-FDA Approved Indications**

**Atrial Fibrillation**

Nadolol can be used to attain heart rate control in the acute management of atrial fibrillation. Oral beta-blockers, including nadolol, are also widely used as the primary therapy for chronic atrial fibrillation. Nadolol also decreases relapse in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

**Ventricular Arrhythmias due to Congenital Long QT Syndrome**

The AHA recommends using nadolol in patients with ventricular arrhythmias due to congenital long QT syndrome to reduce adverse cardiac events and syncope and the prevention of sudden cardiac death.

**Ventricular Premature Beat**

Nadolol is an option for the suppression of premature ventricular beats. This effect is due to bradycardia-induced prolongation of the RR interval.

**Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia**

Nadolol effectively reduces the incidence and severity of ventricular arrhythmias in patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Nadolol appears to reduce ventricular arrhythmia by reducing the catecholamine effect on the beta receptor.

**Supraventricular Tachycardia**

Nadolol is effective in the termination of acute onset supraventricular tachycardia in those patients where the vagal maneuver is not an option or failed and did not respond to adenosine.

**Gastroesophageal Variceal Hemorrhage Prophylaxis in Patients with Liver Cirrhosis**

Clinicians use nadolol to prevent and manage gastroesophageal varices and variceal hemorrhage in patients with liver cirrhosis.

**Thyrotoxicosis**

Nadolol produces clinical improvement in patients with thyrotoxicosis by reducing palpitations, nervousness, and tremor. It produces this effect by reducing the level of free thyroid hormone in the bloodstream. It also reduces the T3 levels and increases the reverse T3 levels.