The initial settings for PSV are dependent on the indication. In a patient breathing at a consistent respiratory rate, setting a higher driving pressure will result in higher peak flow and a higher tidal volume. Minute ventilation will depend on the patient’s respiratory rate and inspiratory effort. After initiating PSV, the patient should be directly observed for several minutes to ensure that the goals of ventilation, oxygenation and patient comfort are met. Pulse oximetry, vital signs, the patient’s subjective response to therapy, and arterial blood gas (ABG) testing can be used to determine the effectiveness of the PSV settings.

**Non-invasive Ventilation in Patients with Acute Respiratory Failure**

It is worth noting that many ventilators designed to provide non-invasive ventilation set an inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) and expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP) rather than a driving pressure and PEEP. Thus, the driving pressure is the IPAP minus the EPAP. It is important to set the driving pressure at a minimum of 5cmH2O to provide adequate tidal volume. Initial settings for non-invasive PSV are as follows: IPAP 10-15cmH20, EPAP 5-10cmH20, FiO2 100%.

**Invasive Ventilation for Patients with Acute Respiratory Failure**

Mechanical ventilators designed to provide invasive ventilation set a driving pressure, PEEP, and FiO2. PSV is not an initial mode of ventilation for intubated patients due to respiratory depression following sedation given during intubation. Patients on control modes of ventilation who are meeting ventilation and oxygenation goals are candidates for PSV. Initial driving pressure should be tailored to approximate the patient’s tidal volume on control mode. PEEP and FiO2 settings should be at the same values as the previous control mode. For example, a patient on pressure control ventilation with a respiratory rate of 12, driving pressure of 15cmH20, PEEP of 8 cmH2O, and FiO2 of 40% would transition to PSV mode with driving pressure of 15 cmH20, PEEP of 8 cmH2O, and FiO2 of 40%.

The advantage of PSV for intubated patients is an improvement in comfort and ventilator synchrony. As the patient has more control over flow delivery and respiratory rate in PSV mode, there tends to be less ventilator desynchrony from patient-triggered breaths during inspiration or passive exhalation and less voluntary movement of the diaphragm in opposition to delivered breaths. Sedation can often be decreased for patients breathing comfortably on PSV mode, allowing for more awake interaction and participation in physical therapy.

**Spontaneous Breathing Trial**

PSV mode is used during a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT) to determine a patient’s readiness for extubation.