A precise pathogenetic mechanism linking the development and progression of liver disease in patients with CF has not been well identified. Classically, the development of liver disease in patients with CF has been attributed to ductal cholestasis caused by CFTR dysfunction. CFTR is a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) dependent chloride channel expressed in secretory epithelial cells of various organs. In the liver, CFTR is expressed by the cholangiocytes (bile duct cells) lining the luminal membrane of the biliary epithelium.

Normally, cholangiocytes serve to perform an array of intracellular transport functions that regulate the transmembrane chloride and bicarbonate reabsorption, thereby determining the secretion and composition of bile.

Besides its function on the regulation of transmembrane chloride conductance, newer studies have demonstrated the effect of CFTR in relation to toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) activity. CFTR normally regulates TLR4 dependent inflammatory responses by inhibiting the activity of Rous sarcoma oncogene cellular homolog (Src), which is a non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase. Mutations in the CFTR gene lead to self-activation of Src and phosphorylation of TLR4, resulting in the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines resulting in disruption of the epithelial barrier by inflammatory cells and translocation of bacteria into portal circulation resulting in chronic inflammation and fibrosis.

CFTR dysfunction affects the gut microbiota causing intestinal inflammation and symbiosis with an overall increase in pathogenic bacteria favoring translocation of bacteria into the portal circulation.