The success of buprenorphine/naloxone is dependent on patient education. Thus, the patient should be educated about the drug's addiction potential and avoidance of other CNS sedatives at each visit. Family members, or caregivers, should receive education about the signs and symptoms of buprenorphine toxicity. Patients and/or caregivers should also receive instruction regarding actions to take in the event of depressed respiration.

The pharmacists need to work in concert with the prescriber to ensure proper dosing, monitor drug interactions, and counsel the patient on appropriate administration. Nursing should be alert for signs of adverse effects or poor compliance. All professionals must be aware of the potential for diversion and keep the entire interprofessional team informed should any possible signs present. Given the nature of the therapy when using buprenorphine, interprofessional team coordination, and communication are essential to driving improved patient outcomes.

To ensure that there is continuity in care, healthcare workers need to communicate all aspects of the treatment with each other at the weekly meeting to ensure that there are no omissions or overlaps in the dosing of buprenorphine. This approach is vital following a patient's discharge from jail or a healthcare institution. The outcomes depend on compliance with therapy. However, because many patients with substance misuse disorder have other significant comorbidities, the overall effectiveness is poor, marked by remissions and relapses.