To this date, no definitive cure is available for Fahr disease, as with other neurodegenerative disorders, and management is focused primarily on symptomatic relief.

(A) **Symptomatic Management**

- Antileptic therapy for seizures

- Pain killers for headaches

- Anticholinergic for urinary urgency or incontinence

- SSRIs for depression, obsessive-compulsive behaviors, and anxiety

- Neuroleptics for movement disorders

(B) **Caution**

The use of carbamazepine, benzipenes, and barbiturates in patients with Fahr disease can lead to increased gait dysfunction. Psychiatrists and neurologists should implement great caution with the use of anti-depressants and anxiolytics as the threshold for side effects with these drugs is low in patients with Fahr disease. Lithium has been known to increase seizure risk in the patients, and neuroleptics can exacerbate extrapyramidal symptoms.

(C) **Physical Rehabilitation**

- Maintaining range of motion and prevention of contractures with the range of motion exercises, passive and facilitated stretching

- Strengthening underutilized muscle: Usually, antigravity extensors muscles are at risk of weakening in neurological disease. A general conditioning program and using exercise machines may be helpful.

- Improving postural stability: Correcting sitting postures, patients with basal ganglia dysfunction can do balance training while doing activities of using stairs, reaching out, etc., and progressive activities from wide to a narrow base, static to dynamic or low to higher cognition.

- Gait dysfunction: Assess for assisted devices, auditory cues like counting, or visual cues like laser attached to canes.

- Symptomatic improvement: Relaxation techniques for anxiety, deep brain stimulation for hyperkinetic disorders, soft tissue release for spasticity, or sensory stimulation in basal ganglia dysfunction.

(D) **Genetic Counseling**

The disease is transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion. The family history is not fully conclusive. Sometimes the family history of a patient is negative because of the early death of a parent before the disease became evident, or it may have a late-onset in the parent or reduced penetrance.

There are no demonstrated medical benefits for screening the relatives. Predictive testing in the form of brain CT scan (calcium deposits precede clinical manifestations by years) and molecular testing (if PDGFB, PDGFRB, XPR1, SLC20A2 pathogenic variant has been identified in proband) can be offered to asymptomatic first-degree relatives (>18 years) after weighing the ethical and psychosocial conditions because no curative treatment is available. Testing individuals >18 years can help them in decision making in regards to their marriage, family planning, career, and finance. Testing is usually not recommended in individuals <18 years considering social issues, discrimination and anxiety in future, negative impact on parent-child or sibling-child relationship, and uncertain CT scan predictability as penetrance is age-dependent.

(E) **Prenatal Counseling**

Prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic diagnosis are possible for high-risk pregnancy in which PDGFB, PDGFRB, XPR1, SLC20A2 pathogenic variant has been detected in the proband.

(F) **Surveillance**: Annual neurologic and neuropsychiatric assessment.