**FDA Approved Indications**

Prazosin is FDA approved for the treatment of hypertension alone or in combination with other antihypertensive agents. However, this medication is not a first-line agent based on current evidence-based guidelines.

**Non-FDA Approved Indications/Off-label Use**

Prazosin has therapeutic use for benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) associated nightmares, Raynaud phenomenon, pheochromocytoma, and scorpion envenomation.

Prazosin was the first alpha antagonist used for BPH. The medication is traditionally used multiple times per day, and as a result, longer-acting alpha antagonists have come to market, which provides convenience.

Prazosin may reduce PTSD-associated nightmares. A systematic review by Kung et al. suggests that there is a benefit as compared to placebo in reducing the frequency and duration of nightmares.

Prazosin has been used in primary Raynaud phenomenon with 1mg three times daily. This intervention showed benefit in some of the patients that received treatment.

Pheochromocytomas cause catecholamine surges and perioperative use of an alpha antagonist can help abate the associated symptoms. Traditionally, clinicians have used phenoxybenzamine; however, comparison among phenoxybenzamine, doxazosin, and prazosin has shown varying results.

A study in India on pediatric patients, with a sample size of 36, suggests that using prazosin in combination with standard therapy lowers mortality of envenomation from a scorpion sting.