There is no effective antiviral therapy for Japanese encephalitis. Management is limited to supportive care with intravenous (IV) fluids and antipyretics. Anticonvulsants may be required for seizure control. Survivors often have poor neurologic outcomes requiring long-term care due to neurologic devastation and ongoing psychiatric symptoms. Up to 30% will suffer permanent intellectual, behavioral or neurologic issues ranging from paralysis, recurrent seizures or inability to speak or perform independent activities of daily living.

Since there is no effective treatment prevention is critical. This is best accomplished by avoiding mosquito bites entirely. Even very short periods of outdoor exposure can result in bites, so proper protective clothing that includes long sleeves, long pants, socks, and closed-toe shoes should be worn.  Pant legs can be tucked into socks to prevent bites to exposed ankles. Transmission is common during the warmer months and mosquitoes may bite through very thin clothing so treating clothing with repellents containing permethrin, DEET or other EPA-registered insect repellants will reduce this risk. Transmission is most frequent when mosquitoes feed, between dawn and dusk, so outdoor activities during this period should be avoided. Travelers should sleep in air-conditioned spaces or use mosquito nets or screens to prevent bites during sleep.

A safe, effective vaccine exists and may be administered in a short-course regimen. The vaccine is quite underutilized. The current Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommendations for the use of the Japanese encephalitis vaccine are as follows:

- The vaccine is recommended for travelers who plan to spend one month or more in endemic areas during the transmission season. This includes travelers who will be based primarily in urban areas.

- The vaccine should be considered for short-term travelers (less than one month) who are planning to spend substantial amounts of time outdoors in rural or agricultural areas, those who plan to participate in outdoor activities and those staying in areas without air conditioning, screens or bed nets. It should also be considered in travelers to an area with a known outbreak and those with uncertain destinations, activities, and duration of travel.

- The vaccine is not currently recommended for travelers with short-term travel plans to urban areas only.