Over time, many different risk factors have been proposed with the intent of helping the proceduralist predict and prepare for challenges that may arise during the induction of anesthesia. One such tool is the Mallampati score. In 1983, Dr. Seshagiri Mallampati, an anesthesiologist, hypothesized that the size of the base of the tongue relative to the oropharyngeal cavity could predict difficult intubation.

A relatively large tongue would mask the palatoglossal and palatopharyngeal arches and the uvula, while a relatively small tongue would not. To test this hypothesis, he enrolled 210 healthy adults undergoing direct laryngoscopy to undergo preoperative evaluation of the relative size of the tongue.

Each patient was seated and asked to open their mouth and maximally protrude the tongue without phonation. Patients were divided into one of three classes based on visible structures. These classes were:

- Class I - fully visualize the faucial pillars, soft palate, and uvula.

- Class II - full visualization of the faucial pillars and soft palate. Unable to visualize the uvula as it is obscured by the base of the tongue

- Class III - Only the soft palate could be visualized

Dr. Mallampati categorized difficult intubation as an intubation attempt that provided less than adequate exposure of the glottis during direct laryngoscopy. He found a significant correlation between this clinical sign (now better known as the Mallampati Score) and the intubation difficulty.

Just two years after this publication, another team of Samson and Young added a fourth classification (now known as class IV) in which neither the faucial pillars, uvula, or soft palate could be visualized. On a larger scale, these researchers found that in all seven cases of difficult intubation among obstetric patients, each was either Mallampati class III or IV.

In 1998, class 0 was introduced to describe the infrequent observation of any part of the epiglottis on a pharyngoscopic view. They claimed in all cases, endotracheal intubation was easy.

The modified Mallampati score used routinely today is as follows:

- Class 0: Any part of the epiglottis is visible

- Class I: soft palate, uvula, and pillars are visible

- Class II: soft palate and uvula are visible

- Class III: only the soft palate and base of the uvula are visible

- Class IV: only the hard palate is visible

To properly assess a patient's Mallampati score, the patient is seated in the upright position and opens their mouth while maximally protruding their tongue. Classically this exam is done without phonation.