Differential diagnosis should be made with other cutaneous lesions that may present with petechiae, purpura, or localized hyperpigmentation related to hemosiderin deposition such as other DPPs.

Purpura annularis telangiectodes (Majocci disease), is characterized by annular, purpuric lesions and erythematous punctate lesions, and central clearing with slight atrophy.

Touraine, a variant of Majocci’s Disease, exhibits a purpura telangiectatic arciform, with fewer lesions, larger, and irregularly arciform.

Pigmented purpuric dermatosis of Gougerot and Blum is characterized by red-brown lichenoid papules that tend to fuse in plaques in older men.

Eczematoid like purpura of Doucas and Kapetanakis is usually bilateral, intensely itchy, and characteristically has eczematous features. Mild lichenification could be present and has a fluctuation course with spontaneous improvement occasionally.

Stasis dermatitis exhibits eczematous patches that progress to red-brown or brownish colored irregular patches, associated varicosities, and leg edema, although both entities could coexist.

Leukocytoclastic vasculitis hemorrhagic bullae and brown pigmentation consistent with hemosiderin deposits, the palpable nature of the lesions, and the histopathology report differentiate it from SD.

Nonaccidental injury exhibit a purpuric patch that evolves and resolves in a few weeks.

Mycosis fungoides can be challenging to distinguish from SD, histopathology detection in the epidermis of large groups of lymphocytes, or many lymphocytes in the spinous layer favor mycosis fungoides.

Scurvy purpuric lesions could be confused, other features in scurvy such as perifollicular purpura, coiled hairs, bleeding gums, and dietary history of reduced vitamin C intake supports scurvy.

Drug hypersensitivity reactions due to rituximab, carbamazepine, meprobamate, bufexamac, chlordiazepoxide, furosemide, nitroglycerin, vitamin B-1, or medroxyprogesterone acetate.