**Medical Management**

Control of ICP is a mainstay of treatment with severe neurological insult.

Level 2 evidence for:

- Avoidance of hypotension (SBP <90 mmHg), as this doubles mortality.

- Prophylactic anti-epileptics reduce early seizures but do not reduce late post-traumatic seizure rates. Late is defined as after one week of the injury.

Level 3 evidence for:

- Secure the airway if GCS 8 or less.

- Avoidance of hypoxia (Saturations <90%), which, if combined with hypotension, triples mortality.

- Target PaCO2 of 5 kPa. Prophylactic hyperventilation has been shown to be detrimental to outcomes; however, it may be used as a temporizing measure in patients with deteriorating neurology. This may be if the patient is being transported to the CT scanner or theatre for intervention.

- The neuromuscular blockade should be avoided routinely; however, it may be used when sedation alone is inadequate in reducing a monitored intracranial pressure (ICP). Routine use of sedation and paralysis increases the incidence of pneumonia and causes longer ICU stays.

- Mannitol or hypertonic saline are useful agents when there are clinical signs of transtentorial herniation, such as pupillary dilatation.

**Surgery**

Patients with traumatic head injuries often have other associated injuries. Over half of the patients with a GCS of 8 or less will have injuries to other organ systems, and 5% will have spinal fractures. 25% of these patients will have an intracranial lesion that may be amenable to surgical evacuation, a so-called ’surgical lesion.’

Surgical options include CSF diversion via ventricular drainage. Hematoma evacuation is the mainstay of treatment for extradural and subdural hematomas. Although, intracerebral hematomas can be managed this way as well; a decompressive craniectomy can also be utilized to allow space for the brain to expand without resulting in herniation syndrome.

In regards to timing, Mendelow et al. showed that extradural hematoma should be evacuated within two hours of neurological deterioration to improve mortality and functional outcome.