Approximately 28 million Americans older than 12 suffer from migraine headaches. Around 18% of women and 6% of men in the United States suffer from migraine headaches. About 38% of those with a migraine headache need to be on preventive therapy, whereas only 3% to 13% of migraine sufferers use preventative treatment.

Prophylactic migraine treatment should be considered in patients with more than three monthly episodes or at least eight headache days in one month.

**Prophylactic Treatment for Migraine Headache**

It is important to determine the frequency, duration, and severity of headaches and any triggers that may precipitate them. All patients with migraine headaches should maintain a headache diary to determine the frequency, severity, and duration of headaches. It also helps identify any triggers that can cause a migraine headache. Some common triggers include environmental factors such as noise, odor, medications (like oral contraceptive pills, hormone replacement therapy, and H2-receptor blockers), food (cheese, wine, chocolate), and behavioral factors such as sleep deficit or excessive sleep.

**1. Pharmacological Therapies for Migraine Prevention**

Various medications are available for migraine prophylaxis and prevention. Choosing the right agent is essential. The efficacy, side effects, contraindications, cost, and compliance should be considered when deciding on the right agent. It is also crucial to consider comorbid medical conditions and drug interactions. Efficacy of treatment can be assessed only after a 2 to 3-month trial; a full trial may take up to 6 months. Always start at a low dose and titrate up slowly. Monotherapy is preferred as there are no significant benefits of using more than one drug unless indicated for other comorbid conditions. Patients should be re-evaluated, and medications preferably discontinued after one year, even if they show improvement in symptoms. Successful therapy is defined as a reduction of migraine attacks by at least 50%.

Migraine attacks are associated with neuronal activation, which is thought to be due to cortical spreading activation (CSD) or a brainstem generator. Preventive medications inhibit CSD through various mechanisms, such as blocking calcium and sodium channels, blocking gap junctions, and inhibiting matrix metalloproteinases.

- 
**Beta-blockers**

Propranolol is the most common and one of the most effective first-line medications used for migraine prophylaxis.

Other beta-blockers that can be used are timolol, atenolol, and metoprolol.

- 
**Anticonvulsants**

Depakote and sodium valproate are two anticonvulsant drugs used for migraine prophylaxis.

Topamax is another drug used as a first-line treatment option for migraine prophylaxis.

Gabapentin has little efficacy for migraine prevention. The recommended dose is from 1200 to 2400 mg per day. Common side effects include somnolence and dizziness.

- 
**Antidepressants**

Amitriptyline is shown to be beneficial in migraine prevention.

Another antidepressant that is probably effective in migraine prevention is venlafaxine.

- 
**Calcium-channel Blockers**

The efficacy of calcium channel blockers in the preventive treatment of migraine is weak. Verapamil has shown weak efficacy in preventing migraines. It is used as one of the second-line pharmacological options for migraine prophylaxis.

Flunarizine is a nonspecific calcium channel blocker that has shown evidence of some efficacy. It is not available in the United States.

- 
**Angiotensin Blockers: ACE-Is/ARBs**

Lisinopril and candesartan have shown some weak efficacy for migraine prevention.

- 
**Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)**

They are used for the prevention of menstrual migraine. Start treatment a few days before the anticipated start of the menstrual cycle and continue for the first few days.

- 
**Triptans**

Zolmitriptan, frovatriptan, and naratriptan have shown benefits in the short-term prevention of menstrual-related migraines. They are started several days before the expected onset and continued for 5 to 6 days.

- 
**Calcitonin Gene-related Peptide Therapy**

U.S. FDA approved Erenumab for the treatment of migraine prevention in May 2018. It is a monoclonal antibody that mediates the transmission of migraine pain by binding to the calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor. It comes as a monthly subcutaneous injection. Common side effects include injection site reaction, constipation, and cramps.

- 
**Others**

Some other medications that have some but little efficacy for migraine prevention include magnesium, vitamin B2, coenzyme Q10, and botulinum toxin.

Methysergide and phenelzine are used as last resort for severe and refractory cases. Use for more than six months can cause cardiac and retroperitoneal fibrosis.

- 
****Alternative Therapies****

Butterbur and feverfew are two herbal medications available for use for migraine prophylaxis. Studies have failed to prove any substantial benefit with feverfew. Butterbur extract made from underground parts of the plant has been endorsed by the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society to reduce the frequency of migraines.

****2. Non-pharmacological Therapies****

Identifying and modifying the trigger, if possible, is important. It is helpful to maintain headache diaries to identify triggers and follow responses when triggers become modified. Therapies that can help prevent migraines include relaxation, acupuncture, massage, cognitive behavior therapy, and biofeedback techniques.

**2012 AHS/AAN Guidelines for Migraine Prevention in Adults**

**Medications are Divided into Three Groups**

- Level A (medications that have proven effectiveness and should be offered to patients who require migraine prophylaxis): Sodium valproate, valproic acid,

- Level B (medications that are probably effective and should be considered for migraine prevention): Amitriptyline, naproxen, fenoprofen, ketoprofen, ibuprofen, magnesium, atenolol, venlafaxine, riboflavin, histamine.

- Level C (medications with possible effectiveness and may be considered for migraine prevention): Candesartan, carbamazepine, lisinopril, pindolol, nebivolol, clonidine, cyproheptadine, coenzyme Q10.

The following is a list of medications as per the current guidance for migraine prophylaxis:

**First-line agents (established efficacy based on evidence):**

- Divalproex

- Propranolol

- Timolol

- Topiramate

- Frovatriptan

- Metoprolol

**Second-line agents (probably established efficacy based on evidence):**

- Amitriptyline

- Atenolol

- Nadolol

- Naratriptan

- venlafaxine

- Zolmitriptan

**Other medications (less evidence-based) for episodic migraine prevention:**

**Possibly Effective**

- Candesartan

- Carbamazepine

- Lisinopril

- Nebivolol

- Nicardipine

**Conflicting or Inadequate Data to Support or Refute the Use**

- Bisoprolol

- Fluoxetine

- Gabapentin

- Nifedipine

- Nimodipine

- Pindolol

- Protriptyline

- Verapamil

**Ineffective**

- Acebutolol

- Lamotrigine

- Oxcarbazepine

- Telmisartan