The oropharyngeal membrane (where the face will eventually form) can already be seen on the embryo as early as week three, between the enlarging areas of the heart and the brain.

The oropharyngeal membrane is surrounded by several prominences (processes) that will eventually give rise to the face.

- The frontonasal process rises from the neural crest and covers the forebrain. It will give rise to two medial nasal processes and two lateral nasal processes. The lateral nasal processes develop lateral to the nasal placode. The medial nasal processes develop medial to the nasal placode and will eventually fuse at the midline to form the inter-maxillary process. By the tenth week, the inter-maxillary process will form the nasal bridge and the philtrum of the upper lip.

- The tissues of the 1st (mandibular) pharyngeal arch originates from mesoderm and the neural crest. The 1st arch will give rise two mandibular processes and two maxillary processes (proximal part of the arch). The maxillary processes will later form to a pair of palatal processes.

The nasal placodes are two ectodermal thickenings that appear at the end of the fourth week on the frontonasal processes.

Additionally, the eyes initially are located on the side of the head but eventually face forward as the rest of the head grows and develops. By the end of developmental week seven, the embryo will have facial features that have a human appearance.

**Palate:**

The palate is the tissue between the nasal and oral cavity and is separated in the primary and secondary palates. By the 6th week, the inter-maxillary segment is formed from the fusion of the paired medial nasal prominences and the maxillary prominences. This epithelium will make the core of the primary palate, and posteriorly the nasal epithelium will touch the oral epithelium making the oro-nasal membrane.[2] Importantly, in the posterior region, the membrane will form an opening called the primitive choana that connects the oral cavity to the nasal cavity. The primary palate will also give rise to the anterior triangular one-third from the incisive foramen and include the four upper incisors.

The secondary palate forms the rest of the hard palate and all of the soft palate and develops during the seventh and eighth weeks. It forms from two palatal shelves (medial outgrowths of the maxillary processes) that grow downward and parallel to the tongue. By the eighth week's end, the two secondary palatal processes fuse and with the primary palate to form the definitive palate. During this same time, the nasal septum grows to separate the left and right nasal passages, and its inferior portion will combine with the definitive palate.

It follows that if proper formation and fusion of the palates are necessary for healthy development and disruption may cause a cleft palate. Significant mechanisms that can cause a cleft palate include growth retardation and mechanical obstruction.

**Pharyngeal apparatus:**

Formed during the fourth week of development, consists of a mesenchymal tissue covered externally by ectoderm and internally by endodermal epithelium.

The pharyngeal clefts are produced from the approximation of ectodermal tissue between consecutive arches, while the pharyngeal pouches form from the approximation of endodermal tissue between consecutive arches. Derivatives of the apparatus relevant during facial development are described below:

- **Pharyngeal cleft:**originate from the ectoderm. The first pharyngeal cleft gives rise to the external auditory meatus of the ear canal. The rest of the pharyngeal clefts form the cervical sinus.

- **Pharyngeal pouch:**originate from the endoderm. The first pouch becomes the endoderm that lines the auditory and eustachian tubes, middle ear, and the inner layer of the tympanic membrane. The second pouch contributes to the middle ear.

- **Pharyngeal arch:**Originate from the mesoderm. The following arches develop into the varying adult structures.

1st: maxillary (V2) and mandibular (V3) branches of the trigeminal nerve (CNV), mandible, incus, malleus, muscles of mastication, maxillary artery, sphenomandibular ligament, the Meckel cartilage.

2nd: Facial nerve (CNVII), stapes, the body of the hyoid, lesser horn of hyoid, muscles of facial expression.

3rd: Hypoglossal nerve (CNIX), the body of the hyoid, greater horn of hyoid, stylopharyngeus muscle.

4th: superior laryngeal branch of the vagus nerve (CNX), thyroid, cricoid, arytenoid, cuneiform cartilage, levator veli platini, cricothyroid muscle.

6th: recurrent branch of the vagus nerve (CNX), thyroid, cricoid, arytenoid, cuneiform cartilage, larynx intrinsic muscles.