The upper extremity is attached to the axial skeleton by way of the sternoclavicular joint. The three joints of the pectoral girdle are the sternoclavicular joint, coracoclavicular joint, and acromioclavicular joint. The bones of the pectoral girdle are the clavicle, scapula, and humerus. The clavicle is positioned immediately superior to the first rib. The distal aspect of the clavicle articulates with the acromial process and coracoid process of the scapula, forming the acromioclavicular joint and coracoclavicular joints, respectively. The most important structural ligaments of the shoulder joint are the glenohumeral ligaments and the coracoacromial ligament.

The scapula is a flat bone with multiple muscular attachments. The glenoid fossa serves the articulating function with the humeral head at the lateral angle of the scapula. The glenohumeral joint is the point of articulation between the humerus, the scapula, and the thoracic cavity, with the latter occurring through the scapulothoracic articulation. The scapula connects to the clavicle via the coracoclavicular joint and the acromioclavicular joint.

The coracoclavicular joint is strengthened by the coracoclavicular ligament that unites the undersurface of the clavicle to the coracoid process of the scapula. The acromioclavicular joint is at the lateral aspect of the clavicle and does not provide much structural support to the shoulder joint. The coracoid process, the acromion process, and the coracoacromial ligament provide peripheral reinforcement for the shoulder joint along with the muscles of the shoulder. The shoulder muscles and peripheral structures of the shoulder function to increase the structural integrity of the shoulder joint.