Although the side effects of aripiprazole are similar to those found in typical and atypical antipsychotics, the degree of extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) and metabolic syndromes are less due to receptor specificity. EPS such as akathisia, parkinsonian features such as resting tremor and shuffling gait, acute dystonic reactions, oculogyric crises, opisthotonos, and tardive dyskinesia are manageable with benztropine or sodium benzoate. Aripiprazole is associated with lower incidences of weight gain, hypercholesterolemia, glucose dysregulation, cardiovascular abnormalities, and hyperprolactinemia. Hyperprolactinemia may manifest as galactorrhea, gynecomastia in men, sexual dysfunction, amenorrhea, or off-cycle bleeding. Other possible side effects of aripiprazole include somnolence, nausea, vomiting, akathisia, and lightheadedness. Antipsychotics agent use requires caution in older adults because it can cause or exacerbate the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) or hyponatremia; thus, it is crucial to monitor sodium during initiation and dosage adjustment. Children and adolescents are more susceptible than older patients to experience EPS, weight gain, and other metabolic side effects. The FDA also recently identified an association between aripiprazole use and compulsive or uncontrollable urges to engage in sex, gamble, binge eat, and shopping.

Rare adverse effects may include neuroleptic malignant syndrome, liver function abnormalities and jaundice, seizures, and agranulocytosis. As with other antipsychotics, aripiprazole carries an FDA boxed warning for increased risk of cerebrovascular events and death in elderly patients with psychosis related to the major neurocognitive disorder and suicidal thoughts among children, adolescents, and young adults.