A significant number of patients with nephrolithiasis present to the emergency department with acute renal colic described as severe pain in the flank region, often associated with nausea/vomiting. In such cases, management of the pain is of utmost priority. Ketorolac can be given as 30 to 60 mg IV or IM loading dose followed by 15 mg every 6 hours. IV acetamenophen and lidocaine have also been used successfully for renal colic pain, but the standard therapy if ketorolac is unsuccessful remains IV opioids. Diclofenac in the dosage of 50 mg orally two or three times in a day can also be used for management.

The first step in the evaluation is to perform a dipstick and microscopic urinalysis and obtain a non-contrast CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis. A plain abdominal x-ray (KUB) is very helpful in tracking the stones over time and in the determination of radiolucency. A radiolucent stone is typically assumed to be made of uric acid unless there is information to the contrary. This can only be confirmed with a chemical composition analysis of the stone.

Urgent intervention with a percutaneous nephrostomy or ureteral stenting is indicated in the following situations:

- Obstruction and infection of the upper urinary tract

- Impending renal failure

- Intractable pain or vomiting

- Obstruction of a solitary kidney

In the most urgent or critical situations, a percutaneous nephrostomy is preferred to minimize manipulation of an infected renal unit.

Management of the uric acid stones is described below:

- **Lifestyle intervention:**The formation of uric acid stones is often associated with metabolic syndrome, diabetes and insulin resistance in many patients. Therefore, weight loss can be beneficial in the treatment of uric acid stones. Dietary changes in diminishing purine consumption in the form of meat protein can also decrease serum uric acid levels.

- **Fluid intake:**The American Urological Association recommends an intake of fluids sufficient to produce at least 2.5 liters of urine in a day in all stone formers. Urinary dilution inhibits the supersaturation of lithogenic products and thus prevents stone formation. However, this should be tailored according to the lifestyle, environment, and occupation of individuals. Certain beverages, including tea, coffee, wine, beer, and alcohol, may have chemicals that will increase stone risk, such as oxalate, that can mitigate their benefit of increasing urinary volume and dilution.

- **Medical dissolution therapy:**Explicit management of uric acid nephrolithiasis can be achieved by medical dissolution therapy. Alkalinization of the urine is the foundation of this treatment with the goal of making the urinary pH around 6.5. Achieving this pH even once a day is adequate for uric acid stone dissolution. Therefore, it is recommended that patients measure their urine pH once a day following the commencement of the treatment.  Ultrasound can be used to track the progress of therapy. Continuing treatment with alkalinizing agents is the recommended maintenance therapy for most uric acid stone formers.

Bicarbonate salts of sodium and potassium are generally used to alkalinize the urine. Potassium citrate therapy is the first-line medication available for uric acid stones. It is given in the dosage of 20 to 40 mEq once or twice in a day. However, it should be avoided in patients with reduced glomerular filtration and patients taking angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers. Sodium bicarbonate, being economical, has been used extensively for uric acid stones. However, it carries a high sodium load which can worsen hypertension, congestive heart failure, and cirrhosis due to fluid retention. Acetazolamide can prove useful in such cases as it is an inhibitor of bicarbonate excretion and leads to diuresis and alkalinization of urine, but it reduces urinary citrate excretion.

Theobromine found in cocoa products has been found to promote the alkalinization of urine. Theobromine has been witnessed to repress the formation of uric acid stones by hindering the nucleation method plus rebuilding the morphology of uric acid stones. Theobromine is thought to substitute the uric acid molecules in crystals, modifying them into potent molecules and minimizing their growth. Theobromine also inhibits the recurrence of stone formation post extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy.

Allopurinol is not routinely recommended for patients with uric acid calculi. It is only advised if the urine's alkalinization is not adequate or if there is hyperuricosuria or hyperuricemia.

The patient should have follow-up imaging studies to assess the location of the stone and detect any complications. The patient is also directed to strain the urine and retrieve the stone for chemical composition analysis. Expectant management can usually be done for 4-6 weeks. If the stone passes, additional follow up is done by 24-hour urine metabolic testing to begin specific kidney stone prophylactic treatment. However, if the stone is still present and has not moved, surgical intervention will be needed. Targeting the radiolucent stone may be difficult with only fluoroscopic guidance in shock wave lithotripsy, although this can be achieved by using retrograde pyelography. Ureteroscopy with laser lithotripsy is an efficient technique for surgical management of most uric acid stones requiring surgical intervention.