**Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT)**

Ablative doses of highly conformal short-course radiotherapy have been explored extensively in several settings, especially for use in the metastatic setting. Recent clinical trials have shown a survival benefit in patients with oligo metastatic (<5 metastasis) treated with radiotherapy (SABR COMET). The data for the use of SBRT in the setting of liver metastasis is encouraging. It offers a far less invasive approach to treatment with excellent local control and acceptable toxicity compared to hepatic resection or even other less invasive measures such as radiofrequency ablation and Trans arterial chemo/radioembolization (TACE/TARE). Local control rates at one year were 87% and 68% at three years, and overall survival of 84% at one year and 44% at three years.

Linac-based SBRT is one of the most common means of performing this technique, although proton therapy and dedicated SBRT systems such as Cyberknife (Accuray) are also available. The simulation must take into consideration respiratory motion. There are several tumor motion management techniques. A 4D CT planning scan allows for the tumor to be tracked as a function of the phase in the respiratory cycle to ensure that the planning target volume encompasses the tumor throughout the respiration. Alternatively, abdominal compression devices can be used in some patients to limit tumor motion. Respiratory gating or breath hold may also be used to limit the size of the target volume by only allowing radiation delivery during specific phases of the respiratory cycle. Fiducial markers placed into the tumor before treatment can also aid tumor tracking and targeting. Fusing other contrast-enhanced imaging studies such as diagnostic MRI or CT to the CT simulation is necessary for target delineation. Multiple static coplanar/non-coplanar fields or volumetric arc therapy (VMAT) can be utilized as a part of planning with the goal of creating a highly conformal plan with rapid dose falloff outside the planning target volume. Image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT) is essential for accurate targeting and can include kV or MV Cone Beam CT, kV fluoroscopy, or ultrasound. Dose and fractionation schedules vary but are typically 30 to 60Gy in 1 to 6 fractions, with the goal biologic equivalent dose (BED) should exceed 100Gy.

Dose constraints for normal structures such as normal liver parenchyma, kidneys, spinal cord, stomach, heart, and small bowel must be evaluated. Task Group-101, which was published by the American Academy of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM), and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines provide dose constraints for SBRT for 1, 3, and 5 fraction courses.

**Conformal Radiotherapy**

Lower doses and a more protracted radiation regimen may be necessary for situations where the liver tumors are too large to be treated with SBRT. These tumors are typically treated with 3D conformal radiation with doses ranging from 48-73Gy in 1.5-1.65Gy/fraction twice daily with a response rate of 60%.

**Whole Liver Radiation**

In contrast to the highly conformal and ablative doses delivered by SBRT, whole liver radiation is typically delivered as a low dose in patients with painful liver metastasis with a significant disease burden. This treatment modality has the advantage of being relatively easier to plan and execute, but it is strictly a palliative measure. There has been no documented survival benefit or synergistic effect when combined with chemotherapy. Patients selected for this type of treatment have limited life expectancy, significant disease burden, and/or have exhausted other treatment options. The treatment schedule is typically short, ranging from 1 to 3 fractions with a dose of 8 to 21Gy in 1 to 3 fractions, with 80% of patients reporting pain relief duration of 13 weeks.

**Trans-arterial Radioembolization**

Trans-Arterial Radioembolization (TARE) takes advantage of the liver’s dual blood supply using Yttrium-90 (Y-90) glass microspheres. An internal approach coupled with a Beta emitter such as Y-90 allows, which has maximal penetration of approximately 1cm and a short half-life (64.2 hours), is ideal because it minimizes dose to uninvolved liver parenchyma. There are two commercially available Y-90 systems; TheraSpheres and Sir-Shere. Eligible patients are those that are not candidates for resection, ECOG ≤ 2, and life expectancy exceeding three months. Contraindications to TARE include total bilirubin exceeding 2mg/dL, Childs Pugh C, ECOG 3+, >20% lung shunting, or a lung dose ≥ 30Gy in a single application.

After patient pre-selection, treatment planning will commence. This will include a diagnostic angiography in which micro aggregates of Tc-99m labeled albumin are then injected, which have a similar dispersion pattern to Y-90 microspheres and is monitored using a SPECT scan. During the planning phase, pulmonary shunting may be identified as vascular abnormalities. These issues may be corrected by embolization, but if they cannot, these would disqualify the patient from treatment. After treatment planning, dose calculations must be performed to determine the level of activity required. The calculations are dependent on the type of spheres being used. If using TheraSpheres, then the activity required is A = 120 (Gy) × M/[(1 - S) × 50], where M is the mass of the whole liver and S is the lung-liver shunt.

**Trans-arterial Chemoembolization (TACE)**

TACE has been investigated as well as a potential treatment for patients with chemorefractory metastatic colorectal cancer. It takes advantage of the same vascular properties of the liver as TARE. Most of the data is retrospective, showing disease stabilization in 40 to 60% of patients. A small prospective Phase III randomized trial comparing systemic FOLFIRI alone to FOLIRI with intra-arterial irinotecan eluting beads demonstrated a higher objective response rate and improved median survival.

**Hyperthermic Ablation**

The use of high temperatures (>60C) to ablate liver tumors can be accomplished by two techniques: Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) or Microwave ablation (MWA). Both techniques rely on heating tumor cells, causing denaturation of proteins, destruction of the cell membrane, and coagulative necrosis.

Radiofrequency ablation utilizes uninsulated electrodes through which alternating electrical current is passed through the patient at a frequency of 375 to 500 kHz. This allows for the development of ionic friction, thus generating heat. RFA is ineffective near major heat sinks such as large vessels, and there is a risk of thermal injury to the bile ducts, diaphragm, and bowel. In addition, there can be interference with cardiac pacemakers. Local recurrence rates range from 10 to 31% depending, but this is dependent on the size and location of the metastasis.

Microwave Ablation heats tumors through dielectric hysteresis of water molecules with frequencies ranging from 0.915 to 2.45GHz.