In addition to the surgical operability criteria and the comorbidity factors taking into account ASA classification (ASA score [American Society of Anesthesiologists] <3), hepatic and renal function and the cumulative dose of chemotherapy treatments must be considered.

- In gastric adenocarcinoma, peritoneal carcinomatosis is very common; even after radical surgery, cytoreduction surgery with CHIP seems to delay oncological progression without affecting long-term survival. The procedure remains in the experimental field and should be reserved for younger patients under the age of 60, who are active, with a PCI <10 and small nodules, without ascites, extraperitoneal metastasis, or hepatic invasion that has responded well to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

- According to a review of the literature and meta-analysis, cytoreduction surgery with HIPEC prolongs overall survival and up to eight years after the gesture in ovarian neoplasia with peritoneal carcinosis.

- In colorectal cancer: the peritoneum is the second site most common metastatic after the liver, about 7 to 15% of colorectal cancer patients have synchronous PC, and 4 to 19% will develop one afterward.

An improvement in patient prognosis has been noticed since the introduction of cytoreduction surgery with HIPEC and modern chemotherapy regimens (capecitabine, oxaliplatin, irinotecan) combined with immunotherapy (bevacizumab, cetuximab, panitumumab).

- Peritoneal pseudomyxoma and mucinous tumors of the appendix: Cytoreduction surgery (CRS)  with HIPEC has been well established as the only treatment for mucinous tumors with peritoneal dissemination, based on retrospective and comparative studies (Chua et al.).

- Mesothelioma: Mesothelioma is a rare tumor of peritoneal origin. Cytoreduction surgery combined with HIPEC improves mean survival by up to 4 years but with repeated procedures.