Acute compartment syndrome is a clinical diagnosis and needs prompt treatment. However, the following are done to evaluate further and to confirm the diagnosis.

- Radiographs should be obtained if a fracture is suspected

- Measurement of intracompartmental pressure is not required but can aid in diagnosis if uncertainty exists. Compartment pressures are often measured with a manometer, a device that detects intracompartmental pressure by measuring the resistance that is present when a saline solution is injected into the compartment. Another method employs a slit catheter, whereby a catheter is placed within the compartment, and the pressure is measured with an arterial line transducer. The slit catheter method is more accurate and allows for continuous monitoring. Its use is also recommended to measure all the surrounding compartments.

- The normal pressure within the compartment is between 0 mmHg to 8 mmHg.
- An **intra-compartmental pressure greater than 30 mmHg indicates compartment syndrome****and a need for fasciotomy.**
- When intra-compartmental pressure increases to within 10 mmHg to 30 mmHg of the patient's diastolic blood pressure, this indicates inadequate perfusion and relative ischemia of the involved extremity.
- The perfusion pressure of a compartment, also known as the compartment **delta pressure**, is defined as the difference between the diastolic blood pressure and the intra-compartmental pressure:
- delta pressure = diastolic pressure - measured intracompartmental pressure
- clinicians often utilize delta pressure less than or equal to 30 mmHg as indicative of the need for fasciotomy.

- Ultrasound with Doppler can be used to look for occlusion or thrombus.

- Elevations in creatine phosphokinase (CPK) may suggest muscle breakdown from ischemia, damage, or rhabdomyolysis.

- If rhabdomyolysis is being considered, renal function tests, urine myoglobin, and urinalysis should be done.
- If rhabdomyolysis is diagnosed, a chemistry panel is needed.

- Preoperative studies should, at a minimum, include a complete blood count and coagulation studies.