A ductal valve creates a unidirectional flow of saliva out of the gland, preventing bacteria from entering. However, this valve may sometimes become incompetent and result in ascending bacterial infection. Dehydration or drying medications, such as atropine, antihistamines, and psychotropic agents, which decrease salivary production and flow, can increase the risk of parotitis from either infectious or inflammatory causes. Sialolithiasis is a common condition where calculi formed from inorganic crystals can obstruct the gland duct, although less common in the parotid than submandibular glands due to serous rather than mucoid saliva. Bacteria trapped behind a high-grade obstruction can proliferate and result in acute suppurative parotitis.taphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and atypical infections, such as candida, should be considered.

In autoimmune parotitis (such as Sjögren or rheumatoid arthritis), an antigen-antibody complex is endocytosed into epithelial cells, processed into a human leukocyte antigen expressed on the cell surface, and recognized by specific CD4 T-lymphocytes, which release cytokines and chemotactic factors augmenting more CD4 activation. B-lymphocytes enter the acini and produce antibodies presenting antigens to CD4 T-cells, with resultant oligoclonal expansion and acinar destruction that can increase the risk of neoplastic transformation. These autoimmune causes result in chronic parotitis, often termed chronic punctate parotitis. Chronic parotitis eventually results in scar tissue, stricture, and sialectasis.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can result in asymptomatic, firm parotid swelling, more pronounced in children than adults, due to CD8+ lymphocytes responding to HIV or other viruses, such as Epstein-Barr, hepatitis C, cytomegalovirus, or adenovirus, infiltrating and ultimately depositing in the gland.

Sarcoidosis can lead to parotid gland inflammation but is less commonly seen than the involvement of lungs, lymph nodes, and skin.