# Continuing Education Activity

Juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG) is a non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis and is fairly common, often affecting infants and young children. Cutaneous lesions usually resolve spontaneously and most patients have an unremarkable course. Ocular JXG can occur and has an increased incidence in those 2 years of age or younger or in those with multiple lesions. Ocular involvement can be associated with many potential complications including blindness. There is an association of JXG with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).

**Objectives:**
- Outline the risk factors for xanthogranulomas.
- Describe the typical presentation of a patient with a xanthogranuloma.
- Review the pathophysiology of xanthogranulomas.

- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication regarding the management of patients with xanthogranulomas.

# Introduction

Juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG) is a relatively common entity and is the most common form of non-Langerhans cell histiocytic disorder of childhood.

As opposed to other xanthomatous diseases, juvenile xanthogranulomas are not associated with metabolic or lipid disorders.

# Etiology

It is presumed that juvenile xanthogranulomas develop after unknown stimuli (infectious or physical) and provoke a granulomatous histiocytic reaction.

Juvenile xanthogranulomas have been associated with juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia (JMML).

Other diseases associated with juvenile xanthogranuloma include the following: urticaria pigmentosa, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, aquagenic pruritis, and even cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.

# Epidemiology

Juvenile xanthogranulomas are most commonly found in early childhood with >15-20% of patients having lesions at birth. It is estimated that in 75% of cases, lesions appear during the first year of life.adult xanthogranuloma.

# Histopathology

Juvenile xanthogranulomas occur most commonly in the skin and show a characteristic morphology. The lesions exhibit a well-demarcated, dense invasion of numerous histiocytes within the superficial dermis and blunting of the rete ridges along with scattered lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils.garland-like.

In ocular involvement, the tumor cells have abundant cytoplasm and show decreased numbers of Touton cells as compared to cutaneous juvenile xanthogranulomas.

Lesions of juvenile xanthogranuloma classically stain with the following markers: CD68 or Ki-M1P and anti F XIIIa, vimentin, and anti-CD4.

# History and Physical

Juvenile xanthogranuloma generally occurs in two forms.

Serious complications can arise when systemic juvenile xanthogranulomas develop. Systemic juvenile xanthogranulomas develop in 4% of children, with an overall mortality of 5% to 10%.

Other CNS complications include seizures, increased intracranial pressure, diabetes insipidus, and developmental delay.

# Evaluation

Dermoscopy is a noninvasive technique used as an aid in the diagnosis of juvenile xanthogranuloma. It shows a characteristic setting sun appearance (red-yellow center and discrete erythematous halo). Complete removal via surgical excision gives diagnostic confirmation.

# Treatment / Management

Curative skin excisions may be performed in easily accessible sites; however, most lesions in childhood spontaneously involute and require no therapy.

Management of non-cutaneous (internal) lesions poses greater difficulty and may include any combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and immunosuppression.

Patients with concurrent neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) should receive frequent followup with a complete blood count to monitor for juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia (JMML).

Eye exams are recommended for high-risk patients. Topical, intralesional, and subconjunctival corticosteroids may be administered for ocular involvement. If complications arise (i.e., glaucoma or hyphema), surgery or systemic steroids may be required.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential of juvenile xanthogranuloma includes both benign and malignant entities, depending on the clinical presentation and site of involvement.

One of the main differential diagnoses of juvenile xanthogranuloma is Langerhans cell histiocytosis (both may exhibit eosinophils). Helpful morphologic features for Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) are grooved vesicular nuclei with a coffee bean" appearance.

Reticulohistiocytoma (another non-LCH histiocytic disorder) has a histologic appearance similar to juvenile xanthogranuloma.

Although juvenile xanthogranulomas may be found in uncommon locations (i.e., vulva), it is important to remember that other entities (such as embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma) may have a similar histologic appearance and should be ruled out.

Other considerations for the differential diagnosis include other xanthomatous lesions, mastocytomas, dermatofibromas, and Spitz nevus.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of juvenile xanthogranuloma is generally excellent with most lesions undergoing spontaneous involution over the course of 3-6 years. Lesions which are of cosmetic concern or pose a risk to vital functions can be treated.

# Complications

There are often minimal to no complications of JXG due to its self-limiting nature. Occasionally, lesions are removed for cosmetic concerns. Ocular lesions often require intervention to avoid potential complications of blindness, glaucoma or hyphema.

# Consultations

Ophthalmology

# Pearls and Other Issues

Isolated intracranial lesions of juvenile xanthogranuloma have been shown to carry a more favorable prognosis (as opposed to other examples of systemic disease). These lesions have been reported to have a BRAF V600E mutation akin to Langerhans cell histiocytosis and Erdheim-Chester disease. However, further study with a larger patient population is necessary to interpret these findings.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of solitary lesions of juvenile xanthogranuloma is often straightforward with routine observation. When multiple lesions are present and or there is the involvement of vital structures, management is best accomplished with an interprofessional team. While skin lesions can be excised, those occurring in other parts of the body may cause compression or obstruction of vital tissues. The outcomes for patients with skin-only lesions is favorable but those with lesions in the CNS may suffer from complications of surgery.