Numerous organic antigens can induce this immune response and cause a specific form of the disease in susceptible individuals. More than 300 antigens that span over a wide range of occupations have been described to cause HP. These antigens can be broadly classified into bacteria, fungi, animal proteins, plant proteins, low molecular weight chemicals, and metals. These exposures typically occur in specific occupations or hobbies but could also occur in the home and immediate environment. Interestingly only a small proportion of the people who are exposed to these antigens develop HP, which implies a complex interplay between host genetic factors and environmental agents. The genetic susceptibility is likely determined by polymorphisms of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) Class II molecules. Cigarette smoking imparts decreased risk of developing clinically significant HP. However, smokers who develop HP have been shown to have a more severe course and higher mortality. The most commonly reported occupational exposures that can cause HP and their specific names are:

- Farmer's lung: Seen in agricultural workers involved mostly in livestock farming.

- Bird or Pigeon fancier’s lung: Caused by exposure to organic antigens in bird (particularly pigeon) excreta. Indirect exposure from feather bedding or down comforters have also been reported to cause disease.

- Hot tub lung: Lung parenchymal inflammation in response to Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) in immunocompetent individuals.

- Cheese workers lung

- Bagassosis

- Mushroom workers lung

- Malt workers lung