The septum pellucidum (meaning translucent wall in Latin - SP), also known as the ventricle of Sylvius, is a thin, triangular double membrane separating the frontal horns of the right and left lateral ventricles of the brain. It extends between the anterior portion of the corpus callosum and the body of the fornix, and its width varies from 1.5 to 3.0 mm. The cavum septum pellucidum (CSP) is a potential cavity between the membranous leaves of the septum pellucidum, separated by at least 1 mm, and is considered a normal anatomical variation. It contains a filtrate of cerebrospinal fluid transferred from the ventricles through the septal laminae, and it does not communicate with the subarachnoid space. Sometimes, it may connect to a more posterior cavity called cavum vergae (CV), but separates from each other by an arbitrary vertical plane formed by the columns of the fornix. This activity reviews the cause and presentation of cavum septum pellucidum and stresses the importance of an interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of cavum septum pellucidum.
- Review the necessary testing involved in the evaluation of a patient with cavum septum pellucidum.
- Summarize when treatment of cavum septum pellucidum is necessary, and describe the treatment and management.
- Explain the importance of interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to aid in prompt diagnosis of cavum septum pellucidum and improving outcomes in patients diagnosed with the condition.