Intermittent exotropia is a clinical diagnosis and does not need any specific laboratory or radiographic tests. It is important to do a detailed assessment of the control and measure the deviation. These patients usually have bilateral good vision and freely alternating fixation. However, patients with strabismic amblyopia might show a fixation pattern. The deviations are usually comitant, and ocular movements are full and free. A complete sensory and motor examination should be performed and deviations measured for near, distance, and all the 9 diagnostic gazes. This is useful in monitoring the deterioration or progression of exotropia on follow-up visits. The basic evaluation can be divided into:

**Subjective Methods**

The control of exodeviation is assessed using New Castle Scoring and divided into Home control and Office control. Scoring is done for each patient from 0 to 9, with 0 corresponding to the best control and 9 to the worst control.

**Home Control**– Exodeviation noticed

- Never – 0

- <50% of the time when the child is awake, appears for distance only - 1

- >50% of the time when the child is awake, appears for distance only - 2

- Squinting observed for distance as well as for near fixation – 3

**Office Control**– while fixating at distance

- Manifests only after cover test, and re-fixates without need for blink (good) – 0

- Blinks or re-fixates after the cover test (fair) - 1

- Exotropia remains manifested after cover test, and no recovery happens even with blinking - 2

- Manifests exotropia spontaneously (poor) - 3

**Office Control –**while fixating at near

- Manifests only after cover test, and re-fixates without need for blink (Good) – 0

- Blinks or re-fixates after the cover test (Fair) - 1

- Exotropia remains manifested after cover test, and no recovery happens even with blinking - 2

- Manifests exotropia spontaneously (Poor) - 3

Total score = Home control+ Office control (distance) + Office control (near)

**Objective Methods**

- Distance Stereoacuity – Distance stereo acuity provides an objective assessment of the control of deviation. It is a significant indicator of the deterioration of fusion. Normal distance stereo acuity indicates good control with little or no suppression.

- Near Stereoacuity - Near stereo acuity does not correlate well with the degree of control in intermittent exotropia.**.**

- Measuring the angle of deviation – Patients with intermittent exotropia need a prolonged alternate cover test to break the tenacious proximal fusion and reveal full deviation. A patch test is advised if there is a significant difference in near and distance deviations.

- 9 gaze measurements - Intermittent exotropia may be associated with other eye movement anomalies, mainly overaction of the inferior oblique muscle and lateral incomitance (a decrease in the amount of exodeviation on side gaze).

- Patch test – This is indicated when there is a near-distance deviation disparity. The patch test is used to dissociate the tonic fusional convergence and helps in differentiating true divergence excess from pseudo-divergence excess. The patch is applied to one eye for 30 minutes, and measurements are repeated after removing the patch without allowing the eyes to fuse in-between.

- Lens Gradient Method – This test is used to identify patients with true divergence excess exodeviations associated with a high AC/A ratio. This test is performed in patients who have a disparity between distance and near deviation, with distance deviation exceeding near deviation by ≥10 prism dioptres after the patch test. After the patch test with eyes being still dissociated, the measurements are repeated for near with a +3D add. If the near deviation increases by 20prism diopters or more for near after the lens gradient method, a diagnosis of true divergence excess intermittent exotropia with a high AC/A ratio is made. The importance of this test lies in the fact that these patients will also have distance-near disparity post-surgical correction and will need bifocal spectacles to control consecutive esotropia for near.

- Far distance measurement – This is done by measuring the deviation by asking the patient to fixate at a far distance rather than at 6 meters. This test helps in uncovering the full deviation by reducing near convergence. A prospective randomized trial showed that 86% of the patients who had surgery for the maximum angle of deviation had a satisfactory outcome, compared to 62% in the group who were operated for the standard deviations measured with a 6-meter target deviation measurements.