The risks for glossectomy include those pertinent to most surgical head and neck procedures, including pain, bleeding, infection, sequelae of healing, damage to nearby structures, and the need for possible future procedures. Risks of general anesthesia, including cardiopulmonary events, stroke, and death, though remote, must also be considered and discussed with the patient.

Discussion about procedure-specific risks to speech and swallow function is essential in counseling patients. Dysarthria and difficulties with speech or swallowing to varying degrees are almost guaranteed with every glossectomy. The long-term functional outcomes may also vary.

Changes in speech and swallowing may also be secondary to the sequelae of healing. In cases of primary closure, tongue tethering can occur that limits the freedom of movement. Even in cases of secondary intention, tongue tethering can occur from unanticipated annealing of open surfaces to one another.

An altered sensation of the tongue is another inevitable complication. Patients may experience neuropathic or phantom sensations from the soft tissue resection. Sensory changes can also be secondary to lingual nerve trauma during glossectomy or neck dissection. In cases where there is more significant tongue resection, sensory changes are more secondary to loss of the sensory input and from the sacrifice of the lingual nerve. In reconstructive cases with regional flaps or free tissue transfer, the reconstructive substrate is commonly non-sensate, and if the tissue used contains muscle, the muscle cannot be used in any meaningful way to restore motor function. Some institutions perform re-innervated free flaps reconstructions, which provide sensation, but no taste.

Patients commonly ask about altered taste. It is a myth that the tongue has specific topography concerning taste. All five taste senses are represented throughout the tongue. Higher acuity taste is facilitated by olfaction via retrograde airflow to the nasal cavity, which should be unaffected by glossectomy.

Salivary fistula is another complication. It occurs when the oral cavity is continuous with the deep neck space. It tends to occur between the floor of the mouth and the submandibular triangle. The loss of the submandibular gland and the vascularized fascia creates a direct communication between the oral cavity and the neck through the floor of the mouth. It can also happen at the site of the sagittal-split osteotomy. In the setting of primary surgery, these wounds tend to heal or can be assisted with some local tissue rearrangement. However, salvage surgery after radiation is prevalent and leaves the operative bed with altered vascularity and impaired healing.

Another risk with surgery is positive margins and recurrences. Positive margins can make wound closure impossible as the reconstruction might not heal to cancer on the inset margins. The risk of salivary fistula and chronic, non-healing wounds is almost certain in that scenario. Persistent cancer should always be on the differential in a chronic, non-healing wound.

For patients undergoing lip-split mandibulotomy, there are increased risks specific to the osteotomy, including osteoradionecrosis of the mandible, malocclusion, and hardware complications. Osteoradionecrosis is a radiation injury resulting in devitalized bone. If the patient develops osteoradionecrosis, they may require secondary resection and reconstruction.

Even if surgery results in a microscopically-negative margin resection and the wound heals, surveillance could still be complicated. In cases of transoral glossectomy without reconstruction, scar tissue from primary and secondary closure may make it difficult to survey for local recurrences, which may result in future procedures coupled with anxiety for the patient and uncertainty for the oncologists surveilling the patient. In cases with trismus from prior radiation where surgery worsens their trismus, surveillance will be difficult. In such cases, the clinical impression may rely on the sum of imaging, fiberoptic endoscopy, and clinical history.