Thalassemia has negative repercussions for many organs, and without a cure, it has high morbidity. The disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a thalassemia care team, cardiologist, hepatologist, endocrinologist, and psychologist. Also, family care, nursing support, and social support are an integral part of the management. A lead consultant should be in charge of the patient care, and a nurse specialist, along with other specialists in the respective fields, should be involved to cover all the aspects of the disease. Patient education is crucial, and social worker involvement, including a geneticist, is essential. In some parts of the world, preventive strategies include prenatal screening, restrictions on issuing marriage licenses to two people with the same disease. The screening of children and pregnant women who visit clinicians is an effective strategy to limit the disease morbidity. The social worker should ensure that the caregiver/patient has adequate support and financial resources so that they can continue with treatment. Nurses should educate patients on the importance of treatment compliance to avoid serious complications, as well as monitoring treatment progress. Pharmacists may soon play a greater role as there are new drug products to assist in gene therapy on the horizon that can eliminate the need for ongoing transfusions.

Active collaboration and discussion between interprofessional team members help in the better understanding of the progression or control of the disease.[Level 5]