**Assessment of the Following Clinical Presentations of Diseases**

**Follow-Up After Liver Transplantation Operation**

Hepatic Doppler is used in the early detection of vascular occlusion or graft rejection, and it is the most preferred method of follow-up due to its low cost and non-invasiveness.

Thrombus formation in the portal vein and IVC can be evaluated on both gray-scale and Doppler assessments. A normal hepatic artery will demonstrate a rapid systolic upstroke lasting up to 80 milliseconds. The resistive index of the hepatic artery, calculated as the ratio of peak systemic velocity minus peak diastolic velocity divided by peak systolic velocity, should be between 0.5 to 0.7.

**Diagnosis of Portal Hypertension and Patency of Collaterals**

Cirrhosis and an alteration in portal hemodynamics ultimately result in an increased pressure gradient in the portal vein resulting in abnormal portal vein blood flow away from the liver.

Additional strengths of Doppler assessment include real-time observation, while limitations include a poor detection of slow blood flow and a reduced frame rate.

**Diagnosis of Budd Chiari Syndrome**

Budd-Chiari syndrome represents an outflow obstruction of the hepatic veins is most typically secondary to a prothrombotic disorder.

**Diagnosis and Follow-Up of Thrombosis**

Chronic thrombus formation can occur in the portal veins, hepatic veins, or the inferior vena cava. Thrombosis appears as an absent signal on color Doppler evaluation. The gold standard for diagnosing vessel thrombosis is angiography of the suspected vessel, but it is an invasive procedure.

**Evaluation of a TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt) Stent**

The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure is one treatment option for patients with cirrhosis or noncirrhotic total hypertension. TIPS shunts function to treat those who suffer from refractory ascites and variceal bleeding.

**Assessment of Hemodynamics of Hepatic Focal Lesions**

Doppler evaluation can be used in the assessment of benign hemangiomas and telangiectasia.

**Hemodynamics in Heart Failure**

This will result in hepatic venous congestion and retrograde flow, inferior vena cava congestion with dilated diameters of the vessels, and increased portal vein pulsatility.