Because of its protean manifestations and lack of a single diagnostic test of choice, the diagnosis of EGPA is based on clinical features more than histopathology or lab testing. With eosinophilic asthma, the clinician must recognize a pattern of multisystem disease and investigate for other supportive findings.

Peripheral blood eosinophilia (greater than 10% on differential white blood cell count or greater than 1500 /dl) is the best-known lab hallmark of the disease. Elevated serum IgE is also found in 75% of patients.

The rest of the laboratory abnormalities are nonspecific, including elevated ESR, CRP, normocytic normochromic anemia, and extrapulmonary rheumatoid factor in 60% of patients.

As mentioned before, the prevalence of ANCA positivity in EGPA is seen in approximately 40% of cases. The common ANCA immunofluorescence pattern is perinuclear, with specificity for myeloperoxidase (MPO).

In their retrospective study of 74 Churg-Strauss syndrome patients, Keogh and Specks reported an increased prevalence of neuropathy and central nervous system involvement in ANCA-positive patients.

Serum IgG4 levels and CCL17 levels correlate with disease activity.

CT chest shows asymmetric diffuse bilateral peripheral ground-glass infiltrates along with bronchial wall thickening. It can sometimes be migratory. Bilateral bronchocentric nodular infiltrates can also occur, but unlike GPA, they do not cavitate. Pleural effusion is present in 20% to 30% of cases.

CT sinuses are characterized by paranasal sinus thickening along with thickening of nasal mucosa without any evidence of bony erosion (seen in granulomatosis with polyangiitis).

Airflow obstruction is present in pulmonary function tests in 70% of patients. Even though FEV1 may transiently improve with corticosteroid therapy, airflow obstruction in variable degrees persist in 40% of patients.

Since cardiac disease portends a poor prognosis, early detection with cardiac MRI is being advocated even in the absence of clinical symptoms once the disease diagnosis is made. Any patient with suspected EGPA should undergo a thorough evaluation of cardiac performance and coronary status.

Sural nerve biopsy is the gold standard test in documenting peripheral neuropathy. Evidence of axonal degeneration is the most common finding, and necrotizing vasculitis and perineural eosinophilic infiltration can only be confirmed in half of the cases.

Skin biopsy is the most convenient to perform. Although none of the findings are exclusive to EGPA, evidence of small vessel vasculitis in an appropriate clinical setting may be enough to make a diagnosis. If the kidney is involved and biopsied, focal necrosis, crescentic deposits, and the paucity of immunoglobulin deposits are the characteristic findings.