The clinical presentation of tethered cord syndrome is broad and varies with underlying etiology and age at presentation. Children and toddlers commonly present with sensorimotor dysfunction, with the sensory loss occurring in a non-segmental distribution.

For patients in late childhood and early teenage years, pain is the predominant presenting symptom, specifically non-dermatomal pain in the lumbosacral region, perineum, and lower extremities.

In the adult patient with a history of spina bifida, the clinical presentation is like that of the adolescent, predominantly with pain and sphincter dysfunction, which can be provoked by flexion and extension movements of the lumbosacral spine.

Trauma often leads to symptomatology within this population and may involve major direct trauma to the spine or may be mild from provoking factors such as exercise, pregnancy, childbirth, etc.

Patients of all ages may present with urinary sphincter dysfunction, which may present as urinary tract infections without an alternative cause or episodes of incontinence between scheduled straight catheterizations. Bowel dysfunction may also occur, and patients can experience constipation.

Physical examination plays a key role in the diagnosis of tethered cord syndrome. It begins with an examination of the dorsal spine for cutaneous manifestations of spina bifida, as well as the presence of scoliotic deformity.

The lower extremities should be examined for orthopedic deformities, which are commonly associated with tethered cord syndrome and may include pes cavus, equinovarus deformity, and hip subluxation. Sphincter disturbances may be difficult to discern in young patients less than one year of age, but anorectal malformation, in addition to lower extremity deformities, should raise suspicion for tethered cord syndrome.

The remainder of the physical examination should include thorough motor, sensory, deep tendon reflexes, and gait assessment. The deep tendon reflexes and muscle tone can be variable.