In patients with severe TR and right-sided heart failure, loop diuretics are recommended for volume overload, including peripheral edema and ascites. Aldosterone antagonists may provide additional benefit, particularly in those with hepatic congestion with secondary hyperaldosteronism.

Most adults with TR have significant left-sided heart disease and treatment should be directed at the primary disease process. If heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction is present, standard therapy, including beta-blockers and agents that inhibit the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, are recommended.

Tricuspid valve surgery is suggested for patients with severe symptomatic TR despite medical therapy without severe right ventricular systolic dysfunction. When feasible, tricuspid valve repair is preferred to tricuspid valve replacement. However, repair is associated with significant risk of recurrent TR. For patients with mild, moderate, or greater functional TR who are undergoing left-sided valve surgery, concomitant tricuspid valve repair is advised. For patients with severe TR with or without symptoms and/or undergoing surgery for left-sided (mitral) valve disease, tricuspid surgery is recommended as noted in the 2014 American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology and the 2012 European Society of Cardiology valvular disease guidelines. The choice of bioprosthetic versus mechanical prosthetic tricuspid valve should be individualized based on patient characteristics. A mechanical valve offers greater durability but requires anticoagulation to reduce the risk of thrombosis.

In patients with PH, primary therapy should be directed at the underlying cause of the PH. In addition, the need for diuretic, oxygen, and anticoagulant therapy should be assessed. Patients with persistent PH whose WHO functional class is II, III, or IV despite treatment of the underlying cause of the PH should be referred to a specialized center to be evaluated for advanced therapy. There is no single best approach to selecting an agent for advanced therapy. The strategy is to choose an agent based on multiple factors including WHO functional class, right ventricular function, hemodynamics, vasoreactivity test, and patient characteristics and preferences.