Bone age assessment can be of utmost importance in various complicated situations involving medical, surgical, forensic, and legal issues. Apart from the ability to assess the chronological age of a person, the evaluation of growth remaining in a person can be extremely beneficial to a clinician in different circumstances, as previously discussed. Although the role of hand X-ray in skeletal maturity estimation is well-known, evaluation of multiple other radiographs can be more beneficial in certain circumstances [e.g., Oxford hip score and calcaneal apophysis in slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE)]. The evidence on this subject is still not extensive, and future research can pave the way for a better understanding of each of these skeletal assessment modalities. Future research can also help us with developing newer modalities, not involving significant radiation exposure for regular assessment of bone age in young children and adolescents. Also, more automated software to assess bone age can revolutionize this field substantially.

The radiologist plays a vital role in the assessment of bone age. However, patient management also involves an extensive inter-professional team of specialists, including family physicians, endocrinologists, orthopedists, or forensic experts. Nurses are also a vital part of the treating team as they can help coordinate the long-term management of these children.

Level of Evidence - The majority of the studies - are based on Level V (or level IV) evidence.