**Acute and Subacute Thyroiditis**

Symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection could indicate subacute thyroiditis, and other infective symptoms like fever and neck pain could indicate acute infectious thyroiditis. History of recent radiation to the neck or radioactive iodine treatment could indicate radiation-induced thyroiditis.

On physical exam, most acute thyroiditis patients have a tender and inflamed thyroid gland.

**Chronic Thyroiditis**

For chronic thyroiditis, a detailed history is paramount to narrowing the etiology. Medication history is important to diagnose underlying drug-induced thyroiditis. Personal history and family history of autoimmune disease can help discover any increased risk of autoimmune thyroid disease. Symptoms related to local compressive symptoms in the neck, including difficulty swallowing or choking sensation or hoarseness of the voice, could indicate underlying large goiter or large thyroid nodule or Riedel thyroiditis. Patients with Riedel thyroiditis usually present with dysphagia, odynophagia, respiratory distress due to the compression of the trachea, esophagus, and also because of the extension of the fibrosis.

Physical exam should include a detailed thyroid exam to evaluate any enlargement, tenderness on palpation, any abnormality in the texture, or any palpable nodules.

Drug-induced thyroiditis can be clinically benign on the exam. Symptoms of hypothyroidism like weight gain, fatigue, constipation, dry skin in patients on amiodarone should raise the suspicion of drug-induced thyroiditis. Amiodarone can also cause hyperthyroidism, and clinical manifestations may be masked initially because amiodarone has beta-adrenergic blocking activity. Check-point inhibitor immunotherapy: Patients usually present with vague symptoms of hypothyroidism like fatigue, weight gain. It should be distinguished from secondary hypothyroidism as these drugs also cause hypophysitis.

Autoimmune thyroiditis and Hashimoto thyroiditis usually present with a painless goiter.

Postpartum thyroiditis usually presents with symptoms of thyrotoxicosis like tachycardia, nervousness, and diarrhea with a history of recent childbirth.

Patients with Riedel thyroiditis can have a fixed, hard, painless goiter on physical exam. Most of the patients are euthyroid but can develop hypothyroidism.