# Continuing Education Activity

Bacterial (exudative) tracheitis is a potentially lethal infection of the subglottic trachea, which can occur in isolation or as a post-viral respiratory infection complication. This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of bacterial tracheitis and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of bacterial tracheitis.
- Explain the role that opportunistic bacteria play in damaging the tracheal mucosa and stimulating the inflammatory response in bacterial tracheitis.
- Identify the typical diagnostic findings with laboratory values, radiography, laryngoscopy, and tracheoscopy.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication in the early diagnosis of airway compromise among the interprofessional team members, providing airway protection for patients with bacterial tracheitis.

# Introduction

Bacterial tracheitis (BT), also known as bacterial croup or laryngotracheobronchitis, was first described in medical literature in the 1920s, despite the name not being coined until the 1970s.

# Etiology

Bacterial tracheitis is a bacterial infection of the trachea often preceded by a viral upper respiratory infection. The most common viruses implicated include Influenza A and B (type A being the most common), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), parainfluenza virus, measles virus, and enterovirus.Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSA]), Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Moraxella catarrhalis, Haemophilus influenzae type B (HiB), Haemophilus influenzae (non-typeable), and less commonly, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumonia, and anaerobic organisms.

The presence of a long-term tracheostomy is another potential predisposing factor for bacterial tracheitis, presumed to be a result of colonization of either a single bacterial species or multi-bacterial species from the tracheostomy tube in approximately 95% and 83% of respective cases.S. aureus, Gram-negative bacilli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Meticulous tracheostomy care, including pulmonary toilet and scheduled changes of the inner cannula and the tracheostomy tube, are required to minimize the risk in this specific population.

# Epidemiology

The annual incidence of bacterial tracheitis varies between countries, with an estimated incidence of 0.1 to 1 case(s) per 100,000 children.****Interestingly, one study of 33 pediatric tracheostomy-dependent patients at a large tertiary care center showed an association of bacterial tracheitis with higher socioeconomic status (SES); although they postulated that patients with lower SES do not present for treatment as frequently.

# Pathophysiology

In bacterial tracheitis, opportunistic bacteria invade damaged tracheal mucosa, made of pseudostratified columnar epithelium, and stimulate local and systemic inflammatory responses. In otherwise healthy patients, this is presumed to be precipitated by a viral upper respiratory infection, while in patients with an indwelling tracheostomy tube, it can also be due to seeding from a colonized tracheostomy appliance.Staphylococcus aureus has been the most commonly implicated pathogen, although reports suggest M. catarrhalis is becoming more common, especially in younger children.

# Histopathology

Sputum, tracheal washings, or tracheal secretions can be sent for microscopic analysis, including gram stain, cell count, neutrophil count, aerobic cultures, anaerobic cultures, and/or fungal cultures. These usually reveal neutrophilia and the identification of bacterial species. Often, bacterial tracheitis is polymicrobial. Infection of the tracheal mucosa causes local inflammation, swelling, thick exudates, pseudomembranes, and necrosis of the larynx, trachea, and mainstem bronchi. A biopsy is rarely performed unless there is a concern for underlying malignancy or another neoplasm.

# History and Physical

Presentation of bacterial tracheitis can occur in various ways depending on the patient's age and whether or not they are tracheostomy-dependent. The most common presentation in non-tracheostomy-dependent children and adults is a more insidious development with prodromal symptoms that suggest a viral respiratory tract infection. Viral symptoms including rhinorrhea, post-nasal drip, cough, fever, myalgia, and sore throat are present up to a week before the acute worsening of the patient.

Drooling and tripoding are less common and suggest an alternative diagnosis such as epiglottitis, as children with bacterial tracheitis do not have as much difficulty swallowing their oral secretions. Patients with severe subglottic obstruction may have cyanosis, appear lethargic, or can be combative, suggesting hypoxemia and/or hypercarbia.

In patients who are tracheostomy-dependent, symptoms of bacterial tracheitis can include high fevers, chills, productive cough, thick mucopurulent secretions, hemoptysis, peristomal skin breakdown or cellulitis, high ventilatory peak pressures, and/or tracheostomy obstruction.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of bacterial tracheitis is primarily clinical via a thorough history and physical examination. As discussed above, patients may appear febrile, dyspneic, hoarse, stridulous, septic or toxic-appearing, and in respiratory distress.****Trial with nebulized epinephrine and glucocorticoids will typically fail to show improvement in the patient's clinical course.

Laboratory investigation with white blood cell count is variable and nonspecific. Leukocytosis, as well as mild leukopenia, are commonly seen. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are also nonspecific but are estimated to be elevated in 68% of patients. Blood cultures are rarely positive; however, they should be obtained if there is suspicion for sepsis or if the patient is immunocompromised.

Radiographic images of the lateral or anteroposterior neck can show subglottic or tracheal narrowing, typical of that seen with croup (steeple sign).****Computed tomography (CT) scans are typically not used during the diagnosis of pediatric patients but can be used in adults or in patients with suspected tracheal stenosis or recurrent tracheitis, who have respiratory stability.

Definitive diagnosis is made by direct visualization, although it is not necessary with strong clinical suspicion. Laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy allow visualization of the infected airway and will demonstrate a normal or mildly erythematous epiglottis and an erythematous, edematous trachea with thick mucopurulent exudates.

Diagnosis of bacterial tracheitis can be difficult given its rarity, in addition to more prevalent diseases with similar presentations. Epiglottitis can also present with fever, upper airway obstruction, and toxic appearance. However, these patients often present with drooling and a preference for the tripod position, which is uncommon in bacterial tracheitis. Croup can also present with stridor and similar radiographic presentation with subglottic narrowing (steeple sign). Bacterial tracheitis can be a complication of croup and should be suspected if therapeutic interventions such as nebulized racemic epinephrine or steroids do not improve the clinical course.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of bacterial tracheitis includes a prompt assessment for airway compromise first. The need for intubation is common with reported rates ranging from 38% to 100% of patients in various studies.

Antibacterial management should be prompt and include broad-spectrum coverage, including MRSA. Gram stain results, if obtained, can focus on antibiotic selection, but broad coverage should be initially chosen until culture results are obtained. Current guidelines recommend a 10-day to 14-day antibiotic course, although no formal studies have investigated the recommended time length of antimicrobial treatment. The first-line treatments suggested include amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ceftriaxone plus nafcillin or vancomycin, clindamycin plus a third-generation cephalosporin, or ampicillin-sulbactam.

Glucocorticoids have not been shown to alter clinical course or patient outcomes.

# Differential Diagnosis

Bacterial tracheitis can be mimicked by many other disease processes including but not limited to:

- Amyloidosis

- Angioedema

- Candidiasis (laryngeal or tracheal)

- Caustic ingestion

- Deep neck space infection (DNSI)

- Diphtheria

- Epiglottitis

- Foreign body of aerodigestive tract

- Fungal laryngitis or tracheitis

- Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegner granulomatosis)

- Laryngeal hematoma

- Laryngeal trauma

- Laryngomalacia

- Laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR)

- Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup)

- Leukoplakia

- Malignancy (esophageal, laryngeal, thyroidal, or tracheal)

- Adenocarcinoma
- Anaplastic thyroid cancer
- Follicular thyroid cancer
- Lymphoma
- Medullary thyroid cancer
- Melanoma
- Metastasis
- Papillary thyroid cancer
- Squamous cell carcinoma
- Thymic carcinoma
- Thymoma

- Necrotizing sialometaplasia

- Peritonsillar abscess

- Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia

- Retropharyngeal abscess

- Sarcoidosis

- Subglottic stenosis

- Tracheal compression

- Tracheal stenosis

- Tracheostomy induced granulation

- Tracheostomy obstruction or decannulation

- Tracheomalacia

- Tuberculosis

- Viral laryngitis or tracheitis

- Vocal fold paresis/paralysis

# Prognosis

Bacterial tracheitis is a life-threatening but very treatable disease process If evaluated and treated early enough in its course. In one review of 36 patients from 2018 in a tertiary care center, 69% of pediatric patients diagnosed with bacterial tracheitis were admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), 43% required intubation, and one patient died from airway obstruction.

# Complications

Complications of bacterial tracheitis include but are not limited to the following:

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)

- Acute ventilatory dependent respiratory failure (AVDRF)

- Airway obstruction

- Anoxic encephalopathy

- Aspiration pneumonia

- Cardiopulmonary arrest

- Cellulitis

- Death

- Disseminated intravascular coagulation

- Hypoxia

- Intubation

- Pneumonia

- Pulmonary edema

- Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), sepsis, septic shock

- Tracheostomy

- Tracheal stenosis

- Toxic shock syndrome

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

If patients require a tracheostomy with either otolaryngology, oral maxillofacial surgery, or general surgery teams, they need to be seen and managed by respiratory therapy, speech therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy teams. The surgical teams should be rounding on their tracheostomy patients daily, provide some local wound and tracheostomy care, and monitor for status changes and complications. They will also be able to provide capping trials and plan time for decannulation once the infection has improved and the patient’s airway stabilizes.

As mentioned below, the respiratory therapy and nursing teams will be crucial to provide daily maintenance to the tracheostomy, whereas speech-language pathology will help the patient to improve their swallowing technique as well as trialing a Passy Muir speaking valve (PMV) for speech. Case management and social work teams are vital for ordering and delivering tracheostomy supplies and evaluating discharge location, whether home versus a rehabilitation facility. These teams are essential in determining discharge status and identifying any safety concerns that the patient or the family may have.

# Consultations

For the primary care specialties, emergency medicine teams, or intensivist teams, prompt consultation to the otolaryngology team(s) and its subspecialties is crucial to preventing concurrent morbidity and mortality. In situations or facilities in which otolaryngology is not easily or readily available, airway examination by anesthesiologists, pulmonologists, or general surgery team is vitally important. Respiratory therapy should always be consulted on any suspected patient with bacterial tracheitis as great pulmonary toilet and tracheostomy care/evaluation is needed to improve patient outcomes and help prevent this disease.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Deterrence of bacterial tracheitis is more useful in both pediatric and adult tracheostomy-dependent patient populations compared with patients without tracheostomy. Outside of general hygiene including appropriate hand washing or facial mask-wearing, there is no way to completely prevent acquiring bacterial tracheitis in patients without tracheostomies. Vaccinations against both bacterial and viral pathogens including Haemophilus Influenzae B, Streptococcus Pneumoniae, and Diphtheria can help reduce tracheal infections and inflammation. Patients and their caregivers should have a low threshold for physician evaluation in any cases of dyspnea or concerns for airway obstruction and should consider being seen by their primary care physician, urgent care, or local emergency department.

In patients with tracheostomies, patient and caregiver education is crucial to deterring bacterial tracheitis. Interprofessional teams including surgery, otolaryngology, respiratory therapy, nursing, speech therapy, social work, and case management should educate tracheostomy-dependent patients on proper cleansing and maintenance of their ostomy sites and devices. Patients should be cleaning their inner cannulas with hydrogen peroxide, saline bullets, and suction multiple times daily to prevent mucous plugging or entrapment of skin or respiratory flora. Humidification is also important to prevent crusting and obstruction. Local wound care including barrier ointments and dressings, crust removal, and local skincare are extremely important to prevent skin breakdown, cellulitis, abscess formation, or tracheal contamination with external pathogens.

# Pearls and Other Issues

The mean duration of hospitalization in pediatric patients without tracheostomy ranges from three to twelve days. Most children recover without debilitating sequelae, with the tracheal mucosa fully healing without permanent damage.

In regards to pediatric tracheostomy-dependent patients, one multicenter retrospective cohort study evaluating over 4000 pediatric patients revealed a median length of stay of 4 days with an interquartile range of three to eight days, with a 30-day revisit rate of 24.9%.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Bacterial tracheitis is a serious disorder of the airways which is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a general otolaryngologist, laryngologist, head and neck reconstructive surgeon, pediatric otolaryngologist, anesthesiologist, infectious disease expert, intensivist, nursing staff, respiratory therapy, speech-language pathology, physical therapy, occupational therapy, case management, and social work. The condition can rapidly compromise the airway leading to sudden death if not promptly appropriately managed; therefore, proper identification by an emergency physician, medical team, nursing team, and/or respiratory therapy is crucially important. Pulmonary toilet is paramount, whether via voluntary coughing and nebulizer treatments with the addition of mucolytics in non-tracheostomy patients or via frequent suctioning and mechanical ventilation in tracheostomy-dependent or intubated patients. Surgical airways are rarely required but must be prepared for in patients without a tracheostomy. Besides antibiotics, the patient will need close monitoring and airway precautions, with a low threshold for intubation or tracheostomy if symptoms fail to respond to more conservative therapies. Some patients require prolonged mechanical ventilation, short-term tracheostomy, or long-term tracheostomy. The outcomes in immunocompromised patients are much more guarded.