# Introduction

In 1986 the Emergency Medicine Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) was passed by the United States Congress. EMTALA was part of the Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act (COBRA), which Congress enacted to address Medicare issues. The original intent of EMTALA was to attempt to prevent discrimination of patients in the form of "patient dumping." Patient dumping is a practice of transferring uninsured patients from one hospital to another strictly for financial reasons.

# Issues of Concern

MTALA applies only to hospitals that accept payment from The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) under the Medicare program.

The first of the three legal requirements enacted by EMTALA is that the hospital must provide a medical screening examination (MSE). A medical screening examination must be performed on any person who presents to the hospital and is requesting treatment to determine if an emergency medical condition (EMC) exists (BUMC). EMTALA defines an emergency medical condition as:

"A medical condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain, psychiatric disturbances and/or symptoms of substance abuse) such that the absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in: placing the individual's health (or, with respect to a pregnant woman, the health of the woman or her unborn child) in serious jeopardy; or serious impairment to bodily functions; or serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part; or (2) concerning a pregnant woman who is having contractions, that there is adequate time to effect a safe transfer to another hospital before delivery, or that the transfer may pose a threat to the health or safety of the woman or the unborn child".

The hospital's emergency department completes the screening examination requirement by not altering its normal, standardized screening procedure.

The second legal requirement of EMTALA is regarding patient stabilization and treatment. If the patient has been found to have an emergency medical condition, they must stabilize the patient. The hospital can alternatively transfer the patient to another hospital. A hospital cannot transfer an unstable patient unless the patient requests a transfer, and a physician certifies that the benefits outweigh the risks of the transfer of an unstable patient.

- The transferring hospital provides medical treatment to minimize risks to the individual's health or the unborn child's health.

- The receiving hospital has space available, has qualified personnel to treat the individual, and has agreed to accept the individual and provide treatment.

- The transferring hospital sends to the receiving facility all available documents related to the emergency condition.

- The transfer takes place through the use of qualified personnel and appropriate transportation equipment.

- The transfer meets any other CMS requirements necessary in the interest of the individuals transferred.

The final legal requirement of hospitals with specialized services, such as a burn-unit, must accept patients with the need for those specialized services; this is to prevent accepting specialized hospitals from refusing transfers based on their ability to pay or insurance status. When another emergency department contacts a hospital with specialized services, they can ask no questions regarding insurance.

# Clinical Significance

EMTALA enforcement is through the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services. If a violation is reported, the regional CMS assigns the investigation to a state-level.

Hospitals and physicians need to be familiar with the details of EMTALA to avoid potential violations and to continue to ensure all patients receive equal and appropriate emergency services. Significant health care funding cuts from both the private and public sectors continue to put pressure on emergency care and, subsequently, EMTALA's safety net providers. Access to emergency care for the uninsured and underinsured was the driving force for the enactment of EMTALA in 1986 and continues to remain just as important today.