In lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs), there are two sets of complications:

Those unique to the disease(s). The reader should refer to the clinical features' tables to know in which LSD they occur:

**Nervous System**

Seizures, hydrocephalus, movement disorders, intellectual disability, psychosis, peripheral neuropathies, carpal tunnel syndrome, and spinal cord compression.

**Cardiovascular**

Hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, congestive heart failure, hypertension, valvular heart disease, and vasculopathy.

**Respiratory**

Lung infiltration and damage, sleep apnea, respiratory failure due to lung damage, and kyphoscoliosis.

**Gastrointestinal**

Splenomegaly and hypersplenism, swallowing difficulties, and increased susceptibility to hepatitis C infection.

**Musculoskeletal**

Bone lesions, fractures, deformities, joint contractures, atlantoaxial instability, and kyphoscoliosis.

**Hematological**

Pancytopenia.

**Eyes**

Corneal opacities and retinal degeneration leading to visual compromise and blindness.

**ENT**

Adenoids and tonsillar enlargement and their clinical effects, upper respiratory infections, eustachian tube dysfunction, and mixed hearing loss.

Side effects of numerous medications used for adjunct treatment. They include sedatives, antiepileptics, antipsychotics, and many drug interactions.

LSDs patients may need neurosurgical, orthopedic, ENT, ophthalmological, and general surgeries. Anesthetic difficulties are structural anomalies of the cervical spine, jaw, upper airways, and respiratory muscle weakness.

**Complications Secondary to Treatments**

- ERT in enzyme naive subjects can induce a foreign antigen response and decrease the effectiveness over time.

- Minor, moderate, and severe allergic reactions can also occur and be managed accordingly. These include: slowing or stopping the infusion, adding pre or post medications like antihistamines, steroids, and leukotriene inhibitors.

- Classic anaphylaxis and anaphylactoid reactions may also occur and will need appropriate management.

- Immunomodulator therapy.

- The intraventricular route of administration for some forms of ERT runs the risk of infections.

- HSCT patients may encounter all of the inherent radiation and immunosuppressive therapy complications, including opportunistic infections and graft versus host disease(GVHD).

- Delayed onset of action, need for repeat administration, anti-vector antibodies, and viral neutralizing antibodies are complications of adeno-associated vectors for gene therapy.

Providers should recognize caregiver burnout early and mobilize support.