The team caring for patients with a femur injury requiring immobilization includes pre-hospital, emergency department, and inpatient teams. Each of these teams needs to reevaluate the need, placement, and effectiveness of the immobilization if placed by a previous team. Some immobilization devices and techniques may suit the needs of these teams, but change may be necessary according to the needs of a new team and environment. When transferring care, teams should include communication about the immobilization and any deficits observed before placing the immobilization device. Handoff is a source of significant risk in relation to patient harm if the appropriate information is not clearly communicated to the new team.

Each team is responsible for evaluating and reevaluating any device placed on a patient. When placing an external device on the lower extremity, an initial evaluation of circulation motor and neurologic is necessary. If a team member notices a deficiency or abnormality, this should be communicated immediately to the physician caring for the patient. This may indicate a critical condition, and the physician should direct care, which may be to adjust the immobilization device, ordering tests, or changing the timeline for definitive treatment.

Other specialists may need to be involved based on the clinical findings. These cases often involve trauma surgery, vascular surgery, and neurosurgery or once another diagnosis has been discovered these specialists may become involved.