Members of the interprofessional team caring for patients with diabetes and obesity monitor hbA1c, body weight, BMI, and lifestyle changes at each visit. When clinicians prescribe medications, they educate patients about side effects and adjust doses when indicated. Pharmacists can reinforce and augment this counseling and perform medication reconciliation. After metabolic surgery, patients are closely monitored by the interprofessional team.

Frequently, these patients require fewer medications since metabolic parameters improve, and there is a higher risk of hypoglycemia. Nurses should note any postoperative complications, including wound dehiscence, perforation, and signs of infection, and alert the treating providers. Clinicians, dieticians, and nutritionists monitor for signs of metabolic derangements such as vitamin and mineral deficiencies or malabsorption syndromes. Avoiding continuous use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications in the first month helps prevent erosion of anastomosis sites. Internal quality metrics aid in assessing remission rates, the safety of procedures, the postoperative course, and long-term outcomes after surgery.

Obesity is a risk factor for T2DM, cardiovascular disease, and other chronic health conditions. Effective healthcare teams actively screen for obesity and diabetes and use the BMI to classify the stages of obesity. ILI and pharmacologic therapy are utilized to achieve a 10% weight loss. Patients with suboptimal weight loss and poor glycemic control despite maximal medical treatment are referred for consideration of bariatric and metabolic surgery. Over the past two decades, bariatric surgery has become safer and more effective. Ongoing surveillance following surgery identifies potential complications and monitors results to improve clinical outcomes.