Approximately 0.4 to 0.9% of newborns have chromosomal abnormalities, and about half of them have an abnormal phenotype.

**Autosomal Trisomies**

**Trisomy 13 (Patau Syndrome)**

- Incidence: Approximately 1 in 5000 to 1 in 16000 live births (third most common autosomal trisomy)

- Karyotype: 47, XX or XY, +13

- Clinical features: Microcephaly, holoprosencephaly, microphthalmia, small or poorly developed eyes (anophthalmia or cyclopia), cleft lip and palate, polydactyly, rocker-bottom feet, congenital heart disease, cryptorchidism, brain or spinal cord abnormalities, weak muscle tone at birth, severe intellectual disability.

- Prognosis: miscarriage, stillbirth, or early death (median survival around one year of age).

**Trisomy 18 (Edwards Syndrome)**

- Incidence: Approximately 1/3000 to 1:5000  live births (second most common autosomal trisomy)

- Karyotype: 47, XX or XY, +18

- Clinical features: Low birth weight, microcephaly, micrognathia, low-set, malformed ears, clenched fists with overlapping fingers, congenital heart and renal abnormalities, rocker-bottom feet, severe intellectual disability, survival about one year.

- Prognosis: miscarriage, stillbirth, or early death (median survival around one year of age).

**Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome)**

- Incidence: Approximately 1:700 to 1/800 live births (most common autosomal trisomy)

- Karyotype: 47, XX or XY, +21

- Clinical features: Characteristic facial appearance, flat facies, prominent epicanthic folds, flat occiput, Brushfiel spot in irides, weak muscle tone at birth, single transverse palmar crease (simian crease), clinodactyly, congenital digestive and cardiac defects, intellectual disability, increased risk for leukemia, Alzheimer disease and hearing an vision problems

- Prognosis: Approximately 75% of conceptions die in embryonic or fetal life. Nevertheless, if birth occurs, the prognosis is relatively good (median survival is 47 years). It is the most common aneuploidy that is compatible with long-term survival.

- Note: Approximately 95% of patients with Down syndrome have trisomy 21. However, 4% of cases are due to Robertsonian translocation, and 1% is due to mosaicism.

**Sex Chromosome Aneuploidies**

**Klinefelter Syndrome**

- Incidence: 1/500 to  1:1000 male births

- Karyotype: Typically 47, XXY (greater than 90%). However, other karyotypes have been described: 48, XXXY and 49, XXXXY and 46, XY/47, XXY (mosaicism)

- Clinical features: Increased height, long extremities, low upper/lower segment ratio, gynecomastia, reduced facial and body hair (female hair distribution), delayed and incomplete puberty, small testes (testicular atrophy), infertility, developmental delay (learning disabilities, delayed speech and language development), increased risk for breast cancer.

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good. The life span is slightly reduced.

**Triple X Syndrome**

- Incidence: Approximately 1/1000 female births

- Karyotype: 47, XXX

- Clinical features: Presents with increased height and risk of learning disabilities, delayed development of speech, language, and motor skills, weak muscle tone, behavioral and emotional difficulties, seizures, kidney abnormalities

- Some cases may seem phenotypically normal.

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good.

**XYY Syndrome**

- Incidence: Approximately 1:1000 male births

- Karyotype: 47, XYY

- Clinical features: Increased height and risk of learning disabilities, delayed development of speech, language, and motor skills, weak muscle tone, hand tremors, seizures, asthma, scoliosis, behavioral and emotional difficulties

- As with triple X syndrome, some cases may seem phenotypically normal.

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good.

**Turner Syndrome**

- Most common sex chromosomal abnormality in females and the most common genetic cause of primary amenorrhea

- Incidence: Approximately 1 in 2000 to 1 in 2500 live female births

- Karyotype: 45, X accounts for 45% of cases because most zygotes cannot survive extrauterine life. Remaining cases have a mosaic karyotype (45, X/46, XX, 45, X/ 46XY or 45, X/47, XXX) or a structural abnormality [isochromosome, 46, Xi (Xq) or (Xp), or ring chromosome, 46, Xr (X)]

- Clinical features: Short stature, webbed neck, low posterior hairline, shield chest, amenorrhea, absence of puberty, the early loss of ovarian function (ovarian dysgenesis), infertility, skeletal abnormalities (i.e., cubitus valgus), lymphedema, congenital kidney and/or heart disease (i.e., horseshoe kidney, coarctation of the aorta).

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good.

Cytogenetic analysis of fetal cells required samples from amniotic fluid, chorionic villi, or fetal blood, which are sampled through invasive testing, such as amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling, and cordocentesis, respectively.