Usually, surgical management is preferred when it comes to follicular lesions.

**Medical Management**

- If the patient is not clinically euthyroid, medical therapy done to achieve a clinically euthyroid state.

- Those with a low serum TSH level could signify a "toxic adenoma." In such lesions, additional, free T3, T4 assay must be done. As mentioned above, an iodine-123 thyroid scan may help determine the functionality of the nodule. These patients must be appropriately treated with medication.

- The patient may undergo observation or levothyroxine suppression therapy as an initial treatment modality. Levothyroxine is administered for six months to determine if the nodule decreases in size. If the nodule falls in size with levothyroxine treatment, this medication is stopped with a follow-up examination of the nodule in three to six months. The growth of nodules during levothyroxine therapy is a strong indication for surgery.

- Almost all cases require surgical management.

**Surgical Management**

- In the case of follicular neoplasms determined by FNA, the risk of malignancy is less than 1% in a hyperfunctioning nodule, with a higher 20% risk if the nodule is hypo functioning.

- If the FNA result shows a follicular neoplasm, surgical management in the form of a thyroid lobectomy with isthmusectomy is the norm. If the ultrasound shows suspicious features, the surgeon should keep in mind the likelihood of malignancy.

- After due consideration of additional risk factors like family history, the presence of other comorbidities, previous history of neck/head radiation, a decision of performing a total thyroidectomy may be taken.

- Patients having a solitary toxic nodule, after determination of the functionality of the same, could undergo therapeutic iodine-131 therapy. Surgically, a unilateral thyroid lobectomy is adequate.

- If the histopathological examination (HPE) examination confirms the Folllciular neoplasm as an adenoma, no further intervention is required.

- Although beyond the purview of the topic, If the lesion fits HPE features of malignancy, then:

- 
              
-  A definitive total thyroidectomy is performed. Prophylactic neck node dissection is not recommended as <10% show nodal spread.
              
              
-  The tumor must be staged according to the TNM staging system by the American Joint Committee on Cancer.
              
              
- About six weeks of postoperative, some studies recommend treatment with I-131 to ablate residual thyroid tissue and reduce the risk of recurrence. 
              
              
- Adequate postoperative surveillance must be done to rule out recurrence/ metastasis. Serum thyroglobulin levels, routine ultrasonography is recommended modalities for monitoring the outcome of the disease.
              
              
- Metastatic lesions must be jointly dealt with the surgeon and the oncologist for better outcomes.

**Main Advantages of Surgical Therapy**

- Relief from pressure-compressive symptoms like dyspnea, dysphagia, hoarseness, etc

- Removal of the lesion helps alleviate the patient's anxiety

- Resolves the issues of thyrotoxicosis in a toxic follicular adenoma

- Avoids unnecessary radiation exposure to the healthy part of the thyroid