Depending on the location of the hydrofluoric acid exposure and the percentage of the acid, patients can present immediately with severe caustic burns to the body and severe pain, with pain out of proportion as the hallmark finding.  Solutions greater than 14.5% will produce immediate symptoms, 12% solutions can take up to an hour, and solutions less than 7% can take hours before symptoms occur.  The concern exists for ocular and respiratory injury when any chemical is splashed / sprayed in the face.

History should include any exposure to hydrofluoric acid through workplace or domestic type exposures to include potential products containing hydrofluoric acid such as rust removers or cleaning agents within the past 24 hours.  One should ascertain the concentration of the solution, exposure time of HF, use of protective agents or any other chemicalsthat was contained in the solution.  Additional information inclucdes any treatment that has been given thus far to the individual.

Physical assessment should include immediate evaluation for life-threatening emergencies including airway compromise, respiratory distress, and cardiac arrhythmias.  Additionally, one can assess for pulmonary edema, ocular injuries, and symptoms of hypocalcemia including Chvostek and Trousseau signs and tetany.

- Chemical burns should be assessed based upon the route of exposure but should include:

- Dermal exposure: Location of the burn with the most common sites of injury are the head and neck, hands, legs and arms, color of the skin surrounding the burn, degree of ulceration and necrosis along with underlying structures such as tendon or bone involvement. 
- Ocular exposure: Signs of irritation with pain are the initial first signs followed by conjunctivitis with edema and congestion.   Subsequent corneal erosion with sloughing and ulceration of the corneal epithelium can occur leadering to corneal opacification in minor splashes with hydrofluoric acid. 
- Inhalation exposure: Toxic gases or vapors will cause nasal irritation with inflammation of the mucosa, mucosal bleeding, ulceration and/or perforation of the nasal septum.  Additional respiratory symptoms based upon the concentration of the hydrofluoric acid and chronicity of exposure can include coughing, dyspnea, upper airway symptoms of laryngitis, laryngospasms, tracheobronchitis as evident with stridor or lower airway symptoms including wheezing, bronchiolar obstruction, bleeding of the airway, pulmonary edema and congestion or pneumothorax.   Chronic dyspnea has been reported in patients with chronic, repeated exposure to fumes or gases containing hydrofluoric acid.  
- Ingestion exposure: Caustic type burns of the mucosa of the oropharynx, esophagus and stomach are evident with ingestion of solutions containing hydrofluoric acid.  Individuals will complain of dysphagia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and severe abdominal pain.   Hydrofluoric acid ingestions can lead to erosive gastritis leading to hematemesis and melana from the hemorrhagic gastritis or more importantly potential perforation of the stomach.  
- Neuromuscular symptoms: Individualizes exposed through all routes can develop neurologic and muscular disorders from the hypocalcemia and hyperkalemia causing interference with normal electrical signal transmission in neurons.   These symptoms can include anxiousness, confusion, headaches, paresthesia, seizures or paralysis, carpopedal and generalized tetany, and coma secondary to cerebral edema.