Laxatives are usually taken orally or as suppositories. Oral formulations include tablets, capsules, powders, chewable tablets, and liquids. Data presented in this section is from product labeling information.

**Bulk-forming Laxatives**

- Psyllium: One tablespoon can be given orally one to three times per day.

- Methylcellulose: One tablespoon powder or 2000 mg fiber caplets can be given three times per day.

**Osmotic Agents**

- Lactulose: For constipation, administer 10-20 g (15-30 mL ) orally once daily; the dose may be increased to 40 g (60 mL) once daily. For hepatic encephalopathy, administer 20-30 g (30-45 mL) orally every hour to induce rapid bowel movement.

- Sorbitol: Administer 30-150 mL orally once daily. It can be administered as a rectal enema 120 mL (30%) solution.

- Polyethylene glycol: For constipation, administer 17 grams with adequate hydration. When used as bowel preparation before surgery, powder for solution (240 mL reconstituted solution) is given orally every 10 minutes until 4 L is consumed and rectal effluent is clear. The patient should fast for at least 3-4 hours before administering PEG.

- Magnesium sulfate: Use 2 to 4 teaspoons (approximately 10 to 20 grams) of granules dissolved in 8 ounces (240 mL) of water; may repeat in 4 hours. Do not exceed two doses per day.

- Glycerin (glycerol): One suppository (2 or 3 grams) per rectum for 15 minutes one time per day.

**Stimulant Laxatives**

- Bisacodyl: Administer 5 to 15 mg as enteric oral tablets one time daily.  Bisacodyl can also be administered as a 10 mg suppository per rectum one time per day for 15 to 60 minutes.

- Senna: It is available as an 8.6 mg tablet. Administer 1 to 2 tablets orally once or two times per day.

**Prokinetic Agents**

- Tegaserod: It is available as 6 mg oral tablets. One tablet is given orally 30 minutes before a meal twice daily for 4 to 6 weeks of treatment.

- Prucalopride: It is available as 1 mg and 2 mg oral tablets. Administer one to two tablets orally once daily.

**Lubricants**

- Mineral oil: It is given as single or divided doses orally to a total of 45 mL in 24 hours and rectally to a total of 118 mL in a single dose.

**Surface Active Agents**

- Docusate: It is available as 100 mg oral soft gels, 283 mg/5 mL (5 mL) a rectal enema, and 50 mg/5 mL oral solution. It is given orally as a 50 to 100 mg dose once daily to a maximum of 300 mg. In addition, it can be given rectally as 283 mg enema one to three times a day.

**Guanylate Cyclase Agonist**

- Linaclotide: It is available as 72 mcg, 145 mcg, and 290 mcg oral capsules. 72 to 145 mcg is given in patients with chronic idiopathic constipation once daily. In the case of patients with IBS and constipation, 290 mcg is used orally once daily.

**Chloride Channel Activator**

- Lubiprostone: It is available as eight mcg and 24 mcg oral capsules. Eight mcg is given twice daily in CIC, and a maximum of 24 mcg is used orally twice daily in case of opioid-induced constipation.