**Empiric Treatment**

The initial therapy for suspected neonatal sepsis is ampicillin and an aminoglycoside, typically gentamicin. Both ampicillin and gentamicin have activity against GBS, which is the most common cause of neonatal sepsis. Additionally, this combination has a synergistic effect and is more effective than either ampicillin or penicillin G alone in killing most GBS strains in vitro and in vivo. Following confirmation of GBS as the causative pathogen, sterility of the bloodstream and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are documented, and clinical improvement is observed, penicillin G alone should be used to complete therapy. Recommendations concerning the optimal dose and duration of treatment should be dictated by the focus and severity of the infection.

**Specific Treatment**

Infants with GBS meningitis should undergo a second lumbar puncture 1-2 days into therapy to document CSF sterility. If CSF culture is negative, treatment therapy can be completed using penicillin G alone for a minimum of 14 days. If CSF culture remains positive, however, a longer treatment course and diagnostic evaluation may be warranted. A contrast-enhanced neuroimaging study can help reveal unresolved cerebritis cases or ventriculitis and can identify the rare infant with complications of subdural empyema or intracranial abscess. Additionally, imaging may identify cerebrovascular complications such as septic thrombophlebitis that can also affect the prognosis. A repeat lumbar puncture should be considered at the completion of therapy to evaluate CSF cell count and protein. Findings of polymorphonuclear cells greater than 30% or protein higher than 200 mg/dL are consistent with cerebritis or parenchymal destruction and may warrant a longer therapy duration.  All infants recovering from GBS meningitis should undergo a diagnostic auditory brainstem response (ABR) test.

Infants with bacteremia without focus should receive a total of a 10-day course of IV antibiotics. Relapses, although rare, have been documented if utilizing shorter courses. Oral therapy is not sufficient and has no place in the management of invasive GBS disease. The treatment duration for patients with septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, or endocarditis appears in table 1 below.

**Recurrent Infections**

The recurrence rate for early-onset GBS disease is approximately 1%. Although rare, recurrence can be due to inadequate dose or duration of therapy, reinfection with a second strain or type, supportive foci, HIV infection, or a humoral immune deficiency. Humoral immune deficiency may be too early to diagnose definitively; however, total IgG levels are usually significantly lower than expected for the patient’s age. Furthermore, susceptibility testing from the first infection and the recurrent episode should be analyzed to ensure in vitro susceptibility to penicillin. If the reason for the recurrence remains unknown, persistent mucous membrane colonization with GBS is the likely source. Beta-lactam antibiotics, even when administered by the parenteral route, do not eradicate GBS colonization reliably. Some studies have shown the benefit of rifampin (20 mg/kg per day) to eradicate mucosal GBS colonization when given orally during the last four days of parenteral therapy. However, a more recent study showed a failure of rifampin to eradicate GBS colonization in infants reliably.

**Prevention**

Intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis (IAP) is indicated for all mothers with a positive GBS screening culture routinely obtained at 35 to 37 weeks’ gestation. Revised guidelines from 2010 also recommend IAP for pregnant women who have a history of GBS bacteriuria at any point during the current pregnancy or have a history of a previous infant with invasive GBS disease. In pregnant women with unknown GBS status, IAP is indicated if any of the following risk factors are present: (1) preterm delivery less than 37 weeks gestation, (2) membrane rupture for 18 hours or greater, (3) an intrapartum temperature of 100.4 F or higher, or (4) intrapartum nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) is positive.

Prophylaxis with a beta-lactam antibiotic (preferably penicillin) given four or more hours before delivery is highly effective for early-onset disease prevention. The initial dose of penicillin G is 5 million units, followed by subsequent doses of 2.5 to 3.0 million units every 4 hours until delivery. Alternatively, patients may instead receive ampicillin, 2 g IV initial dose, then 1 g IV every 4 hours until delivery.

The definition of adequate IAP is administering penicillin, ampicillin, or cefazolin at least 4 hours before delivery.not have a history of anaphylaxis, angioedema, respiratory distress, or urticaria after administering penicillin or a cephalosporin should receive cefazolin (2g initially and 1 g every 8 hours until delivery). For women with severe penicillin allergy (anaphylaxis, angioedema, respiratory distress, or urticaria), susceptibility testing should be performed, and clindamycin (900 mg every 8 hours until delivery) or vancomycin (1 g every 12 hours until delivery) can be given to based on susceptibility patterns of the isolated GBS organism. Furthermore, neither clindamycin IAP nor vancomycin IAP has been evaluated for efficacy in preventing early-onset GBS neonatal disease.