The choice of treatment of spontaneous intracranial hypotension depends on the severity of the symptoms. If the headaches are acute and uncomplicated with severity ranging from mild to moderate, conservative management is advised.

If the symptoms persist even after 1 to 2 weeks of conservative management or the headache is associated with debilitating features, the first-line therapy would be an epidural blood patch (EBP). EBP is also indicated in patients with a connective tissue disorder, an aggressive method of injury leading to the symptoms, or when the symptoms are present for more than 2 weeks at the point of diagnosis.

The hypothesis proposed for EBP effectiveness is that it can produce a tamponade of the CSF leak causing the resolution of the symptoms in the short term. Also, in the long term, it causes deposition of fibrin and the formation of scar tissue around the leaks providing long-term management.

Epidural fibrin glue and surgical correction of the leaks are the next treatment options if the patient is not managed effectively even after repeated epidural blood patch trials. Epidural fibrin glue is effective in nearly one-third of the patients who were not managed with EBP trials. Moreover, it is a good alternative treatment in comparison to surgical correction of the CSF leaks. However, both epidural fibrin glue seal and surgical correction of the CSF leaks require the identification of the points where CSF leak is occurring.

The failure of nonsurgical therapies warrants the surgical correction of the CSF leaks.

Patients who fail adequate treatment with EBP, with no identification of points of CSF leaks, are treated with continuous epidural infusion of dextran or saline. This helps in replenishing the CSF volume, which can, in turn, alleviate the symptoms.