Newer generation drug-eluting stents have a great safety and efficacy profile. Specific subgroups of patients with markedly complex anatomical and clinical characteristics present a higher risk of complications. These are the characteristics for which further margins of improvement are indicated:

- Diabetes Mellitus: Diabetes mellitus has been associated with highly accelerated atherosclerosis due to its highly thrombotic and inflammatory state. These patients usually present with narrow coronaries, multivessel involvement, and long lesions, which are challenging for coronary revascularization. Novel drug-eluting stents with higher antiresorptive activities might help negate these problems associated with diabetic patients in the future.

- Acute Myocardial Infarction (MI): Percutaneous intervention with drug-eluting stent placement plays a central role in the management of acute myocardial infarction. Still, the rate of stent-related complications is higher compared to stable patients. Stent malapposition is one of the complications among patients with myocardial infarction due to the presence of vasoconstriction and thrombus between the stent and arterial wall. To overcome this issue, newer technologies are under study. Specifically, self-expandable stents that are designed to adjust to arterial size over time. Secondary, mesh-covered stents are developed to overcome distal embolization. These new advancements that may improve clinical outcomes in patients with myocardial infarction are under extensive studies.

- Restoration of Vascular Pathology: Most of the metallic drug-eluting stents are permanent in nature, which limits the restoration of normal vessel physiology of the coronary artery. Fully bioresorbable stents in the future seem to negate this limitation in the future.

- Calcified Lesions: Heavily calcified lesions continue to present challenges to PCI and stent thrombosis. Future development of novel devices is warranted for better outcomes.

- Bifurcation Lesions: Coronary bifurcation possess a higher rate of complications. There are several approaches and novel stents developed. The need for dedicated devices for bifurcation lesions is still under study.