**Compatibility testing**

Incompatible Saline Crossmatch

ABO-incompatible or Polyagglutinable donor red cells

Anti-A1 in a patient of A subgroup or passively acquired anti-A,anti-B

Cold or room temperature reactive alloantibody (e.g., anti-M) or autoantibody (e.g., anti-I)

Rouleaux

Incompatible Antiglobulin Crossmatch

Antibody to low-prevalence antigen in the donor unit

Passively acquired anti-A,anti-B (IgG type)

Variation in antigen strength as in P1 or dosage



Auto anti-HI(-H) or anti-LebH and the selected unit is non-group O

The unit lacks a corresponding antigen (Phenotype matched) or low expression (dosage)

Reagent red cell diluent-dependent antibodies

Alloantibody that is known to cause DHTR or DSTR (Eg. anti-Jk, Fy)

Passively acquired autoantibodies (IVIG, Monoclonal antibody Eg. Daratumumab)

Autoantibody (Broad specificity)

**Interpretation:**

If the result is positive (antibody detected), antibody identification is required to determine the specificity and clinical significance of the detected antibody. If alloantibodies are detected in pregnant patients, a titer test is performed.

Negative results mean that no antibodies were detected.

A positive antibody screen with incompatible crossmatch with negative auto-control indicates the presence of alloantibody(s). If the auto-control test is positive, the cause could be nonspecific antibodies directed against the enhancement medium or rouleau formation.

Crossmatching by indirect antiglobulin testing method: A negative test (crossmatch compatible) indicates that the serum or plasma contains no detectable antibodies that are reactive with the red cells being transfused.

Compatibility testing in infants (< 4 months old): Crossmatch compatibility testing is not required if the antibody screen is negative, the transfused red cells are either ABO identical, compatible, or Group O and RhD negative or identical. Compatibility testing is to be performed with maternal serum or plasma as well.

Evidence supports the use of fresher red cells (less than seven days after collection) when the transfusion volume in neonates is greater than 25 ml/kg.

Emergency release: Uncrossmatched ABO identical group or group O red cells or group O whole blood (without hemolysins) may be issued if the recipient's group is unknown. However, compatibility testing should be continued and completed, and if incompatibility is detected, the recipient's physician should be notified immediately.