The presentation of pituitary adenoma depends on tumor size and functional status.

Pituitary microadenoma is usually an incidental finding on MRI head. Patients are asymptomatic unless the tumor is hormonally active.

Pituitary macroadenoma presents with mass effects and potentially hormonal deficiency or hormonal excess.

Pituitary apoplexy is a sudden hemorrhage into pituitary adenoma. It is very rare. It presents with symptoms of a mass effect that includes sudden headaches and vision changes along with hormonal deficiency.

- **Symptoms from Mass Effect**:

- **Visual impairment:**Visual impairment is reported in approximated 40% to 60% of patients. Suprasellar extension of the pituitary adenoma compresses the optic chiasm leading to visual field defects. Bitemporal defect is the most prevalent pattern, followed by homonymous defects. The involvement of the oculomotor nerve can lead to diplopia, while the fourth, fifth, and sixth cranial nerves may also be involved with invasive tumors.

- **Headache:**Headache is commonly reported in pituitary adenoma; however, it is a non-specific symptom.

- **Hormonal deficiency:**One or more anterior pituitary hormonal deficiencies can be observed in patients with pituitary macroadenoma.

Gonadotropin deficiency presents as amenorrhea in females and erectile dysfunction in males.

Growth hormone (GH) deficiency in adults leads to fatigue and weight gain.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) deficiency symptoms are weight gain, fatigue, cold intolerance, and constipation.

Adrenal corticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency presents with fatigue, arthralgia, weight loss, low blood pressure, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain.

**2. Functioning or secreting adenomas**: The clinical presentation depends on the hormone secreted as described below:

- **Prolactin-secreting adenoma:**Elevated prolactin suppresses the gonadotrophin levels leading to infertility, decrease libido, and osteoporosis in both sexes. Females present with amenorrhea and galactorrhea while men present with erectile dysfunction and gynecomastia.

- **GH secreting adenoma (acromegaly):**Presentation includes headaches, vision changes, an increase in ring or shoe size, arthritis, carpal tunnel syndrome, and excessive sweating. Clinically patients have coarse facial features, frontal bossing, enlarged nose, prognathism, enlarged tongue, and skin tags. Other comorbidities like hypertension, cardiomyopathy, obstructive sleep apnea, and multiple colonic polyps may be present at the time of diagnosis.

- **ACTH-secreting adenoma (Cushing disease):**Presents with weight gain, muscle weakness, mood disorders, easy bruising, and multiple fractures. Clinical features include a round face, facial plethora, supra-clavicular fat, ecchymoses, and purple striae on the abdominal area and armpits.

- **TSH secreting adenoma:**Patients have symptoms of palpitations, arrhythmias, and weight loss. On exam, they may have tremors and a goiter.