As previously mentioned, Rh incompatibility is centered on the Rh status. The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) strongly recommends a Rh(D) blood type and antibody screen for all pregnant women at the initial prenatal visit (grade A). Additionally, the USPSTF recommends repeat antibody testing for all unsensitized Rh-negative mothers at 24 to 28 weeks of gestation, unless the father is Rh-negative (grade B). Antibody testing should also be performed at delivery. There are numerous outcomes after initial testing:

- If a mother is found to be Rh-positive, there is no risk of alloimmunization regardless of the Rh type of the fetus

- If the mother is Rh-negative, then alloimmunization can be assessed by an antibody screen

- If the Rh-negative mother is antibody positive, then a confirmatory study, such as a Coombs test, is needed to direct further management and monitoring of the pregnancy

- If the Rh-negative mother is antibody negative, paternal Rh testing can be performed as well.

If the father is also Rh-negative, then there is no risk for alloimmunization and complications of Rh incompatibility. On the other hand, an Rh-positive father gives the fetus a 50% risk of having Rh-positive erythrocytes and a higher risk for the complications of Rh incompatibility. If the father is Rh-positive or the father’s Rh status cannot be determined, then more invasive testing may be needed.

For Rh-negative mothers that have potentially been exposed to fetal Rh-positive blood, one must assess fetomaternal hemorrhage. This assessment can be done with the rosette test for screening. Positive screens can be confirmed with the Kleihauer-Betke (KB) test or flow cytometry to determine the percentage of fetal blood cells (based on detecting fetal hemoglobin F) in the maternal circulation and the next steps in management.

In a patient’s first affected pregnancy, surveillance of maternal antibody titers is recommended. Titers are repeated every month until 24 weeks of gestation and repeated more frequently in the third trimester. In a patient with a history of HDN, maternal titers are not utilized for determining the appropriate time to initiate fetal surveillance in a subsequent pregnancy. Fetal surveillance includes serial Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) dopplers every 1 to 2 weeks beginning at 24 weeks gestation and antenatal testing beginning at 32 weeks gestation. MCA peak systolic velocity of greater than 1.5 MoM is an indication for cordocentesis to determine fetal hematocrit and the need for intrauterine transfusion.