Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) is an enzyme that breaks down and inactivates bradykinin. ACE is present in the lungs and the kidneys and also converts angiotensin I to angiotensin II. This conversion is a crucial step in blood pressure control as angiotensin II causes vasoconstriction and increases blood pressure and constriction of efferent arterioles in the kidneys. Therefore, inhibition of ACE has clinical application as a mechanism for decreasing blood pressure. ACE inhibitors such as captopril, enalapril, lisinopril, and ramipril all inhibit ACE. They are clinically used to manage patients with hypertension, leading to decreased mortality in patients with heart failure, patients with proteinuria, and patients with diabetic nephropathy. ACE inhibitors can reduce heart remodeling that is caused by chronic hypertension. ACE inhibitors are used in patients with chronic kidney disease such as those with diabetic nephropathy, as they decrease intraglomerular pressure, thereby slowing the thickening of the glomerular basement membrane.

Inhibition of ACE decreases the amount of angiotensin II formed from angiotensin I. This decrease in angiotensin II causes a reduction in the glomerular filtration rate by preventing the constriction of efferent arterioles. This dilation of efferent arterioles causes an increase in renin due to the loss of negative feedback. Inhibition of ACE, however, also inhibits the inactivation of bradykinin. Because bradykinin is a potent vasodilator, the prevention of bradykinin inactivation causes excessive amounts of bradykinin to build-up. This increased bradykinin can cause the side effect of angioedema, which can be seen in some patients taking ACE inhibitors and is the reason for the contraindication of ACE inhibitors in C1 esterase deficiency.

Therefore, clinically, angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB) can be used instead of ACE inhibitors for blood pressure control in hypertensive patients, heart failure, proteinuria, chronic kidney disease, including diabetic nephropathy, or patients with intolerance to ACE inhibitors such as those who have excessive coughing or angioedema.

FDA has approved medications for treating the acute attacks of hereditary angioedema like c-1 esterase inhibitor concentrate, B2 bradykinin receptor inhibitor, a kallikrein inhibitor, and plasma free recombinant C1-inhibitor concentrate. FDA approved prophylaxis to prevent attacks of hereditary angioedema are C1 esterase inhibitor, plasma-derived concentrate of C1-esterase inhibitor, and plasma kallikrein inhibitor (monoclonal antibody).