The three types of DHR can distinguish one to another according to the skin reactivity they produce once antigens applied epicutaneously or intradermally. The magnitude of the reaction can be assessed in animals by measuring the thickening of the skin, which is local but also systemic such as cytokine synthesis and T-cell division.

In contact dermatitis, small antigens called haptens penetrate the skin and combine with tissue protein and mediate immune reactions. Langerhans cells are the principal antigen-presenting cells involved in the recognition of hapten-tissue protein complexes and their presentation to T cells. Also, keratinocytes, which express MHC class II molecules and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), make a group of cytokines including IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, among others that help in the establishment of the contact hypersensitivity response.

Tuberculin-type hypersensitivity, initially described by Koch, occurs in patients with tuberculosis (TB) or those vaccinated against tuberculosis when they are injected subcutaneously with tuberculin (a product derived from the tubercle bacillus). They react with skin induration, swelling, and redness.Leishmania tropica and Mycobacterium leprae.

Granulomatous-type hypersensitivity results from the persistence within macrophages of intracellular pathogens or other substances that the cell is unable to process or destroy. It occurs to a variety of antigens, including beryllium, talc, silica, among others, where macrophages are unable to digest them. In allergic alveolitis, the APC is unable to process and assimilate the immune complexes, and granuloma develop. Another disease is sarcoidosis, where the antigen is unknown but leads to granuloma formation.