A 1.5 Tesla magnet is widely used for breast imaging.

Breast cancer is the most common indication for obtaining MRI. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI is required to distinguish benign versus malignant lesions of the breast. It enables assessment of tumor morphology and enhancement kinetics.

Abbreviated MRI protocols have been proposed for cancer screening and diagnosis with reduced scan time and cost.

**Artifacts**

An artifact occurs due to misinterpretation of the object in the FOV.

Artifacts are broadly classified based on patient factors and technical factors.

Patient factors:

1. Motion artifact

Motion can be physiological due to respiration and pulsation of the blood vessels or patient movement which can be voluntary or involuntary. Patient motion can affect the entire series of images or sometimes only a few images in a series especially when it is due to pulsation of blood vessels. Motion artifact always occurs in the phase-encoding direction.Fix: Educate the patient about the importance of holding still. Patients with pain or claustrophobia may need adequate analgesia or sedation.

2. Positioning

Improper positioning of the breasts within the breast coil can result in signal distortion and inhomogeneous fat suppression. Large breasts can get compressed against the coil and produce abnormal signal hyperintensity at the site of contact. Fix: Breasts should be properly placed within the dedicated breast coil. Comfortable positioning of the patient with arms by the side or above the head.

3. Metal artifact

Ferromagnetic (iron, nickel, cobalt) and non-ferromagnetic (titanium) metals have higher magnetic susceptibility. Metallic objects such as biopsy clips, jewelry, skin tattoos, metallic snaps on clothing, deposits from core biopsy needle or electrocautery devices produce field inhomogeneity which presents as signal void along with distortion of the image. MRI of the post-surgical breast for local recurrence remains challenging due to the metal artifact.Fix: Thorough examination of the patient with the removal of any metallic objects is required; using a lower field strength scanner such as 1.5 Tesla magnet with a short echo time (TE).

Technical factors:

1. Zipper artifact

Zipper artifact, also known as radiofrequency interference occurs when there is an external radio-frequency (RF) signal that is not consistent with the phase encoding gradient. The images have a noisy background which manifests as alternating dark and bright bands across the image. The source of the external RF signal can be within the imaging unit or outside such as television, radio, or patient monitoring equipment. The imaging unit has a metal shield called the Faraday cage that normally prevents the external RF signal from entering the unit. Breach in this metal shield result in zipper artifact.Fix: Periodic quality control check of the Faraday cage is necessary. Ensure the door to the scan room is closed correctly. Use of monitoring equipment that is MR compatible.

2. Wrap-around artifact

When the FOV is smaller than the signal producing tissue, it results in a wrap-around artifact. The signal generated by the tissue outside the FOV gets superimposed on the contralateral side of the image. Wrap-around artifact, also known as aliasing, occurs along the phase-encoding direction.Fix: Aliasing can be reduced by increasing the FOV or by phase oversampling. Saturation bands can also be used to suppress the signal from excited tissues outside the FOV.

3. Chemical shift artifact

There are two kinds of chemical shift artifact. In the first kind, the differences in the precession frequency of the protons in water and fat generate an image with bright and dark bands on either side of the tissue. This type always occurs in the frequency encoding direction. The second kind of chemical shift artifact occurs on gradient-echo images, where the water and fat protons move in and out of phase at fixed time points, depending on the strength of the magnet (1.5 T or 3T). As a result, there will be signal void at the fat-fluid interface, which presents as a dark rim around the tissue.Fix: Chemical shift artifact (first kind) can be reduced by increasing the bandwidth per pixel. Use of fat suppression technique, longer TE and changing the frequency encoding direction also can reduce this artifact.

4. Moire fringes or Zebra artifact

Zebra artifact is a combination of wrap-around artifact and field inhomogeneity. It is seen along the edges with larger FOV as alternating bands of bright and dark signal. It can also occur when a body coil is used instead of the breast coil.Fix: Selecting appropriate FOV to reduce aliasing or phase oversampling. Shimming of the magnet to reduce field inhomogeneities.