**Mineralocorticoids**

The mineralocorticoids, which include corticosterone, 11-deoxycorticosterone, and more importantly, aldosterone, act on the kidney to increase sodium reabsorption and potassium excretion. Water reabsorption follows increased sodium reabsorption, resulting in an increase in effective circulating volume and therefore increased blood pressure. Specifically, mineralocorticoids achieve this via increased synthesis of epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) and sodium-potassium ATPases on the principal cells of the distal nephron.

Mineralocorticoids also promote potassium ion secretion at the principal cells because of the gradients produced by the above channels. In high potassium states, aldosterone synthesis is increased to promote potassium excretion. Lastly, mineralocorticoids promote hydrogen ion secretion at the intercalated cells.

Interestingly, 11-deoxycorticosterone and corticosterone also have mineralocorticoid effects. These are weaker than aldosterone but can produce a strong mineralocorticoid effect when present in excess levels, as in some forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), for example, 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency resulting in hypertension.

**Glucocorticoids**

Cortisol is the major glucocorticoid and increases in response to stress which activates the HPA axis. Therefore, all of its functions can be thought of as allowing the body to function with increased stress. Upon engaging glucocorticoid receptors, cortisol increases the expression of genes that will regulate metabolism, the immune system, cardiovascular function, growth, and reproduction. Cortisol is essential for maintaining blood pressure because it increases the sensitivity of vascular smooth muscle to vasoconstrictors like catecholamines and suppresses the release of vasodilators like nitrous oxide.

**Androgens**

The adrenal androgens, primarily DHEA, require peripheral conversion to active sex steroids in the gonads and peripheral tissue. Circulating DHEA-sulfate is the best measure of adrenal androgen excess. Some DHEA is also converted to androstenedione. Ultimately, both are converted to testosterone in peripheral tissues, which is converted to 5-alpha-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the most potent androgen.

**Catecholamines**

Adrenal catecholamines, epinephrine, and norepinephrine are involved in executing the fight-or-flight response of the sympathetic nervous system. They increase blood pressure via alpha-1 receptors on vascular smooth muscle. They help increase serum glucose by activating glycogenolysis and increasing glucagon secretion via beta-2 receptors and decreasing insulin secretion via alpha-2 receptors.