# Definition/Introduction

Human subjects research is a heavily regulated type of research, hence this paper will start with two critical definitions. The US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Code of Federal Regulations, 45 CFR 46, provides the following definitions:

- Obtains information or biospecimens through intervention or interaction with the individual, and uses, studies, or analyzes the information or biospecimens; or

- Obtains, uses, studies, analyzes, or generates identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens."

Research means “a systematic investigation, including research development, testing and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge.” Human subjects research is at the intersection of these two federal definitions and must obtain Institutional Review Board approval before starting, regardless of the type of design involved. The topic of a human research study varies and can include building a theory or hypothesis, determining patient satisfaction, or testing a medication, tool, device, process, or health intervention, to name a few.

Research studies are classified into a qualitative study, a quantitative study, or a combination of both, called a mixed-methods study.

**Quantitative Research**

A research study can be done to describe variables and/or to determine the association of test and outcome variables regarding the research topic.

For observational or non-interventional research studies, the investigator gathers data for identified variables of interest without any intervention or outside influence by the investigator on the groups under study. Cohort, cross-sectional, and case-control are the common types.

A cohort study involves longitudinally following a group or groups of population with certain known exposures to determine who develops certain diseases or illnesses. This type of study could establish causal relationships between exposure and outcomes such as illness.

**Qualitative Research**

Qualitative research aims to answer the more open-ended questions that arise during the research process. Rather than trying to answer quantitative ‘how much’ or ‘how many’-type questions, qualitative research seeks to answer ‘how’ and ‘why’ questions.

There are many approaches used for qualitative research. Some of the most common are ethnography, grounded theory, phenomenology, and narrative research.

**Mixed Methods Research**

In some cases, a combination of both qualitative and quantitative methods, or what is called a mixed-methods research is performed. Mixed methods approaches that combine qualitative and quantitative research can allow for hypothesis generation and hypothesis testing to help try to answer questions in a more well-rounded way. This is usually done to get the benefits of both numerical and non-numerical information to answer the research questions on hand. For example, a cross-sectional study found that young teens are vaping at a high rate. For further elucidation of the reasons why these teens vape, a subsequent focus group could be performed.

# Issues of Concern

One of the primary concerns in doing research is the identification and formulation of the research problem (i.e., research question).

The second area of concern for research studies is selecting the correct research study to perform.  Many times descriptive and qualitative research must first take place to produce a robust, significant, and feasible research hypothesis for later quantitative research methods.

# Clinical Significance

The significance of research studies and its findings collectively support both clinical and public health needs. The discovery of new medicines and new treatment modalities for specific diseases is possible using randomized clinical (control) trials, more commonly termed as RCTs.

In clinical settings, case studies and case series can be used by clinicians, surgeons, and other clinical specialists to scientifically document and describe the occurrence of rare diseases.

Research studies can be both simple and complex; thus, they can be performed in several ways, which must be consistently systematic and scientific. The acquisition of new research findings will eventually find utility in the application of evidence-based medicine (EBM).