The epidemiology of measles is variable across the globe and is related to immunization levels achieved in a particular region. Before implementing widespread vaccination programs, measles accounted for an estimated 2.6 million deaths. Despite vaccination in the present era, The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that approximately 134,200 deaths (15 deaths/hour) occurred in 2015 due to measles.  According to the CDC, there were 372 cases in 2018 and 764 cases through May of 2019.  Measles is a reportable disease in most nations, including the United States.

The measles virus has no animal reservoir and occurs only in humans. The virus is highly contagious, with each case capable of causing 14 to 18 secondary cases among susceptible populations. Measles is transmitted from person to person by respiratory droplets, small particle aerosols, and close contact. The incubation period is 10 to 14 days, although longer periods have been reported. Unvaccinated young children and pregnant women are at high risk for contracting measles, and measles most commonly affects young children. More recently, there has been a shift to older children and adolescents due to increasing levels of immunization coverage and alterations in the levels of population immunity at different ages. Young infants born to mothers with acquired immunity are protected from measles due to passive antibody transfer, but as these antibodies wane, they become susceptible. Infectiousness of a case is maximal in the four days before and four days after the rash develops, which coincides with peak levels of viremia and the features of cough, conjunctivitis, and coryza.