The colostomy appliance should be changed every 5-7 days, depending on the appliance. Patients generally do this themselves or with the help of the primary caregiver, or parent in case of children. Any case of skin breakdown or skin irritation or difference in stomal appearance should be seen by a health worker.

Before starting the procedure, all supplies should be arranged, and handwashing and donning of gloves should be done. The used stoma bag should be first emptied of all content, and then the flange removed by gentle traction on the bag or flange towards the stoma with counter-traction on the skin. An adhesive remover may also be used. The stoma and parastomal area should be gently cleaned with water, dabbed rather than scrubbed, without using soap. The stoma should be assessed and must be moist, above skin level, and pink to red in color, and the peristomal skin should be normal. Any deviation from this should be notified to the surgeon. The stoma should be measured, or the previous measurement remembered and size should not be more than 1/16-1/8.

The peristomal skin should be dried appropriately to allow good seal formation. Adhesive pastes or powders may also be applied peristomally. The paper cover on the back of the flange is then removed with the border tape in place. It is then placed around the stoma and held in place for 1 to 2 minutes to create an adequate seal. If it is a 2-piece bag, the bag is then clipped on to the flange. A belt may be applied around the abdomen and clipped to the sides of the flange to hold it in place. After this, safe disposal of the stoma bag, handwashing, and documentation of the procedure must be done.

Another integral aspect of colostomy care is mental health support through a thorough assessment of the patients’ psychomotor status as to how they are coping and dealing with the stoma. Poor body image perception, sexual dissatisfaction, and depression are common in patients with colostomies. Reassurance, psychiatric, and behavioral counseling may be needed to alleviate these symptoms.