The common fibular nerve is a frequently discussed subject compared to other neuromuscular complaints due to its frequent injury and its classic clinical presentation. Because of its location, it is fairly vulnerable to damage. It travels across the lateral aspect of the knee over the neck of the fibula, where its only protection is skin and subcutaneous fat and fascia. Thus, various trauma to the lateral knee often results in damage to the common fibular nerve. For example, if a football player is tackled from the side, the result may be a fibular neck fracture and common fibular nerve injury.

Another frequent mechanism of injury to the common fibular nerve is through compression of the nerve as it crosses the fibular head and neck or distal to them. This may occur after a splint or cast is placed incorrectly or too tight, or in the case of compartment syndrome after a trauma or burn. These examples would present similarly: the compressed nerve would initially cause paresthesias, followed by loss of sensation and weakness and ultimately resulting in loss of dorsiflexion of the foot and loss of ankle eversion if left untreated. It should be noted that in these cases, there might also be a vascular compromise, so distal pulses should be examined.

There are also clinical presentations that may mimic an injury to the common fibular nerve but are actually due to proximal injuries at the level of the sciatic nerve. One common example is in the case of piriformis syndrome. In some cases or anatomical variants, the sciatic nerve, which carries fibers for the common fibular nerve, may become entrapped within the piriformis muscle. A tight piriformis may then cause similar symptoms to the classic common fibular nerve injury: loss of dorsiflexion, loss of foot eversion, and loss of sensation to the anterolateral aspect of the leg and dorsum of the foot. However, in addition to these symptoms, the patient might also experience symptoms proximal to the knee similar to the classic presentation of sciatica. Thus, it is essential to differentiate between sciatica, piriformis syndrome, or just simply an injury to the common fibular nerve in order to formulate a proper treatment plan.