When encountered by the immune system, atypical mycobacteria are taken up by macrophages, causing the macrophages to release IL-12 and TNF-alpha. IL-12 release activates the IL-12-interferon gamma pathway. This pathway further recruits additional macrophages, neutrophils, and T-cells. This process ultimately results in the killing of these intracellular bacteria by nitric oxide and free radicals. The macrophages, neutrophils, and T-cells recruited to the site of infection can sometimes result in granuloma formation, creating a fibrinous mass walling off the infection and isolating it from the rest of the body. Atypical mycobacteria are often able to evade this response due to the ability of the glycoproteins in their cell wall to inactivate the phagosome-lysosome fusion process and free radical destruction allowing the bacteria to live as intracellular organisms within macrophages.

**Lymphadenitis:**According to the American Thoracic Society and Infectious Disease Society of America, Mycobacterium avium complex bacteria cause approximately 80% of atypical mycobacterial infections in children. The progression of atypical mycobacterial lymphadenitis has been described in four stages by Toretta et al. (2018). The first stage describes a unilateral submandibular, preauricular, or cervical chain lymph node that slowly and painlessly enlarges over several days to months. Stage one was noted by the author to be unlikely to show systemic symptoms. Stage two describes the presence of tenderness indicative of necrosis within the lymph node. Stage three describes erythematous discoloration of the overlying skin. Stage four describes the progression of skin breakdown to the formation of sinus tracts.

**Pulmonary:**The three species that make up the vast majority of atypical mycobacterial pulmonary infections are theMycobacterium avium complex bacteria (approximately 80%), Mycobacterium kansasii, and Mycobacterium abscessus. Mycobacterium avium complex infections can be further grouped into two different presentations. The first presentation is found more commonly in middle-aged males with the risk factors of long term alcohol and tobacco abuse. In these patients, the MAC bacteria tend to form large fibrocavitary lesions in the apex of the lung. These lesions can rapidly progress to encompass significant areas of the lung within 1 to 2 years and generally result in morbidity and mortality at a much faster rate. The second type of presentation of MAC lung disease more commonly affects postmenopausal caucasian women. In this presentation, the bacteria form small pulmonary nodules and cylindrical bronchiectasis with a concentration of nodules in the right middle lobe and ligula of the left upper lobe of the lungs. Similar presentations to MAC pulmonary disease are seen with Mycobacterium kansasii and abscessus. Mycobacterium kansasii tends to form large fibrocavities in the apex of the lung, similar to the first type of MAC disease presentation. A much smaller proportion of infections resemble the nodular and bronchiectatic type of presentation. Mycobacterium abscessus infection presents the majority of the time with a nodular and bronchiectatic presentation concentrated in the upper lung fields. Mycobacterium abscessus will form fibrocavities in approximately 15 percent of infections.

**Skin and Soft Tissue:**Atypical Mycobacteria enter the skin and soft tissue through trauma, surgical procedures, or via indwelling medical equipment. All species of atypical mycobacteria can cause skin and soft tissue infection. The most common species to cause skin and soft tissue infection are Mycobacterium chelonae, abscessus, fortuitum, ulcerans, and marinum. Mycobacterium marinum infection is also known as the fish tank granuloma, after originally being discovered to cause soft tissue infection in fish tank workers/enthusiasts. It most commonly causes localized erythema and granuloma formation of the digits, which can progress to nodular lymphangitis of the hands and forearms similar in appearance to sporotrichosis. These bacteria more rarely can affect tendons, joint spaces and cause osteomyelitis. Immunocompromised patients have had recorded cases of disseminated infection. Mycobacterium ulcerans is also known as the Buruli ulcer. These ulcers are known for their large areas of skin involvement, deep ulceration, and marked cosmetic disfigurement. They most commonly begin as a small, painless nodule, which slowly begins to ulcerate. These ulcers are characterized by poorly defined and irregular borders and can cover extensive sections of the body. Other variations of these lesions may also begin as localized erythema, subcutaneous edema, or a violaceous skin rash. Of note, approximately 15% of Mycobacterium ulcerans infections cause osteomyelitis. Mycobacterium fortuitum most commonly presents as a solitary subcutaneous nodule. The majority of cases ofMycobacterium fortuitum infection have low morbidity and limited infection. Immunocompromised patients, however, have been known to suffer from the more serious and disseminated infection. Mycobacterium abscessus most commonly forms an abscess under the site of skin trauma/penetration. These abscesses are painful to the touch, may form draining sinus tracts, and may progress to ascending lymphadenitis. Disseminated disease can occur in immunocompromised individuals and produce diffuse subcutaneous nodules with lymphadenitis. Mycobacterium chelonae presents in the majority of cases as small disseminated cutaneous nodules that are painful to the touch. The skin surrounding these lesions is often hyperpigmented. Lesions may also drain, form sinus tracts, appear as cellulitis or non-healing ulcers. Infection is most common in immunocompromised patients. Mycobacterium chelonae has also been known to cause osteomyelitis.