Simultaneous action of multiple contributing factors such as peripheral vascular disease, neuropathy, biomechanical structural deformities, and soft tissue changes is behind the formation and progression of foot ulcerations.

Vasculopathy consists of both macro- and microvascular processes. Cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and peripheral vascular or arterial disorders are among the macrovascular, and arterioles and capillaries dysfunctions are the microvascular processes. Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) commonly affects the peroneal and tibial arteries. The atherosclerotic plaque begins to expand within the vessel walls, and the occlusion facilitates the healing of ulceration. Diabetes, smoking, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia can contribute to PAD, leading to an increased risk of ulceration. Patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) and PAD are at a higher risk of lower extremity amputations. Hyperglycemia is associated with increased thromboxane A2 (TXA2), a platelet aggregating factor and vasoconstrictor; this increase can lead to a hypercoagulable state and occlusion.

As the capillary size decreases, an increase in vascular permeability and an impairment in the local blood flow regulations alter the microvasculature in patients with DM. Endothelial dysfunction is thought to be the leading cause of changes in the microvascular system. Endogenous nitric oxide causes dilatation of both arteries and veins at the microvascular level by regulating the vascular tone. Vasoconstriction and hypertension occur as the level of nitric oxide decreases. Lower responsiveness of patients with diabetes to nitric oxide puts them at a higher risk of increased vasoconstriction and, subsequently, ulceration due to a lack of adequate nutrients and oxygen for healing.

Peripheral neuropathy is a progressive loss of peripheral nerve fibers, including the sensory, motor, and autonomic fibers. It can progress to a complete sensation loss, which typically begins distally at the toes and advances proximally with a stocking and glove pattern. Patients are not aware of minor traumas at advanced levels of peripheral neuropathy. Motor neuropathy causes a muscle imbalance leading to increased pressure and a tissue breakdown in certain weight-bearing areas. Autonomic neuropathy causes a decreased supply of nutrients and oxygen to the soft tissues of the foot by shunting the arterial blood flow away from the nutrient capillaries. Hyperglycemia is the leading cause of neuropathy in patients with DM. Nitric oxide has also been demonstrated to be decreased in diabetic patients with peripheral neuropathy.

Osseous deformities of the foot play an important role in the development and chronicity of foot ulcers. Structural deformities such as hallux valgus, hammertoes, equinus, hallux limitus, and Charcot foot can lead to an increase in pressure and, thus, ulcerations. A decreased soft tissue density and fat pad atrophy can also predispose patients to lower extremity ulcerations.