**Calculation of IOL power in eyes with SO:**The problem arises due to a difference in speed of sound in vitreous (1532 m/s) and SO (986m/s for 1000mPas SO, and the speed of sound varies depending on the viscosity of the silicone oil used). This results in falsely higher axial length (AL) and lower IOL power calculation. The true AL can be obtained by multiplying the calculated AL with a factor of 0.71.

Such calculations are needed if emmetropia is planned after silicone oil removal. When emmetropia is planned for a silicone oil-filled eye (including eyes in which long-term silicone oil tamponade is needed and silicone oil removal is not being planned), 3-4 diopters should be added to the IOL power derived using the previous methods (ultrasonic or optical biometry in silicone oil mode).

**Use of gas in patients undergoing surgery during****general anesthesia:**Nitrous oxide (N2O) is 117 times more water-soluble than SF6. Therefore, it tends to diffuse inside the gas bubble leading to a rapid expansion of the bubble (SF6 bubble may expand up to three times its original size). Therefore, IOP may rise rapidly after 15 to 20 minutes and then decrease after N2O is discontinued as it diffuses out of the body through ventilation. Hence, N2O should be discontinued 15 to 20 minutes before the intraocular gas injection.

**Clinical assessment of gas volume in the vitreous cavity:**The volume of gas fill can be calculated based on its fill in the vitreous cavity. The patient should be examined in an upright position. A bubble with its inferior meniscus at the center of the pupil is around 50% vitreous volume. In contrast, a bubble with its inferior meniscus above the pupillary center is around 30% to 40 % of vitreous volume.

**SO emulsification:**Some eyes may require permanent tamponade. High viscosity SO (5000 centistokes) can be used in such eyes to prevent early emulsification. Such eyes should be frequently monitored for SO emulsification and IOP rise as they may need a SO exchange in these situations.

**Glaucoma**: Eyes receiving tamponade in the vitreous cavity may develop high intraocular pressure and glaucoma. Regular follow-up and monitoring of IOP are vital. Color photo of the fundus and optic disc, central corneal thickness, optical coherence tomography of the retinal nerve fiber layer, and Humphrey visual fields should be performed as needed.

**Cataract:**Cataract is an important cause of visual decline after using vitreous tamponade and pars plana vitrectomy. A regular slit-lamp examination needs to be performed for early detection and management.