# Introduction

The superficial peroneal nerve is also known as the superior fibular nerve. The superficial peroneal nerve originates from the common peroneal nerve alongside the deep peroneal nerve. The superficial peroneal nerve is the smaller of the two nerves.

# Structure and Function

The superficial peroneal nerve has both motor and sensory components. The motor component of the nerve innervates the lateral compartment of the lower leg which includes the peroneus longus and peroneus brevis muscles. Motor activation of these muscles by the superficial peroneal nerve is primarily responsible for eversion and mild plantar flexion of the foot.

The medial dorsal cutaneous nerve and intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerves are the terminal branches of the superficial peroneal nerve. These nerves handle the sensory component of the superficial peroneal nerve to the dorsum of the foot although it does not provide sensory innervation to the first webspace. Instead, the dorsal peroneal nerve provides sensory innervation to this area.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The lateral compartment of the lower leg in which the superficial peroneal nerve lies receives its vascular supply predominantly from the fibular artery and the posterior tibial artery.

# Muscles

The superficial peroneal nerve supplies motor innervation to the following muscles:

- Peroneus longus muscle

- Peroneus brevis muscle

# Physiologic Variants

Anatomic variations of deep (crural) fascia piercings have been widely identified for the superficial peroneal nerve.

In addition to variation in fascial layer piercings, the superficial peroneal nerve has also been shown to be located in various compartments of the leg rather than the normal lateral leg compartment. According to one study in India, 28.3% of cadaveric specimens were found to have the superficial peroneal nerve located in the anterior compartment.

# Surgical Considerations

The superficial peroneal nerve is the only nerve that can be visualized in the human body without dissection by simply plantar flexing, inverting the ankle, and examining the dorsum of the foot.

It is important to consider the anatomic variations of the superficial peroneal nerve and its branches as the branch most commonly at risk for iatrogenic injury is the intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerve when it courses near the distal fibula and both the medial and intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerves at the level of the ankle.

# Clinical Significance

When the superficial peroneal nerve is injured, one will lose the ability to evert the foot based upon the motor mechanics of the nerve.