The optic tract receives its vascular supply by branches of the posterior communicating artery (PCOM) and anterior choroidal artery (AChA). The optic nerve, chiasm, and tracts are intimately involved with the circle of Willis in terms of physical relationship, as exemplified by physical compression caused by vessel aneurysms at branch points commonly leading to visual deficits. Vascularization of these nerve tracts is also provided in part by vessels of the circle of Willis.

The posterior communicating artery comprises the posterior linkage of the circle of Willis between the ICA and the posterior cerebral artery (PCA). Perforating branches of the PCOM supply several structures, including the thalamus, hypothalamus, mammillary bodies, optic chiasm, and posterior part of the optic tract.

The anterior choroidal artery is a branch off the internal carotid artery or rarely the middle cerebral artery (MCA). The anterior choroidal artery most commonly branches off the posterior wall of the ICA between the origin of the PCOM and the termination of ICA. The AChA divides into cisternal and intraventricular segments, the latter referencing the vessel after traversing the choroidal fissure. The cisternal segment is located lateral to the optic tract before curving medially to the inferomedial optic tract surface, following by travel to the lateral geniculate body and choroidal fissure. Ischemia of the posterior communication artery and anterior choroidal artery have correlations with optic tract abnormalities.