Vaccination of individuals employed in high-risk occupations is an efficient approach to halting the disease. The formalin-killed, whole-cell vaccine Q-VAX is 92% to 98% effective at clinical disease prevention. Vaccination is recommended after skin testing as priorly exposed individuals are more likely to have untoward reactions. Coxevac is an inactivated vaccine used in veterinary animals. Isolation in a hospital is recommended if an infected patient undergoes a procedure that can result in the aerosolization of contaminated tissue (autopsies, obstetrical/gynecological procedures). Avoiding raw milk, ectoparasite containment, promoting safe veterinary practices, and disinfecting infected tissue are strategies to decrease exposure. Commercial disinfectants containing benzalkonium chloride or 5% hydrogen peroxide are successful in decontamination.

Prevention and management of Q fever are best handled with an interprofessional healthcare team using open communication and collaborative efforts to achieve optimal patient results. This team will include clinicians, infectious disease specialists, mid-level practitioners (PAs and NPs), nurses, and pharmacists, coordinating their activities and information sharing to improve patient outcomes. Pharmacists with infectious disease specialization can assist clinicians with the latest antibiogram data and perform medication reconciliation while giving the patient counsel on their medications. In most cases, nurses will administer these regimens and should report back to the prescriber or pharmacist if they note any degradation of patient status or adverse reactions. All team members must engage in open communication and precise record-keeping. This interprofessional approach will improve patient outcomes. [Level 5]