Acute interstitial nephritis is associated with medications, infections, and systemic diseases. Drugs are the most common cause of AIN in all age groups. Antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, ciprofloxacin) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are frequently associated with AIN. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), 5-aminosalicylates, rifampin, allopurinol, and acyclovir are other common drugs that can cause AIN. AIN is also recognized as the most common renal lesion in AKI cases associated with immune checkpoint inhibitors (e.g., pembrolizumab).

Infections with the following organisms can cause AIN:

- Bacteria- E. coli, Campylobacter, Salmonella, streptococci

- Viruses- Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, measles, mumps, polyoma, herpes simplex virus

- Spirochetes- Leptospirosis, syphilis

- Parasites- Toxoplasmosis, leishmaniasis

- Fungi - Histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis

Systemic disorders that have been found to cause AIN include sarcoidosis, Sjogren’s syndrome, IgG-4 related systemic disease, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

Idiopathic****AIN is noted in certain unique disease entities such a TINU syndrome (tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis syndrome) and anti-tubular basement membrane (anti-TBM) disease. TINU syndrome presents with acute onset of granulomatous bilateral uveitis (redness, pain, and photophobia) and abnormal renal function from interstitial nephritis. Renal involvement usually precedes the eye manifestations but can occur concurrently. TINU is common in children and younger adults age < 20 years, although cases are reported in older age groups greater than 60. Women are affected more than men with no specific ethnic predominance. TINU is seen in 1%-2% of ophthalmology practices, but it represents up to a third of symptomatic acute bilateral uveitis cases in patients younger than 20 years. The pathogenesis of TINU remains elusive. A combination of genetic susceptibility (Class II human leukocyte antigen subtypes), autoimmune, infectious, and iatrogenic factors are suspected of playing a role.

- Abnormal creatinine or reduced creatinine clearance

- Abnormal urinalysis (low-grade proteinuria, microscopic hematuria, sterile pyuria, white blood cell casts, eosinophiluria, elevated b2 microglobulin)

- Systemic illness for more than two weeks (fever, weight loss, fatigue, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, anemia, abnormal liver enzymes)

Anti-TBM disease presents with acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease in all age groups. Polyuria and polydipsia are the usual accompanying symptoms. Microscopic hematuria and sub-nephrotic range proteinuria can be seen. Anti-TBM antibodies are implicated in the pathogenesis of this disease. The anti-TBM antibodies are directed against the tubulointerstitial nephritis antigen, specifically in the kidney's proximal tubular basement membrane (TBM). Antibody formation can be triggered by drug exposure. The characteristic findings that clinch the diagnosis are the presence of anti-TBM antibodies in the serum, interstitial mononuclear infiltrate with tubulitis, tubular injury on light microscopy, and strong linear IgG staining along the TBM on immunofluorescence. Electron microscopy does not show any immune complexes.