Complete histopathological examination of tissue from a patient with suspected linear IgA bullous dermatosis (LABD) should include an examination of both a standard hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stained specimen along with direct immunofluorescence (DIF). On routine H and E staining, a subepidermal blistering process is observed with a predominately neutrophilic infiltrate. Early in the disease process, this neutrophilic infiltrate may be mainly localized to the dermal papillae and be confused for the "papillary dermal neutrophilic stuffing" seen in dermatitis herpetiformis. Later in the disease process, after the subepidermal split becomes apparent, large numbers of eosinophils may intermix with the neutrophilic infiltrate in the dermis. This creates a diagnostic dilemma because bullous pemphigoid can have similar findings.

One clue that may help sway the examiner more toward the diagnosis of LABD, over DH or BP, is how the neutrophils appear to almost "line up" at the basement membrane. Generally, a definitive diagnosis of LABD is not able to be confidently made based on H and E alone. Therefore, the DIF remains essential in procuring the diagnosis of a vesiculobullous disorder.

Immunopathology remains the gold standard for establishing a diagnosis of LABD or chronic bullous disease of childhood. The classic findings are linear deposition of IgA at the basement membrane zone. Two histopathologic subtypes of the disease exist and are categorized by the location of the IgA deposition. The most common variant is the lamina lucida subtype followed by the sub-lamina densa variant.