# Continuing Education Activity

Encephalocele is usually a congenital type of neural tube defect, where a sac containing brain/meninges/cerebrospinal fluid forms outside the skull due to a bone defect. On occasions, acquired encephaloceles may result from trauma, tumors, or iatrogenic injury. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of encephalocele and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of an encephalocele.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of an encephalocele.
- Outline the management options available for an encephalocele.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication in patients with encephalocele and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Encephalocele is usually a congenital type of neural tube defect (NTD), where a sac containing brain/meninges/cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) forms outside the skull through a bone defect. On occasions, acquired encephaloceles may result from trauma, tumors, or iatrogenic injury. If the sac is formed by protrusion of meninges and CSF, it is appropriately called a meningocele, but it is called an encephalocele when it contains brain tissue. However, both are commonly called encephaloceles.

Repair of the encephalocele is not an emergency, and only those with skin ulceration or CSF leaks need rapid surgery to avoid meningitis. Surgery can be performed as early as two months of age but is usually delayed until about four months to several years due to the small total blood volume of infants. The surgical goals are the closure of the skull defect with a watertight dural closure and the bony defect reconstruction.

# Etiology

The majority of encephaloceles are congenital. Some cases are acquired secondary to tumors, trauma, or iatrogenic injury. One of the most accepted theories for the origin of a congenital encephalocele is the incomplete separation of the surface ectoderm from the neuroectoderm after the closure of the neural folds. The cranial neuropore usually closes on day 25 of embryogenesis. A problem before this day will produce an incomplete closure with a defect not covered by skin.

Genetic and environmental factors have been implicated in the development of an encephalocele.

# Epidemiology

Myelomeningocele, meningocele, encephalocele, and anencephaly comprise 80% of all NTDs. Encephaloceles represent 15%-20% of all NTDs. The incidence of congenital encephaloceles is estimated at 1 in 10,000 live births.

Many NTDs have sex predominance in females, but it is more pronounced for encephalocele (4.5:1).

Approximately 70% to 90% of encephaloceles involve the occipital area.

# Pathophysiology

The exact mechanism for developing an encephalocele has not been identified, but several theories had been proposed. One of the most accepted theories for the origin is a problem with the separation of the surface ectoderm from the neuroectoderm after the closure of the neural folds.

Problems with the mesoderm have also been suggested.

Anterior encephalocele development occurs from abnormal development of the foramen cecum. A diverticulum of dura usually projects anteriorly between the developing nasal and frontal bones at the fonticulus frontalis/foramen cecum. Later in embryogenesis, the diverticulum regresses, and the bone closes. However, if it does not regress, the brain can herniate through the bone defect and form an encephalocele.

The bone defect occurs anterior to the cribriform plate. Nasofrontal encephaloceles result from herniation through the foramen cecum and the fonticulus frontalis and projects along the nasal bridge between the nasofrontal sutures into the glabella. Nasoethmoidal encephaloceles occur when there is herniation through the foramen cecum into the prenasal space and nasal cavity under the nasal bones and above the nasal septum. Naso-orbital encephaloceles occur along the medial orbit wall at the level of the frontal process of the maxilla and the ethmoid-lacrimal bone junction.

Basal encephaloceles occur through the cribriform plate, ethmoid, or sphenoid sinuses and are usually occult. Transethmoidal encephaloceles result from herniation through the cribriform plate, sphenoethmoidal result from herniation through ethmoid and sphenoid bone, transsphenoidal result from herniation through the craniopharyngeal canal, and sphenomaxillary result from herniation through the superior and inferior orbital fissure.

Associated anomalies depend on the location of the encephalocele.

# History and Physical

A visible skin-covered mass near the midline in the head's anterior or posterior area is a sign that a patient has an encephalocele. The anterior encephalocele is usually related to the nasal bridge, glabella, or medial orbit. In the posterior area, it can be above or below the torcula. The sac can be mostly filled with CSF and can be translucent.

Depending on the size, the encephalocele can cause severe facial deformity and hypertelorism.

An anterior encephalocele's most common presenting symptom is nasal obstruction, followed by CSF rhinorrhea and meningitis. Less frequent presentations included hypertelorism.

In posterior encephalocele, hydrocephalus is common in 40% to 60% of occipital cases.

# Evaluation

Prenatal ultrasound, often performed between the 9th and 11th weeks of gestation, is the mainstay imaging showing a fluid-filled sac through a skull defect.

DNA testing for chromosomal abnormality screening can be done at ten weeks.

Prenatal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will easily show the defect but will require fetal sedation. Postnatal brain MRI is the study of choice as it shows the defect, the contents, brain tissue, and any associated anomalies. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the head with three-dimensional reconstruction is done to evaluate the skull defect, bone anomalies, and hydrocephalus. Angiography is used if the defect is close to the dural sinuses. This can be done using CT or MRI angiography.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of encephalocele is surgical. The goals are to repair the bone defect with a water-tight dural closure, eliminate the excess skin, and remove the non-functional brain tissue. When an anterior encephalocele is removed in infants or young children, the facial skeleton will remodel substantially. Craniofacial reconstruction is required for extensive frontal cases to correct hypertelorism and bone defects.

The surgical approach is usually open, but an endoscopic approach can be used when an anterior encephalocele involves the sphenoid/ethmoid region. Endoscopic endonasal surgery for anterior basal encephaloceles provides a relatively favorable risk-benefit profile, with a low postoperative CSF leak rate.

The time to perform surgery depends on the size, location, associated complications, and whether a skin layer covers the encephalocele. If a skin layer is present and acts as a protective cover, surgery can be delayed for a few months or years. If no layer of skin protects the encephalocele, surgery is recommended shortly after birth. Children with basal encephaloceles should have an early surgical correction to prevent infections and the progressive herniation of intracranial contents.

For sincipital or basal encephalocele surgery, the low blood reserve in small children and technical anatomic challenges must be weighed against the risks of facial deformity, airway compromise, and infection. As a result, some have recommended deferring surgery until the age of 2 to 3 years if there is no evidence of active rhinorrhea or a life-threatening condition. However, others have recommended surgery as early as two months as there is sufficient nasal expansion caused by the encephalocele, decreasing the technical difficulties.

Repair of the dural defect, either primarily or using pericranium, must be done in all cases. Fibrin glue is used to reinforce the closure.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Nasal glioma

- Cranial dermal sinus tract

- Nasal dermoid cyst

- Nasal epidermoid

- Dacryocystitis

- Dacryocystocele

- Hemangioma

- Nasal polyp

# Prognosis

Many factors play a role in the prognosis of an encephalocele, like the location, the size, the amount of brain inside the sac, the presence of dural sinuses in the sac, and the presence of the hydrocephalus.

Long term evaluation of children with encephaloceles shows that 48% had adequate development, 11% had mild impairment, 16% had a moderate impairment, and 25% had severe impairment.

Factors that increase mortality include low birth weight, multiple intracranial defects, and Black race.

# Complications

The most common complications are CSF leaks and meningitis. The endoscopic approach repair complication rate of 14% compares favorably to over 20% reported in open procedures.

- CSF leak

- Meningitis

- Seizures

- Hydrocephalus

- Endoscopic recurrence

- Developmental delay

- Developmental impairment

# Consultations

- Neurosurgeon

- Plastic surgeon

- Craniofacial surgeon

- Otolaryngologist

- Intensivist

- Neurologist

- Endocrinologist

- Cardiologist

- Neurorehabilitation

- Geneticist

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prenatal ultrasound is usually performed between the 9th and 11th weeks of gestation and will show a fluid sac. Parental counseling takes place for orientation and possible termination of pregnancy. Genetic counseling may be of benefit for affected individuals and their families.

To prevent NTDs, folic acid fortification of food or folic acid supplementation during childbearing age is recommended. However, there is no clear association between folic acid insufficiency and encephalocele formation. Women of childbearing age should use 400 mg of folic acid daily.

Special remedial education and other medical, social, and vocational services are recommended for those children with developmental delays.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients often have complex medical and neuro disabilities, and an interprofessional team approach is essential. Coordinating care is most appropriately done within this team. Endocrine abnormalities accompany many midline malformations that can be present in encephaloceles; thus, endocrinological evaluation is necessary. Morbidity and mortality have greatly improved with the use of brain MRI, better neurosurgical techniques, and a dedicated neonatal intensive care. The neuroradiologist provides the interpretation of studies to determine the cause of the defect and associated anomalies. Additional studies needed can be recommended before surgery.

While a primary clinician is almost always involved in the care of patients with an encephalocele, it is important to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that includes an obstetrician, neurosurgeon, neurologist, intensivist, craniofacial specialist, and plastic surgeon. The integrated care pathway, combined with an evidence-based approach, will provide the patient's best outcomes.