Diagnostic modalities used in primary bone cancer include imaging, laboratory blood tests, and tissue biopsy.

**Plain Film Radiograph**

All patients should have orthogonal plain film radiographs when a potential PBC is identified. Plain x-rays may show the following findings:

- Osteolytic, osteoblastic, or mixed changes.

- A moth-eaten appearance, suggesting bone destruction secondary to a rapidly expanding tumor within a bone, commonly seen in Ewing sarcoma and telangiectatic osteosarcoma

- A permeative appearance, suggesting tumor progressing through bone, with an ill-defined zone between tumor and healthy bone, often seen in small cell tumors, including Ewing sarcoma

- "Onion skinning," with the tumor lifting partially-formed periosteal bone, classically seen in Ewing sarcoma.

- "Codman triangle," with periosteum lifted off bone and osteoid laid down.

- "Sunburst" appearance, with vertical osteoid calcification due to significant periostitis.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI scan remains the gold standard for the assessment of local tumor extent. The whole anatomical compartment should be imaged, with MRI sensitive for bone and soft tissue lesions. Biopsy planning is crucial, and MRI allows the definition of neurovascular structures. Modern techniques, including dynamic MRI, allow for better characterization of high-grade tumor areas and have been used to assess tumor response to chemotherapy.

**Computed tomography (CT)**

CT scan is used when the diagnosis remains unclear following MRI or MRI is contraindicated. It remains the modality of choice in pelvic PBC and for planning reconstructive surgery. Patients with confirmed PBC require staging, and although many centers still perform chest radiographs, a CT chest is the gold standard for assessing metastatic pulmonary disease.

**Whole-Body Bone Scintigraphy (Bone Scan)**

Whole-body bone scintigraphy is a nuclear medicine study that utilizes Technetium-99m as an active agent, highlighting areas of osteoblastic activity. It allows the detection of malignancy and is useful in diagnosing metastatic disease.

**Positron emission tomography (PET)**

PET scan is a nuclear medicine study that utilizes the high metabolic rate of tumor cells, measuring the uptake of injected radiolabeled F-18 fluoro-deoxy-glucose (FDG). PET scan is in some centers for initial staging of PBC, and studies have suggested it as a modality for follow-up when used in combination with CT scan.

**Laboratory Blood Tests**

Specific laboratory blood tests are not used in diagnosing PBC; however, they form part of the patient workup. In patients undergoing chemotherapy, baseline urea, creatinine, and liver function tests allow baseline assessment of renal and hepatic function. Biochemical markers alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) offer some predictive value, and levels can be monitored in follow-up to assess for disease recurrence.

**Tissue Biopsy**

Biopsy of the lesion is needed for definitive diagnosis, allowing for histopathological assessment and tumor grading. Biopsy should be performed in conjunction with the operating surgical team, ideally in a specialist bone cancer center. It requires meticulous planning, with suboptimal biopsy impacting on definitive surgical treatment options. Imaging should be performed before a biopsy, aiding in approach planning and preventing tissue disruption that could make radiological assessment more difficult. Percutaneous, incisional, or excisional techniques are used. Ultrasound, x-ray, and CT scans allow precise guidance. The tract should be well marked, allowing for excision at the time of surgery, and a specialist bone cancer pathologist should assess samples. Specific markers on immunohistochemistry staining would assist in the diagnosis. Greater than 95% of Ewing sarcomas show extensive membranous expression of CD99. CD99 is not specific to Ewing sarcoma, so other markers are also used in the immunohistochemistry panel.