**Normal Puberty**

Puberty is the transition of a child to sexual maturity and is marked by activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. A surge in the secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus stimulates the pituitary to increase its secretion of follicular stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). An increase in the basal levels of FSH and LH leads to activation of gonads, and an event referred to as "gonadarche," which is the main event in puberty. Activation of the gonads leads to an increase in the secretion of sex hormones, estrogen in girls, and testosterone in boys. In girls, an increase in estradiol leads to breast development (thelarche), an increase in bone mineral density, linear skeletal growth (growth spurt), and eventually epiphyseal fusion, which leads to the cessation of linear growth. The peripubertal rise of FSH also causes an increase in uterine volume and growth of ovarian follicles, which leads to cyclical ovulation and menstruation (menarche). "Adrenarche" occurs due to a pubertal increase in the secretion of adrenal androgens-dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS). Adrenarche manifests as an increase in pubic and axillary hair growth ("pubarche"), acne, and adult-type body odor. Other pubertal changes include an increase in the secretion of growth hormone and weight and body composition changes.

In girls, breast budding (Thelarche) is the first detectable secondary sexual characteristic. However, pubarche is the initial manifestation in 15% of girls.

**Precocious Pseudopuberty**

In precocious pseudopuberty, the excess secretion of sex hormones occurs from the gonads, adrenal glands, ectopic or exogenous sources. This process does not depend on the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis and is associated with suppressed levels of GnRH, FSH, and LH. The exact pathophysiology varies depending on the underlying disorders:

- HCG producing tumors: excess testosterone production occurs due to stimulation of the LH receptors on the Leydig cells, which leads to testicular enlargement and isosexual precocious puberty in boys.

- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: excess androgen production occurs most commonly due to 21 hydroxylase deficiency or less commonly due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency. Both these disorders lead to a decrease in cortisol production, which stimulates adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion and accumulation of cortisol precursors. The cortisol precursors are then redirected to the androgen pathway leading to excess androgen production. This manifests as virilization in girls (hirsutism, clitoromegaly), isosexual precocious puberty in boys and signs of adrenarche (axillary, pubic hair, body odor, and acne) in both sexes.

- Primary hypothyroidism: precocious pseudopuberty occurs due to stimulation of the FSH receptors as thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and follicular stimulating hormone (FSH) are structurally similar. Stimulation of the ovaries causes estrogen production, which leads to premature breast development and galactorrhea, followed by vaginal bleeding. It also leads to the development of ovarian cysts. "Van Wyk and Grumbach syndrome" refers to the combination of primary hypothyroidism, precocious puberty, delayed bone age, and ovarian cysts in girls. In boys, this condition presents with premature testicular enlargement.

- McCune Albright syndrome: This condition occurs due to a post-zygotic activating mutation of the GNAS gene coding for the alpha subunit of the Gs protein, which leads to overactivity of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) pathway. Stimulation of the cAMP pathway leads to the formation of functional follicular ovarian cysts, which lead to signs of estrogen excess and precocious puberty in girls.

- Familial male-limited precocious puberty: FMPP is an autosomal dominant condition caused by an activating mutation of the luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor. This causes premature stimulation of the Leydig cells in the absence of Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) and increased testosterone production in boys.