As with quantitative procedures, it is important to verify that the results of qualitative and semi-quantitative examinations are correct before reporting them to the requesting healthcare provider.

Positive and negative controls are recommended for many qualitative and semi-quantitative tests, including some procedures that use special stains or reagents and tests with endpoints such as agglutination or color change.

Keep the following in mind when using traditional controls for qualitative or semi-quantitative tests: test control materials in the same manner as testing patient samples; use a positive and negative control, preferably once each day of testing, or at least as often as recommended by the manufacturer; choose positive controls that are close to the cut-off value of the test, to be sure the test can detect weak positive reactions; for agglutination procedures, include a weak positive control as well as a negative control and stronger positive control.

Basic safety rules for laboratory conduct should be observed whenever working in a laboratory.

Protect all work surfaces with disposable absorbent bench top paper, discarded into biohazard waste containers weekly or whenever blood contamination occurs. Wipe all work surfaces weekly. All equipment should be regularly inspected for wear or deterioration. Equipment should be maintained according to the manufacturer’s requirements, and records of certification, maintenance, or repairs should be maintained for the life of the equipment.