As described in the previous section, many factors affect the quality of the image. Although these factors are controllable, mistakes can be made that can ultimately reduce the quality and evaluation of the image. The main factors that contribute to the quality of the image are contrast, blur, noise, artifacts, and distortion.

Image noise, another component that affects image quality, gives images a grainy appearance and causes random variations of image brightness. Factors that can contribute to image noise include a variation of photon concentration, thermal activity within an electronic device, fluorescent lights, or sensitivity of the image receptor. Noise can be controlled but not completely prevented. Objects with low contrast are typically most affected.

Conventional radiography, fluoroscopy, and CT scan all use ionizing radiation to produce images, which is another issue of concern. Due to the rise in the use of CT scans and X-rays, it is important to note the harmful effects caused by radiation. Ionizing radiation causes detrimental biological effects on a cellular level either by indirectly producing free radicals to interrupt cellular metabolism or directly damaging the DNA of cells in the body. Cells are considered damaged when the level of cell damage exceeds the cell's ability to repair itself. There is an elevated risk of cancer development due to DNA mutations that occur with ionizing radiation. Studies of radiation-induced cancer from Hiroshima and Nagasaki have shown that there can be a 10 to 20 year latent period from the time an individual gets exposed to radiation to the time of cancer development.