Ocrelizumab is an FDA-approved CD20-directed humanized monoclonal antibody indicated to treat adult patients with primary progressive or relapsing multiple sclerosis; it received approval from the FDA on March 28, 2017.

FDA-approved indications (with clinical trial summaries):

**Multiple Sclerosis (MS)**

**Primary-Progressive MS**

- ORATORIO study: In this double-blinded study, 732 patients were randomly assigned 2 to 1 to either ocrelizumab (two intravenous 300 mg doses given 14 days apart every 24 weeks) or placebo for at least 120 weeks until a prespecified number of disability events occurred. The study's primary endpoint was the percentage of patients with 12-week confirmed disability progression.  Ocrelizumab showed a 12-week confirmed disability progression of 32.9%, whereas the placebo arm showed a 39.3% rate (hazard ratio = 0.76, p=0.03).

**Relapsing MS**

- OPERA I study: In this double-blinded study, 821 patients were randomly assigned 1 to 1 to either ocrelizumab (two intravenous 300 mg doses given 14 days apart and then a single 600 mg doses every 24 weeks) or interferon beta-1a (subcutaneous 44 microgram dose three times weekly) for 96 weeks with a primary endpoint of annualized relapse rate. Results showed that ocrelizumab has a statistically significantly lower annualized relapse rate at 0.16 vs. interferon beta-1a at 0.29 (46% reduction, p<0.001).

- OPERA II study: In this double-blinded study, 835 patients were randomly assigned 1:1 to either Ocrelizumab(two intravenous 300mg doses given 14 days apart and then a single 600mg dose every 24 weeks) or interferon beta-1a (subcutaneous 44 microgram dose three times weekly) for 96 weeks with a primary endpoint of annualized relapse rate. Results showed that ocrelizumab has a statistically significantly lower annualized relapse rate at 0.16 vs. Interferon beta-1a at 0.29 (47% reduction, p<0.001).

At the time of launch, ocrelizumab had a list price of $65000 annually. It is generally covered by commercial insurance and by Medicare. The manufacturer provides patient payment assistance in the form of a co-pay program and referrals to a patient payment assistance foundation.