FSS patients have a proportionate short stature (SS). The provider's responsibility does not end with the diagnosis of FSS. An examination should include establishing the exact cause of the SS, especially when the SS is severe and/or subtle evidence of genetic diseases is present.

Genome sequencing techniques and bioinformatics have emerged as novel methods to diagnose monogenic defects of genetic short stature in families.

Conditions transmitted genetically and responsible for SS include growth hormone (GH) receptor gene mutations, GH gene deletions, mutations in the PROP1, POUF1, SHOX genes, and familial pseudo-hypoparathyroidism, and some causes of familial hypothyroidism.

Monogenic causes of SS are often inherited and occur in families.

A case of SS in the proband and her mother due to microdeletion of the X chromosome (Xp22.33 deletion), a cause of Turner syndrome, with preserved ovarian function and capability to transmit the defect vertically to offspring has been reported.

Some cases with SS in families can be traced to syndromic causes that may or may not have all classical features of the syndromes. A family with short stature and Silver-Russell-like phenotype due to a microdeletion in chromosome12q14.3 has been described with varying features in the index case and other relatives.

Some patients and their family members who were initially classified as FSS or ISS were found to have Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) caused by heterogeneous defects in the SHOX gene.

Defects in the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor (GH-IGF1) axis may be responsible for some familial cases of short stature. The latter includes GH resistance, as well as IGF1 mutations or other gene anomalies. An IGF1 receptor gene anomaly has also been described in families. When a patient and several family members present with a) low birth weight and length, b) normal or high IGF1 levels, c) exaggerated GH response to stimulation tests, and d) poor response to GH therapy compared to the more commonly occurring small for age (SGA) short stature patients, IGF1 receptor mutations or haploinsufficiency of the IGF1 gene must be sought for.

Short children with FSS showed normal IGF1 but higher basal and GHRH-Arginine stimulated GH levels when compared to normal control children as well as those with GH deficiency, thus proving a decreased peripheral GH sensitivity in these patients. Higher GH levels are necessary to keep IGF1 in the target range.

A novel heterozygous IGF1 splicing mutation in a large family with FSS has also been described.

Isolated GH defects in some families are inherited in autosomal recessive, dominant, or x-linked fashion.