The blood supply of the pituitary is unique because it is connected to the hypothalamus. This capillary system is known as the hypothalamohypophyseal portal system. The superior hypophyseal arteries form the primary capillary plexus. This plexus supplies blood to the median eminence. The blood from the median eminence would then drain via the hypophyseal portal veins in a secondary plexus. It is via this system that peptides that are released at the median eminence enter the primary plexus. From that point, the peptides would be transmitted to the adenohypophysis via the hypophyseal portal veins to the secondary plexus. The portal system has fenestrated capillaries that would allow for exchange between the hypothalamus and the pituitary. The cells of the adenohypophysis express G-protein coupled receptors that bind to the peptides allowing the release of hormones from the anterior pituitary.

The majority of the blood supply of the adenohypophysis is derived from the paired superior hypophyseal arteries. These arteries arise from the medial aspect of the internal carotid artery just after leaving the cavernous sinus. The superior hypophyseal emerges 5-mm distal to the origin of the ophthalmic artery and then will go on to form the primary capillary network found in the median eminence. This capillary plexus supplies blood to the pars distalis. The capillary plexus is drained by the anterior and posterior hypophyseal portal veins.

Short veins from the pituitary gland drain into the neighboring dural venous sinuses.