**Surgical Procedures**

Radial Nerve Injury

- Wrist extension achieved with transfer of PT to ECRB

- Finger MCP extension achieved with transfer of the FCR to EDC or FDS of the long finger to the EDC

- Thumb extension achieved with the transfer of the palmaris longus to the EPL or FDS of the ring finger to the EPL.

Low Median Nerve Injury

- Thumb opposition achieved with the transfer of the abductor digiti minimi to the APB (Huber), extensor indicies proprius to the APB (Burkhalter), or FDS of the ring finger to the APB (Bunnell or Royle-Thompson). These are considered opponensplasty procedures as they attempt to restore thumb opposition. Palmaris longus to APB (Camitz) transfer is another well described procedure but only restores palmar abduction, not thumb opposition.

High Median Nerve Injury

- Thumb opposition achieved with transfers described above

- Thumb interphalangeal (IP) flexion is achieved with the transfer of the brachioradialis, ECRL, or ECU to the FPL

- DIP and PIP flexion to the index finger can be achieved by transferring the ECRL to the FDP tendon of the index finger or by side-to-side tenodesis of the flexor digitorum profundus tendons.

Ulnar Nerve Palsy

- Clawing is corrected by blocking MCP hyperextension which allows for the transmission of the EDC extensor forces distally to the PIP and IP through the extensor hood.  This is accomplished by MCP capsulodesis or tenodesis. The FDS slips of the affected finger can be transected 2 cm proximal to their insertion and sutured back to themselves proximally creating a lasso around the A1 pulley (Zancolli lasso). Alternatively, the FDS of the long finger can be transected 2 cm proximal to its insertion and retracted from the tendon sheath proximally and then rerouted distally deep to the intermetacarpal ligament and inserted into the radial lateral bands of the small and ring fingers (Stiles-Bunnell). Clawing of all four digits (as seen in a combined ulnar and low median nerve palsy) can be treated using the FCR, or ECRB tendon split into two to four tails according to the number of fingers being addressed. The tails are then extended using free tendon grafts and attached to the radial lateral bands of the small, ring and long fingers and the ulnar lateral band of the index finger (Brand).

- Power pinch (normally achieved by the ulnarly innervated adductor pollicis, 1st dorsal interossei, and deep head of the flexor pollicis brevis) can be addressed using the ECRB or FDS for an adductor plasty. The ECRB adductor-plasty is performed by detaching the ECRB from its insertion on the base of the second metacarpal and retrieving it proximal to the extensor retinaculum. A free tendon graft is then used as an extension on the end of the ECRB tendon and routed distally between the second and third metacarpals and attached to the adductor pollicis insertion on the first metacarpal. Alternatively, FDS adductor-plasty can be done using the long finger FDS. The FDS is harvested 2 cm proximal to its insertion and routed across the palm and attached to the adductor pollicis insertion.

EPL Rupture in the setting of a healed distal radius fracture is treated with EIP to EPL transfer.  When harvesting the EIP, it can be identified ulnar to the index EDC tendon at the level of the metacarpal head.