Unfortunately, there are few studies that investigate the efficacy of muscle energy, and a systematic review of randomized control trials from multiple disciplines that practice physical manipulations for muscle energy in patients with COPD was inconclusive.

One of the best-known and used osteopathic medicine (OMT) approaches is the Muscle Energy Technique (MET).

The effectiveness of the technique will depend on some factors, such as the correct positioning of the joint and the correct muscle tension, an exact diagnostic path, a force put by the operator sufficient to change the muscular behavior of the area, and an adequate repositioning of the articulation after the manual procedure.

The clinical mechanisms that explain the positive response to the technique are not fully understood. MET could stimulate mechanoreceptors and send muscular-articular afferents to inhibit nociceptive afferents, as in a reflex circuit, by varying the mechanical and metabolic environment of the treated area. The technique could stimulate reciprocal inhibition, making the activated muscles more relaxed and stretch, with gain in joint movement. Another hypothesis is improving fluid drainage, improving the metabolic environment, and lowering inflammatory indices and nociceptive substances.

When to choose to perform a MET? This technique has no side effects. The concept of this approach is to exploit the force that the patient can express, respecting the physiological limits without creating pain or discomfort. The technique can also be used to prepare other techniques, such as a high-velocity low-amplitude (HVLA) or for more demanding stretches, and prepare the ribs for more effective work on the diaphragm muscle. For example, after a sternotomy cardiac surgery, patients may present positional changes in the rib joints, causing pain. To improve the function of the respiratory muscles and the muscles that affect the rib cage, respecting the sternal wound, it is possible to perform a MET. When the pain has improved, other more comprehensive approaches (such as unwinding or more challenging rehabilitation exercises) can be performed, increasing the patient's ability to breathe and move. The presence of a scar due to previous trauma or surgery can alter the movement of a rib and the surrounding muscles. In this case, it is necessary to know that MET can be used to increase the range of motion (ROM) of the rib, improving the afferent/efferent picture of the treated area but, precisely because of the scar presence, it is likely that the reduction of the ROM can to return. In this situation, it is not wrong to reschedule visits for the patient and periodically carry out this manual technique, to obtain more lasting maintenance of muscle and joint movement.

To conclude, MET can be used as the only technique if the result is the complete restoration of joint and muscle function, or the technique can be used to prepare for more demanding techniques for the patient.