Fresnel prisms have been used widely to treat squints, amblyopia, nerve palsies, and nystagmus.

- Phorias – Fresnel prisms are used to disrupt the fusion, which causes the eye to deviate. Hence promotes fusion and reduces the deviation.

- Early onset strabismus – Prism adaptation in the preoperative period can help by enhancing surgical outcomes or, in some cases, by establishing fusion non-surgically.

- Amblyopia – Fresnel prisms can be applied as a weak patch over the dominant eye in mild cases of amblyopia.

- Nystagmus – Fresnel prisms can be used in large abnormal head posture cases. Prisms are placed with the base away from the direction of gaze preference; this allows eyes to rotate into position without a significant head turn. This help by redirecting the visual gaze towards the null point of nystagmus towards the field of minimal tremor.

- Nerve palsies – Fresnel prisms can be advised as a temporary measure in patients with isolated nerve pathologies to avoid diplopia or to increase the field of gaze. This allows the maintenance of binocularity during the recovery period. The power of these might be changed as the muscle function recovers.

- Incomitant strabismus – Fresnel prisms can be applied over part of a lens to allow correction in specific gaze positions. Occasionally different prism powers might be needed in various fields of gaze for which Fresnel prisms can be easily cut and placed over spectacles as needed.

- Hemianopsia/ One-eyed patient– Fresnel prisms placed several degrees off the central gaze with the base towards the non-seeing eye can help by increasing the visual field.

- Bedridden patients – Base-down prisms can be advised for patients to read or watch television. These prisms change the image's angle and allow reading without needing head elevation.

- Rehabilitation – Fresnel prisms can be used with the base placed towards the patient's neglected side. This can help by making the patient more aware of the neglected side. In stroke patients who tend to lean towards one side, prisms can be placed with the base directed toward inappropriate posture. This can help in alleviating the postural deficits related to vestibular movements.

- Multiplex prism- In a one-eyed patient's field, expansion cannot be achieved by a conventional Fresnel prism. Hence, multiplex prisms are new devices for patients with apical scotoma limiting monocular field expansion.