Though most fevers in the ICU are of infective etiology, the possibility of non-infective etiology also needs to be considered in any setting to prevent abuse or misuse of antibiotics.

**Postoperative Fever**

Fever is quite frequently seen in the first 48 hours after surgery. Early postoperative fever is usually noninfectious due to an inflammatory response to surgery. This does not require evaluation. Fever after 72-96 hours post-surgery is usually infectious and needs further evaluation. The surgical wound should be evaluated for infection. The other causes of fever are atelectasis, urinary tract infection, deep vein thrombosis, suppurative phlebitis, and pulmonary embolism.

**Ventilator-associated Pneumonia (VAP)**

Ventilator-associated pneumonia is pneumonia occurring 48 hours after endotracheal intubation. Pneumonia is defined as the presence of lung infiltrates and evidence that it is infectious as indicated by the new onset of fever, purulent sputum, leukocytosis, and decline in oxygenation.

**Catheter-related BloodstreamIinfection (CRBSI)**

CRBSI is a bloodstream infection attributed to an intravenous catheter. It is the commonest cause of nosocomial bacteremia. A definitive diagnosis of CRBSI is made if the same organism grows from at least one percutaneous blood sample culture and the catheter tip.

**Fever Due to Indwelling Catheter (CAUTI)**

Catheter-associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI) is a urinary tract infection in a patient on a urinary catheter or was catheterized in the last 48 hours. The urinary samples should be obtained directly from the catheter's sampling port to diagnose catheter-associated urinary tract infections. If the catheter has been in place for >2 weeks, it should be replaced, and the sample should be taken from a new catheter.

**Pressure Ulcers**

A pressure ulcer is a non-infective cause of fever in the ICU. However, it is commonly associated with infection and sepsis. The incidence of pressure ulcers varies between different clinical settings. Literature shows a wide range of variations in pressure sore prevalence between 5% to 40%.

**Acalculous Cholecystitis**

Acalculous cholecystitis is an inflammatory disease of the gall bladder which occurs without a gallstone. It results due to dysfunction of the gall bladder emptying. It occurs in approximately 1.5% of critically ill patients. It occurs in critically ill patients due to other medical or surgical conditions. The common clinical features include fever with sepsis, jaundice, and right upper quadrant pain and tenderness. Abdominal ultrasound is required for diagnosis. CT abdomen may be required if the diagnosis is not clear.

**Nosocomial Sinusitis**

Nosocomial sinusitis is usually overlooked as a source of infections in critically ill patients. Predisposing nosocomial sinusitis factors include nasogastric or nasotracheal tubes, facial fractures, nasal packing, and steroids.

**Nosocomial Diarrhea**

The most common cause for febrile diarrhea is Clostridioides (previously Clostridium) difficile infection, infecting patients who have recently been treated with antibiotics. The antibiotic most commonly associated with Clostridioides difficile infection is clindamycin. The criteria for diagnosis include diarrhea, defined as an increase in stool liquidity and an increased frequency of bowel motions, and the presence of toxins produced by Clostridioides difficile in the stools. Treatment includes supportive measures, stoppage of the ongoing antibiotic therapy, and antibiotics to eradicate Clostridioides difficile. E.g., metronidazole, oral vancomycin, fidaxomicin.Clostridioides difficile.

**Drug Fever**

3-5% of febrile episodes in ICU are attributed to drugs.

**Hyperthermia Syndromes**

Hyperthermia is a high core body temperature > 41 degrees C. It differs from fever because body temperature is elevated above the thermoregulatory set point. Hyperthermia does not respond to pharmacological therapy. Hyperthermia syndromes include heat stroke, malignant hyperthermia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and serotonin syndrome. Endocrine conditions like thyrotoxicosis, adrenal crisis, and pheochromocytoma also cause hyperthermia.