Mitral stenosis is a relatively common disorder, which, if left untreated, is associated with high morbidity and mortality. Mitral stenosis rates had decreased in the US 4 decades ago, but with the mass migration of individuals from other countries, a resurgence of cases has been observed. The number one cause for most cases of mitral stenosis is rheumatic fever. The key is to prevent the valvular disorder by ensuring that patients with strep throat are adequately treated. Because of the high morbidity of the disorder, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team.

Once the diagnosis of mitral stenosis is made, the patient should be educated about the need for surgery. Those who remain asymptomatic will need annual exams, including echocardiograms. Patients with palpitations may require a Holter monitor to confirm the presence of atrial arrhythmias. Many of these patients will need anticoagulation with warfarin. Hence, the pharmacist should ensure that monthly blood work is done to ensure therapeutic anticoagulation. A dietary consult is often important as failure to thrive is common. A cardiology nurse should monitor the patient for symptoms as they will require surgery. The type of prosthetic valve used depends on patient factors.

Cardiac surgery nurses should educate the patient on the type of prosthetic valves available and which may be best suited for them. Finally, the primary care provider, pharmacist, and nurse should discuss with the patient the possibility of developing an infection of the valve and the need for prophylaxis when undergoing any type of invasive procedure. Because atrial fibrillation is a persistent problem, anticoagulation will be required in most patients. Hence, close monitoring of the INR by a dedicated nurse is necessary.