The management of atrioventricular canal defects is challenging and complex. To derive good outcomes, there should be good communication between the cardiac surgeons and the primary cardiology team taking care of the patient. It is important to define the anatomy and the surgical approach prior to taking the patient to surgery. In some cases, a smaller ventricle or a straddling valve may preclude definitive biventricular repair. Thus, the importance of having a cardiac conference with a team of cardiologists and cardiovascular surgeons helps in discussing the management (both preoperative and postoperative). As with any other complex procedure, the preoperative workup must be thorough, and the patient should be seen by a cardiologist to optimize cardiac function with the help of anti-failure medications as needed. Because of the potential risk of complications, if surgery is done earlier in life, it is important to have a nutritionist to help make sure that adequate weight gain takes place prior to surgery.

In the postoperative period, the role of the nurse and pharmacist is critical. The nurses will assist the team by monitoring the patient for pain, sternotomy site infection, chest tube output management, and a variety of common postoperative complications such as atelectasis, deep vein thrombosis, postpericardiotomy syndrome, and pain. The pharmacist may be involved in parenteral nutrition if needed until the patient is able to take feeds enterally. The need for meticulous planning and discussion with other professionals involved in the management of the patient is highly recommended to lower morbidity and improve outcomes.