The diagnosis of a generalized tonic-clonic seizure is based on the patient's history and physical examination. The patient’s experience, recollection, and awareness of the event should be the initial focus of the history taking. A history of prodrome (auras) should be inquired and often involve subtle changes in mood, cognition, and headache. The auras can be helpful for localization of the seizure origin and indicate focal onset seizure rather than generalized type. Patients after presentation with the first episode of generalized tonic-clonic seizure should be asked about prior staring spells (absence seizures) or early morning myoclonic jerks; the presence of multiple seizure types can help to make a diagnosis of epilepsy or a particular epileptic syndrome. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures begin with an abrupt loss of consciousness without any aura. The tonic phase of seizure can start with a scream with a generalized stiffening of the body with or without cyanosis. After the initial tonic phase, clinical features evolve into clonic jerking followed by postictal sleepiness, confusion, or agitation. A detailed history should also be obtained regarding any environmental or physiologic triggers( example: fever, the menstrual period, lack of sleep, stress, strong emotions, strenuous exercise, loud music, flashing lights, etc.) immediately preceding the seizure.

A detailed physical examination is important in these patients. A postictal state of confusion, somnolence, headache, personality, and mood changes are common and characteristic of generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Examination of oral mucosa can reveal lateral tongue bites, which can be seen in approximately 22% of patients with epileptic seizures. Lateral tongue bites are not seen in patients with psychogenic nonepileptic seizures. Bruises and scrapes over the body can be seen commonly after a seizure. Vertebral compression fracture can manifest as back pain after a fall from the seizure event. Nuchal rigidity from meningeal inflammation from an infection or asterixis from the metabolic disorder can be evident on physical examination that can point towards the etiology of the seizure. Focal weakness or asymmetry on examination can point towards focal seizures evolving into bilateral tonic-clonic seizures rather than generalized seizure onset. Skin examination can reveal signs of neurocutaneous syndromes such as neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, and Sturge-Weber syndrome, which are associated with epilepsy. Signs of urinary incontinence due to the relaxation of the urinary sphincter can be seen in an immediate postictal phase.