The esophagus has a rich supply of arterial blood coupled with venous drainage, with these being segmental. The cervical esophagus and UES are supplied with blood via branches of the inferior thyroid artery. The thoracic esophagus is supplied by the aortic esophageal arteries which are at the terminal branches of the bronchial arteries. The abdominal segment and LES are supplied with blood via the left gastric artery and a left phrenic artery branch. These arteries flow into the submucosa of the esophagus as a dense network. Venous blood then flows into the superior vena cava from the aforementioned submucosal plexus. The azygous system provides drainage for the proximal and distal segments of the esophagus while the midsection of the esophagus receives drainage via auxiliaries of the left gastric vein which branches from the portal vein.

Lymph channels and lymph nodes together provide the esophagus with lymphatic drainage. The channels begin endothelial or as blind sacculations which are also endothelial. They then collect into larger lymph channels running the length of the esophagus (orthogonally to the transverse plane). Flow direction is dictated by paired semilunar valves in these channels. These channels then combine in different areas to enter into respective regional lymph nodes. Drainage occurs in three sections of the esophagus, broken into thirds, with significant interconnections existing between each segment. Drainage into the thoracic duct from the deep cervical lymph nodes is achieved by the drainage of the proximal third segment of the esophagus. Drainage into the superior and posterior mediastinal node is achieved by the lymphatics of the third middle section of the esophagus. Finally, the lymphatics of the distal third-most section of the esophagus ultimately drain into the gastric and celiac lymph nodes.