**Safety Mechanisms**

**Pin Index Safety System**

The Pin Index Safety System (PISS) exists to prevent the incorrect E-Cylinder from being attached to the yoke of the anesthesia machine at the wrong site. The PISS consists of two index pins specific to the corresponding hole of only one type of E-cylinder (i.e., air, oxygen, nitrous oxide). This prevents misconnections and the delivery of incorrect gases to the patient. The pins on the yoke of the anesthesia machine should never be altered or exchanged to prevent erroneous delivery of anesthetics.

**Diameter Index Safety System**

Much like the PISS, the Diameter Index Safety System (DISS) prevents inappropriate connections that would cause the incorrect delivery of gases to the patient. The DISS has non-interchangeable pipeline connections of varying diameters, so there is only one unique connection for each pipeline gas.

**The Sequence of Flowmeters**

The flowmeters allow for titration of gases from the pipeline or E-Cylinder and consist of a tapered tube with the smallest diameter at the bottom.  A bobbin sits at the bottom of the meter and gradually is elevated towards the top of the flowmeter as the flow of the gas being titrated increases. The sequence of the flowmeters is of paramount importance to prevent the creation of a hypoxic gas mixture. The oxygen should always be situated downstream of other gases to prevent a hypoxic gas mixture. In a scenario where the oxygen is stationed upstream from other gases, a leak in the system between the entry of the oxygen and another gas would divert oxygen away from the patient resulting in a hypoxic gas mixture. With the oxygen situated downstream from other gases, a leak near the flowmeters may result in a lighter degree of anesthesia but a significantly lessened risk of a hypoxic gas mixture.

**Gas Scavenging System**

The long-term effects of exposure to volatile anesthetics are a potential occupational hazard. Some studies have demonstrated an increased risk of spontaneous abortions, increased infertility, and having children with congenital anomalies. Long-term exposure to volatile anesthetics possibly predisposes anesthesiologists to multiple organ system dysfunctions. The modern anesthesia machine incorporates a gas scavenging system to capture volatile anesthetics to minimize exposure to volatile anesthetics. The scavenging system gathers exhaled volatile gases from the anesthesia equipment. It transports them away from the operating room, likely into the atmosphere and outside the building, housing the anesthesia machine. Most anesthesia machines utilize an open system that sits over the exhaust port and adjustable pressure limiting valve of the anesthesia machine. The scavenging system gathers gases into a reservoir then utilizes the pipeline suction to transport the reservoir gases outside of the operating room. Positive and negative pressure relief valves are utilized to prevent the transmission of scavenged gases into the breathing circuit.

**Pressure Regulator**

An anesthesia machine requires consistent, constant flow of gas at a suitable low pressure to prevent barotrauma to the patient's lungs.  A pressure regulator is situated between the variable high-pressure E-cylinders and the intermediate pressure system of the anesthesia machine to provide consistent lower pressure. The pressure of an E-cylinder of oxygen can reach over 2000 psi or 13,700 kPa, whereas the intermediate pressure system typically relying on the pipeline supply operates at 45 to 60 psi (475 to 413 kPa). Pressure regulators help provide smooth and consistent gas flow despite fluctuations in pipeline pressures due to peaks/troughs with demands of the pipeline supply throughout the day and with varying pressures of E-cylinders.

**Prevention of Hypoxia**

Modern anesthesia machines typically have a minimal pre-determined, mandatory oxygen flow once the anesthesia machine is turned on to prevent the lack of oxygen delivery to the patient. Anesthesia machines also dissuade users from selecting a gas mixture below that of atmospheric oxygen concentration (21%) to prevent hypoxic gas mixtures. There have been documented incidents of hypoxic gas mixtures while utilizing nitrous oxide without an appropriately complementing oxygen concentration. To protect against hypoxic gas mixtures with nitrous oxide, a mechanical or electronic linkage exists between the two flow control valves to allow for adequate proportioning of the nitrous oxide: oxygen ratios in modern machines. Likewise, interlocks on the vaporizers prevent more than one vaporizer from being used at the same time to prevent excessively high concentrations of volatile anesthetics.