Band shaped keratopathy (BSK): Chronic ocular inflammation like uveitis, chronic herpetic keratouveitis; phthisis bulbi, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and long-standing silicone oil in the eye may lead to calcific band-shaped keratopathy.

Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy (PBK) and aphakic bullous keratopathy (ABK): PBK manifests largely due to damage caused to the endothelial cells. The endothelial cells are responsible for maintaining the relatively dehydrated state of the cornea. Irreversible damage to endothelial cells manifests in corneal edema. The intraoperative damage caused to endothelium by instrumentation, ultrasonic energy during phaco, and exposing endothelium to toxic solutions leads to endothelial damage.

In ABK, vitreous is the major insulting agent causing damage to the endothelium due to vitreo-corneal touch.

Striate keratopathy: Striate keratopathy is characterized by the presence of corneal edema with Descemet's folds after cataract surgery in an eye with a relatively healthy and clear cornea and in the absence of obvious Descemet's membrane detachment.

Corneas with pre-existing compromised but non-decompensated endothelial pumps are largely at risk of developing striate keratopathy.

Whorl (vortex) keratopathy or cornea verticillata: Agents causing whorl keratopathy include amiodarone, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, phenothiazines, tamoxifen, indomethacin, and many other pharmacologic agents.

Exposure keratopathy: Exposure keratopathy is a consequence of the inability to maintain uniform tear film distribution over the ocular surface. Tear film helps in maintaining the epithelial integrity and thus prevents any epithelial denudation. Decreased corneal sensation, decreased blink reflex, decreased blink rate, proptosis, lagophthalmos (paralytic, cicatricial, nocturnal), poor Bell's phenomenon, and severe lid deformities (lid coloboma, cicatricial ectropion, post-excision of lid tumor) causing exposure may result in abnormal tear film distribution over the ocular surface.

Infectious crystalline keratopathy (ICK): It is a rare gray-white branching corneal opacity in the corneal stroma with minimal to absent surrounding inflammation. This is seen in cases associated with prolonged topical steroid use. This is seen mostly in cases with previous penetrating keratoplasty. The most common inciting organism is alpha-hemolytic Streptococcus viridians. Other organisms reported include S. Pneumoniae, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, Peptostreptococcus, Haemophilus species, Mycobacterium species, Pseudomonas, Candida species, and many more.

Neurotrophic keratopathy: Neurotrophic keratopathy may occur post-herpes zoster ophthalmicus (post-HZO) and after trigeminal nerve damage due to surgery or tumor.

Metabolic Keratopathy: Metabolic keratopathy manifests due to enzymatic defect along the normal metabolic pathway. The toxic byproducts accumulate in the different parts of the body including the cornea.

- Mucopolysaccharidoses: Here enzymes necessary to degrade different mucopolysaccharides are deficient resulting in their accumulation.

- Cystinosis: Mutation of cystinosin results in the accumulation of cystine crystals in the cornea.

- Wilson's disease: Deficiency of Wilson disease protein (ATP7B) results in the accumulation of copper in different parts of the body including the cornea.

- Lecithin-Cholesterol Acyltransferase (LCAT) deficiency: Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency results in increased unesterified cholesterol, triglycerides, and phospholipids and manifests as corneal arcus, corneal stromal haze, and angioid streaks.

Filamentary keratopathy: It is a chronic disorder in which, filaments made of mucus and epithelial debris are attached at one end to the corneal surface. The various causes are:

- Keratoconjunctivitis sicca,

- superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis,

- exposure keratitis,

- corneal edema,

- neurotrophic keratopathy,

- Sjogren's syndrome,

- chronic use of anticholinergic medication, and many other conditions.

Climatic droplet keratopathy/Labrador keratopathy/Spheroidal degeneration: This results from the photochemical degradation of plasma proteins by UV light.

Lipid keratopathy: This is a degenerative condition of the cornea, where lipid degeneration occurs. Disorders of lipid metabolism and Herpetic corneal infection are the major causes of lipid keratopathy. The vascularization brings the lipid into the corneal stroma.

Superficial punctate keratopathy (SPK): It is a non-specific clinical finding of varied etiology characterized by the punctate loss of epithelial cells. The various causes are viral keratoconjunctivitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, blepharitis, chemical injury, contact lens wear, toxic keratopathy due to topical medications, Bell's palsy, ultraviolet ray exposure, and many other causes.

Ultraviolet (UV) keratopathy: The corneal burn caused by UV-B results in UV keratopathy. Causes include welding arc exposure and light reflected from the snow.

Toxic keratopathy- Dendritiform keratopathy may be noted due to polyquaternium-1 (preservative).

Keratopathy related to vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC): The keratopathy is largely due to the mechanical effect of papillae and also due to the release of various cytokines.

Keratopathy related to Stevens-Johnson syndrome****(SJS)/ toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN): Most of the cases of SJS or TEN are related to hypersensitivity reactions to a medication or its metabolite. In some cases, viral fever can also act as a trigger.

Keratopathy associated with aniridia: Keratopathy associated with aniridia is poorly understood and the changes are likely secondary to limbal stem cell deficiency (LSCD).