The complications associated with positive pressure ventilation are many and can be quite serious. This is why a thorough understanding of its use is required by an interprofessional group of medical providers. This article will list some of the most recognized complications and explain how or why they occur. Most complications will focus specifically on classic mechanical ventilation as its exact nature is more invasive, and it is important to understand its consequences. However, although rarer, complications can and do occur, with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation.

**Ventilator-associated Lung Injury and Barotrauma**

Barotrauma occurs when there is alveolar damage due to high pressures entering the lungs. Specifically, the transalveolar pressure, which is the difference in pressure between the alveolus and the surrounding interstitial space, is increased to such an extent that the epithelial lining of the alveoli is damaged. With repeated breaths and inappropriate ventilation, the damage often occurs on a microscopic level until it is severe enough to cause an overt pneumothorax, subcutaneous emphysema, or pneumomediastinum, which are all conditions associated with high mortality rates.

Excessively high tidal volumes or inspiratory pressures are some of the underlying culprits in the cause of barotrauma. One of the landmark studies on acute respiratory distress syndrome, known as ARDSNet, demonstrated that using lung-protective strategies with lower tidal volumes (between 4-8 mL/kg based on ideal body weight) have improved mortality benefits and are associated with more ventilator-free days for patients. Additional studies have examined lung protective strategies for patients not suffering from acute lung injury and have also found reduced morbidity and mortality benefits, although additional studies are needed for conclusive evidence.

**Hemodynamic Effects**

Positive pressure ventilation results in physiologic alterations in intrathoracic pressure and cardiac output. One of the most common hemodynamic effects from positive pressure ventilation is a reduction in preload to the heart secondary to increased intrathoracic pressure that impressive the inferior vena cava and right atrium. This effect is more prominent in individuals that may already have reductions in intravascular volume. Likewise, changes in intrathoracic pressure or cardiac output can precipitate an arrhythmia or myocardial ischemia.

Even though most arrhythmias are related to structural changes in the heart, it is common for them to occur secondary to positive pressure ventilation. This is because ventilated patients often have respiratory and electrolyte derangements, including hypoxemia, hypercapnia, acidemia, alkalemia, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, or hypocalcemia. Serial arterial blood gasses are often obtained to identify and correct underlying derangements and prevent arrhythmias. Likewise, mechanical ventilation and critical illness lead to hormonal and catecholamine changes in the body that can precipitate myocardial ischemia. This process can occur at any time while a patient requires mechanical ventilation but is also likely during weaning trials when myocardial oxygen demand is increased, and a patient’s sedation is decreased or turned off to assess their ability to come off the ventilator.

**Ventilator-associated Pneumonia**

The most common infection among mechanically ventilated patients receiving positive pressure ventilation is ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP). The mortality rate is high and can range between 20% to 50%.

Common pathogens include gram-negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Acinetobacter species, and gram-positive bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus. Powerful broad-spectrum antibiotics exist to counteract these organisms, but antibiotic resistance among bacteria is a growing concern in intensive care units across the globe. Thus, it is important to be vigilant with patients that require mechanical ventilation and to frequently follow up on complete blood counts, bacterial cultures, and chest radiographs to identify any source of infection.

**Oxygen Toxicity**

Critically ill patients that require positive pressure ventilation or mechanical ventilation are often hypoxemic and require high levels of inspired oxygen (FIO2). However, not all conditions that require a patient to be mechanically ventilated require high levels of oxygen therapy. In fact, high levels of oxygen can be toxic to the human body. Areas of the lungs with ventilation-perfusion mismatches under high FIO2 can actually lead to a phenomenon known as re-absorption atelectasis that will further aggravate any ventilation-perfusion mismatches. High oxygen levels are also associated with increased vasoconstrictive effects on coronary circulation and increased mortality from cardiac causes.

**Neuromuscular Complications**

Patients that require mechanical ventilation often need sedation due to the stimulating nature of the endotracheal tube. Likewise, the act of being on a ventilator can be a traumatic experience. Some patients that are in desynchrony with the ventilator, colloquially known as “fighting the vent,” may require paralytic medications such as rocuronium, vecuronium, or cisatracurium so that they can be safely ventilated to treat their underlying condition. However, important neurochemical changes occur within patients’ bodies, such as the depletion of bioenergetic neuron reserves, altered sodium channel activation, and increased inflammatory cytokines, which lead to changes such as atrophy of the diaphragm or critical illness myopathy.

These changes make it difficult to wean patients off the ventilator and may require the patient to undergo a separate surgical procedure known as a tracheostomy to create an opening in the neck to place a tracheostomy tube for further ventilatory support based on the patient’s underlying critical illness. These patients often require prolonged mechanical ventilation.

**Miscellaneous Injuries Related to Non-invasive Ventilation**

Non-invasive ventilation, by its very nature, is associated with fewer risks than invasive mechanical ventilation, but not all patients can benefit from its use. Nevertheless, it is important to be aware of some of the common complications. Facial ulcers and lacerations occur in approximately 13% of patients.

A tight seal is required to properly ventilate patients, but it is important to be aware that the seal is not too tight as to cause injury to the face. Other issues that arise include eye irritation, dry airway passages, and gastric distention.