The CHIP was created to provide “child health assistance to uninsured, low-income children effectively and efficiently that is coordinated with other sources of health benefits coverage for children.”

For the State Children Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), low-income children are defined as those whose family income is above the eligibility for Medicaid but below the 200% poverty level, which is approximately $32,000 for a family of four.

The SCHIP fulfills the following functions:

**Accountability**

The 24 billion dollars allocated by the federal government demonstrates strong accountability and represents a significant national interest in the provision of health care coverage for uninsured or underinsured children.

Accountability represents a process by which an individual or organization takes ownership of and accepts responsibility for a particular activity or activities and provides information regarding its progress and development with the ultimate goal of meeting requirements and expectations.

**New Opportunities**

The CHIP opens avenues for

- New opportunities and innovations in child health management

- Flexibility in insurance expansion and making existing programs better

- Increasing access to children’ s health care

- Development of children-specific performance improvement measures

- Sustenance

Although the program will provide insurance coverage for uninsured children through federal funding, millions of children will still not have insurance coverage or be underinsured. The future expansion and sustenance of the program and a careful evaluation of how the funds disbursed to the individual States are managed under SCIP are essential.

There are severe issues of concern since the establishment of CHIP. Initially, there was a significant drop in the percentage of uninsured children from 2008 to 2016, a drop of 9.8 % to 4.7 %. However, recent data show an increase of approximately 276000 uninsured children from 2016 to 2017. Only the District of Columbia experienced a decline in the number of uninsured children in 2017.

About three-quarters of children who lost coverage live in states which did not expand their Medicaid coverage for low-income adults.

The rate of uninsured children in states that did not implement an expansion of the Medicaid program almost thrice the cost compared to States with expanded Medicaid programs.

The number of children without health insurance increased nationally from 4.7 percent in 2016 to 5 percent in 2017. Nine states experienced a statistically significant elevation in their rate of uninsured children (SD, UT, TX, GA, SC, FL, OH, TN, MA).

Texas is the state with the highest number of children without health coverage. Close to one in five uninsured children in the U.S. reside in the state of Texas.

States with a higher number of Native Americans and Alaskan natives tend to have a higher number of uninsured children when compared to the national average.

Based on the 2017 Statistical Enrollment Report, about 9.4 million children are enrolled in CHIP.