Pain is a symptom, not a diagnosis. It is essential to determine what underlying injury or disease processes are responsible for the patient's pain since this helps determine effective treatment. For instance, it is crucial to determine if a patient's neuropathic pain is peripheral or central. In another example, if a patient suffers from severe knee pain, it is essential to consider whether or not the knee pain is secondary to severe osteoarthritis, in which case the patient may benefit from an injection or possibly from a knee replacement. In contrast, if the knee pain were instead related to a different condition such as rheumatoid arthritis, infection, gout, pseudogout, or meniscal injury, very different treatments would be indicated.

The differential diagnosis for generalized chronic pain includes allodynia from chronic opioid use as well as major depressive disorder and other psychiatric or sleep disorders, including insomnia. Furthermore, autoimmune diseases such as lupus or psoriatic arthritis, fibromyalgia, and central pain syndromes, should be considered in presentations involving wide-spread, generalized chronic pain. The four main categories of pain are neuropathic, musculoskeletal, mechanical, and inflammatory. Persistent and under-treated painful conditions can lead to chronic pain. Thus, chronic pain is often a symptom of one or multiple diagnoses and can become its own diagnosis as pain becomes persistent and the body's neurochemistry changes. It is critical to treat acute and subacute pain before chronic pain develops.