Vitamin B12, also known as cobalamin, has a vital role in the normal synthesis of myelin.

In pernicious anemia, there are autoantibodies produced against the parietal cells. This leads to a lower level of IF, and hence the absorption of cobalamin is affected. In patients with terminal ileum defects such as Crohn disease, the cubam receptor is likely to be affected, thus resulting in the non-absorption of the IF-B12 complex into the enterocytes.

Currently, the Schilling test is not readily available in most countries to diagnose vitamin B12 deficiency. Labeled cobalamine can no longer be obtained. No replacement test provides the same information, but the level of serum vitamin B12 is now a test of choice in many hospitals. Patients with more than 300 pg/mL are normal, 200 to 300 pg/mL borderline, and less than 200 pg/mL are classified as deficient in vitamin B12. The levels of homocysteine and methylmalonic acid are also usually investigated and elevated in those patients. Other options are the CobaSorb test that measures changes in circulating holo-transcobalamin before and after B-12 administration and the 14C-labeled B-12 test for quantitative measurement of absorption of a low-dose radioactive tracer.

Patients with low levels of cobalamin are tested for autoantibodies to intrinsic factor with an immunoassay. Pernicious anemia is usually caused by the presence of autoantibodies against parietal cells that make intrinsic factors, and the presence of those autoantibodies is considered a confirmatory test.