The liver function test is assessed as the initial biomarker elevated in acute viral hepatitis. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) are elevated during the acute episode. ALT is elevated 2-to-100 fold depending on the severity of the acute viral hepatitis. International normalized ratio (INR), prothrombin time (PT), albumin, and ammonia are evaluated for acute and chronic viral hepatitis infections.****

**Hepatitis A**

Pregnant women who had contact with persons with acute hepatitis A should be screened for acute hepatitis A virus infection. Hepatitis A viral infection is diagnosed by detecting the immunoglobulin M antibody to the hepatitis A (anti-HAV IgM) virus in pregnant women and the fetus/newborn.

**Hepatitis B**

Vertical transmission of Hepatitis B virus from infected mothers to their fetuses or newborns results in a 90% likelihood of the newborn getting infected if the pregnant woman has chronic hepatitis B and positive for Hepatitis B virus E antigen (HBeAg).

The U.S. Preventive Services have recommended universal screening for hepatitis B virus infection during pregnancy at the first prenatal visit and Task Force (USPSTF) and the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).

Thus every pregnant woman should be screened for the hepatitis B surface antigen at the initial visit. This is to decrease the mother-to-child transmission of the hepatitis B virus.

**Hepatitis C**

Transmission is associated with pregnant women with higher levels of HCV RNA.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend risk-based screening for HCV in pregnant women. The anti-HCV antibody is tested as the screening tool during pregnancy.

**Hepatitis D**

World Health Organization (WHO) recommends screening pregnant women infected with Hepatitis B virus for Hepatitis D virus. Serum immunoglobulin M anti-HDAg is detected during active infection.

**Hepatitis E**

Pregnant women in the second and third trimesters are mostly affected during epidemics. The mortality rate as high as 5% to 25%. There is a higher mortality rate in pregnant women who progressed to fulminant hepatitis. Anti-HEV IgM is tested during pregnancy for suspected cases.