The indications for developing a behavior modification plan can be for any unwanted, maladaptive, or aberrant behavior. It can also be used to teach and reinforce new, desired behaviors. In clinical settings, the treatment team utilizes the concept of operant conditioning to reinforce prosocial behaviors through positive consequences as seen in token economy, shaping, differential reinforcement of desired behaviors, and extinguish the undesired behaviors through negative consequences like an overcorrection, response costs, time outs.

In child psychiatry, behavior modification is often part of treatment planning when a child is diagnosed with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, or other externalizing disorders (as opposed to internalizing disorders like major depression). While behavior therapy is not limited to externalizing behavior disorders, it is often a key part of the treatment plan because the presenting problem is behavior-related.

Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) is one of the common therapeutic techniques used in behavior modification. It has been proven very effective in those diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders and other similar developmental disorders.

Behavior modification is also a component of Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT), which teaches specific skills to the parents that they can use to help improve physical and verbal exchanges with their children. PCIT is an evidence-based intervention for preventing child abuse & neglect, helpful for children who exhibit disruptive behavior and/or have experienced trauma, those on the autism spectrum, and has been shown to decrease child’s risk of antisocial and criminal behavior later in life.

The Triple P – Positive Parenting Program draws on social learning, cognitive therapy, behavioral modification, and developmental theory as well as an exploration into risk factors associated with the development of social and behavioral problems in children. It aims to empower parents with the skills and confidence they need to be self-sufficient and to be able to manage family issues without ongoing support.

Many reviews and meta­analyses of the research literature have established that behavioral treatments—including brief intervention, marital and family therapy, behavioral couples therapy, relapse prevention, and other cognitive-behavioral treatments in addition to community reinforcement and contingency management approaches—are among the most effective treatments for AUDs