Primary melanoma is treated with surgical removal of the tumor with wide excision or Mohs micrographic surgery, which provides a definitive cure. Late-stage melanoma leads to metastasis, can be difficult to treat, is refractile to therapies, and has high genomic variability.

Due to the reactivation of the MAPK pathway or other mutations, the treatment responses were short-lived.

**Surgical excision**. Surgical excision margins depend on the tumor's depth of invasion. AAD clinical practice guidelines established in 2018 suggest:

- In situ – margins 0.5 cm and up to 1 cm

- Less than 1 mm – margins 1 cm

- 1-2 mm – margins 1 to 2 cm

- 2-4 mm – margins 2 cm

- Greater than 4 mm – margins 2 cm

- For lentigo maligna melanoma on the face, ears, scalp, or other locations where a cosmetic outcome is important, Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS) or staged excisions have been used with low local recurrence rates. Although MMS is currently not the preferred approach to melanoma excision, it has certain advantages. On surgically constrained sites, margins less than 1 cm are not recommended for primary invasive melanoma. Permanent section analysis of the central MMS debulking specimen is recommended to identify and stage potential invasive melanoma.

**Systemic Therapy**

Due to melanoma's immunogenicity, it is a type of cancer amenable to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy.

Immune activity increases during infection to identify and eliminate the source of infection. The body controls the overactive immune response by activating immune checkpoints such as CTLA-4, PD-1, and PD-L1.

PD-1/PD-L1 functions within the tumor microenvironment, as the PD-1 receptor is expressed on the surface of T-cells, and the PD-L1 ligand is expressed on tumor cells.

Monoclonal antibodies can block immuno-checkpoint interactions. Ipilimumab blocks CTLA-4, and Pembrolizumab/Nivolumab blocks PD-1. The FDA has approved these antibodies for patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma. These agents have been shown to have positive and durable responses as well as improved survival in a subgroup of patients.

Stage III melanoma patients whose melanomas have been resected can undergo a variety of treatment regimens based on their BRAF genotype. A combination of BRAF and MEK inhibitors and anti-PD-1 is adjuvantly administered to patients with mutated BRAF, while patients with wild-type BRAF are treated with anti-PD-1 rather than anti-CTLA-4.

**Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors**

Immune checkpoint inhibitors are effective regardless of BRAF mutation status.

**BRAF/MEK Inhibitor Combination Therapy**

BRAF-targeted therapy may be considered if the disease harbors a BRAF V600-activating mutation. Results from multiple randomized trials suggest that BRAF/MEK inhibitor combination therapy may enhance the duration of response compared with BRAF inhibitor monotherapy.

It is important to note that BRAF and MEK inhibitors may interact with radiation therapy and potentially increase toxicity.

**Local Therapy**

Local therapy options for extracranial metastases include intralesional injection with talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC), resection, or radiation.

**Follow-Up**

Follow-up should be individualized.

**Supportive Care**

Supportive care may be considered for those with poor performance status, disease progression despite proper treatment, or not fit for the preferred systemic treatment options.