**Optical Aniseikonia.**This is caused by a difference in refractive error. A disparity in the eye's spherical refractive error is called anisometropia, while aniso-astigmatism is reserved for dissimilarity in the amount or the orientation of cylindrical error. Anisometropia causes a difference in size, while aniso-astigmatism causes a difference in the shape of an image.

When the vertical astigmatic meridian has comparatively less plus (or more minus) dioptrical power, objects appear vertically compressed or horizontally elongated in the affected eye. Objects appear vertically stretched and horizontally compressed when the horizontal meridian has less plus dioptrical power.

Besides a difference in the dioptrical power of the spectacle lenses, other parameters such as index of refraction, lens thickness, vertex distance, and base curve affect spectacle magnification and can result in optical aniseikonia. Changes in the cornea and the crystalline lens can cause anisometropia and as well as aniso-astigmatism, while changes in the length of the eyeball (axial length) or a difference in the refractive index of the vitreous cavity contents can only cause anisometropia and do not result in aniso-astigmatism.

Spectacle lenses may cause a change in the shape of objects as well. High minus lenses will cause a barrel type of distortion (the corners of the image appear squeezed inward), and high plus lenses will cause a pincushion type of distortion (the corners of the image appear stretched outward). Unequal barrel or pincushion distortion between the two eyes can also result in optical aniseikonia. Other types of distortion that cause aniseikonia include

**Causes of Optical Aniseikonia**

**Caused by the Cornea**

- Keratoconus is caused by thinning of a portion of the cornea and often affects one eye more than the other. It causes asymmetrical progressive myopia and high amounts of astigmatism.

- Corneal edema can be caused by contact lens overwear, some medications such as amantadine (for Parkinson disease), netarsudil (for glaucoma), and belamtamab mafodotin (for multiple myeloma), and corneal endothelial diseases such as Fuch dystrophy and complications from cataract surgery.

- Many types of corneal stromal and surface diseases are categorized into those caused by injury, inflammation, infection, and dystrophy.

- Corneal surgeries that may leave the patient with anisometropia are intentional (monovision correction) or unintended unequal LASIK, PRK, and radial keratotomy refractive correction. Radial keratotomy often results in progressive hyperopic changes that are often unequal and may eventually result in anisometropia. Other surgeries that can cause optical aniseikonia are corneal epithelial scraping, corneal crosslinking, radial keratotomy, phototherapeutic keratotomy, and INTACS.

**Caused by the Crystalline Lens**

- Cataracts generally cause an increase in the refractive index of the crystalline lens resulting in more myopia.

- Unilateral crystalline lens removal resulting in aphakia was historically one of the most common causes of clinically significant aniseikonia. Advances in cataract surgery and intra-ocular lens implantation have made this condition less common.

- Hyperglycemia has been reported to cause refractive changes of all types, even though in clinical practice, high blood sugar levels are generally associated with increased myopia.

- An accommodative spasm can occur due to medications such as pilocarpine or excessive time spent focusing.

- Multiple other medications besides pilocarpine are associated with refractive changes. These include topiramate, acetazolamide, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, indapamide, promethazine, spironolactone, isosorbide dinitrate, bromocriptine, tetracycline, corticosteroids, hydrochlorothiazide, penicillamine, quinine, metronidazole, isotretinoin, and aspirin. While the mechanism of action is not always known, for some medications such as topiramate, the refractive change is caused by an anterior movement of the lens and not a change of accommodation or refractive index.

- Lens subluxation will usually cause an increase in astigmatism as the subluxation process progresses and after complete dislocation results in a larger hyperopic shift. This can be caused by simple ectopia lentis, in ocular diseases such as pseudoexfoliation syndrome and aniridia, and systemic diseases such as Marfan syndrome, Homocystinuria, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

- Unilateral cataract surgery. While cataracts are usually bilateral, they may develop at an unequal rate, and surgical intervention may be chronologically spaced apart. In most studies, the second eye undergoes cataract surgery immediately after the post-operative period has ended for the first surgery for only 30 to 40 percent of patients.

**Caused by the Vitreous Space**

- Silicone oil is used for retinal tamponade and may cause hyperopic or myopic shifts based on posture and phakic, pseudophakic, or aphakic status of the eye.

- Intravitreal gas such as sulfur hexafluoride or perfluoropropane is used for retinal tamponade and may generate a large myopic shift of up to 50 diopters.

**Caused by a Difference in Axial Length**

- Anisometropia and the resultant aniseikonia, when due to an increase in axial length, can be congenital and, when not treated, can lead to amblyopia. Congenital anisometropia is predominantly caused by genetic predisposition but can also be caused by congenital glaucoma.

- When anisometropia is developmental, it is mainly caused by genetic predisposition.

- Strabismus can also be a trigger for the development of anisometropia.

- Iatrogenically induced changes in axial length occur in scleral buckle procedures. In one study, an average of 0.99 mm increase in axial length caused myopia to increase by 2.75 diopters.

**Retinal Aniseikonia.**This is caused by a distortion of the macula.

**Causes of Retinal Aniseikonia**

- Macula swelling causes a pincushion type of distortion as well as micropsia.

- Shrinking of the macula will cause a barrel type of distortion and macropsia.

- Macula distortion can be caused by retinal dragging, scarring, inflammation, and infection. Common causes are epiretinal membrane, macula hole, vitreomacular traction syndrome, proliferative retinopathy (diabetic and other types), vitreoretinal inflammation and strands, retinal granuloma, retinopathy of prematurity, and others.

**Altered Brain Function.**This can be the cause of symptoms of micropsia and macropsia seen in conditions such as Alice in Wonderland syndrome, Charles Bonnet syndrome, migraine, and hypnagogic/hypnopompic hallucinations.

While these conditions may present with complaints that resemble those of aniseikonia, they can be ruled out as they generally affect both eyes. In theory, conditions that alter the visual pathways behind the retina can create aniseikonia as well. However, there are no cases reported in the literature. Neural adaptation to the reversal of optical aniseikonia, even when it has been longstanding, has been well studied.