The diagnosis of HI is usually made by clinical examination of the newborn because of the severe characteristic clinical features at birth. Due to the severity of the disease, fatal outcomes in the prenatal period are frequent. In families with a known history of HI, prenatal genetic testing via fetal DNA analysis may be offered. Amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling for fetal DNA analysis is less invasive and replaced the old and more invasive techniques of fetal skin biopsy. Another modality of testing for HI in patients with a known family history of HI is with the use of ultrasound. Prenatal 3-D ultrasonography show features suggestive of HI, including ectropion with bulging eyes, eclabium with a large immobile mouth, flattened nose, rudimentary ears, flexion contractures with abnormal limbs.

Other common features on ultrasound also include echogenic dense floating particles in amniotic fluid described as ("snowflake sign"), polyhydramnios, and growth restrictions. Infants face complications secondary to the compromise of the skin barrier. Monitoring for systemic infections is warranted and includes comprehensive blood work that should be obtained routinely, including white blood cell count and blood cultures. Wound cultures can be obtained if a purulent discharge is observed in the fissures, and infection is suspected. Moreover, close observation to minimize the risk of dehydration includes measurements in urinary output, weight, and electrolyte that may be abnormal secondary to impaired barrier function.