Glomerulonephritis (GN) is a prominent cause of renal impairment. It leads to 10% to 15% of end-stage renal disease cases in the United States. In most instances, the disease becomes progressive without timely intervention, eventually leading to morbidity.

Glomerulonephritis constitutes 25% to 30% of all end-stage renal disease cases—about a quarter of patients present with nephritic syndrome. Progression, in most cases, is relatively quick, and end-stage renal disease may ensue within weeks or months of the beginning of acute nephritic syndrome.

IgA nephropathy has been found to be the most common cause of glomerulonephritis worldwide.Staphylococcus aureus–related nephritis rose to 30%, and hepatitis C virus-associated glomerulonephritis also increased.

Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis remains much more prevalent in regions such as the Caribbean, Africa, India, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, South America, and Malaysia. In Port Harcourt, Nigeria, acute glomerulonephritis in the pediatric age group 3-16 years was 15.5 cases/year, with a male-to-female ratio of 1.1:1; it is not much different currently.

An Ethiopian study from a regional dialysis center found that acute glomerulonephritis was the second most common cause of acute kidney failure requiring dialysis, comprising about 22% of cases.

**Age-, Gender-, and Race-related Demographics**

Acute nephritis can appear at any age, including infancy. Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis usually develops in the pediatric population aged 5-15 years. Only 10% of cases occur in patients 40 years old or above. Outbreaks are common in children around six years old.

Acute glomerulonephritis affects males more than females, with a male-to-female ratio of 2 to 1. Postinfectious glomerulonephritis has no predilection for racial or ethnic groups.