The primary care provider should utilize the appropriate tests to diagnose and differentiate nSHPT from nPHPT, refer difficult or doubtful cases to the endocrinologist, and coordinate with other providers.

The radiologist, nuclear medicine physician, and laboratory technologist will need a good history, especially what medications the patient is taking, any previous procedures, allergies, and the reason for the tests. Each of them will be able to counsel patients appropriately for necessary testing, suggest possible or better alternatives, provide the correct interpretation, and communicate this to the treating physician.

Gastroenterologists and bariatric surgeons should be knowledgeable about nSHPT and ensure collaboration with endocrinologists in preventing and treating the condition.

Endocrine surgeons and high-volume parathyroid surgeons (otolaryngologists and head and neck general surgeons) tend to have better outcomes.

Parathyroid surgeons should communicate the indications for parathyroidectomy, discuss the pros and cons of various procedures, anticipate complications, and coordinate pre and postoperative medical management with endocrinologists. When intraoperative PTH monitoring is done, a close working relationship with the laboratory personnel is paramount.

Pharmacists identify correct dosage, drug interactions, contraindications, and signs of toxicity and communicate effectively with endocrinologists and other providers.

Nurses are skilled in the early identification of complications. They also play an important part in patient education and instruction. They help prepare patients for various investigations while providing counseling and allaying concerns, fears, and anxieties. They also provide critical pre and postoperative care and promptly communicate changes in the patient's condition with physicians.