All embryonal tumors are classified as WHO IV.

Embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes shows abundant neuropil and true rosettes, and have amplification of the C19MC region on chromosome 19.

ATRT usually shows a loss of SMARCB1 (INI1) protein immunoreactivity. They have three groups (ATRT-TYR frequent at infratentorial regions in very young children, ATRTMYC prevalent at the supratentorial area in older children, ATRT-SHH at both ages).

CNS neuroblastoma with FOXR2 activation is highly cellular with small cells with hyperchromatic nuclei surrounded by a clear halo. Areas of neuropil, neurocytic cells, or ganglion cells are seen. Vascular pseudorosettes, nuclear palisades, and Homer Wright rosettes are commonly found. It can have microvascular proliferation.

CNS Ewing sarcoma family tumor with CIC alteration is densely cellular with small round cells. The tumor has both alveolar and fascicular patterns of growth. It does not have markers of differentiation.

CNS high-grade neuroepithelial tumor with MN1 alteration shows a mixture of solid and pseudopapillary patterns with pericellular hyalinization. Commonly expressed glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).

CNS high-grade neuroepithelial tumor with BCOR alteration shows a combination of spindle to oval cells with perivascular pseudorosettes and fibrillary processes. Commonly expressed GFAP. They are highly cellular with a thin-walled capillary network.

Medulloepithelioma show neuroepithelial cells with papillary arrangement that may mimic the embryonic neural tube. It can have necrosis and hemorrhage.