**Mechanisms of Lasers**

The mechanisms of lasers can be separated into five types based on the power density of the laser and its exposure time with the tissue.

- Photochemical interaction

- Thermal interaction

- Photoablation

- Plasma-induced ablation

- Photodisruption

Photochemical interaction, otherwise known as photoactivation, is the mechanism of using long exposure times at lower power density to chemically catalyze a photosensitive dye (photocatalysis).

Thermal interactions usually use shorter exposure times and higher power density levels than photochemical interactions. This allows the laser to be absorbed by tissue pigment, which causes the tissue to become hot enough to coagulate and denature.

The amount of heating depends on the properties of the laser and the tissue targeted, but usually, an increase of 10 to 20 degrees C is enough to cause coagulation, with the effect predominately occurring at the 60-70 C mark.

Photoablation, also known as photodecomposition, allows for the splitting of molecules by breaking their covalent chemical bonds without heat transfer to nearby tissue (ultraviolet dissociation).

Plasma-induced ablation, like photoablation, breaks down molecules but also leads to plasma formation through a process called cascade ionization. Essentially, it ionizes atoms by stripping them of their electrons and speeds electrons up (optical breakdown) so that they can collide with other atoms and ionize those atoms as well (plasma ionization).

Photodisruption uses even higher energy power densities than plasma-induced ablation using pulses that are a few nanoseconds long.

When the pulse duration is reduced, the power (energy per second) increases for a given energy. Thus, ultrashort pulses (femtosecond laser) can generate higher peak power with lower energy when compared to nanosecond pulses.