The diagnosis of dissociated vertical deviation is based on clinical examination alone. A few of the important tests include:

- Cover/Uncover Test – Spielmann’s translucent occluder is used. a) Manifest DVD – Once the fixating eye is covered, the deviated eye shows a downward movement to take up the fixation. b) Latent DVD – The deviation manifests only once the eyes are dissociated. In this, no movement of the uncovered eye occurs. The eye undercover is elevated and moves down once it is uncovered.

- Head tilt test – The deviation of the eye increases on contralateral head tilt.

- Bielschowsky’s graded density filter test – In this test, when one eye is covered, it elevates under the cover, and the other eye takes up the fixation. The filter bar consisting of increasing density of neutral density filters is placed before the fixing eye. As the filter of gradually greater density is placed before the fixing eye, the elevated eye starts moving down. When the filters of lesser density are placed in front of the fixing eye, the other eye undercover will start elevating again.

- Red filter test – This is also a dissociation test. Torchlight is shown as a target, and red glass is placed in front of one eye. The red glass dissociated the eyes. The eye behind the filter drifts up, and the patient localizes the red image the fixation light. In DVD, the red light is always seen below the fixation light irrespective of whichever eye the filter is placed. This helps differentiate DVD from other forms of cyclo-vertical deviations, in which red light position changes relative to the fixation light based on which eye fixates.

- Measurement of DVD – This is done using a base down prism. A prism is placed in front of the deviated eye first, and the patient is asked to fixate at a target located at a distance of 6 meters. The occluder is then shifted to the fixating eye allowing the deviating eye to take up fixation. The alternate cover test is repeated with prisms of greater power until no downward movement of the deviated eye is noted. In patients with bilateral DVDs, this test needs to be repeated for each eye separately.

- Grading of DVD

1+ deviation = a slight deviation

2+ deviation = a small deviation

3+ deviation = a moderate deviation

4+ deviation = a large deviation