The establishment of catheter-based interventions first occurred in the late 1970s. The idea behind catheter-directed interventions for acute coronary syndrome flourished due to its ability to use the circulation as a "vascular freeway" to approach occlusive coronary disease without the use of open-heart surgery. The ability to gain percutaneous vascular access and intervene on an occluded vessel with a catheter completely revolutionized cardiovascular medicine. A cardiac catheter, first characterized by Werner Forssmann in 1929, was described as a plastic tube that allowed the delivery of substances (medications or contrast) for imaging and monitoring of intracardiac pressures. Catheters continued to evolve from purely diagnostic tools for pressure measurements to therapeutic tools, as described by Gruentzig's breakthrough in the late 1970s.

Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, balloon angioplasty remained controversial and primarily indicated for stable ischemic lesions. ACS patients continued to rely on the use of intravenous thrombolytic therapy and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery for treatment. Then in the late 1990's Stone, Grines, in collaboration with the other PAMI (primary angioplasty in myocardial infarction) investigators, demonstrated the safety and efficacy of using balloon angioplasty for the primary treatment of acute coronary syndrome. PAMI demonstrated that patients that presented with ACS treated with percutaneous balloon angioplasty compared to tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) demonstrated reduced rates of in-hospital mortality (2% vs 7%, P = 0.03), as well as recurrent ischemia (11% vs 29%, P < 0.001) and stroke (0% vs 4%, P = 0.02), and demonstrated shorter hospital stays (7.6 vs 8.4 d, P = 0.04).

Again in the late 1990s, two more landmark trials, BENESTENT, and STRESS were published demonstrating the use of a metal scaffold, termed a stent, was efficacious and safe for implantation in the coronary arteries and exhibited a lower rate of major cardiovascular adverse events when compared to balloon angioplasty.