Nonbullous impetigo often starts as a vesicle or a pustule. Multiple vesicles often coalesce and rupture after which the purulent exudate forms the characteristic honey-colored crust. An erythematous base is also present.  There are often multiple lesions on the face and extremities, especially in areas in which disruption of the skin barrier has occurred.  The rapid spread and satellite lesion formation follow self-inoculation, often in areas with no apparent break in the skin barrier. Mild regional lymphadenopathy is a common associated finding. Systemic symptoms such as fever are typically absent in nonbullous impetigo.

Bullous impetigo begins with small vesicles that become flaccid bullae. The exfoliative toxin A produced by S. aureus causes loss of cell adhesion in the superficial epidermis. The bullae contain a clear or yellow fluid which eventually progresses to become purulent or dark. Surrounding erythema and edema are typically absent.  Once the bullae rupture, an erythematous base with a rim of scale remains. Bullous impetigo does not form a honey-colored crust. Lesions most commonly form in the intertriginous regions and on the trunk and, unlike nonbullous impetigo, may occur in the buccal membranes.  There are typically fewer lesions present than in non-bullous impetigo.  Regional lymphadenopathy is absent. Systemic symptoms, such as fever, are more common than in nonbullous impetigo.

Ecthyma is a deep tissue form of impetigo. Ulcerative lesions penetrate through the epidermis and deep into the dermis.  These ulcers appear as “punched out” lesions with violaceous margins. The crusts can be honey-colored or brown-black. The lesions may be purulent.