As described in more detail above, multiple nerves converge at the pterygopalatine ganglion. This section describes which nerves arise from the pterygopalatine ganglion and the various structures innervated by these nerves. The pterygopalatine ganglion gives rise to the following nerves: the nasopalatine nerve, the lesser palatine nerve, the greater palatine nerve, the posterior superior lateral nasal nerves, the posterior inferior lateral nasal nerves, and pharyngeal nerve.

The posterior inferior lateral nasal nerves branch off from the greater palatine nerve in the pterygopalatine canal to innervate the medial and inferior nasal meatuses, along with the inferior nasal concha. The posterior superior lateral nasal nerves directly project from the pterygopalatine ganglion to go through the sphenopalatine foramen to enter the nasal cavity posteriorly to innervate the middle and superior nasal conchae, the posterior aspect of the nasal septum, and the posterior ethmoidal air cells.

The maxillary nerve, with its purely sensory axonal fibers, serves as a pathway for the post-ganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers of the pterygopalatine ganglion. The autonomic fibers of the pterygopalatine ganglion traverse with branches of the maxillary nerve that include the zygomatic, posterior superior alveolar, and infra-orbital nerves. The post-ganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers that travel with the zygomatic nerve are especially important because these nerves are what ultimately provide innervation to the lacrimal gland.

The nasopalatine nerve exits the pterygopalatine fossa from the sphenopalatine foramen and emerges within the posterior aspect of the nasal cavity. The nasopalatine nerve continues within the nasal cavity along the nasal septum in an anteroinferior direction, traversing a groove in the vomer and providing branches along its trajectory. The nasopalatine nerve ultimately passes through the incisive canal and fossa to innervate the gingiva and mucosa of the anterior hard palate, just posterior to the maxillary incisors and canine teeth.

The greater palatine nerve innervates the remaining portion of the hard palate’s gingiva and mucosa. The lesser palatine nerve is responsible for providing innervation to the soft palate, uvula, and tonsil. The soft palate communicates the sensation of taste from the lesser palatine nerve to the greater petrosal nerve.

Finally, the pharyngeal nerve, which branches off of the pterygopalatine ganglion, exits the pterygopalatine fossa via the palatovaginal canal. The pharyngeal nerve is responsible for providing innervation to the mucosa and glands of the nasopharynx.