Cervical ectropion requires no treatment unless the symptoms are affecting the patient's daily life. First-line treatment is discontinuing hormonal contraceptives like oral contraceptive pills, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate, and switching to nonhormonal contraception methods. If the symptoms persist, the following treatment can be offered:

- Cautery is an outpatient procedure carried out without general or local anesthesia. There are two types of cautery:

- Electrocautery also is known as cold coagulation. The cautery probe is held for 30 seconds against the area of ectropion, while the area is treated with heat to destroy the abnormal cells.

- Cryotherapy (freezing): The cautery probe is held for two minutes against ectropion while the area becomes frozen.

- Microwave tissue coagulation. Although the appearance of the cervix is better after microwave tissue coagulation, no other benefits have been found compared with either interferon-alpha suppository therapy or cryotherapy.

- Laser therapy. In this procedure, the carbon dioxide laser beam is used to destroy the abnormal cervical epithelium seen on magnification by a colposcope. It is an outpatient procedure and is done under no general or local anesthesia. The advantages of laser therapy are better precision, insignificant pain post-procedure, and rapid healing.

- Alpha interferon suppository. It has an immunomodulatory effect and an anti-proliferative effect. Interferon-alpha enhances the function of the T lymphocytes.

- Polydeoxyribonucleotide vaginal suppository. It leads to re-epithelialization of the area of the ectropion, therefore reducing the size of the ectropion.

- Boric acid vaginal suppositories can be used to make the pH acidic.

- Autologous platelet-rich plasma application. It is a promising therapy. The tissue healing time is short, and post-procedural bleeding is much less than laser therapy.

- Focused ultrasound is another promising therapy for symptomatic cervical ectropion as it can be used for a wide variety of women.

There is a cure rate of 92 percent with treatment with cautery or microwave tissue coagulation therapy. A cure rate of 79 percent has been seen with laser treatment.

Treatment success is determined by the following,

- Improved appearance of the cervix that was earlier bright red color

- Decrease in symptoms

- Improved characteristics of the cervical mucus

- Restoration of the T and the B lymphocyte populations

Ultrasound is not a reliable modality to monitor the treatment success of cervical ectropion.

After appropriate treatment, the following symptoms should prompt the patient to return to the clinic for further evaluation for cervical infection or neoplasia.

- Malodorous discharge

- Persistent postcoital or intermenstrual bleeding