There are various treatments available for scabies. Evidence shows that when medications are used as directed, the efficacy of standard treatment options is comparable. These include topical permethrin, topical crotamiton, and systemic ivermectin. Adverse reactions are rare to these medications

Topical permethrin 5% cream is effective and widely used. The cream is typically applied once a week for two weeks (total of 2 treatments). However, this treatment is occasionally associated with scabies resistance, poor patient compliance, and rare allergic reactions

Oral ivermectin is another option, although the United States Food and Drug Administration has not approved its use for scabies treatment. It is administered to individuals ten years and older and given one time. An additional dose is given two weeks later if symptoms persist. Two doses of ivermectin are scabistatic; the second treatment kills mites that have hatched since the first treatment. Oral ivermectin is recommended due to convenience, ease of administration, favorable side effect profile, and safety. Rates of compliance are higher with this treatment modality than with topical permethrin, and the tablet form of ivermectin reduces the likelihood of misuse or inadequate application, as may occur with the topical permethrin

Other options are topical lindane, 5% precipitated sulfur, malathion, and topical ivermectin.

Treatment choices may be limited in those with S. scabiei resistance or with limitations due to cost, availability, or potential toxicity, especially among pregnant women and children.

Treatment failure / recurrence  is common, and isolating the cause can help prevent further infection and limit outbreaks in communities. Reasons for treatment failure include not treating close contacts simultaneously, not decontaminating beddings and clothes at the time of treatment, and nonadherence to the treatment regimen.  Treatment failure of crusted scabies can result from ivermectin-resistant Sarcoptes mites. Moxidectin is the recommended therapy for known ivermectin-resistance