Smith fractures present a challenging management issue for the astute clinician/provider. The ultimate goal of successful treatment is, of course, to restore alignment. Many times given the shear fracture pattern, these fractures are not amenable to nonoperative management. Nonetheless, the provider needs to obtain post-reduction x-rays to ensure appropriate alignment of the fracture because even two millimeters or more articular step-off increases risk for the development of degenerative arthritis.

- Dorsal or volar comminution

- Intra-articular involvement

- Instability post-reduction

- Surface angulation greater than 20 degrees

- Articular surface step-off over 2 mm

- Radial shortening greater than 5 mm

Conservative Approach

The mainstay of treatment of non displaced and stable distal radius fractures is closed reduction followed by immobilization. While the more common fracture pattern (Colles) required a characteristic hyperextension deformity with a volar directed force to maintain reduction with splinting, the opposite is necessary for Smith fracture reductions. The wrist, therefore, is reduced and splinted in extension. The closed reduction is performed under procedural sedation, hematoma block, regional nerve block, intravenous regional/Bier block, or general anesthesia.

A trial of closed reduction with percutaneous pinning (CRPP) is another option. Kirschner wires are minimally invasive, low-cost, and offer good functional outcomes for two or three-part fractures.

A third option is external fixation. With the rise of ORIF, popularity has significantly declined. The principal concept is that external fixation utilizes ligamentotaxis to maintain appropriate positioning of the fracture fragments. Currently, this largely serves for stabilization of patients with polytrauma before the transfer, or for initial management of an open fracture with significant tissue loss.

As stated above, ORIF has become the most favored method of treatment, especially with the advancement of locking plates; this is the best choice for a fracture that is unstable or not reducible.