The goal of medical treatment of congenital adrenal hyperplasia differs by the age of the patient. CAH is a recessive gene, so both the mother and father must be recessive carriers. Couples with recessive CAH genes may prevent CAH through preimplantation genetic diagnosis.

During infancy and childhood, treatment aims to prevent adrenal crises, early virilization, promote normal growth, avoid electrolyte abnormalities and dehydration. In adolescents and adults, the goal of treatment shifts to achieving normal reproductive function and fertility while avoiding chronic complications of medication insufficiency or excess, including Cushing syndrome. To achieve this balance requires close monitoring. Educating parents, caregivers, and older patients with CAH about the signs, symptoms, prevention, and emergency treatment of adrenal crises is an integral part of the management of CAH. All patients with CAH are advised to wear medical identification and have a glucocorticoid emergency injection kit for use in adrenal crises.

**Medical Therapy**

General principles in the treatment of CAH include:

Supply enough glucocorticoids to reduce hyperplasia and reduce the overproduction of androgens and mineralocorticoids.Provide replacement of mineralocorticoids and extra salt if deficient.Provide testosterone or estrogen replacement at puberty if deficient.Additional therapy, as needed, to optimize growth by delaying puberty or delaying bone maturation.

Spironolactone should be avoided in salt-wasting CAH due to increased risk for dehydration.

Patients with CAH require stress dose steroids in cases of significant trauma, surgery requiring general anesthesia, febrile illnesses, and gastroenteritis leading to dehydration; however, not for minor ailments, everyday stress, or exercise.

**Surgical Therapy**

Surgery is not required for the majority of infants with mild forms of virilization.

Infants with ambiguous genitalia need a surgical consult for corrective surgery. The risks and benefits of early versus delayed operation should be carefully discussed with the child's parents by a multidisciplinary team of specialists involving the pediatric endocrinologist, urologist, surgeon, and anesthesiologist. Surgery should only be done in centers that specialize in genitoplasty. Surgery is only undertaken in a few selected infants and must be done by experienced surgeons.

In the past, some infants required bilateral adrenalectomies to manage severe virilization and prevent premature skeletal maturation- however, today, this procedure is rarely done.

**Long-Term Monitoring**

Patients with CAH need lifelong follow up to monitor the doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids and monitor the side effects of these hormones. Patients with CAH should have routine screening for cardiovascular and metabolic diseases as the general population.