**Focal Epilepsy with Impaired Awareness**

The primary differential diagnosis to consider when considering idiopathic (genetic) generalized epilepsy is focal epilepsy with impaired awareness, as this can have implications for treatment. Typical absences can be distinguished from focal seizures with impaired awareness (previously referred to as complex partial seizures) by several features. Typical absences are shorter duration, rarely prolonged, or complicated. They have no associated aura. They can be provoked by hyperventilation (in most cases), and automatisms, while associated with both, rarely involve the trunk or legs in typical absence seizures.

**Syncope**

Syncope is an important condition to consider. It can be confused with generalized tonic-clonic seizures by eyewitness accounts as it can be associated with limb jerking and incontinence (albeit this is less common). Syncope has a distinctive prodrome of visual or auditory fading, nausea, diaphoresis, and pallor. It occurs mainly from standing, whereas seizures can happen in any posture. The episode is shorter, with quicker recovery not associated with the delayed postictal recovery seen with generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Cardiac conditions such as transient atrioventricular (AV) blocks, Brugada syndrome, and prolonged QT resulting in episodes of ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation, can occur. They should merit consideration in all patients who have had a collapse. Attacks may occur during exercise and can be preceded by palpitations, chest pain, and presyncope symptoms. An electrocardiogram is necessary in all cases where a patient has presented with a loss of consciousness.

**Non-epileptic Attack Disorder**

Non-epileptic attack disorder is something that clinicians should bear in mind when assessing patients with suspected seizures. It is most common in women and between the ages of 15 and 35. The motor component of the attack can often be associated with flailing asynchronous movements, with side-to-side head movement and pelvic thrusting being common. Patient’s eyes usually remain closed in comparison to generalized tonic-clonic seizures where they are open. There may also be resistance to eye-opening. The episodes can be prolonged, wax and wane, and have abrupt cessation as opposed to generalized tonic-clonic seizures, which abate slowly.