**Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura****(ITP)**

ITP appears to be an autoimmune condition resulting in thrombocytopenia, petechiae/purpura, and bleeding from mucosal surfaces. There have been many antibodies implicated in the pathogenesis of ITP with the two main autoantibodies being against IgG and the glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa complex on platelets. Platelets tagged by these autoantibodies then get broken down by phagocytes in the spleen, resulting in thrombocytopenia. Without platelets to form the platelet plug, which is the first step of hemostasis, the patient becomes more susceptible to bleeding. Most patients with ITP only have minor bleeds, such as nosebleeds or conjunctival bleeds. However, these patients are at risk of severe bleeds, and that risk helps guide management. ITP tends to affect children around five years old or older adults. In children, ITP typically presents with a sudden onset, usually following a microbial illness and is brief. In adults, it typically presents with insidious onset and is a chronic condition. In both patient populations, there must be a high index of suspicion, and ITP is usually a diagnosis of exclusion. A CBC and peripheral blood smear are typically performed in the initial evaluation. In adults, it is essential to rule out ITP secondary to other autoimmune diseases, so an anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) and autoantibodies specific for other conditions may be tested as well. A more specific test for ITP would be autoantibodies against IgG and GP IIb/IIIa. In children, treatment is generally conservative, as ITP is typically transient. Adults usually require treatment. Prednisone is the first-line treatment in adults and can also be used to treat children. IVIG can also be used to reduce or eliminate causative autoantibodies and is typically used before steroids in children and after steroids in adults. In cases refractory to medical management, a splenectomy is an option as most platelet breakdown occurs there.

**Trauma**

The spleen is one of the most commonly injured organs in blunt abdominal trauma. While it sometimes suffers injury in penetrating trauma, this is less common. Like with other traumatic injuries, the primary focus taking care of a trauma patient is resuscitation and rapid detection of serious injuries following the advanced trauma life support (ATLS) protocol. After performing a thorough physical exam and fluid resuscitation, a FAST exam is typically performed early in the evaluation of a trauma patient, sometimes as a part of the physical exam. Because the FAST exam can sometimes miss intraparenchymal injuries, a high degree of suspicion is necessary. The rest of the workup largely depends on hemodynamic stability. If the patient is hemodynamically stable, regardless of FAST exam results, the patient should undergo imaging using a CT scan. Active extravasation and blush of contrast are indicative of active bleeding. If the patient is hemodynamically unstable with a positive FAST exam, the patient can undergo exploratory laparotomy without further workup.

Splenic injury in trauma generally fall into five grades, according to the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST), which typically categorizes the injuries as lacerations, hematoma, or vascular and describe the extent of injury to vessels or specific splenic tissue. Injury grades I-III are most commonly treated in the hospital using medical management. Surgical management is an option if the patient’s condition does not improve or respond to medical management. Injuries greater than grade III are considered high-grade and typically treated using surgery, although select cases can receive medical management. Procedural treatment of splenic injury can range from the relatively non-invasive angioembolization to partial or total splenectomy. Medical management generally consists of symptomatic treatment with serial CBCs to trend the hemoglobin. Serial imaging is also an option if there is suspicion for bleeding, such as decreasing hemoglobin, or signs of peritonitis. A bleed may present later as a hematoma, the spleen itself, or another collection of fluid may have ruptured between initial survey and admission.