Most cases of episcleritis are mild, transient, and will resolve without intervention within 2 to 21 days. Supportive treatment with refrigerated artificial tears at least four times daily is a common recommendation. Some patients require medical intervention depending on the severity of their symptoms. For those patients who require prescription medication, a mild topical corticosteroid such as fluorometholone 0.1% or loteprednol etabonate 0.5% may be prescribed four times a day for 1 to 2 weeks then tapered down. Although the risk of steroid response causing ocular hypertension is rare with these mild steroids, patients should followup 1 to 2 weeks after initiating treatment to monitor intraocular pressure and evaluate for resolution of the episcleritis. If the episcleral inflammation does not respond to fluorometholone 0.1% or loteprednol etabonate 0.5%, then the clinician may need to prescribe prednisolone acetate 1% four times a day. This is a more potent corticosteroid with greater anti-inflammatory effects but also has a higher risk of ocular hypertension. In general, the inflammation associated with episcleritis is not severe enough to warrant the use of difluprednate 0.05% or oral steroids. Topical steroids may also cause posterior sub-capsular cataracts and increase a patient’s susceptibility for infection; therefore, it is necessary that they are used judiciously.

Oral NSAIDs such as ibuprofen or naproxen may be used as an alternative to topical steroids or if topical steroids do not adequately resolve the inflammation. The dosage for ibuprofen is 200 to 600mg 3 to 4 times per day, and the dosage for naproxen is 250 to 500 mg twice per day for up to two weeks. Oral NSAIDs should be used with caution because of the risk of gastric ulcers and should be prescribed with an antacid such as omeprazole 20 mg daily or ranitidine 150 mg twice per day.

Topical NSAIDs such as diclofenac 0.1% and ketorolac 0.5% are of limited use, but some clinicians do prescribe these medications as a steroid alternative as well.