**Risk Factors**

- History of past near-fatal asthma requiring endotracheal intubation is the greatest single predictor of death from bronchial asthma.

- Similarly, poor patient perception of dyspnea and hypercapnia due to a blunted hypoxic ventilatory response rendered by the chronicity of severe disease or even psychiatric illness is also an ominous risk factor.

- Recurrent hospitalizations or deteriorations despite chronic oral steroid use, late presentation since the onset of symptoms, altered mental status, and sleep deprivation during an ongoing presentation can also be bad prognostic markers of a favorable outcome to initial treatment.

- History of coronary artery disease poses a risk of cardiological adverse events with therapy itself. All these in medical history should alert the evaluating clinical team for a level of preparedness towards the risk of imminent status asthmaticus.

**Physical Examination**

Brenner and colleagues demonstrated certain hemodynamic traits in patients who assumed an upright position than supine. They tend to have a significantly higher heart and respiratory rate along with pulsus paradoxus, a significantly lower PaO2, and a lower peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR). However, the progressive decline in clinical and mental status in the late presentation of status asthmaticus may also counter-intuitively lead patients to assume a supine position. That alone should not be a decision-maker. After initial treatment, a diaphoretic patient, preferring to sit upright, unable to speak complete sentences, or using accessory muscles of respiration all point toward status asthmaticus.

One of the circulatory consequences of status asthmaticus apart from tachycardia and tachypnea is a large respiratory phase variation in pleural pressure. The increased inspiratory effort against obstructed airway results in augmented negative intrathoracic pressure. This results in reduced left ventricular filling and outflow due to a combination of (1) septal deviation to the left due to an enlarged right ventricle (RV), (2) increased left ventricular (LV) afterload, and (3) increased RV afterload due to increase in pulmonary arterial pressure. Systolic blood pressure, therefore, tends to fall at the height of inspiration. Pulsus paradoxus is the difference between end-expiratory and end-inspiratory systolic blood pressure. It is augmented to more than 12 mm Hg in status asthmaticus, although it may paradoxically decline in late-stage with increasing fatigability and loss of respiratory drive.

Tachycardia greater than 120 can be an indicator of disease severity as well as treatment response to beta-agonists. Grossman et al. demonstrated that successful treatment results in a 24-hour drop in heart rate from 120 per minute to 105 per minute. Sinus tachycardia is the predominant rhythm, although supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias have also been reported.

Classic wheezing, as an indicator of bronchospasm, is poorly reliable, as the extent of alveolar airflow is so significantly impaired in these subsets of patients that it cannot generate a wheeze before bronchodilation.