Irritable bowel syndrome with prominent constipation (IBS-C) and chronic idiopathic constipation (CIC) are functional gastrointestinal disorders connected with constipation. IBS-C and CIC together affect about 20% of the general population, including the geriatric group, impairing the overall quality of life. When patients do not respond adequately to over-the-counter therapies, they need safe and effective long-term prescribed treatment. Patients might be intolerant to the more well-established medicines currently available in the market. For adults, linaclotide is a novel remedy with a favorable safety profile.

After obtaining the patient's informed verbal consent, providers such as primary care physicians, gastroenterologists, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants prescribe linaclotide and set realistic goals for treatment outcomes. Nurses administer the linaclotide via feeding tube in in-patient settings. At discharge, they have opportunities to counsel the patients regarding the drug dosage, administration, treatment compliance, and circumstances when medical attention is necessary.

During follow-up visits, nurses can detect and report adverse effects to the consultants. Pharmacists review the drug dosage, administration, and storage process at all kinds of healthcare settings and report the concerns to the physicians. The patients are advised to read the FDA-approved labeling and take medicine regularly, at least 30 minutes before the first meal of the day, and follow the prescriber's advice. A high fiber diet, adequate fluid intake, and exercise have added benefits while on linaclotide. Patients should keep the medicine out of reach of children and dispose of the unused supply. Families should contact the poison control center immediately in cases of accidental ingestion by children. The collaboration and open communication among interprofessional healthcare team members will positively impact patient outcomes.