The many physiologic variations in the pelvis and pelvic outlet between individuals of the male and female sex relate to function and body mass. In males, the pelvic bones, such as the pubic rami, tend to be thicker and heavier. The female pelvis is comparatively wider and shallower than males, which can be demonstrated by the iliac crest that may reach the level of the L4 vertebrae in males but only reaches the L5 vertebrae in females. The angle of the pubic arch, sometimes called the subpubic angle, will also show physiologic variation. Males have an acute subpubic angle (<70 degrees), and females have an obtuse angle (>80 degrees). The anteroposterior diameter of the pelvic outlet varies greatly as male coccyx tends to curve sharply inward, but the female coccyx is relatively straight. The pelvic outlet in females is rounder and larger, with straighter ischial spines. The physiologic variations between sexes are visible as early as the fourth month of fetal life, and the differences are widely attributed to the female pelvic cavity being adapted for the passage of a fetus through a birth canal. Forensic pathologists and forensic anthropologists utilize these differences to determine the sex of skeletal remains accurately.

The Caldwell-Malloy classification system is a common tool used to describe normal variants of the pelvis. These variants have not demonstrated any causation or correlation between a patient’s size or weight. Many pelvises are mixed type, a combination of types, not a single pure type. The mixed types derive their names from a convention where the posterior segment determines the type of pelvis, and the anterior segment determines the “tendency.”

The four normal variants of pelvic shape according to Caldwell-Malloy classifications

- Gynaecoid

- This shape is the most common female pelvis shape with a wide interspinous distance that is ideal for vaginal delivery.

- Android

- This pelvic anatomy is the most common masculine pelvis shape with a curved coccyx, prominent ischial spines, short AP diameter, and heart-shaped inlet. Overall, the internal dimensions of the pelvic cavity and pelvic outlet are smaller, and therefore vaginal delivery is relatively difficult.

- Anthropoid

- This pelvic shape is common in men with an AP diameter greater than the transverse diameter. The inlet and outlet are ovoid-shaped, and thus, the shape is generally suitable for vaginal delivery.

- Platepelloid

- This pelvic shape is uncommon in both male and female patients. The short AP diameter and wide transverse diameter make vaginal delivery very difficult. This pelvic shape is commonly associated with the arrest of labor, and thus surgical interventions are likely needed.