Merosin, which refers to the laminins that contain the alpha2 subunit encoded by LAMA2, play a key role in extracellular matrix composition and signaling. Recent research has begun to find novel uses and functions of the alpha2 subunit, which may elucidate the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of certain diseases.

**Bacterial Superantigen Binding**

T cell activation, initiated by T cell receptor (TCR) binding to peptide-MHC complexes or antibody-mediated crosslinking of TCR, requires functional LCK and ZAP-70 proteins. Staphylococcal antigens, however, can fully activate T cells through an alternative LCK-independent pathway. This alternative pathway involves an interaction between the superantigen and a Galpha11-containing G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) that activates phospholipase beta (PLCbeta) and subsequent T cell activation and IL-2 production. Complementary binding assays and ligand-receptor capture technology (LRC-TriCEPS) have identified a laminin-alpha2 subunit as an important component of this process. The laminin-alpha2 subunit bridges the superantigen to the GPCR, and researchers have proposed it as a coreceptor target for novel therapeutic strategies.

**Muscular Dystrophy**

Mutations in LAMA2 contribute to the pathogenesis of merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy (MDC1A) or LAMA2-related muscular dystrophy (LAMA2 MD), a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neonatal hypotonia, muscle weakness secondary to demyelination of peripheral nerves, and elevated levels of creatine kinase.

**Medullary Sponge Kidney Disease**

Laminin-alpha 2 subunit has also been proposed as a potential urine-specific biomarker for medullary sponge kidney (MSK) disease, according to Fabry et al. ’s proteomic studies. MSK is a rare malformation of the kidney associated with recurrent nephrolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis. Currently, this disease gets diagnosed through time-consuming and expensive clinical tests such as urography as no molecular diagnostic biomarkers currently exist. Their study found laminin-alpha2 subunits in urine samples of patients with MSK and have proposed the protein as a potential candidate MSK biomarker for early and convenient diagnosis of the disease.