Adrenal cancer happens when healthy cells in the adrenal gland grow out of control. Some people have no symptoms, but in other cases, the lesion gets discovered while undergoing an imaging test for another reason.

When adrenal cancer causes symptoms, it does so via the production of hormones. Depending on the levels of the hormones involved, this can cause symptoms such as:

- Muscle weakness

- Weight gain

- Increased hair growth, usually on the face (in women) and deep voice

- Fatigue

- Trouble sleeping

- The purple coloration on the skin

- Hypertension

Adrenal tumors can also cause other symptoms that are not related to the level of hormones. These can include:

- Weight loss or loss of appetite

- Pain in the abdomen or lower back

All symptoms listed above can result from many other disorders, and hence a thorough workup is required. However, if a patient perceives these symptoms, they need to report it to their doctor or nurse.

Tests for adrenal cancer usually include:

- Blood analysis and urine tests to determine the levels of different hormones

- CT or MRI scan

The treatment chosen will depend on the stage of adrenal cancer. Most patients with the adrenal disease are treated with surgery to remove the tumor. After surgery, some patients may require additional treatments that can include:

- Chemotherapy

- Radiation therapy

After the initial treatment, the doctor must follow the patient regularly to determine if cancer has been cured or has come back. Follow-up tests include blood and imaging tests. Having symptoms could mean the adrenal tumor has returned. The patient should inform their doctor or nurse if they have any signs or symptoms. Long-term medicinal treatment to correct the hormone levels may be necessary.

**What happens if my adrenal cancer returns or is widespread?**If the adrenal tumor return or spreads, the patient may require additional chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation therapy.