# Introduction

Pathergy phenomenon has been well known to dermatologists since it was first described in 1937 by Blobner as a state of altered tissue reactivity in response to minor trauma.

Hulusi Behcet, a Turkish dermatologist, first characterized the clinical entity now known as BD by a triad of recurrent aphthous stomatitis, relapsing uveitis, and genital ulceration.

Along with BD, pathergy is also widely reported in various other disorders, including neutrophilic dermatoses such as pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) and Sweet syndrome.

# Procedures

As of now, there is still no standardized method of conducting the pathergy test. Intradermal, subcutaneous, and intravenous methods have all been used. Although intradermal needle prick is most commonly used for pathergy testing, many investigators have also used the intradermal injection of normal saline, monosodium urate crystals, or streptococcal antigens to perform the test.

Although there is no consensus among clinicians, studies have shown that positive rates for the SPT can be increased by making at least two needle pricks on the hairless part of the volar forearm with a large hypodermic needle. The needle is usually inserted with the bevel up at an angle of 45 degrees to a depth of 3 mm to 5 mm.

Furthermore, the diameter of the needle used has also been related to pathergy.

# Indications

Although the pathergy phenomenon is seen in various disease entities, pathergy testing is only indicated in establishing the diagnosis of BD. Once regarded as synonymous with BD, pathergy has decreased in prevalence over time and varies among different populations.

The ISG criteria, most recently revised in 2006, has been validated to enable multicenter collaborations and reports values of 97% specificity and 92% sensitivity for BD.

Based on this scoring system, a diagnosis of BD is established by a sum of three or more points. Therefore, a pathergy test is indicated when an individual suspected of having BD exhibits only one of the major criteria or two or fewer of the minor criteria. For example, if a patient has a history of recurrent oral aphthosis (greater than 3 episodes per year) and pseudofolliculitis, a positive pathergy test can confirm the diagnosis of BD. However, if a different patient presents with recurrent oral aphthosis, uveitis, and genital aphthosis, a diagnosis of BD can be made without recourse to the pathergy test.

# Potential Diagnosis

In the appropriate clinical context, a positive pathergy test should prompt consideration of BD on top of the differential diagnosis due to the high specificity of the test for the disease. The most common clinical feature of BD is the occurrence of recurrent, painful mucocutaneous ulcers (greater than 3 times a year). Oral aphthae are present in most patients with BD, but can also occur in other diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Pathergy was once regarded as pathognomonic of BD because it was essentially absent in patients with SLE and recurrent aphthous stomatitis who presented with oral lesions akin to those seen in BD.

There have been various reports of the pathergy phenomenon in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) treated with interferon-alpha, atypical eosinophilic pustular folliculitis, myeloproliferative disorders, and in neonates with Down syndrome. A previous study showed that CML patients receiving treatment, specifically with interferon-alpha, had a high prevalence of positive pathergy tests (24%).

Although pathergy testing has not been extensively studied in other disease entities, pathergy is a known feature of several other neutrophilic dermatoses, including pyoderma gangrenosum (PG), Sweet syndrome, erythema elevatum diutinum, and blind loop syndrome.

# Normal and Critical Findings

A physician ideally evaluates the pathergy test 24 to 48 hours after initial provocation. Erythema without any induration surrounding the needle prick site is considered normal, and thus a negative result.

Dilsen method of assessing and grading SPT is commonly used by clinicians and is based on the visible response on the skin 48 hours after needle prick.

# Interfering Factors

Results of the pathergy test have been known to vary widely between populations and even between different investigators studying the same population. The positivity rate for pathergy tests in BD is highest in countries along the Silk Route, which includes the Middle East, Far East, and Mediterranean Basin.

One of the major interfering factors affecting results of pathergy testing is thought to be related to the materials and methods used to conduct the test. Various studies revealed that using a blunt (sterilized, reusable) needle increases the intensity and frequency of positive pathergy tests.

Another possible interfering factor with pathergy testing is thought to be the use of corticosteroids by BD patients, which can increase the false-negative results according to some studies.

# Complications

There have been no serious reported complications of the oral or skin pathergy test in BD patients. The papules and pustules that result from the skin prick usually become maximum in 48 hours and disappear within 45 days.

Complications related to pathergy in PG patients have also been well documented. Surgical debridement of PG ulcers has occasionally resulted in the rapid progression of the ulcers with an exponential increase in size.

# Clinical Significance

Although pathergy testing has decreased in its sensitivity over the past few decades, it remains an invaluable test in the diagnosis of BD. Despite the loss in sensitivity, the test has demonstrated improvements in its diagnostic odds ratio, positive predictive value, and positive likelihood ratio.

Despite the presence of pathergy clinically in other conditions, BD is the only disease that includes a positive pathergy test as part of its diagnostic criteria. Nevertheless, the knowledge of pathergy reaction in neutrophilic dermatoses such as PG and other disease entities is important because it may influence the diagnoses and assessment of these conditions. It would be of great interest to systematically study and perform pathergy tests in patients with these diseases because it may provide invaluable insight into their pathophysiology and possibly guide their management.