The scapulohumeral muscles dynamically position the glenoid properly in the glenohumeral socket and are vital for the function of the glenohumeral joint. They coordinate the motion of the scapula and humerus to allow efficient movement to take place. The motion of these two joints is quantifiable with scapulohumeral rhythm (SHR).

The supraspinatus originates from the supraspinous fossa.

Infraspinatus originates from the infraspinous fossa of the scapula,  located on the dorsal aspect of the scapula below the scapular spine.

Teres minor originates from the posterior part of the scapular, next to the lateral border.

Subscapularis originates at the medial and lower two-thirds of the lateral border of the subscapular fossa. It inserts onto the lesser tubercle of the humerus. The subscapularis internally rotates the humerus. In certain positions, the subscapularis provides adduction and extension.

The deltoid originates from the spine of the scapula and the lateral third of the clavicle. It inserts at the lateral humerus at the deltoid tuberosity. It has three parts, anterior, lateral, and posterior. Together, the deltoid abducts the arm past fifteen degrees. The anterior and posterior portions stabilize the arm. The lateral part raises the arm from 15 to 100 degrees.

Teres major originates from a lower one-third of the lateral scapula. It inserts medially to the intertubercular groove. Its function is to provide shoulder extension, adduction, and internal rotation.

Coracobrachialis originates from the coracoid process and inserts at the medial aspect of the middle of the humerus.

The biceps brachialis muscle originates with its long head from the supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula and with its short head from the coracoid process of the scapula. Its action at shoulder level is to flex and facilitate adduction on a horizontal plane—both heads of which it is composed join at the level of the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus. Thanks to a common tendon, they are inserted at the level of the radial tuberosity and on the fascia of the forearm from the ulnar side.

The triceps brachii is formed from three parts: the long head, lateral head, and medial head. The long head arises from the subglenoid tuberosity of the scapula and the glenoid labrum. The lateral head is born from the posterior aspect of the humerus, above and laterally to the groove of the radial nerve. The medial head originates from the posterior aspect of the humerus, inferior to the groove of the radial nerve. The three muscular heads are brought downwards, converging on a strong tendon that inserts itself to the superior and posterior faces and the margins of the olecranon. The long head of the brachial triceps intervenes in the extension of the arm and the posterior adduction.

The latissimus dorsi muscle forms the posterior pillar and the posterior wall of the axillary cavity. It covers the lower and lateral sides of the back (lumbar region) and the lateral part of the chest. It originates, through the posterior leaflet of the lumbodorsal fascia, from the spinous processes of the last six thoracic vertebrae and the lumbar vertebrae, from the supraspinous ligament, the medial sacral crest, and the posterior third of the external lip of the iliac crest. Some of its fibers also originate from the outer face of the last three or four ribs. The muscular bundles are carried up and out towards the axillary region, reaching the insertion line on the medial lip of the bicipital groove of the humerus (crest of the small tuberosity). At the level of the shoulder, it is the most important internal rotator, as it is the most important for the adduction and flexion of the shoulder.

The pectoralis major muscle is located anteriorly in the thorax and forms much of the anterior wall of the axillary cavity. There is a clavicular head, a sternum-costal head, and an abdominal head. The bundles of the three parts converge outwards and insert with a flattened tendon at the lateral lip of the bicipital groove of the humerus (crest of the great tuberosity). Its contraction at shoulder level helps flexion, internal rotation, and adduction on a horizontal plane.

The trapezius muscle is located in the nuchal region and the dorsal part of the thorax. It originates from the medial third of the superior nuchal line, from the external occipital protuberance, the nuchal ligament, and the spinous processes of the seventh cervical vertebra and of all the thoracic vertebrae, as well as from the supraspinous ligament. Its bundles converge towards the shoulder and are inserted at the lateral third of the posterior margin of the clavicle, at the medial margin of the acromion, at the upper lip of the posterior margin of the spine of the scapula, and at the medial end of the spine itself. Its action influences the movements of the scapula and indirectly helps the shoulder in adduction and flexion in the first degree.