# Continuing Education Activity

Claustrophobia is the fear of enclosed spaces. About 12.5% of the population have this fear, with the majority of them being females. Claustrophobia is a specific phobia where one fears closed spaces (claustro means closed). Examples of closed spaces include engine rooms, small or locked rooms, cellars, tunnels, elevators, MRI machines, subway trains, crowded places, etc. Claustrophobic people are not frightened of enclosed spaces per se but of what could happen in the enclosed space. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of claustrophobia and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of claustrophobia.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with claustrophobia.
- Summarize the management options available for claustrophobia.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to manage claustrophobia and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

A phobia is a fear which causes significant impairment in a person's ability to live everyday life. An example of life impairment is avoiding the feared object or scenario.

Claustrophobia is a specific phobia where one fears closed spaces (claustro means closed). Examples of closed spaces are engine rooms, small or locked rooms, cellars, tunnels, elevators, MRI machines, subway trains, crowded places, etc.

Claustrophobic people are not frightened of enclosed spaces per se but of what could happen in the enclosed space. As agoraphobia is increasingly being recognized as a fear of what might unfold in a public place, such as having a panic attack, claustrophobia can also be regarded in this manner—a subjective sense of being trapped features in the accounts of most claustrophobic people. Most closed places entail some level of entrapment along with a restriction of movement. Animals certainly, and people potentially, are vulnerable "in situations of confined space"; experimental neuroses are easily induced when an animal is put in a confined environment.

Fear of suffocation concerns claustrophobic people. This extraordinarily intense and expected component of claustrophobia is interpreted as a grave threat by claustrophobic people. Many claustrophobic people experience a fear of suffocation when in an enclosed space which is closely associated with the sensation of shortness of breath.

# Etiology

Social anxiety disorder is a DSM-V psychiatric condition characterized by an intense fear of social situations and scrutiny—patients who have claustrophobia display a great fear and anxiety of closed spaces. The belief with a social anxiety disorder is that the frontal regions of the brain cannot downregulate amygdalar hyper-activation. The same disruptions in the amygdala-frontal network in social anxiety disorder are attributable to claustrophobia.

There are two phenomena associated with innate pathological fear, fear sensitization and failure of fear habituation. The amygdala has a decreased threshold activity and decreased potentiation of activity in fear sensitization. Research suggests a dysfunction in the learning-independent fear circuit, which drives defensive behavior without prior learning, in nonexperiential phobias. Habituation is the reduced emotional reaction of a person to repeated stimuli. In fear habituation, the amygdala has decreased habituation.

A single gene defect in the human GPM6A gene is a suspected genetic risk for claustrophobia. The GPM6A gene, expressed in the amygdala and throughout the central nervous system, encodes a stress-regulated neuronal protein found on chromosome 4q32-q34, associated with panic disorder.

# Epidemiology

Claustrophobia has a lifetime and 12-month prevalence of 7.7% to 12.5%.

# History and Physical

Patients with specific phobias report various physical and emotional symptoms. Based on these symptoms, practitioners utilize screening tools to diagnose patients with claustrophobia. Physical symptoms include, but are not limited to, difficulty breathing, trembling, sweating, tachycardia, dry mouth, and chest pain. Emotional symptoms include, but are not limited to, overwhelming anxiety or fear, fear of losing control, an intense need to leave the situation, and understanding the fear as irrational but an inability to overcome it.

People with claustrophobia tend to feel the fear of what might happen in a confined space which leads to the sense of oxygen not being adequate. Thinking about it or being confined may trigger a fear of being unable to breathe adequately, running out of oxygen, and being restricted. When anxiety levels exceed, the person may begin to experience:

- Sweating and chills

- Increased heart rate and high blood pressure

- Dizziness and lightheadedness

- Dry mouth

- Hyperventilation

- Hot flashes

- Nausea

- Headache

- Numbness

- A choking sensation

- Chest tightness/pain and difficulty breathing

- An urge to urinate

- Confusion

Not all people with claustrophobia will present with all these features, as the presentation can be variable.

# Evaluation

Claustrophobia evaluation starts with a patient that presents with the symptom of fear. It needs to be determined if the fear represents a phobia, normal fear, a general medical condition, or an anxiety disorder. Questions in the initial history taking part in the assessment that assesses how the fear impacts the person's development, daily life, and family dynamics are vital to distinguishing anxiety and phobias. For children, sample questions are: How do the child's parents respond to their fear? Can the child or parent recall the exact trigger of the anxiety? Is there any interruption in the child's daily schedule more than three times a day?

Questionnaires are options to evaluate claustrophobia. The Spielberger psychology questionnaire consists of 20 items; each scored from 20 to 80, which measures apparent anxiety.

# Treatment / Management

The mainstay of management for claustrophobia is cognitive behavioral therapy, in which the patient can discuss negative and distorted beliefs.

Interoceptive exposure is a form of treatment where the patient gets exposed to the physical sensation of anxiety in a controlled environment.

Utilizing virtual reality (VR) technology in a stimulating computer-generated atmosphere is one option for treating claustrophobia. Studies have indicated the efficacy of VR tools (apps) in educating patients about MRI and simulating the experience of actually being scanned.

Medications may also be used in the management of this phobia. Options include benzodiazepines, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and other investigational drugs (cycloserine, hydrocortisone, quetiapine).

# Differential Diagnosis

A community survey of 9282 adults residing in the United States showed that the presence of one specific phobia is associated with the prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorder, social phobia, bipolar disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, alcohol dependence, separation anxiety disorder, and major depressive disorder.

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a common disorder that merits consideration in the differential. The main distinguishing reason is the presence of a traumatic event causing PTSD. A specific phobia is not always preceded by a traumatic event (experiential-specific phobia vs. nonexperiential-specific phobia).

# Prognosis

Patients with claustrophobia commonly have a chronic course of their anxiety disorder, increasing the risk of other psychopathology.

# Complications

There is an 83% likelihood of uncovering multiple specific phobias once diagnosed with a particular phobia during a patient's life.

# Consultations

In managing people with claustrophobia, the following can be helpful:

- Psychologists

- Psychiatrists

- Counselors

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients must be provided with information on the symptoms and criteria necessary for claustrophobia. They will be better able to seek help and address their anxiety about enclosed environments once they can identify the origin of their anxiety.

People should be advised on self-help techniques to manage their stress/anxiety during an episode. It is advisable to avoid the triggers as much as possible to maintain a healthy life. In addition, they should be informed about the treatment options available so they can make an informed choice.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There must be an interprofessional team approach to patients with claustrophobia and other specific phobias. The nursing staff, clinicians, and ancillary staff members aim to decrease the patient's anxiety, especially in anxiety-provoking scenarios, such as an MRI procedure. Clinicians need to determine which part of the MRI procedure is the most anxiety-provoking for the patient, acknowledge their concerns, and address their specific phobia. However, it is essential to avoid undermining the patient's concerns and implying that they can choose to stop the fear they experience at will. The patient should be counseled on how they can have the most significant control level during the procedure to have comfort, such as allowing a family member into the room with them during the procedure (when clinically appropriate).

The management of anxiety disorders requires an interprofessional team that includes physicians, nurses, other technicians (e.g., radiation techs), and, where appropriate, pharmacists to communicate and collaborate in treating the condition. They also help the patient through anxiety-producing procedures (such as an MRI) to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]