Renal cysts can be diagnosed by ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging scans (MRI).

Infantile polycystic kidney disease is usually first evaluated with ultrasound in utero. The mother usually presents with oligohydramnios from the poor renal function of the fetus. After birth, an ultrasound is performed that will show enlarged kidneys with numerous small renal cysts bilaterally. The kidneys can be further evaluated with MRI which normally shows a diffuse increase in T2 signal. Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease is usually evaluated in utero versus early in neonates and presents as multiple non-communicating renal cysts. Adult polycystic kidney disease is often evaluated with ultrasound or CT. The classification of more than two cysts per side by the age of 30 helps in the diagnosis. Obstructive cystic renal dysplasia is diagnosed in utero demonstrating a normal to small kidney size of the affected kidney with multiple scattered cysts.

Ultrasound evaluation of a renal cyst can be described as simple, complex. A simple renal cyst has a well-marginated anechoic lesion with possible posterior acoustic enhancement. A minimally complex cyst may demonstrate a few septations. A complex cyst will demonstrate thick septations or walls and can have a hypoechoic appearance or signs of internal debris.

Acquired single or multifocal renal cysts are classified using the Bosniak classification on a contrast-enhanced CT and can be adjusted for MRI use. A Bosniak I lesion is a simple cyst with imperceptible walls and is round. No follow-up is needed, and there is a less than 1% chance of malignancy. A Bosniak II lesion demonstrates minimal complexity with a few thin septations less than 1 mm in diameter, thin calcification, or a high attenuated lesion less than 3 cm in diameter without enhancement. Bosniak II lesions require no follow-up and have a less than 1% chance of malignancy. A Bosniak IIF lesion demonstrates minimal complexity, an increased number of thin septations, with possible "perceived" enhancement with no true measurable enhancement, or a high attenuated lesion larger than 3 cm. These lesions require follow-up with CT or ultrasound. No definitive interval timeline is given, but most references say approximately 6 months after diagnosis and then annually for 5 years if there is no progression. A Bosniak IIF lesion has a 5% chance of malignancy. A Bosniak III lesion is indeterminant in appearance with thick septations with possible nodularity or measurable wall enhancement greater than ten Hounsfield units. The recommended treatment is biopsy and partial nephrectomy versus ablation. A Bosniak III lesion has a 55% chance of being malignant. A Bosniak IV lesion describes a solid mass with cystic versus necrotic components. These are described as being unquestionably malignant. The recommended treatment is partial or total nephrectomy. The Bosniak IV lesion has a 100% chance of being malignant.

A simple cyst on MRI will demonstrate a low T1 signal, high T2 signal, with no evidence of enhancement post-contrast.