LDH assays can measure the amount of LDH present in the serum that leaks from the tissues when damaged. The catalytic property of LDH leading to reversible oxidation of L-lactate to pyruvate, mediated by the hydrogen acceptor, NAD+, is harnessed as a basis of the measurement of LDH activity. Clinical diagnostic laboratories assess the rate of production of NADH that changes the optical density of the sample measured spectrophotometrically at 340 nm. The conversion of pyruvate to lactate or reverse reaction of oxidation of L-lactate to pyruvate can be monitored spectrophotometrically. LDH activity is measurable in various samples such as plasma, serum, tissue, cells, and in the culture medium for research purposes. Care is required when handling serum and plasma samples because hemolysis can cause an artefactual increase in the enzyme levels due to its release from ruptured erythrocytes.

Typically, the normal range of LDH is between 140 to 280 U/L. However, the clinical interpretation depends upon the signs and symptoms of the patient. The serum usually has a higher level of LDH as compared with plasma because of LDH release during clotting. The LDH activity also increases during strenuous exercise to generate lactic acid under normal physiological conditions.

Besides testing the concentration of LDH in samples, LDH isozyme testing also helps to assess the type, location, and severity of tissue damage.  LDH is a tetrameric enzyme made of H and M subunits. The assembly of the enzymes occurs in a defined ratio through a tissue-specific synthesis of subunits, hence providing tissue specificity, i.e., heart-specific LDH (LDH-1) preferentially synthesizes all four H subunits, while liver LDH (LDH-5)  is exclusively made of all M-subunits. Similarly, other tissues synthesize the subunits in a specified ratio. LDH isozyme testing identifies the isozymes as LDH 1 to 5 based on the electrophoretic mobility shift. The different subunit composition imparts a difference in the net charges and hence a different migration in an electric field. A good separation pattern of LDH isozymes is obtained in a buffer of pH of 8.6. In a typical LDH isozyme electrophoretic pattern, LDH-1 moves as a fast band, followed by LDH-2, LDH-3, LDH-4, and LDH-5 being the slowest band. The normal serum percentage of LDH-1 (4H) is 30.4 to 36.4%, LDH-2 (3H1M) is 30.4 to 36.4%, LDH-3 (2H2M) is 19.2 to 24.8%, LDH-4 (1H3M) is 9.6 to 15.6%, and LDH-5 (4M) is 5.5 to 12.7%.