Hammertoe deformities can be extremely painful and can have a significant impact on a person’s quality of life. Surgical correction of hammertoe deformities is therefore among the most commonly performed surgical procedures performed on the forefoot.

**Non-surgical Treatment**

Before the surgical route is considered, conservative treatments are usually attempted. These treatments are concerned with relieving pressure dorsally over the involved PIPJ, plantarly to its metatarsal head as well as relieving the pressure to the tip of the involved toe. With lesser digit deformities, it is recommended that the patient begins using insoles or orthotics and shoes with a wide toe box to accommodate the deformities as well as to alleviate the pain that may present with the impingement of the digits.

**Surgical Treatment**

Once the flexion contractures start forming and becoming constant along with pain, surgical intervention may be indicated. Historically, this has been based on balancing out the forces from the extensors and the flexors by altering the relative lengths of the toe, including its osseous structures and its tendons. The distinction between flexible and rigid hammertoes, as well as the absence or presence of associated MTPJ deformity, will help to guide you to conservative care or to the best surgical intervention. Recent findings have shown that lesser toe surgery makes up 48% of forefoot surgeries with hammertoe surgery being the most common procedure.

Treatments must address and evaluate the deformity at all joints of the affected digit including DIPJ, PIPJ, and MTPJ. The most common surgical techniques employed to address the rigid or so-called fixed hammertoe deformities are PIPJ resection arthroplasty or PIPJ arthrodesis. For the correction of flexible hammertoes, soft tissue release is often used and this will maintain the structural stability of the toe.

If digital surgery is warranted and instability is noted at the MTPJ, this should be addressed as a concomitant procedure such as an osteotomy to address the affected metatarsal, and/or plantar plate repair. Plantar plate rupture may be diagnosed on physical examination by the Lachman test and is considered the most accurate clinical test for diagnosing MTPJ pathology. During the test, the metatarsal head should be stabilized while the proximal phalanx is displaced dorsally. If displacement is over 2 mm or 50% of the MTPJ, the test is positive indicating a plantar plate rupture or insufficiency. A dorsal medial deviation of the digit, often affecting the second toe, is commonly seen as an objective finding of MTPJ instability along with exquisite point tenderness just distal to MTPJ at the insertion of the plantar plate apparatus into the base of the proximal phalanx.

- **PIPJ resection arthroplasty**- Resection of the head of the proximal phalanx will shorten the distance from the origin to the insertion of the flexor digitorum longus and flexor digitorum brevis causing weakness. However, the extensors will not be weakened since their insertions are into the MTPJ via the extensor hood apparatus. This procedure is therefore most effective in treating flexor induced hammertoe deformities that are semirigid or rigid, as well as for elongated digits. Due to the loss of structural integrity, multiple arthroplasties should be avoided.

- **PIPJ arthrodesis**- The fusion of the PIPJ is an effective procedure for most deformities related to the digits. It is particularly useful and preferred when there are significant deforming forces, as well as when all or multiple digits are involved since it maintains the structural stability to the toes. The fusion converts the toe to a rigid lever arm, leading to FDL and FDB tendons now augmenting the intrinsic muscles providing plantarflexion stability at the MTPJ.

- **Tendon transfers**- Transferring the FDL and FDB tendons to the dorsal aspect of the proximal phalanx convert these tendons to plantar flexors of the MTPJ during weight-bearing in the same fashion as PIPJ arthrodesis. This procedure is indicated for flexible deformities. For the extensor tendon transfer, the EDL may be transferred to the metatarsal neck to eliminate the deforming force.

- **Tenotomy**- Another procedure indicated for flexible deformity is a flexor tenotomy performed at the PIPJ which effectively releases both the FDL and FDB. For mild, flexible extensor hammertoes the extensor tenotomy is indicated. The tenotomy must be performed proximal to the extensor hood apparatus to effectively release the pull. If the incision is made at the MTPJ, it requires a full capsulotomy.

- **Weil Osteotomy**- This is a distal oblique osteotomy resulting in a shortening of the metatarsal and is a procedure most commonly seen when addressing hammertoes or claw toes. It is often used to correct dislocations of the digits and angular deformities.

- **Plantar Plate Repair**- Commonly performed in conjunction with a Weil osteotomy. It is typically carried out through a dorsal approach where the injured or ruptured plantar plate is repaired using suture.