The Romberg maneuver is a commonly performed test during the neurological exam. It is a valuable clinical sign to evaluate the integrity of the dorsal columns of the spinal cord and is particularly useful in patients with ataxia or severe incoordination.

Although ataxia may develop gradually and insidiously, the screening test is indicated when the patient admits an inability to move around in the dark or even maintain balance when washing their face. In disease states with severe proprioceptive impairment, the patient may even exhibit a noticeable impairment when standing together with the feet.

The Romberg test is quite helpful in a broad range of neurologic disease states in assessing and confirming various neurological conditions including but not limited to Parkinson's disease (causes postural instability and a shuffling gait), Friedreich ataxia (causes staggering gait and frequent falls), Vitamin B12 deficiency (causes ataxia gait), Tertiary syphilis (causes sensory ataxia; impaired proprioception), Normal pressure hydrocephalus in the elderly (truncal ataxia with falls), Wernicke's syndrome (associated with chronic alcoholism which causes limb ataxia), and Ménière's disease.

Romberg sign is positive in:

- Los of proprioception among patients with myelopathies and sensory neuropathies

- Uncompensated unilateral or bilateral vestibular dysfunction, and

- Pathology involving the anterior vermis and the paravermis of the anterior cerebellar lobe.

In cerebellar disease, the patient is often unsteady with the eyes open as well. The patient significantly tends to fall to the side of the affected labyrinth during the test.

The Romberg test or Timed Get Up and Go Test has also been applied for measuring frailty kinematics and accelerometry index among the aged population.