There are many possible methods of confirming that a particular protein is being synthesized.

**Immunostaining**

Because of the large number of proteins synthesized in a typical cell, verifying the presence of a particular protein is understandably challenging. One way to confirm the presence of a specific protein in a clinical specimen is through immunostaining. This technique introduces an antibody to a protein of interest, and the exquisite specificity of the antibody serves for protein detection.

In immunostaining, the specimen is incubated with a primary antibody solution. This antibody can contain a fluorescent molecule on its heavy chain or an enzyme (such as horseradish peroxidase) that will fluoresce in the presence of a suitable substrate. The light released can be visualized under a microscope or exposed to photosensitive film in a dark room for later development. Immunostaining can either be direct where the primary antibody possesses the means of fluorescent detection or indirect, where a secondary antibody raised against the primary antibody is detectable via fluorescence.

**Protein Electrophoresis**

As with nucleic acids, proteins can be separated based on size and/or charge using gel electrophoresis. Proteins can be run in their native configurations or undergo denaturing before electrophoresis. In denaturing electrophoresis, a detergent such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) is used to disrupt non-covalent bonding forces within proteins. SDS also gives proteins common charge to mass ratios, so the only force operating during SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis is the molecular sieving action of the polyacrylamide gel. Proteins separated in this manner can be detected either non-specifically with dyes like coomassie blue or specifically using antibodies in a procedure referred to as Western blotting or immunoblotting.