# Definition/Introduction

Pharmacokinetics is the study of a drug moiety or a compound as it moves through the body after its administration. It involves the processes of drug absorption, bioavailability, clearance, and distribution.

Drug distribution is the disbursement of an unmetabolized drug as it moves through the body’s blood and tissues. The efficacy or toxicity of a drug depends on the distribution in specific tissues and in part explains the lack of correlation between plasma levels and the effects that are seen. Based on the molecular structure, drugs have variable distribution in different types of tissues such as fat, muscle, and brain. Unlike other tissues, the brain and testes are unique, as they contain membrane barriers making a drug significantly less susceptible to distribution.

**Lipophiliic (Fat Soluble)**

- Nonpolar compounds

- Easily diffuse across lipid bilayers of cell membranes

- Rx can be administered topically

- Free diffusion across the blood-brain barrier

- Biotransformed in the liver

- Excreted through the bile duct

**Hydrophilic (Water Soluble)**

- Polar compounds

- Cross lipid bilayers via facilitated transport (passive chemical diffusion across a cell membrane by ion channels or carriers)

- Eliminated by kidneys

# Issues of Concern

Drug distribution is impacted by several factors related to the drug and the body. The drug-related factors include blood and tissue binding proteins, pH, and perfusion. The body-related factors include body water composition, fat composition, diseases (e.g., volume depletion, burns, third spacing).

# Clinical Significance

As people age, the overall body water reduces. However, intracellular water remains relatively stable from the first month of life to adulthood. Higher doses of drugs per kilogram weight are required in younger children as they have a higher percentage of water.

Understanding drug distribution and pharmacokinetics (PK) is important for all clinicians prescribing medication, along with understanding the fundamentals of protein binding.

Competition for plasma binding can influence drug effects. For example, Aspirin and Warfarin are known to compete for the same plasma protein binding site. Administering both drugs at the same time will increase the unbound drug, thereby potentiating their effects and potentially lead to bleeding risk.

Phase I metabolism involves what is known as the cytochrome P-450 system (CYP enzyme). CYP alters a drug in such a way so that it will be more amenable to combining with polar molecules. These reactions involve basic chemistry principles such as oxidation, reduction, or hydrolysis. Phase II metabolism is the process of adding a polar moiety to the drug, such as sulfate, acetate, or glucuronate. The addition of a polar moiety to a drug makes the drug water-soluble and available for excretion by the kidney.

**Phases of Biotransformation**

- **Phase I reaction**: The drug is first transformed into a polar metabolite via oxidation by the cytochrome P-450 system → allows phase II to occur.

- **Phase II reactions**: Involves the coupling of the metabolite with glucuronic acid, acetyl groups, sulfates, amino acids, or glutathione.

**Types of Drug Kinetics**

- **Zero-order kinetics****:**The rate of metabolism/elimination remains constant and is independent of the concentration of a drug.

- **First-order kinetics****:**The rate of metabolism/elimination is directly proportional to the plasma concentration of the drug.

**Half-life (T1/2):**The time required for a drug's plasma concentration to reach half of its initial value.

- **After 4****half-lives**> 90% of the drug is eliminated.

**Drug clearance:**The measure of the rate of drug elimination → the plasma volume that can be completely cleared of the drug in a given period of time.

Additionally, uremia not only affects protein binding, but kidneys also play a significant role in drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME). Renal dose adjustment is essential in moderate to severe renal failure. Important strategies for managing and drug dosing must be adjusted accordingly, and the risks must be weighed against the benefits.

Several factors impact drug distribution. These factors include the concentration of drug transporters in blood, pH, perfusion, body water composition, body fat composition, and most certainly disease conditions (e.g., volume depletion, burns, third spacing). The majority of protein binding is relevant only when the drug is more than 90 percent protein bound. In the hypoalbuminemia state, which occurs in malnutrition and inflammation, there is a higher concentration of the unbound drugs. Body composition and metabolic factors also affect drug distribution. For example, during the last trimester of pregnancy, plasma volume expands, so there is an overall diluting effect on plasma proteins. There is also a change in adipose tissue. Additionally, pregnant women are frequently excluded in clinical trials related to drugs.

The **cytochrome P-450 system**is a family of heme-containing enzymes found in the liver and intestinal tract. There are multiple forms of CYP enzymes. Some drugs can either induce or inhibit specific isoforms of the enzyme, affecting the ADME of a drug. A clinician must be aware of potential drug-drug interactions with CYP enzyme inducers and inhibitors and naturally occurring compounds that can alter the actions of CYP enzyme. Naturally occurring compounds include grapefruit juice, nicotine-containing products, and St. John’s wort.

Below is a list of the major drugs that inhibit and induce the cytochrome P-450 system, as well as dugs that are a major substrate of the enzyme:

**CYP1A2**

- Inhibitors: amiodarone, cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, fluvoxamine

- Inducers: carbamazepine, phenobarbital, rifampin, tobacco

- Substrates: caffeine, clozapine, theophylline

**CYP2C9**

- Inhibitors: amiodarone, fluconazole, fluoxetine, metronidazole, ritonavir, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole

- Inducers: carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin

- Substrates: carvedilol, celecoxib, glipizide, ibuprofen, irbesartan, losartan

**CYP2C19**

- Inhibitors: fluvoxamine, isoniazid, ritonavir

- Inducers: carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin

- Substrates: omeprazole, phenobarbital, phenytoin

**CYP2D6**

- Inhibitors: amiodarone, cimetidine, diphenhydramine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, quinidine, ritonavir, terbinafine

- Inducers: none

- Substrates: amitriptyline, carvedilol, codeine, donepezil, haloperidol, metoprolol, paroxetine, risperidone, tramadol

**CYP2E1**

- Inhibitors: none

- Inducers: ethanol, isoniazid, tobacco

- Substrates: acetaminophen, theophylline, verapamil

**CYP3A4 and CYP3A5**

- Inhibitors: clarithromycin, diltiazem, erythromycin, grapefruit juice, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nefazodone*****, ritonavir, telithromycin, verapamil

- Inducers: carbamazepine, Hypericum perforatum, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin

- Substrates: alprazolam, amlodipine, atorvastatin, cyclosporine, diazepam, estradiol, simvastatin, sildenafil, verapamil, zolpidem

Below is an additional list of common drug-drug interactions involving the cytochrome P-450 system that clinicians should be aware of:

Drug: **amiodarone**

CYP enzyme: CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 inhibitor

Drug-Drug Interaction: warfarin

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP2C9

Side Effects: Increased risk of bleeding caused by increased warfarin level.

Drug: **carbamazepine**,**phenobarbital**,**phenytoin**

CYP enzyme: CYP3A4 inducer

Drug-Drug Interaction: Ethinyl estradiol-containing contraceptives

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP3A4

Side Effects: Unplanned pregnancy caused by reduced estradiol level.

Drug: **clarithromycin**,**erythromycin**,**telithromycin**

CYP enzyme: CYP3A4 inhibitor

Drug-Drug Interaction: simvastatin, verapamil

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP3A4

Side Effects: Myopathy or rhabdomyolysis caused by increased simvastatin level. Hypotension and QT interval prolongation caused by increased verapamil level.

Drug: **diltiazem**,**verapamil**

CYP enzyme: CYP3A4 inhibitor

Drug-Drug Interaction: prednisone

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP3A4

Side Effects: Immunosuppression caused by increased prednisolone serum levels.

Drug: **fluoxetine**,**paroxetine**

CYP enzyme: CYP2D6 inhibitor

Drug-Drug Interaction: risperidone, tramadol

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP2D6

Side Effects: Increased risk of extrapyramidal adverse effects caused by increased risperidone level.

Drug: **Grapefruit juice**

CYP enzyme: CYP3A4 inhibitor

Drug-Drug Interaction: buspirone

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP3A4

Side Effects: Dizziness and serotonin syndrome caused by increased buspirone level.

Drug: **metronidazole**

CYP enzyme: CYP2C9 inhibitor

Drug-Drug Interaction: warfarin

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP2C9

Side Effects: Increased risk of bleeding caused by increased warfarin level.

Drug:**terbinafine**

CYP enzyme: CYP2D6 inhibitor

Drug-Drug Interaction: amitriptyline

Metabolizing Enzyme: CYP2D6

Side Effects: Dry mouth, dizziness, and cardiac toxicity caused by a prolonged increase in amitriptyline and nortriptyline.

**CYP**= cytochrome P-450

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The interprofessional team and healthcare professionals, including laboratory technologists, pharmacists, nurses, and clinicians, need to all work together to ensure the safety and efficacy of administered drugs. After the clinician chooses the choice and dosage of a particular drug, the pharmacist should verify dosing, report any drug interactions, and take notice of special clinical situations that will influence drug levels and hence efficacy as well as adverse events (e.g., albumin levels, changes in weight, malnutrition, renal and hepatic function). In one study in chronic kidney disease patients, pharmacists identified 5302 drug-related problems and made 3160 recommendations with acceptance rates up to 95%.

When possible and indicated plasma levels should be followed. Nurses play a critical role in drug administration and alerting the team regarding errors related to medication reconciliation.