When considering the replacement of an aortic valve, it is essential to consider the form and function of the native valve. The aortic valve works in a no man's land, separating two remarkably different zones of pressure over a height of approximately 12 to 18 mm. The ventricular side contracts in systole while the aortic side expands; then, in diastole, the ventricular side relaxes while the aortic side contracts somewhat. The aortic valve must completely separate and insulate these two pressure zones from each other, then be able to rapidly reverse that separation and equalize the pressure gradient, oscillating between these two states fluidly. The aortic valve must also protect and promote blood flow to the coronary ostia.

The anatomic nomenclature surrounding the aortic root region can become quite subtle. On a tour of the region, following the flow of blood from the left ventricle, the first zone encountered is the ventriculo-aortic junction (VAJ), the transition zone from ventricle myocardium to aortic tissue. In diagrams depicting the aortic root in cross-section, where the three-valve leaflets appear as inverted rounded-tipped triangles, the VAJ is marked by a line connecting the inverted apexes of the valve leaflets. Continuing the tour, one observes the lines of those triangular valves rising and inserting onto the walls of the aortic tube from apex to base further distal. Where these valve attachments are inserting is referred to as the basal ring or surgical aortic annulus.

Continuing the tour, moving through the aortic valve leaflets, one observes the tops of their insertion points can also be seen as a ring referred to as the sinotubular junction (STJ), marking the end of the aortic root and the beginning of the ascending aorta proper. From the VAJ to the STJ, the lumen bulges slightly, before beginning to taper at the ascending aorta. Now that the tour has gone through the valves, by looking behind at the road traveled, one can observe that under this bulging, each of the valve leaflets accommodates a little hollow space or little eddy pool called a sinus. In the right sinus, there is the origin of the right coronary artery; in the left sinus, there is the origin of the left coronary artery; the third sinus (the posterior one) contains no coronary artery. The coronary origins are anomalous in 1% of the population, with more common variants including separate origins of the LAD and circumflex or a circumflex taking the right coronary as its origin.

The geometry of these sinuses allows the collection of eddy currents between the bulged wall of the aortic root and the valve leaflets, keeping the valve from getting stuck on the aortic wall and thus slightly open for blood flow into the coronaries and in a ready position to close instantly at the end of systole.

The aortic valve has several surgically relevant anatomic relationships that must be born in mind to avoid injury. The non-coronary and the left coronary cusps of the aortic valve are structurally contiguous with the strongest fibrous tissue of the heart, the central fibrous body, but as such, they are also structurally continuous with the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. Directly underneath the junction of the right coronary cusp and the non-coronary cusp is the ventricular membranous septum and the AV node. The right and left coronary cusps junction is externally continuous with the pulmonary artery. Quite proximal to the ostium of the right coronary is the branch point of the sinoatrial nodal artery. A network of tiny coronary veins may be present around the ostium of the left coronary.

The pathophysiology of the aortic valve either spring from stenosis or insufficiency (regurgitation) and both are a failure of the valve to insulate the two pressures zones, heart and aorta, from each other. A stenotic valve (less than half the normal 3-5 cm squared surface area) exposes the ventricle to a pressure gradient, leading to heart wall stress. Wall stress sets the heart up for a compensatory cycle of hypertrophy to minimize wall stress at the ultimate expense of impaired coronary blood flow, fibrosis, and more wall stress.

Aortic stenosis is the most common pathology of valves needing correction in developed countries, with most cases due to senile degenerative calcification of normal trileaflet valves or degeneration of congenital bicuspid valves.

In broad terms, aortic stenosis is correctable by aortic valve replacement, while isolated aortic insufficiency is correctable by aortic valve replacement or repair.