Informed consent must be obtained, and the risks and benefits of the operation explained. The patient is positioned supine in the angiography suite and induced under general anesthesia. A femoral sheath is placed in the standard fashion for angiography. The sterile field includes the eye, eyebrow, forehead, and cheek.

**Incision**

A small incision is made in the medial upper eyelid crease; alternately, a sub-brow incision may be used. Authors prefer the medial upper eyelid incision. The incision is carried down through the orbicularis oculi muscle using blunt separation with Stevens scissors. It is important to obtain hemostasis at this point as there will be oozing from the tissues below the orbicularis oculi muscle, which can interfere with the surgical site.

**Orbitotomy**

The orbital septum is opened medially, revealing the medial retroseptal fat pad, which will be whiter than the central fat pad. This fat is bluntly dissected in the posterolateral direction until an arterialized feeder of the SOV is identified, which is traced back until the main trunk of the SOV is found. If multiple feeders are identified, the milking of the vessels may help identify the direction of flow. If the vessel has not significantly engorged, it has been suggested that an osteotomy may be needed to broaden exposure to the deep orbit, although we have not found .this to be necessary in over 40 cases. Sewell retractors together with moist neurosurgical cottonoids are invaluable at this stage. If the surgeon is familiar with the anatomy of the angular vessels, the supraorbital and supratrochlear vessels, the superior ophthalmic vein can be identified with relative ease by following one of these vessels leading into the superior ophthalmic vein. Another maneuver that we have found helpful is to use a blunt separating motion with either a hemostat or Stevens scissors. This allows separation of the superomedial orbital tissues, which in turn will expose the dilated superior ophthalmic vein. For the sake of completeness, it should be mentioned that some surgeons perform an additional brow incision, dissect the subcutaneous tissues and the frontalis muscle until the orbital rim is reached. They then design a small orbitofrontal bone flap is made in the orbital rim. In this approach, the SOV can be identified within the superomedial portion of the periorbital cone following gentle retraction of the superior rectus.

**Isolation of the Superior Ophthalmic Vein**

The SOV is bluntly isolated, freed from attachments, and exposed to the surface for incision of the vessel wall. Rubber loops may be used around the superior ophthalmic vein to allow manipulation. The vein is kept taut with these loops (4-0 silk sutures may also be used), and the vein is entered with an angiocatheter. Brisk bleeding confirms a full-thickness opening and allows cannulation. The angiocatheter is usually tied with a suture, and the catheter is advanced to the cavernous sinus with fluoroscopic guidance using a gentle injection of contrast through the catheter. Once the placement is confirmed, obliteration of the cavernous sinus can be performed using standard endovascular techniques (liquid embolic agents, coiling).

The SOV is ligated distal to the insertion point unless it is large and thick-walled, in which case the vessel is primarily closed. The orbit may be irrigated with an antibiotic solution.

**Closure**

After meticulous hemostasis is obtained, the orbital incision is closed using simple 6-0 catgut sutures. Follow-up angiography is recommended if there is suspicion for recurrence of the fistula. Clinical follow-up is recommended at 3 and 6 months post-intervention. The patient's vision and intraocular pressures are assessed.