The visual outcomes of all these pathologies are variable depending on the infecting microbe, the immune status of the patient, and specific sites of retinal involvement. For example, herpetic viral infections are rapidly progressive and can lead to retinal detachment, while Toxoplasma infections are usually self-limited and can be observed.

Vision loss occurs when the retinitis involves the fovea or optic disc, or there is the development of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment when breaks occur in the thin, necrotic retina. Patients may also complain of visual loss due to the formation of absolute scotoma in the area of retinal necrosis.

The vision loss of a patient with toxoplasmosis may also be due to the vitreous inflammation being so severe as to cause a drop in vision or choroidal neovascularization occurring as a late complication of the disease. Macular scar and optic atrophy can cause permanent visual impairment.

Visual outcomes in ARN are generally poor mostly due to retinal detachment (20% to 73% incidence in 3 months) but might also be due to chronic vitritis, epiretinal membrane, macular ischemia, and optic neuropathy.

PORN syndrome is a rare but visually blinding complication of AIDS. The prognosis is dismal with disease progression and/or recurrence despite aggressive therapy with intravenous antiviral drugs. These patients usually end up with total retinal detachments and minimal to no perception of light subsequently.

SSPE is a potentially lethal disease with a very guarded prognosis both in terms of salvage of vision as well as life.

Post-fever retinitis usually has good visual prognosis.