The proximity of the foramen spinosum to the foramen ovale and trigeminal nerve provides it with significant clinical relevance. The foramen spinosum acts as an anatomical landmark during neurosurgical procedures. Some example procedures include surgeries to treat trigeminal neuralgia, tumors, and epilepsy. There have been various techniques used to treat trigeminal neuralgia such as microvascular decompression, stereotactic radiosurgery, and percutaneous procedures including radiofrequency rhizotomy or balloon decompression. The percutaneous procedures, in particular, require cannulation of the foramen ovale which may become difficult due to the potential anatomical variation of the shape of the foramen. The majority of times the foramen ovale is oval in shape, but in some individuals, it is almond, round or slit-shaped. Having an idea of the anatomical location of the foramen ovale can play an essential role in facilitating successful CT-guided cannulation percutaneously. One study of interest looked at 100 dry human skulls (70 male, 30 female), studying them for any anatomical variations of the foramen ovale. Researchers measured the distance between the foramen oval and foramen spinosum. According to the study, the mean distance between the foramen ovale and foramen spinosum in the male subjects was 4 mm on the right and 3.8 mm on the left side, and in the females, 3.6 mm on the right and 3.2 mm on the left side, respectively. This estimated distance between the foramen ovale and foramen spinosum may ease our ability to locate the foramen ovale for percutaneous cannulation and can increase the chances of success of the procedure. There are other studies that have examined which angle of cannulation the foramen ovale has.

The middle cranial fossa is the most commonly fractured fossa in accidental injuries. The fracture line follows a particular course. It starts from the parietal tuber, passes through the parietal bone, squamous temporal, petrous temporal bone, and usually involves the tegmen tympani, internal acoustic meatus, foramen ovale and may also involve the foramen spinosum due to its close proximity. Damage to the foramen spinosum or the temporal bone due to a head injury caused by a road traffic accident or direct trauma can sever the middle meningeal artery at the level of the foramen spinosum. This trauma can lead to bleeding between the skull and dura mater resulting in an epidural hematoma.