The initial management revolves around stabilization of the patient and balancing the amount of blood flow through the pulmonary and systemic circuits. Care is typically provided in a neonatal or cardiac intensive care setting.

**Treatment of Pulmonary Congestion and CHF**

- Use loop and thiazide diuretics to help achieve proper fluid balance

- Improve LV failure by reducing excess volume, filling pressure, and pulmonary congestion.
- Improve RV failure by maintaining control of systemic venous congestion.

- Patients in respiratory distress may require additional positive-pressure support (CPAP, SiPAP, endotracheal intubation).

- Avoid the use of supplemental oxygen as this may worsen pulmonary over-circulation.

- Correct any metabolic derangements, electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, and anemia to prevent worsening heart failure.

****Prostaglandin Infusion****

Promote ductal patency with prostaglandin infusion if there is a concurrent aortic arch anomaly.

**Definitive Surgical Correction with a Single-Stage Repair Within the First Month of Life**

- Procedure for TA without truncal valve or aortic arch abnormality
- Mobilization of pulmonary arteries from the truncus to the RV with conduit-based RVOT reconstruction
- Closure of the VSD with a patch

- Aortic arch abnormalities and the truncal valve should also be fixed at this time.

- Primary palliation with pulmonary arterial banding and delayed surgical repair may be required to allow the infant to grow. This two-stage correction is not routinely recommended due to higher rates of morbidity and mortality.

**Immediate Post-Operative Care Should be Provided in a Cardiac Intensive Care Unit.**

- Fluid and electrolyte management, sedation and pain control, respiratory control, cardiovascular management, renal function, neurological status, infection control, nutritional status are all important factors to consider during the post-operative period.

- While noninvasive monitoring of the heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation are the most basic requirements, invasive pulmonary and atrial catheters with central and arterial lines can be used for closer continuous monitoring.