The renal corpuscle consists of several histological structures (FIG 1):

**Glomerulus capillaries**form a central tuft of looped capillaries located in the center of the renal corpuscle. These capillaries deliver blood and create a large surface area for renal filtration. These capillaries are optimized for filtration. The blood flow is regulated over broad ranges of pressures, thus keeping the glomerular filtration rate relatively constant. This regulation occurs via the capillaries' unique location between two resistance arterioles (afferent and efferent, think E for exit).

**Intraglomerular mesangial cells**physically support the glomerular capillaries, occupy the intercellular spaces underneath the basement membrane. They are generally on the opposite side of the glomerulus from the podocytes.

Mesangial cells have additional functions, contractile, and phagocytic functions.

**Bowman's capsule**consists of the visceral and parietal layers (FIG 1). The inner visceral layer completely encircles the glomerular capillaries. It is comprised of specialized stellate epithelial cells termed podocytes. In contrast, the outer or parietal layer of Bowman's capsule is a single layer of simple squamous epithelium. It is into the space between these two layers into which urine is filtered.

**Podocytes**serve both as support of glomerular capillaries and are part of the glomerular filtration barrier. They are large cells with euchromatic nuclei and form the visceral layer of the Bowman's capsule with exposure to the urinary space (FIG 1). The interdigitating secondary processes of the podocytes (pedicels, or foot processes) cover and encircle much of the surface of the glomerular capillaries. These foot processes contain actin and are thought to have some contractile activity top oppose distension of the glomerular capillaries.

The slit diaphragms are specialized adherens junctions with nephron and other proteins forming a zipper-like structure with small pores about the size of an albumin molecule.

**The glomerular basement membrane**is the third component of the filtration barrier, along with the capillary endothelium and podocytes (FIG 1, and 2). It is a fused basement membrane of the endothelial cells and podocytes, and also offers some support to the glomerular capillaries.

**The juxtaglomerular apparatus**is an important group of structures located at the entry of the capillaries in the glomerulus (FIG 1). Two of these are specialized sensory structures that have feedback mechanisms to regulate glomerular blood flow and filtration rate.

- Macula densa (thicker spot) is a thickened region of the distal convoluted tubule. It is characterized by apical nuclei and tightly packed columnar cells. It responds to the salt concentration in the tubule filtrate and is a tubuloglomerular feedback system that regulates the glomerular filtration rate. It is important to note that the macula densa regulates the glomerulus that connects to the distal tubule, which detects the salt concentration.

- Juxtaglomerular cells (also granular cells) are specialized smooth muscles in the walls of the afferent arteriole. These cells synthesize and secrete renin in response to decreased arteriolar blood pressure and activate the renin-angiotensin system to regulate blood pressure.

- Lacis cells are extraglomerular mesangial cells and are in the stalk of the glomerular tuft of capillaries.