Gustation, better known as taste, is an important special sensation that affects diet and human pleasure. Loss of taste or altered taste can occur in many disorders of the peripheral or central nervous system, and gustatory testing allows us to better diagnose and manage these conditions. There is a complex interplay of gustatory, olfactory, somatosensory, and emotional stimuli in taste perception. This poses a difficult task for the clinician wishing to test gustation, and as such, a multidisciplinary approach must be adopted. A further issue is the lack of suitable objective tests. To date, there are no clinically useful objective tests of gustation.

**Gustatory Pathway**

The sensation of taste is complex, and although the gustatory pathway has been anatomically defined, the perception of flavor is not simply a product of this pathway alone. Chemicals known as tastants are detected by cells from taste buds, which lie within papillae. Fungiform papillae are the most numerous and are found in high concentration on the tongue's anterior two-thirds.

A key principle in taste detection is that there are five basic tastes: sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami (more recently, it has been suggested that fat may also be a further basic taste).

This process is modulated by sensory input from cranial nerves I and V. Olfaction is an important part of taste, as demonstrated in wine tasting: opening the velum without swallowing allows volatile tastants to reach the olfactory epithelium, thus contributing to the perception of flavor.sweet home,” or being “dealt a bitter blow.”

**Gustatory Dysfunction**

Gustatory disorders are classified clinically as either quantitative or qualitative.ageusia (a complete loss of taste), hypogeusia (diminished taste), or hypergeusia (a heightened sense of taste). Dysgeusia is a qualitative disorder where patients experience a distorted taste. This is further classified according to its relation to eating. If occurring while eating, it is described as a parageusia, but if permanently present or experienced in the absence of oral stimulation, we call it phantogeusia. A dysgeusia diagnosis is made following descriptions in the patient’s own words and cannot be reliably tested. However, quantitative gustatory disorders can be measured.