An idiopathic macular hole is a disease of elderly individuals, mostly in their 6th to 7th decade of life, and females are more affected. The painless, gradual diminution of central vision with or without distorted vision is the main complaint. Initially, during the early stage of development of macular hole, vision may be mildly affected, but as it progresses visual problem increases.

Visual acuity reduction varies mildly in partial-thickness (PT) to markedly in a full-thickness macular hole (FTMH). Usually, slit-lamp biomicroscopy with +90D/+78D fundus viewing lenses confirms the diagnosis of FTMH as a red central spot.

Two different easy and simple examinations by slit lamp and laser-aiming beam can easily distinguish between a full-thickness macular hole and pseudo hole. After focussing a thin slit-lamp beam on the fovea with a fundus viewing lens, if the patient is asked to describe the thin slit, typically the patient describes a discontinuity or break in the midline i.e., Watzke-Allen test positive suggestive of full-thickness macular hole. Patients with a pseudo hole may describe as thinning of the slit in the center, or a bend at the center with no discontinuity. Varying sized laser-aiming beam (50 micrometers, 200 micrometers) if projected on the center of the macula in cases of a pseudo hole, can be seen but can not be detected by the patients with macular hole.

Associated features may be evident in the form of epiretinal membrane i.e., perilesional puckering, involutional thinning, cystoid changes, complete posterior vitreous detachment (PVD), retinal pigment epithelium changes, pseudo-operculum, vitreomacular traction (VMT), and others. Depending on the stage of development, a yellowish cuff of fluid may be visible with yellowish dots in the center. The fellow eye must be examined for the presence of similar changes. PVD, if present, carries a lower risk of development of macular hole, if not present already.