**Harm-Reduction Strategies for Stigmatized Groups**

Studies show that implicit bias training has little to no benefit without disaggregating the experiences of stigmatized groups and providing actionable recommendations. Here, we outline harm-reduction strategies, disaggregated based on the previously stigmatized groups (advanced age, nonwhite race, HIV positive, disabilities, substance use disorder, alcohol use disorder, low socioeconomic status, mental illness, non-English speaking, non-heterosexual, and obesity). Patients often belong to more than one group, given the intersectionality of historically disadvantaged populations in the US (e.g., being black with low socioeconomic status).

**Persons of Advanced Age**

Older adults are often associated with a cultural fear of death and dying.

Implicit bias can result in less mental health treatment for individuals of advanced age. Strategies to reduce implicit bias are created to educate clinicians that older adults deserve mental health treatment and should not be overlooked due to unconscious prejudicial negative feelings that clinicians may hold. HCPs should aim to schedule multiple health appointments in the same location and allot extra time for care for older adults. A healthcare team must ask for written permission before speaking with family members and caregivers. Healthcare teams should talk directly to patients even if a caregiver is present. Studies have shown that peer mentor support among older adults and support from those who have experienced illness facilitates patient empowerment.

**Persons of Nonwhite Race**

In 2021, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cited racism as a serious public health threat (CDC, 2021). Indeed, numerous studies have shown specific examples of race-based discrimination in healthcare settings. For example, implicit racial biases impact clinical decision-making for pain management, noninvasive cardiac testing, thrombolysis, cardiac catheterization, and cancer screening.

Strategies to reduce harm from implicit racial bias include finding things in common such as a shared group membership, which has been associated with a decrease in implicit racial bias.

- "Many of our patients face racism in healthcare; is this something you've experienced before?"

- "Are there any important life events that you've experienced or are currently experiencing that affect your health?"

Finally, it is essential to thank patients for sharing their stories, validate them, and acknowledge the trauma that those experiences may have caused. Knowledge of these experiences gives context to patients who lost trust in the healthcare system or may appear "non-compliant." Incorporating this practice into healthcare workflows enhances value-based care.

**Persons with Limited English Proficiency**

The nature of implicit bias toward those with limited English proficiency stems from an inherent miscommunication in health care. For English speakers, speaking English in the work setting is comfortable; when HCPs are displaced from their comfort zone, study findings reveal that healthcare quality declines. The widespread use of medical interpreters has reduced many patient barriers, but interpreters are usually only available in large healthcare systems and are not often used during outpatient care. As a result, HCPs often translate to the best of their ability when communicating with a patient with limited English proficiency. Although faster, this method leaves wide gaps in the exchange of health information and treatment compliance.

Strategies to reduce harm due to implicit bias against those with limited English proficiency include consistently using professional medical translators in outpatient and inpatient settings. Before patient care visits, it is more effective if HCPs and staff can ensure the professional translator is available for the entire appointment.

**Persons Living with HIV (PLWH)**

The nature of implicit bias against persons living with HIV (PLWH) has deep roots in AIDS exceptionalism, a Western response to a lethal virus that initially disproportionately affected men who had sex with men (MSM). Fear and stigma in the early 1980s drove a public health response that worsened the alienation of PLWH. The long-term impact of this public health response is a deeply held, false narrative that PLWH are dangerous. This narrative continues to dampen opportunities for well-studied public health measures to expand prophylaxis, diagnosis, and treatment of HIV.

Implicit biases and stigma associated with HIV are independent barriers to testing, adherence, and retention.

Strategies to reduce harm due to implicit biases against PLWH include actively countering the belief that HIV is avoidable without irresponsible behavior. Decades of studies have shown that PLWH is not the problem; a nationwide response that fails to protect its vulnerable population(s) has a more catastrophic outcome than the role of any individual group.

**Persons of the LGBTQIA+ Community**

The stigma surrounding PLWH and its misconstrued association with the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer/questioning (LGBTQ) community is exacerbated by heteronormative microaggressions when receiving healthcare, conveying the message that non-heterosexual identities are abnormal, different, or inferior to the heterosexual majority.

To reduce harm from implicit biases against those identifying with the LGBTQ community, it is essential to do one's diligence in understanding the terminology and how patients define themselves.

Although not enough to produce culturally competent care, small changes such as supporting the observance of LGBTQ Pride Day or encouraging employees to use their descriptor pronouns can have a positive impact.

**Persons with Substance Use Disorder, Alcohol Use Disorder, History of Incarceration, or Exposure to Police Violence**

Individuals with substance and alcohol use disorders, a history of incarceration, or exposure to police violence represent a population with significant unmet social and health needs. These unmet needs are exacerbated when HCPs hold negative implicit attitudes that individuals belonging to these groups are poorly motivated, manipulative, noncompliant, and violent.

Studies findings reveal that medical, nursing, and pharmacy trainees rarely receive training in healthcare delivery for persons with histories of criminal legal system exposure, characterized as those with frequent police stops, arrests, and incarceration, despite this group representing 57% of men and 31% of women in the US population.

One goal of implicit bias awareness and training is to reduce the harmful effects of implicit biases toward community-dwelling persons with a history of criminal legal system involvement. To do this, we must first dismantle the idea that a person with a history of incarceration must be a bad person; some groups are more likely to be incarcerated due to race alone.

**Persons with Low Socioeconomic Status or a History of Homelessness**

It is well-documented that HCPs working in safety-net hospitals and emergency departments express disdain towards individuals with low socioeconomic status and homelessness, colloquially known as the "revolving door" of acute care utilization in this population.

Strategies to reduce harm from implicit biases towards individuals from this group are twofold: 1) countering burnout with mindfulness and positive coping mechanisms and 2) eliminating the belief that low socioeconomic status and/or homelessness is earned.

**Persons with a Disability**

Evidence exists for the presence of implicit bias toward persons with a disability (PWD) from OT/PT specialists,

To reduce harm from HCP implicit biases toward PWD, HCPs should involve PWD in redesigning clinic spaces to improve accessibility. Many US outpatient clinics have incorporated features such as wheelchair-accessible doors, touchscreens, height-adjustable exam tables, and scales with handrails, but the lack of national standardization remains a limitation.

**Persons with Mental Illness**

The prevalence of mental illness is rising due to increased recognition and treatment (National Institute of Mental Health, 2022). Unfortunately, the negative stigma of having a mental illness prohibits many from seeking treatment.

Strategies to reduce harm due to implicit biases toward those with mental illness include speaking up when HCP colleagues dismiss a patient's mental illness or use it as a reason for lower-quality medical treatment.

**Persons with Obesity**

Those with obesity are too often misrepresented as lazy, irresponsible, and lacking self-discipline; however, ample evidence suggests that genetic factors, socioeconomic status, and environment can change a person's obesity risk.

Strategies to reduce harm to those with obesity starts with using appropriate terminology. For example, HCPs must use the word obesity as a noun describing an illness and not use the word obese as an adjective to describe a patient. The proper terminology is a patient with obesity and not an obese patient. This concept also applies to electronic health documentation; for example, the HCP should record a patient's information as a "31-year-old patient with obesity" and not a "31-year-old obese patient."