**Respiratory Insufficiency**

Arguably the most common mechanism underlying failure to wean patients off the ventilator. In its simplest form, the problem stems from an imbalance between respiratory pump capacity and demands.

**Reduced Ventilatory Capacity**

The prolonged duration of mechanical ventilation, especially when accompanied by the use of passive modes of ventilation, can lead to diaphragmatic weakness and atrophy. Other factors contributing to respiratory muscle weakness include excessive steroids, sedatives, paralytic agent use, critical illness myopathy, a systemic inflammatory response associated with sepsis, malnutrition, and immobility. All of these factors are inherent to the ICU patient population; together, they trap the patient in a vicious circle where more weakness leads to more difficulty in weaning off the vent, leading to prolonged ICU stay and so forth.

**Cardiovascular Insufficiency**

Heart failure is another risk factor that can compound the ventilator weaning process. Important physiological changes occur during the process of transition from mechanical ventilation to spontaneous breathing. The most notable of which is a loss of positive intra-thoracic pressure. That results in an increase in venous return to the right ventricle and an increase in both preload and afterload. This is particularly relevant in the ICU patient population, most of whom have variable degrees of positive fluid balance. That increase in cardiac work can raise myocardial oxygen demand and precipitate ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease.