The mite that causes scabies is Sarcoptes scabiei var. Hominis Sarcoptidae

Clinically, it presents in three forms: classic, nodular, or a contagious crusted variant also called Norwegian scabies.

Sarcoptes scabiei resides in the dermal and epidermal layers of humans as well as animals. Scabies occurs worldwide and is a common skin condition. The infestation begins with the female mite burrowing within the stratum corneum of its host where it lays its eggs. It later develops into larvae, nymphs, and adults.

The classic form of scabies may have a population of mites on an individual that range between 10 to 15 organisms. It typically takes ten minutes of skin-to-skin contact for mites to transmit to another human host, in cases of classic scabies. Transmission of the disease can also occur by fomite transmission via clothing or bed sheets.  This presentation of scabies often manifests with hyperkeratotic plaques that can be diffuse or localized to the palms, soles, and under fingernails.

The nodular form of scabies is a variant of the classic form.  This form presents with erythematous nodules with a predilection towards the axilla and groin. The nodules are pruritic and considered to be a hypersensitivity reaction to the female mite.

The crusted variant, Norwegian scabies, can have up into millions of mites on a single individual. Crusted scabies occurs in patients who are immunocompromised due to immunosuppressive therapy, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or older age