The discovery of KIT and PDGFRA mutations has not only revolutionized our understanding of the pathogenesis of GISTs in addition to providing diagnostic criteria, but it has also had a significant impact on the treatment of GISTs, specifically with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The tyrosine kinase inhibitors imatinib mesylate, sunitinib malate, and regorafenib collectively represent the medical therapy of GISTs. The European Society of Medical Oncology (ESMO), the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Task Force, and the Japanese Society of Clinical Oncology (JSCO) recommend imatinib as the standard treatment for patients with metastatic, recurrent, or unresectable GIST.

The typical course of imatinib for primary therapy is 400 mg of imatinib daily, indefinitely.

Recent studies have looked at the benefits of the adjuvant use of imatinib following surgical resection of GIST. DeMatteo et al. conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial which demonstrated that one year of adjuvant imatinib led to an improved rate of recurrence-free survival (RFS) at one year (98% vs. 83%), but that this benefit seemed to decrease over time following completion of therapy. There was no difference seen in overall survival.

For patients with locally advanced disease, neoadjuvant imatinib can be used to help reduce tumor burden to facilitate R0 surgical resection better. Indications for this use include tumors where negative margins will be difficult to obtain, when reduced tumor burden may allow for function-sparing resection, and when resection would not be otherwise possible without a mutilating surgery.

Recommendations regarding the timeline of monitoring for treatment response vary to some degree. Guidelines do agree on the use of CT scan to monitor the response or recurrence of disease, with MRI and PET also serving as useful adjuncts. Monitoring for the response can be difficult given the multitude of changes that can be seen on a CT scan with the response to medical therapy, as tumors may initially appear to be increasing in size or number due to changes in their density, making them more readily apparent despite adequate therapy. In general, a greater than 10% decrease in tumor size or greater than 15% decrease in tumor density is associated with a good therapeutic response.

Treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors is associated with a wide variety of side effects, which are most commonly seen in the first eight weeks of therapy. The most common side effects of imatinib include anemia, edema, fatigue, nausea, pleuritic pain, diarrhea, granulocytopenia, and rash.