The suboccipital muscles are a group of four muscles located inferior to the external occipital prominence of the skull. The four muscles are the rectus capitis posterior major, rectus capitis posterior minor, obliquus capitis inferior, and obliquus capitis superior.

**Rectus Capitis Posterior Major**

- Origin: Spinous process of C2 vertebrae

- Insertion: Inferior nuchal line of the occipital bone

- Action: Extension of the neck, ipsilateral rotation of the head

**Rectus Capitis Posterior Minor**

- Origin: Posterior tubercle of C1 vertebrae

- Insertion: Inferior nuchal line of the occipital bone

- Action: Extension of the neck, ipsilateral rotation of the head

**Obliquus Capitis Superior**

- Origin: Transverse process of C1 vertebrae

- Insertion: Portion of the occipital bone between nuchal lines

- Action: Extension and lateral flexion

**Obliquus Capitis Inferior**

- Origin: Spinous process of C2 vertebrae

- Insertion: Transverse process of C1 vertebrae

- Action: Ipsilateral rotation of the head

The innervation of all the suboccipital muscles is the suboccipital nerve, which is the dorsal ramus of the C1 spinal nerve.

**Suboccipital Triangle**

- The suboccipital triangle is an anatomic landmark involving the suboccipital muscles and allows for the localization of the vertebral artery and the suboccipital nerve.

- Rectus capitis posterior major forms the superomedial border

- Obliquus capitis superior forms the superolateral border

- Obliquus capitis inferior forms the inferolateral border

- The posterior atlanto-occipital membrane forms the floor of the triangle

- The roof of the triangle is formed by the semispinalis capitis muscle

- The contents of the suboccipital triangle are the suboccipital nerve (dorsal ramus of C1), the third part of the vertebral artery (V3), and the suboccipital venous plexus.

Directly posterior (or superficial) to the suboccipital muscles is the semispinalis capitis. Further posterior to these muscles includes the splenius, sternocleidomastoid, and trapezius. While the suboccipital muscles function as postural muscles, they also allow for head movement.