The beginning of gastrulation is marked by the appearance of the primitive streak, a groove in the caudal end of the epiblast layer.

The cranial end of the embryo seems to play an important role in initiating gastrulation. At the cranial end of the primitive streak, epiblast cells ingress at a greater rate forming a circular cavity known as the primitive pit. As the primitive streak elongates, migrating epiblast cells join the streak at the cranial end, forming a mass of cells around the primitive pit. This mass is called the primitive node, which becomes the primary tissue organizer where transcription factors and chemical signaling drive the induction of tissue formation. Known signaling factors and pathways in primitive streak formation include transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB), Wnt, Nodal, and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), which are discussed in more detail in the molecular section.

Epithelial cells in the lateral edge of the epiblast layer undergo an epithelial-to-mesenchymal cellular transition to delaminate (detach) and migrate down or into the primitive streak.

Cell proliferation and ingression continue in all directions as the embryo grows; however, the primitive streak will always expand directionally from the caudal to the cranial end and then regress in the opposite fashion. Regression occurs after the formation of the intra-embryonic mesoderm, and the primitive streak should completely disappear by the end of the fourth week — a lack of primitive streak regression results in clinical abnormalities.

After the three germ layers have formed, the newly produced structure (the trilaminar embryonic disc or gastrula) is primed for organ system formation, which relies highly on direct interaction and induction events between the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. Cells continue to invaginate through what is now called the primitive node. The cells begin to form a hollow tube extending from the cranial end to the prechordal plate, known as the notochordal process. As the embryo grows in each direction, the notochordal process grows longer until it fuses with the endoderm to form the notochordal plate. Once the fusion is complete, there is a free passageway between the amniotic cavity and the yolk sac, known as the neurenteric canal, or canal of Kovalevsky.

It is theorized that the neurenteric canal forms to maintain pressure equilibrium between both chambers. Later in development, the two edges of the notochordal plate will fuse into a solid mesodermal rod known as the notochord. The notochord is a critical embryologic structure that provides structural support and marks the midline of the embryo. Chemical and physical interactions between the notochord and dorsally situated ectoderm produce neuroectoderm and, eventually, the nervous system.