Talocalcaneal coalitions are asymptomatic in three-quarters of the population. As quoted by D.H. Lawrence, “What the eye doesn't see, and the mind doesn't know, doesn't exist.” The diagnosis of talocalcaneal coalitions poses a dilemma. The screening of the tarsal coalition is best done in the primary care set up and referred to a specialist orthopedic surgeon or the physiotherapist for further patient workup. Diagnosis and management require the efforts of a collaborative interprofessional team

Even symptomatic patients can have successful management with orthotics, physiotherapy, and analgesia. Conservative treatment of talocalcaneal coalition requires an interprofessional approach in conjunction with the physiotherapists, orthotics. Patient and parent education, combined with imparting realistic information and expectations from the management, is crucial for a successful outcome. A proper history and clinical examination supplemented by radiographs, CT, or 3D CT, MRI scanning are essential for diagnosing the condition and planning for future surgical intervention. The radiologist plays a vital role in helping out the surgical planning by calculating the size and the area of the coalition. Orthopedic specialty nursing staff can prove extremely helpful, assisting in procedures, answering patient questions, providing a bridge between therapists and the managing clinician, and offering patient counsel. Various operative procedures have been advocated based on the size, shape, and relation of the hindfoot valgus, and these complex operative decisions and performing these procedures is best when at expert centers equipped to deal with these problems.

In conclusion, the interprofessional approach to talocalcaneal coalitions is most appropriate for its management. [Level V]