Acute ischemic stroke patients who meet the criteria for rtPA and do not have any contraindications should receive IV rtPA. Patients who have large vessel occlusions should be evaluated for possible endovascular intervention. All patients suspected of having an acute ischemic stroke should be admitted for a full neurological workup.  Neurology consultation should be obtained. The workup of acute ischemic stroke includes a search for a source of thrombus, which includes carotid artery evaluation by ultrasound, CTA, MRA, or conventional angiography.  A transthoracic echocardiogram is obtained to ascertain for low ejection fraction, the cardiac source of the clot, or patent foramen ovale.  EKG and telemetry are obtained to ascertain for rhythms predisposing to stroke such as atrial fibrillation.  Labs such as a fasting lipid panel, and hemoglobin A1C, are obtained to ascertain for modifiable risk factors for stroke.  Other labs such as a hypercoagulable panel in young patients or B12 and syphilis testing in selected patients is also obtained. Antiplatelet and statins remain the mainstay of medical management of stroke.

For ischemic stroke, Alteplase (IV rtPA) within 4.5 hours of stroke onset is the standard of care.

The following patients are excluded from receiving IV rtPA, if they present between 3 and 4.5 hours:

- Age >80 years

- Severe stroke (NIHSS > 25)

- History of diabetes and prior stroke

- Taking an oral anticoagulant regardless of INR

Contraindications for IV rtPA include:

- Unclear time and/ or unwitnessed symptom onset

- Time last known to be at baseline state is >3 or 4.5 hours

- Current intracranial or subarachnoid hemorrhage

- Severe head trauma or ischemic stroke within 3 months

- Cranial or spinal surgery within 3 months

- Gastrointestinal malignancy or bleed within 21 days

- Active internal bleeding

- Coagulopathy (platelets <100 000/mm, INR >1.7, aPTT >40 s, or PT >15 s)

- Those who received a treatment dose of low molecular weight heparin within 24 hours.

- Infective endocarditis

- Direct thrombin inhibitors or direct factor Xa inhibitors

- Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors

- Intra-axial intracranial neoplasm

- Current severe uncontrolled hypertension (not maintained less than or equal to 185/110 mm Hg)

The indications for mechanical thrombectomy with a stent retriever in a patient >18 years of age include:

- Minimal pre-stroke disability

- Causative occlusion of the internal carotid artery or proximal MCANIHSS of ≥6

- Reassuring non-contrast head CT [Alberta Stroke Program Early Computed Tomography Score (ASPECT) score of ≥6]

- If the patient can be treated within 6 hours of last known normal.

A notable potential complication after fibrinolytic therapy is hemorrhagic transformation. Hemorrhagic transformation is classified as hemorrhagic infarction and parenchymal hematoma, each with 2 subsets. Predictive factors for the occurrence of this complication include increased infarction area, gray matter location, atrial fibrillation, and cerebral embolism, acute hyperglycemia, low platelet count, and poor collateral circulation.

Aspirin is recommended within 24-48 hours after stroke onset. Its administration can be delayed for 24 hours in patients treated with IV tPA. Mono/dual antiplatelet therapy is not a contraindication for receiving rtPA.

When to start anticoagulation in patients with atrial fibrillation after acute stroke is always a dilemma. Usually, it depends on various factors like the size of the stroke and other comorbidities. Usually, if the size of the stroke is smaller to moderate and no hemorrhage, we start anticoagulation in 7-14 days.

Sometimes there are patients with small hemorrhagic transformation after acute stroke, and in this scenario, it is better to wait for anticoagulation for a couple of weeks. This delay is not associated with excessive stroke recurrence.

For patients with significant disabilities, physical therapy and occupational therapy consults should be obtained.  Similarly, if swallowing and speech are of concern, then speech/swallow consults should be obtained.  All patients should have follow-ups arranged with their primary care providers, and with neurology at appropriate times post-discharge. For symptomatic and significant carotid artery stenosis, referrals to vascular or neurological surgery should be sought.

The patient's comorbidity has to be addressed and one should avoid hyperthermia. Oxygen supplementation is recommended when the oxygen saturation is less than 94%. Both hypo- and hyperglycemia need to be addressed as they can affect the outcome.

Significant cerebral edema can occur after stroke and thus a CT scan should be done in patients who have altered mentation. Mannitol can be used but there is no evidence to support the routine use of corticosteroids. Patient position, hyperosmolar therapy, hyperventilation, and barbiturate coma may be used to lower the intracranial edema.

Seizures occur in about 15% of patients within the first few days of the stroke. Those who develop chronic seizures need treatment.

it is important to understand that palliative care is also an important component of stroke management. Some patients have severe stroke and are incapacitated. Thus, one has to discuss the end-of-life, palliation, and do-not-resuscitation issues with the family.