The adductor canal is a space located distal to the midpoint of the anteromedial thigh that functions as a tunnel for several neurovascular structures. The average length of the canal is reportedly between 8.5 to 11.5 centimeters, depending on specific study and differences in sex.

- Anatomical Location

- **Proximal Border: The AC begins at the apex of the femoral triangle**. This is the point where the medial border of the sartorius muscle crosses the medial border of the adductor longus muscle. Some sources cite the apex of the femoral triangle as the lateral border of the adductor longus muscle. However, the most recent consensus maintains that it is the medial border of the adductor longus muscle.
- **Distal Border: The AC ends at the adductor hiatus,**which is the largest of five fibrous openings within the adductor magnus muscle. As the superficial femoral artery passes distally through the adductor hiatus, it is renamed the popliteal artery.
- **Anterolateral Border: Vastus medialis muscle**
- **Posterolateral Border: Adductor longus and adductor magnus muscles**
- **Medial Border: Vastoadductor membrane (VAM)**. This is also sometimes referred to as the “roof” of the AC. Superficial to the VAM is the sartorius muscle (see clarification below).

- Clarification: True Adductor Canal vs. Subsartorial Space

- There is inconsistency among published sources, textbooks, and online resources regarding the roof/medial border of the AC. Some sources define the medial border as the sartorius muscle. The adductor canal is deep to the sartorius muscle, and the span of the sartorius muscle determines its limits. However, deep to the sartorius muscle is an aponeurosis called the vastoadductor membrane. The true adductor canal is roofed/bordered medially by the VAM. The space between the VAM and sartorius muscle is a plane called the subsartorial space or the subsartorial compartment. This naming can cause confusion as the adductor canal (Hunter’s canal) is sometimes called the subsartorial canal. However, the distinction is important because the true AC and the subsartorial space (superficial to the VAM) contain distinct groups of nerves.

- Function

- The AC functions as a tunnel that transmits neurovascular structures from the femoral triangle in the proximal thigh to the popliteal fossa and maintains an anatomic continuity between the two compartments.

- Surface Landmarks

- The adductor canal can be located using surface landmarks along with ultrasound. It was initially reported that the midpoint between the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) and the patellar base corresponds to the proximal end of the AC. However, this was disputed by several studies that demonstrated that the midpoint between the two landmarks actually localizes the femoral triangle. Rather, the adductor canal can be more reliably localized a few centimeters distal to the original midpoint location.

- Structure of Femoral Triangle (Scarpa’s triangle)

- Proximal border: inguinal ligament
- Lateral border: medial border of sartorius
- Medial border: medial border of adductor longus
- Floor: iliopsoas, pectineus, adductor longus, and possible adductor brevis muscles
- Apex: the intersection between the medial border of the sartorius muscle and the medial border of the adductor longus muscles