History and physical examination of pediatric feeding disorder involve making a provisional diagnosis confirmed by investigations.

**History**

For a neonate presenting with feeding disability, a detailed birth history including any trauma during delivery, anomalous ultrasound scan findings, duration of labor, and any associated complications during labor. A thorough placenta examination is vital in giving a clue about cerebral palsy and chromosomal syndromes. In particular, non-chromosomal genetic syndromes need to be ruled out with the help of a geneticist.

When reflux is the cause, a detailed history of the amount and frequency of reflux is taken. Any anatomical obstruction or gastric motility disorders are evaluated when the symptoms of vomiting, choking, and inability to keep down food are present. The age of gestation is also crucial for considering prematurity as a probable co-factor or essential cause. For an infant, developmental milestones are evaluated to see any delay in their presentation. Additionally, symptoms of food allergies and sensory abnormalities are carefully evaluated.

For grade 1 to 12 school children, their performance in school and home settings are assessed, ruling out the possibility of autism spectrum disorders as a causative factor. Any distress, stress, food selectivity, and altered eating habits reported by the caregiver are noteworthy. Psychiatric disorders most likely present in the adolescent population and may result in feeding disabilities. The perception of adolescents about weight and body shape, eating habits, and binge eating with or without compensatory behaviors need to be assessed.

History from a caregiver is vital in finding the type of feeding techniques and postures used during feeding a child.

**Signs and Symptoms**

- Vomiting, gagging, or choking while eating.

- Refusal to eat certain food types.

- Throwing tantrums when given food.

- Difficulty in swallowing.

- Turning head or crying while eating.

**Physical Examination**

Physical examination includes a detailed examination of all systems. In particular, facial dysmorphism, patency of choanae, an examination of the oral cavity, and abnormalities in the palate or oropharynx can be the contributing factors. The tone and size of the tongue are assessed. Abdominal examination may reveal tenderness, hyperactive or hypoactive bowel sounds, or any olive-shaped mass indicating bowel obstruction as a probable cause. Developmental milestones are assessed during the physical examination. Height and weight are measured. A full neurologic examination, including evaluation of the muscle tone and power, is performed to look for cerebral palsy or stroke as a cause.