Surgical resection in eligible patients is the cornerstone of treatment with low-grade gliomas. Despite the lack of level 1 evidence, it serves as both a diagnostic and therapeutic modality. Sufficient tissue is obtained not only to confirm the diagnosis but also to perform molecular testing. Resection can relieve mass effects, hydrocephalus, and edema. Although never prospectively examined, the completeness of resection has been shown to impact overall and progression-free survival.**≥**90% resection of the tumor, the 5-year overall survival was 97% versus 76% for those <90%.

There are multiple techniques available to perform gross total resection (GTR) of the tumors and avoid neurological deficits in extended surgery or when tumors are not well demarcated. These include stereotactic neuro-navigation, intraoperative MRI, fluorescence-guided glioma surgery, and intraoperative functional mapping.

Multiple surgical techniques exist that either maximize tumor resection or minimize morbidity. Intraoperative MRI (iMRI), developed in the 1990s, is one of the more established techniques for tumor identification and serves the goal of maximizing tumor resection through the use of real-time imaging.

Other methods of tumor detection to maximize resection include heme precursor 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA), which is synthesized into protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), which emits red light when excited by blue light.

Intraoperative functional mapping describes a multitude of techniques with the common goal of minimizing postoperative morbidity. The awake craniotomy for functional mapping is one such technique. Once the skin incision is complete and the bone flap removed, sedation is discontinued, and direct cortical or subcortical stimulation is then performed.

Stereotactic neuro-navigation is commonly used in cranial surgery and allows for a 3-dimensional anatomic reconstruction using cross-sectional imaging such as CT or MRI. It is very useful in preoperative planning as it allows for the tailoring of craniotomies. However, the lack of real-time adjustments due to edema and CSF changes limits its usefulness and typically requires additional functional imaging. MRI diffusion tensor imaging (MRI-DTI) or Magnetoencephalography (MEG) are non-invasive functional mapping tools that can be utilized alongside traditional neuro-navigation. Randomized trials with standard neuro-navigation with or without MRI-DTI demonstrated approximately a 50% reduction in postoperative neurologic deficits (9.8% vs. 18.6%) using non-invasive functional imaging.

LGGs can recur years to decades after initial definitive treatment. These patients may present with seizures, new neurologic deficits, or progression on follow-up imaging. Treatment management in this area is controversial, and the data remain retrospective. Re-resection can be considered when complete resection of the tumor is possible. The completeness of resection at primary treatment and re-resection influences overall survival.

Complications as a result of surgical resection include seizures, epidural hematoma, cerebral abscess, wound infection, stroke, motor deficits, sensory deficits, speech deficits, partial blindness, and behavioral changes.

To plan subsequent therapy, MRI is performed in the first 24 to 72 hours postoperatively. Observation is recommended to detect any neurologic deficits afterward.