The anterior compartment of the arm contains (biceps brachii, coracobrachialis, brachialis)

**The biceps brachii:**the long head originates from the supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula, and the short head originates from the tip of the coracoid process of the scapula. The insertion of this muscle will be on the posterior part of the radius tuberosity and by the bicipital aponeurosis to the medial aspect of the forearm. It serves as a powerful supinator of the forearm and flexion of the elbow joint and plays a minimal role in flexion of the shoulder. Innervated by the musculocutaneous nerve.

**The coracobrachialis:**the name of the muscle explains it very well; it starts from the coracoid process and inserts into the middle of the medial side of the humerus. It flexes the arm and serves as a weak adductor. The musculocutaneous nerve innervates it.

**The brachialis:**it started from the front of the lower half of the humerus and inserted in the anterior aspect of the coronoid process of the ulna. It is a strong elbow flexor. Innervated by musculocutaneous nerve and a small part of the muscle by the radial nerve.

The posterior fascial compartment contains ( three heads of the triceps muscle)

**The triceps muscle:**long head from infraglenoid tubercle, the lateral head from the upper half of the posterior surface of humerus shaft above the spiral grove, and the medial from the lower half of the shaft of the humerus at the posterior surface below the spiral grove. They all inserted into the ulna olecranon as a common tendon. The action of this muscle is the extension of the elbow joint and supplied by the radial nerve.