Often, non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (NECT) is the initial imaging tool for nonspecific neurologic symptoms, typically because of the desire to quickly evaluate for intracranial hemorrhage, ischemic infarction, or other acute abnormality. On NECT, OGs typically appear as a hypodense or sometimes isodense peripheral mass that may appear cortically based with focal gyral expansion. Because of their peripheral cortical-subcortical location and slow-growing nature, calvarial remodeling may be seen. Coarse calcification is also a common finding, seen in up to 90% of cases. More specifically, a gyriform pattern of cortical calcification is more favorable to represent an OG.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offers a better characterization of the tumor than CT and can help define the true extent and infiltrative nature of OG. T2 weighted sequences demonstrate a circumscribed heterogeneously hyperintense tumor that is often cortical/subcortical in location and may have a mild peri-tumoral hyperintense signal. There are frequently small areas of cystic change, microhemorrhage, and macroscopic calcifications demonstrated with T2 hypointense signal due to susceptibility signal loss and increased tumor heterogeneity. OGs are hypointense to gray matter on T1 weighted imaging, and enhancement in low-grade tumors is common, ranging from patchy enhancement to moderate enhancement, and enhancement does not necessarily correspond to higher grade OG. OG typically has facilitated, rather than restricted diffusion, with hyperintensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps.

More advanced MRI techniques such as spectroscopy and perfusion may be complementary to anatomic imaging and may be helpful in characterizing and grading the tumor. However, since most OGs are low grade, these advanced imaging techniques may not add much additional information to the more traditional anatomic imaging. Spectroscopy tends to show a mildly elevated choline and decreased N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peaks, seen in most neoplasms, and is more prominent in high-grade versus low-grade gliomas due to increased mitotic activity. There may be elevated myoinositol, and the presence of 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG) suggests IDH mutation status.

Preoperative evaluation of white matter tracts using MRI diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) sequences and tractography can demonstrate the position and proximity of white matter tracts to the tumor and typically shows displacement rather than the destruction of white matter tracts. Additional evaluation with functional MRI (fMRI) can also show the proximity of the tumor to the eloquent cortex, such as important language, motor, sensory, and visual areas.

The MRI imaging appearance alone is insufficient to distinguish OG from other intracranial neoplasms, especially other low-grade tumors, and histopathologic evaluation and genetic marker testing are required for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. All patients with a tumor will require a biopsy for diagnosis. In 2016 the WHO changed the criteria for the classification of CNS tumors to include both phenotypic and genotypic analysis. The diagnosis of OG is now made using molecular markers, and the tumor must possess both an IDH1 or IDH2 mutation and 1p/19q codeletion to be classified as an OG.