The histological features of neuronal and glioneuronal tumors are heterogeneous. All neuronal and glioneuronal tumors should demonstrate positivity for immunohistochemical staining with neuronal cell markers, such as synaptophysin or neuron-specific enolase (NSE).

Table 1: Histological features of individual neuronal and glioneuronal tumors.

Gangliocytoma

- Ganglion cell component

- Disruption of normal ganglion cell architecture

- Dysmorphic cells

MVNT

- Multiple nodules

- Immature neuronal cells

- Prominent nucleoli

- Vacuolated cells are Olig2+

Dysplastic cerebellar gangliocytoma

- Maintains folia architecture

- Replaces internal granular layer with abnormal ganglion cells

- Purkinje cell number is reduced

- Dense capillary network

Central neurocytoma

- Sheets of packed monomorphic neurocytic cells

- Clear cytoplasm

- May demonstrate perivascular rosettes

- The neuronal staining pattern differentiates these tumors from oligodendrogliomas.

Extraventricular neurocytoma

- Similar to central neurocytoma

- The main differentiator from central neurocytoma is the location in the brain parenchyma or other extraventricular location rather than within the ventricular system.

Cerebellar liponeurocytoma

- Areas of lipomatous features in a glioneuronal background

- Not true fat, but lipidization of the cells

- Elevated Ki-67 index compared to most other tumors within the neuronal and glioneuronal group.

Ganglioglioma

- Similar to gangliocytoma, but with neoplastic glial cells

- The glial portion is typically the more aggressive portion in the anaplastic form.

DIG/DIA

- Mesenchymal region and neuroepithelial region

- Ganglion cells are typically in a desmoplastic stroma

- The presence of neuronal cells differentiates DIG from DIA.

DNET

- Mucin-rich multinodular growths

- Cells with clear cytoplasm resembling oligodendroglia appear to infiltrate the surrounding brain in a perpendicular fashion.

- Neurons in mucin-rich regions appear to float, termed “floating neurons.”

DGONC

- Clear cytoplasm

- Ganglion cells are present

- Nuclear clusters

- Possible lymphocytic component

- Olig2+, GFAP-

- Further characterization is needed

PGNT

- Pseudopapillary structure

- Perivascular rosettes

- Ganglion cells are occasionally seen.

- Perivascular rosette cells are GFAP+ and synaptophysin+

- Low proliferation index

RGNT

- Neurocytic rosettes

- Perivascular pseudorosettes

- Some mucinous areas

- The glial part may have Rosenthal fibers

- Low Ki-67 index

MGT

- Oligodendroglia-type cells in a myxoid stroma

- Olig2+

DLGNT



- Microcysts

- May have a fibrillary or myxoid background

- Oligodendroglia-type cells

- Olig2+ in some specimens

- Synaptophysin positivity helps differentiate these tumors from primary diffuse leptomeningeal gliomatosis.