SPECT imaging can produce false results from an assortment of imaging artifacts. These include movement from the patient, cardiac motion, attenuation of photon beams, and misalignment of the attenuation maps. The software has been developed to help diminish the effect of these artifacts. Some clinicians will repeat the study with the patient positioned prone, supine, or standing to better recognize artifacts.

Other interfering factors can include improper elimination of the radiotracer. Some studies require that once the radiotracer is given, it is bound to the appropriate site, and the rest is eliminated via the kidneys or liver. If there is improper elimination, then the radiotracer can be picked up in areas that obscure the results.

Tc99m labeled radiotracers have the unique interfering factor of unbending, resulting in unbound Tc99m-pertechnetate. The free Tc99m will travel around the patient’s body and eventually localize to the salivary glands, thyroid, and stomach. This may skew the interpretation of studies using this radiotracer.

Studies requiring detection of radiotracer inside the patient can be obscured if the patient is wearing jewelry. It is recommended that all jewelry be removed before the procedure.

Medications can also interfere with the results. Depending on the study being performed, it may be recommended that certain medications be held. For example, for radioactive iodine I-131 therapy, it is recommended that the patient does not take anti-thyroid medication such as propylthiouracil or methimazole one to two weeks before the procedure.