Finasteride is a competitive inhibitor of types II and III 5-alpha-reductase isoenzyme, resulting in inhibition of testosterone conversion to dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Finasteride has minimal selectivity for the type I 5-alpha-reductase enzyme. The type I 5-alpha-reductase isomer is present in sebaceous glands, sweat glands, dermal papillae cells, and epidermal and follicular keratinocytes. Type II is in the outer root sheaths of hair follicles, the epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, and the prostate.

Research has shown that finasteride reduces prostatic DHT levels by upwards of 90% and serum DHT levels by 70%. However, increasing the dose does not necessarily result in greater serum reduction. Dutasteride, in comparison, inhibits all three 5-alpha-reductase isoenzymes leading to a 99% reduction in serum DHT levels.

- In the treatment of androgenic alopecia,  finasteride does not lead to a 100% reduction in DHT; hair loss is slowed but not completely halted.

- In the treatment of benign prostate hyperplasia, long-term use of finasteride has been associated with a reduction in prostatic volume, thereby providing relief from bothersome urinary symptoms attributed to an enlarged gland. Previously published literature has demonstrated a reduced risk of urinary retention and delayed the need for surgical intervention.

**Pharmacokinetics**

In the clinical study using 1 mg tablets, the bioavailability of finasteride is observed at approximately 65% and is not affected by food. Finasteride is approximately 90% protein bound with a volume of distribution of 76 L at a steady-state and can cross the blood-brain barrier. Upon discontinuation of finasteride, DHT levels return to normal within 14 days. In patients treated for benign prostate hyperplasia, the prostate volume returns to baseline within three months; patients receiving treatment for androgenic alopecia have a reversal of hair count within 12 months.

Finasteride undergoes extensive metabolism in the liver (hepatic metabolism) via the cytochrome P450 enzyme system, specifically CYP3A4, into two active metabolites with less than 20% of the activity of finasteride. Finasteride has a half-life of elimination from the serum of 5 to 6 hours, ranging from 3 to 16 hours. In elderly patients (greater than 70 years of age), the half-life can be prolonged to 8 hours. In comparison to dutasteride, the half-life of finasteride is markedly shorter. Dutasteride has a half-life of 4 to 5 weeks.

Finasteride is eliminated as metabolites, 57% in the feces and 39% in the urine. After the intravenous infusion, the mean plasma clearance of finasteride was about 165 mL/min in healthy young subjects.