History and physical examination are the mainstays in the diagnosis of delirium and dementia. Obtaining a history from both patients and family members is important. First and foremost is to get the patient's baseline mental and functional status. Secondly, acuity of the symptom onset and a timeline of the progression needs to be established. Once a baseline is established, a brief cognitive screening assessment is performed via Mini-Cog and Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)-5 requires the following criteria for delirium:

- Disturbance in attention and awareness develops acutely and tends to fluctuate in severity.

- At least one additional disturbance in cognition

- Disturbances that are not better explained by preexisting dementia.

- Disturbances that do not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal or coma.

- Evidence of an underlying organic cause or causes.

DSM-5 formulated the following criteria to diagnose dementia:

- A significant cognitive decline from the baseline level of performance in one or more cognitive domains. This can be based on the concern of the patient, or the caregiver or significant informant OR cognitive performance on the neuropsychological testing.

- The cognitive impairment interferes with the activities of daily living

- The cognitive decline does not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium

- Cognitive decline is not better explained by any other medical or psychiatric condition.