Patients with myopic traction maculopathy can present from early adulthood to the later years of life. Most commonly, they present in the 5th or 6th decade of their life. But presentation in the 3rd or even 2nd decade of life is not unusual. The chief complaint is usually a unilateral or bilateral diminution of vision in a high myopic patient. Rarely, the patients may be completely asymptomatic with no visual complaints at all.

The onset of symptoms is insidious, and the progression is gradual. Both eyes may be affected either simultaneously or at a gap of a few months or years. Patients may also give a history of floaters, flashes of light, metamorphopsia, or scotoma.

On examination, there may be visible areas of scleral thinning. The cornea may have tell-tale signs of prior refractive surgery if the patient has undergone any. Myopic eyes usually have a deep anterior chamber. The crystalline lens may have signs of cataractogenesis, especially in older patients. On indirect ophthalmoscopy examination of the fundus with a 20D lens, posterior vitreous detachment may be seen. There may be evidence of lattice degeneration, with or without holes, in the retinal periphery.

The disc is generally large with a physiologically large cup. Background tesselations due to chorioretinal degeneration are noted. The macula may not show anything remarkable other than prominent tesselations on examination. Lacquer cracks, Forster-Fuch spots, myopic choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM), and posterior staphyloma may be noted to be coexistent in these eyes.

The clinician may note diffuse atrophic patches in the retina, which appear whitish-yellow in appearance. Peripapillary atrophy, which appears as well-defined atrophic areas around the disc or at the posterior pole, may also be noted. Fundus examination with a 90D lens can make the clinician suspicious of myopic foveoschisis. Shallow macular retinal detachments and macular holes may be picked up on slit-lamp biomicroscopy.