The coracoclavicular ligament may be referred to as a complex because it is composed of two parts, the conoid and trapezoid ligaments. The conoid and trapezoid ligaments are continuous inferiorly at the coracoid process attachment but separate at an angle before attaching to the inferior aspect of the clavicle superiorly.

The conoid ligament attaches to the clavicle at the conoid tubercle, which is posterior medial to the trapezoid tubercle. From superior to inferior, the conoid ligament appears as an inferior pointing cone. Thus, the superior attachment at the clavicle is wide, while the inferior attachment is narrow, wrapping around the posteromedial aspect and root of the coracoid process.

The other part of the coracoclavicular ligament, the trapezoid ligament, is typically anterior-lateral to the conoid ligament. It is quadrilateral in shape, as its name implies, and is thinner than the conoid ligament. Inferiorly the trapezoid ligament attaches to the posterior-superior aspect of the coracoid process, coming in contact with the anterior part of the conoid ligament. Considering the spacial relationship between the trapezoid and the conoid ligaments, moving from the inferior attachment to the superior attachment, one may see that the trapezoid ligament angles anterolaterally away from the conoid ligament, while the conoid ligament is nearly vertical. Finally, the trapezoid ligament attaches at the trapezoid line on the inferior surface of the clavicle. A bursa separates the trapezoid ligament and the conoid ligament.

The coracoclavicular ligament, as described above, serves to connect the clavicle and the coracoid process of the scapula. Its two-component structure allows for proper apposition of the acromion and the clavicle while preventing vertical displacement of the scapula with respect to the clavicle. The angled space between the trapezoid and conoid ligaments allows for some rotation of the scapula with respect to the clavicle. Although not an intrinsic component of the AC joint, it adds stability to the AC joint.

Some authors mention the medial coracoclavicular ligament (MCCL) or Caldani bicorne ligament, considering coracoclavicular as a lateral ligament. The MCCL was first described in 1802 and is between the posterosuperior portion of the coracoid process, the first rib (medial border) and the lower area of the clavicle (middle third). Its description is as a pearlescent yellow bundle of a fibrous structure. The MCCL has a length of about 59.5 mm. Its role is to help stabilize the acromioclavicular joint and act as a last brake, in the presence of cranial and posterior tractions.