Weaning from VV or VA ECMO is one of the most challenging aspects of ECMO management. Each patient has their own algorithm and should be individualized each time a weaning attempt is tried. There is not an exact algorithm for weaning every patient from ECMO.

**VA ECMO Weaning**

- The initial cause of cardiogenic shock must have resolved or been corrected prior to weaning from VA ECMO. Depending on the initial cause of VA ECMO initiation, the weaning process will start at different times for different disease processes. Every patient will have a different weaning strategy and an individual plan.

- To begin a weaning trial, the patient should have MAP >70 with or without inotropic or device support, low vasopressor/inotropic support, oxygen saturation greater than 95%, central venous oxygen concentration greater than 70%, normal ventilation and oxygenation of the patient's lungs with improving chest Xrays, echocardiographic data with an ejection fraction greater than 25% to 30%.

- Weaning is started by reducing the overall pump flow on the ECMO circuit.

- The patient will need to have inotropic drugs at reasonable levels for support. The patient may also have an aortic balloon pump or a left ventricular device in place for added support. Weaning attempts can still be started with these mentioned drugs/devices in place. Some centers recommend weaning ECMO before removing the left ventricular support device.

- When the pump is slowly titrated down, the patient will start to develop more pre-load, and the heart can be monitored for how well the left ventricle can eject.

- Each time the ECMO flow level is decreased, the cardiac function should be continuously monitored using echocardiography. Noninvasive cardiac function monitoring can be used, or a pulmonary artery catheter can be placed to monitor second to second cardiac function changes.

- Strict attention to the ventilator settings and respiratory support must always be accounted for. Pulmonary blood flow will significantly increase, thus changing your PEEP and tidal volume settings.

- The maximum flow rate on the majority of ECMO machines is around 6 liters per minute. When weaning VA ECMO, we recommend weaning at increments of 0.5 liters per minute to 1.0 liter per minute changes when decreasing the flow rates. Flow rates should not drop below 2.0 to 2.5 l/min as this will cause clotting in the cannulas and circuit.

- Each time a decrease in flow rate is made, this rate should be maintained for at least 60 minutes to monitor the patient's decompensation. If the patient shows any signs of failure to have adequate cardiac output, signs of inadequate tissue perfusion, increasing blood lactate levels, or any echocardiographic findings of ventricular demise should prompt the physician to place the patient back on full support and monitor the patient for recovery of their cardiac function on full ECMO support.

- When weaning from VA ECMO, the patient may show signs of stability with a left ventricular ejection fraction greater than 25% with a normal cardiac index greater than 2.5 L/min. These are good signs for ECMO weaning.

- If the patient shows signs of hemodynamic instability or signs of distress at any time, the patient should be changed to full ECMO support. When monitoring with a transesophageal echo or transthoracic echo when weaning, we need to look for signs of rising left or right-sided filling pressures, progressive ventricular dilation, worsening or new signs of mitral or tricuspid regurgitation, any sign of hypoxia or hypercarbia on arterial blood gas, any sign of ventilator changes with elevated peak pressures or plateau pressures. Also, look for signs of increasing vasopressors support when the patient has signs of hypotension with a map less than 60

- Once the patient has completed weaning from the ECMO circuit, the heparin infusion can be stopped, and the pump flow on the ECMO machine will be raised. This is performed to avoid any clot accumulation. Some institutions will administer a positive inotrope at this time to help facilitate cardiac output after the cannulas have been clamped. If the patient is deemed liberated/weaned from ECMO support at this time, the patient can be decannulated with the removal of the cannulas. This could be performed at the bedside if the percutaneous placement of the cannulas was performed. If central cannulation or surgical cutdown were performed, the cannulas would need to be removed in the operating room.

- Once the patient has been completely weaned from ECMO, the patient will need continuous monitoring of their cardiac output, oxygen saturation levels, lactic acid levels, pH, urine output, and vent settings to confirm the patient can maintain perfusion of their organs.

- After liberating the patient from ECMO support, patients sometimes have signs of an inflammatory response requiring an increase in their inotropic support. This is not uncommon when weaning from ECMO.

**VV ECMO Weaning**

- When weaning from VV ECMO as described above with VA ECMO, all respiratory function should be recovered.

- Before weaning from ECMO support, the patient’s respiratory function should be thoroughly inspected. The patient's native lung should be able to support 50 to 80% of the total gas exchange within the native lung. The majority of severe lung disease patients can begin weaning when their native lungs have gained 80% of their oxygen delivery function. The patient's respiratory mechanics must demonstrate significant improvement. The gas exchange when considering a weaning trial on moderate ventilator settings should have a PF ratio >100. The FiO2 should be less than 50% with reasonable PEEP levels < 10.

- As the native lung function improves, the ECMO support can be decreased. The extracorporeal blood flow can be slightly decreased, but with VV ECMO, the sweep gas flow controls the oxygenation to the native lungs through the ECMO circuit.

- The majority of patients on VV ECMO have a sweep gas at 100%. As their lung's oxygenation and ventilation improved, we recommend decreasing the ventilator FiO2 before decreasing the sweep gas oxygen concentration. This will help avoid any major oxygen toxicity to the healing lungs. Some centers do recommend weaning VV ECMO sweep gas prior to weaning FiO2 on the ventilator.

- When weaning, there are no particular ventilator settings that are recommended for better outcomes. Some centers use controlled mechanical ventilation when on support, then transition to assist control with pressure support when weaning off. The vent settings should be changed to values that are acceptable to non-ECMO patients.

- As the sweep gas and FiO2 are decreased, an hourly arterial blood gas should be performed within 30 minutes of the adjustment to check for oxygenation and ventilation.

- If the patient tolerates the wean with tolerable arterial blood gas levels and vent settings, the sweep gas can continue to be titrated. Some ECMO programs report that decreasing flow rates less than 2.5 L/min puts the patient at a higher risk for blood clot formation in the circuit or cannulas. Some physicians wean the flow rate to 2.5L/min, then decrease the sweep gas down while monitoring the patient, while other physicians will lower the flow rate to 1-1.5 L/min while weaning the circuit once the sweep gas has been titrated to off. As mentioned above, the flow rate does not matter nearly as much during VV ECMO. The sweep gas is the major determinant of oxygenation and ventilation of the patient. Therefore higher or lower flow rates are per physician preference regarding clot formation.

- Around 20 minutes after the sweep gas has been turned off, the patient’s O2 saturation and arterial blood gas will confirm if the patient can support oxygenation and ventilation while being off VV ECMO. The ECMO flow rate can be continued with no adjustment in the heparin dose.

- If the patient shows signs of distress or hemodynamic instability at any point, the weaning trial should be aborted, and the patient should be put back on full ECMO support. Weaning failure is indicated by an SPO2 level of less than 88% or an increase in the patient's respiratory rate greater than 30 to 35 breaths per minute.

- Some centers recommend a trial of 1 hour or up to 6 hours to prove that the patient has passed weaning from VV ECMO. During this time, the patient must be monitored closely for any signs of hemodynamic instability, arterial blood gas analysis to confirm the adequacy of oxygenation and ventilation, and the patient’s ventilator settings and respiratory mechanics must be carefully assessed as well. If the patient remains hemodynamically stable with normal lab values during this time, the ECMO support can be discontinued, and the patient can undergo decannulation.

- Regarding VV ECMO decannulation, the circuit can be disconnected once the patient is weaned, and the cannulas can be left in place for up to 48 hours in case the patient needs to be restarted on ECMO. If the cannulas are to be left in place, they require periodic flushing with heparin to avoid thrombosis up the cannula with the continuation of the patient anticoagulation. Once the cannulas are removed, pressure can be held over the site for around 30 to 45 minutes. Some centers then perform venous Doppler ultrasound of the cannulated vessels' limbs to ensure there is no thrombosis present.