- Intracavernous alprostadil is useful for its vasodilating properties, which act by relaxing the smooth muscle of the corpus cavernosum, hence increasing the diameter of the cavernous arteries leading to an erection. After intracavernous administration of alprostadil, it is either metabolized locally or via the lungs after being absorbed systematically. Short-term trials have shown that using alprostadil by an intracavernous route is equal to if not superior in inducing erection as compared to other drugs used via intracavernous routes such as papaverine or the combination therapy of papaverine and phentolamine, linsidomine, and topical nitroglycerine (glyceryl trinitrate). If used in therapeutic dosages, most patients tolerate intracavernous alprostadil well. Some potentially severe side effects of intracavernous alprostadil are priapism (4%) and fibrosis (8%).

- Topical alprostadil therapy is associated with a high rate of discontinuation, as are intracavernosal or transurethral therapies, which are inconvenient and invasive.

- Intraurethral suppository/medicated urethral system for erection (muse) - alprostadil can be used as an intraurethral suppository or medicated urethral system for erection, but have shown to be less efficient in inducing cavernous smooth muscle relaxation and also have more side effects such as penile pain/burning, hypotension, and urethral bleeding. This is why self-injection therapy with alprostadil is still considered the first-line therapy/gold standard for the management of erectile dysfunction. The intraurethral suppository is usually only for patients who have refractory erectile dysfunction.

- Alprostadil cream is an option with vacuum devices with an elastic ring placed at the base of the penis to achieve sufficient rigidity to maintain an erection for satisfactory penetration.

- Intravenous prostacyclin (PGI2) analogs have shown to be more effective than aspirin for dealing with the rest pain and healing the ischaemic ulcers in Buerger disease.