It is available as oral solution 25% (236.5 mL), oral tablets 500 mg, 1000 mg and intravenous solution 250 mg/mL (20mL vial). Aminocaproic acid can inhibit both the action of plasminogen activators and also plasmin activity to a lesser extent. It should not be administered without a definite diagnosis confirmed by laboratory results indicative of hyperfibrinolysis.

**Oral Dosage**

For the management of acute bleeding caused by hyperfibrinolysis, the recommended oral dosage is 5 g the first hour, followed by 1 to 1.25 g/hour for 8 hours or until bleeding is under control. The maximum daily dose for both oral and intravenous formulations is 30 g.

**Intravenous Dosage**

The intravenous dosage is 4 to 5 g over 1 hour, followed by 1 g/hour continuous infusion in 50 mL of diluent for 8 hours or until achieving bleeding control. It is recommended to dilute the initial intravenous dose (4 to 5 g of aminocaproic acid) in 250 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride injection, 5% dextrose injection, or lactated Ringer's injection. Rapid infusion of the undiluted drug is not recommended and may result in hypotension, bradycardia, and/or arrhythmia.

**Special Patient Population**

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer label has not provided any information on administering aminocaproic acid in patients with renal impairment.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**The manufacturer label has not provided any information on administering aminocaproic acid in patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Aminocaproic acid is a pregnancy Category C medicine, and animal reproduction studies are not conducted. It is also unknown whether aminocaproic acid can cause fetal harm or affect the reproduction capacity of a female of childbearing age. Therefore, Aminocaproic acid should be administered to a pregnant woman only if indicated and no safer alternatives.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**It is unknown whether aminocaproic acid is excreted in human milk. However, as many drugs are excreted in human milk, exercise caution when administered to a lactating woman planning to breastfeed.

**Pediatric Patients:**The safety and effectiveness of aminocaproic acid in pediatric patients have not been established.