The MCL is one of the most commonly injured ligaments of the knee. Valgus stress is the most common mechanism of injury. Injuries can be contact (a direct blow to the outer aspect of the lower thigh or upper leg) or non-contact (common in skiing). Contact injuries are usually more severe. (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1888587/)

Patients with an MCL injury will present with pain (ranging from mild to severe), stiffness, swelling, tenderness of the medial knee, and knee instability.

Injuries are classified as grade I, II, or III based on the severity of damage and the laxity of the ligament, measured by medial joint opening with the valgus stress test (VST).

- Grade I: Involves a few fibers of the MCL with local tenderness and a solid endpoint; valgus opening less than 5 mm.

- Grade II: Disruption of more fibers with generalized tenderness and usually a firm or perceptible endpoint; valgus opening 5 to 9 mm.

- Grade III: Complete MCL tears with considerable tenderness and no perceptible endpoint; valgus opening greater than 10 mm. Grade III injury suggests that other knee ligaments may be injured.

Partial or complete ruptures in the ligament significantly increase the load on the ACL, putting the ACL at risk for a tear. The medial meniscus is often also injured due to its relationship with the dMCL.

**Assessment**

Assessment of the MCL is best within 20 to 30 minutes of injury before pain, swelling, and muscle spasms make examination difficult. The assessment includes palpation and a special test, the valgus stress test (VST). Moving vertically, midway along the medial joint line, the anterior aspect of the ligament can be palpated. Focal tenderness indicates an MCL injury. The VST assesses laxity of the MCL compared to the contralateral knee as a control. The test should be performed with the patient relaxed in a supine position and the knee in slight flexion to isolate the ligament. The examiner should place one hand on the lateral aspect of the knee joint line and the other hand on the medial ankle. Gentle valgus stress should be applied by manually moving the knee medially and the ankle laterally. A positive result would be an increase in medial joint space. Laxity at 30 degrees of flexion indicates injury to the sMCL while laxity at 0 degrees of flexion suggests injury to the dMCL.

When assessing for an MCL injury, the examiner should carefully inspect surrounding structures. Suspicion of additional injury may require imaging and referral to an orthopedic surgeon.

**Treatment**

Treatment is often non-operative because the MCL has strong vascular support for healing. Initial treatment includes:

- Rest, ice, compression, elevation (RICE) to control pain.

- Analgesics: Acetaminophen is commonly used for pain control and has no adverse effect upon healing.

- Protection from further injury: stop sports or heavy activity until full motion and strength is regained (usually within 3 to 6 weeks).

When rehabilitating an MCL injury, early joint motion is encouraged and weight-bearing as well as activity advance as tolerated by the patient. Rehabilitation is step-wise and like other musculoskeletal injuries. Patients must first restore active range of motion. Next, the goal is to improve strength, proprioception, agility, and general fitness. Athletes will go on to perform sports-specific activities and return to play.

Bracing is often recommended, though controversial. If a brace is used, usually for pain relief, a hinged knee brace is best to restrict medial movement but permit as much flexion as the patient can tolerate. Extension is often limited.