Tafamidis is administered orally and is currently available as soft capsules in the following two strengths:

- Tafamidis meglumine 20 mg capsules (equivalent to 12.2 mg of tafamidis free acid)

- Tafamidis free acid 61 mg capsules

Dosage in ATRR cardiomyopathy (FDA-approved indication): The recommended dose is either tafamidis meglumine 80 mg (four capsules of 20 mg) or tafamidis 61 mg (single capsule) orally once daily.

**Specific Patient Populations**(according to manufacturer's labeling)

- **Hepatic Impairment:**There are no significant differences in tafamidis in patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 5 to 6). Patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score 7 to 9) have decreased systemic exposure and increased clearance of tafamidis, but these patients have low TTR levels than healthy subjects. Consequently, the exposure of tafamidis relative to the amount of TTR is sufficient to maintain the stabilization of the TTR tetramer in these patients. The significance of severe hepatic impairment on tafamidis is not known.

- **Renal Impairment:**No clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of tafamidis are observed in patients with renal impairment. But therapeutic benefit has not been established with impaired renal function (eGFR<25 mL/min/1.73 m2) based on 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guidelines.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Preclinical studies indicates that tafamidis may cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. In animal reproductive studies, administration of tafamidis to pregnant rabbits resulted in adverse effects on development (embryofetal mortality and fetal malformation) at a dosage approximately nine times the human exposure (AUC) at the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD). In addition, postnatal mortality and growth retardation were observed in offspring of pregnant rats administered tafamidis meglumine approximately two times the MRHD-based on body surface area (mg/m2). Limited human data on tafamidis use in pregnant women have not identified major congenital disabilities or miscarriage, but more research is still needed. Hence, advise pregnant women of the potential risk to a fetus and consider pregnancy planning and prevention.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**Currently, there is no data regarding the presence of tafamidis in human milk and its effect on the breastfed infant. However, in pregnant and lactating female rats radioactivity study revealed that tafamidis meglumine is transferred to milk after oral administration. Animal studies also suggest the potential for serious adverse drug reactions in the breastfed infant. Consequently, advise patients that breastfeeding is not recommended during treatment with tafamidis.