The histological and functional classification schemes offer a broad understanding of joints. As aforementioned, histological classification is based on the dominant type of connective tissue, and functional classification is based on the amount of movement permitted.

Histologically the three joints in the body are fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial. Functionally the three types of joints are synarthrosis (immovable), amphiarthrosis (slightly moveable), and diarthrosis (freely moveable). The two classification schemes can be correlated: synarthroses are fibrous, amphiarthroses are cartilaginous, and diarthroses are synovial.

Within these categories, each specific joint type (suture, gomphosis, syndesmosis, synchondrosis, symphysis, hinge, saddle, planar, pivot, condyloid, ball, and socket) has a specific function in the body.

**Fibrous Joints**

A fibrous joint is a fixed joint where collagenous fibrous connective tissue connects two bones. Fibrous joints (synarthroses) are usually immovable and have no joint cavity. They are subdivided further into sutures, gomphoses, and syndesmoses.

Sutures are immobile joints found only in the cranium. The plate-like bones of the skull are slightly mobile at birth because of the connective tissue between them. The spaces between the bones are termed fontanelles. This initial joint flexibility allows the fetal head to pass through the birth canal at delivery and permits brain enlargement after birth. As the skull enlarges, the fontanelles reduce to a narrow layer of fibrous connective sutures that suture the bony plates together. This connective tissue is termed Sharpey fibers. Eventually, cranial sutures ossify. Finally, the two adjacent plates fuse to form one bone; this fusion is termed synostosis.

Gomphoses are the immobile joints found only between the teeth and their sockets in the mandible and maxillae. The periodontal ligament is the fibrous tissue that connects the tooth to the socket.

Syndesmoses are slightly movable joints (amphiarthroses). This type of fibrous joint maintains integrity between long bones and resists forces that attempt to separate the two bones. All syndesmoses are amphiarthroses, but each specific syndesmosis joint permits a different degree of movement. For example, the tibiofibular syndesmosis primarily provides strength and stability to the leg and ankle during weight-bearing; however, the antebrachial interosseous membrane of the radioulnar syndesmosis permits rotation of the radius bone during forearm movements. The interosseous membranes of the leg and forearm are also areas of muscle attachment.

**Cartilaginous Joints**

In cartilaginous joints, the bones attach by hyaline cartilage or fibrocartilage. Depending on the type of cartilage involved, the joints are further classified as primary or secondary cartilaginous joints.

A synchondrosis, or primary cartilaginous joint, only involves hyaline cartilage and can be temporary or permanent.

A temporary synchondrosis is an epiphyseal plate (growth plate). It functions to permit bone lengthening during development. The epiphyseal plate connects the diaphysis (shaft of the bone) with the epiphysis (end of the bone) in children. Over time, the cartilaginous plate expands and is replaced by bone, adding to the diaphysis. Eventually, when all the hyaline cartilage has ossified, the bone has completed its lengthening, and the diaphysis and epiphysis fuse in synostosis. Other temporary synchondroses join the ilium, ischium, and pubic bones of the hip. Over time, these also fuse into a single hip bone.

A permanent synchondrosis does not ossify with age; it retains its hyaline cartilage. Permanent synchondroses function to connect bones without movement as a synarthrosis joint. Examples are found in the thoracic cage, such as the first sternocostal joint: the first rib is joined to the manubrium by its costal cartilage. Other examples include the relationship between the anterior end of the other 11 ribs and the costal cartilage.

A symphysis, or secondary cartilaginous joint, involves fibrocartilage. Fibrocartilage is thick and strong, so symphyses have a remarkable ability to resist pulling and bending forces. While the fibrocartilage firmly unites adjacent bones, the joint is still an amphiarthrosis joint and permits limited movement.

A symphysis can be narrow or wide. Narrow symphyses include the pubic symphysis and the manubriosternal joint. In females, the slight mobility of the pubic symphysis between the left and right pubic bones is critical for childbirth. A wider example of a symphysis is the intervertebral symphysis or intervertebral disc. The thick pad of fibrocartilage fills the gap between adjacent vertebrae and provides cushioning during high-impact activity.

**Synovial Joints**

Synovial joints (diarthroses) are freely mobile and are considered the main functional joints of the body. The synovial joint is characterized by the presence of a joint cavity. The primary purpose of the synovial joint is to prevent friction between the articulating bones of the joint cavity. The joint cavity is surrounded by the articular capsule, a fibrous connective tissue attached to each participating bone just beyond its articulating surface. The joint cavity contains synovial fluid secreted by the synovial membrane (synovium), which lines the articular capsule. Hyaline cartilage forms the articular cartilage, covering the entire articulating surface of each bone. The articular cartilage and the synovial membrane are continuous. Some synovial joints also have associated fibrocartilage between articulating bones. An example of this is the menisci of the knee.

While all synovial joints are diarthroses, the extent of movement varies among different subtypes and is often limited by the ligaments that connect the bones. Therefore, synovial joints are often further classified by the type of movements they permit. There are six such classifications: hinge (elbow), saddle (carpometacarpal joint), planar (acromioclavicular joint), pivot (atlantoaxial joint), condyloid (metacarpophalangeal joint), and ball and socket (hip joint).

**Synovial Joint: Hinge**

A hinge joint is an articulation between the convex end of one bone and the concave end of another. This type of joint is uniaxial because it only permits movement along one axis. In the body, this axis of movement is usually flexion and extension (bending or straightening). Examples include the elbow, knee, ankle, and interphalangeal joints.

**Synovial: Condyloid**

A condyloid joint, or an ellipsoid joint, is an articulation between the shallow depression of one bone and the rounded structure of one or more other bones. This type of joint is biaxial because it permits two axes of movement: flexion/extension and medial/lateral (abduction/adduction). An example is the metacarpophalangeal joints of the hand between the distal metacarpal and proximal phalanx, commonly known as the knuckle.

**Synovial Joint: Saddle**

A saddle joint is an articulation between two bones that are saddle-shaped - concave in one direction and convex in another. This type of joint is biaxial. One example is the first carpometacarpal joint between the trapezium (carpal) and the first metacarpal bone of the thumb. This arrangement permits the thumb to flex and extend (within the plane of the palm) as well as abduct and adduct (perpendicular to the palm). This dexterity gives humans the characteristic trait of “opposable” thumbs. The opposable thumb is critical for the complex motions involved in the use of the hand. Loss of the thumb by any mechanism severely limits the utility of the hand.

**Synovial Joint: Planar**

A planar joint, or gliding joint, is defined as an articulation between two bones that are both flat and of similar size. This type of joint is multiaxial because it permits many movements; however, surrounding ligaments usually restrict this joint to a small and tight motion. Examples include intercarpal joints, intertarsal joints, and the acromioclavicular joint.

**Synovial Joint: Pivot**

A pivot joint is an articulation within a ligamentous ring between the rounded end of one bone and another bone. This type of joint is uniaxial because, although the bone rotates within this ring, it does so around a single axis. An example is the atlantoaxial joint between C1 (atlas) and C2 (axis) of the vertebrae. This joint permits side-to-side head motion of the head. Another example is the proximal radioulnar joint. The radius sits in the annular radial ligament, which holds it in place as it articulates with the radial notch of the ulna, which permits pronation and supination.

**Synovial Joint: Ball and Socket**

A ball and socket joint is an articulation between the rounded head of one bone (ball) and the concavity of another (socket). This type of joint is multiaxial: it permits flexion/extension, abduction/adduction, and rotation. The only two ball and socket joints of the body are the hips and the shoulder (glenohumeral). The shallow socket of the glenoid cavity permits a more extensive range of motion in the shoulder; the deeper socket of the acetabulum and the supporting ligaments of the hip constrain the movement of the femur.