# Introduction

Cholecystokinin (CCK) is a peptide hormone linked to the gastrointestinal (GI) system. The receptors are expressed in the central nervous system

# Cellular Level

In peripheral neurons such as those found in the intestinal mucosa, they express CCK in I-cells. Food intake, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), and glucocorticoids play a role in regulating CCK expression. Estrogen, dopamine, and injury situations activate CCK-mRNA in neuronal cells. Activation of transcription factors of these signaling pathways is unknown. Receptors in the CNS are G protein-coupled; CCK-2 receptor subtype (formerly known as CCK-B) are found mainly in the brain, and CCK-1 receptor subtype (formerly known as CCK-A) found mainly peripherally, for example, in the pancreas. Adenylyl cyclase is activated inducing a rise in intracellular cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate (cAMP) and the activation of protein kinase A (PKA). They associate this rise in cAMP with CCK-receptor-mediated pathway with high concentrations of CCK. cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity is CCK concentration dependent. PKA activity peaks rapidly and maintains a high level of activity at high doses of CCK.

# Molecular Level

The specific affinity of membrane receptors on target cells determines the action of CCK and gastrin. CCK-1 and 2 are part of the class 1 G-protein-coupled receptor family. It is made up of seven transmembrane domains connected by intracellular and extracellular loops with an extracellular N-terminal and intracellular C-terminal tails. They divide these receptors into subtypes based on their affinity to CCK or gastrin. The CCK-1 receptor has an affinity 500-times higher for CCK than gastrin. The CCK2 receptor has the same affinity for CCK as it does for gastrin. CCK-1 receptor also has a very high affinity for sulfated CCK than non-sulfated CCK while CCK-2 receptor cannot differentiate between the 2. One of the extracellular loops of CCK-2 receptor contains 5 amino acids paramount to gastrin sensitivity. Loss of His207 from CCK-2 receptor leads to a loss of CCK binding. His207 is also found in the CCK-1 receptor binding site, and an exchange in this region for another amino acid and the Asp region of CCK leads to a loss or gain of affinity. Therefore, the binding sites of CCK-1 and CCK-2 receptors share some homologous regions and the Asp of CCK further demarcates the binding site of the CCK-2 receptor.

# Function

**Roles**

**In the Intestine
**

- Mediates digestion by regulating the release of pancreatic exocrine enzymes which plays a role in the digestion of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates

- Causes contraction and relaxation of the gallbladder via the sphincter of Oddi in response to food; CCK regulates the release of bile acid to aid in further fat digestion in the small intestine

- Regulates overall GI movement, in other words, gut motility

- Energy production

- Gene expression

- Protein synthesis

In the Brain

- Regulates feeding behavior: Leptin acts on the brain to inhibit food intake resulting in satiety

- Pain perception

- Memory

# Mechanism

Fatty acids and proteins stimulate the release of CCK via a direct action on the I-cells. GPR40 is a G-protein-coupled receptor expressed on I-cells that responds to long-chain fatty acids. Discharge of vagal efferent neurons is stimulated by the action of CCK on CCK-1 receptors and increase intracellular calcium. They find these neurons in both the stomach and small intestines, and CCK initially activates the afferent fibers in the small intestine via a paracrine mechanism. This inhibits the excitatory vagal efferent pathway to the distal stomach. Gastric vagal afferents are stimulated in response to the hormonal effect coupled with the inhibitory vagal efferent pathway to the proximal stomach.

# Testing

Gallbladder dysfunction is defined as an abnormally low gallbladder ejection fraction (GBEF).

# Clinical Significance

Obesity blunts the effect of CCK, which means there is insensitivity of vagal afferent neurons to CCK. This reduced expression of CCK accounts for reduced effect on satiety and the fact that most obese people always complain about feeling hungry. Consumption of high-fat diets with diminished expression of the CCK-1 receptor increases the levels of ghrelin in plasma. This increases food intake, and it does this by suppressing the expression of satiety peptide cocaine and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) in vagal afferent neurons. CCK is also involved in metabolic regulation and lipid absorption. They link inactivation of the CCK signaling pathway to reduced weight gain. Inactivation increases energy expenditure and lowers energy extraction.

CCK acts via the vasovagal pathway and is activated peripherally via gastric wall distension. They use intragastric balloons in clinical practice to treat weight loss by mimicking this pathway. By distending the stomach it activates the vagal nerve and the nucleus of tractus solitarius and the paraventricular nucleus, leading to a centrally mediated feeling of satiety.

CCK plays a minor role in the release of incretin as compared to glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) from islet cells. Decreased size of islet cells and mass of beta-cells correlates with upregulation of CCK expression and increased sensitivity to CCK for insulin release in obesity. It, therefore, can mediate compensatory mechanisms within the islets of Langerhans.

Cancers of the GI tract including medullary thyroid cancer, small cell lung cancer all express gastrin and CCK-2 receptors. Gastrin and CCK2R/gastrin receptor (GR) play a role in regulating cellular proliferation, loss of cell-cell adhesion, differentiation and morphology and the enhanced motility/invasion of epithelial cells. The activation of the CCK2R/GR via the intracellular signaling pathway can lead to carcinogenesis. These receptors, therefore, play a crucial role in starting the events leading up to preneoplastic lesions and cancer development.