# Continuing Education Activity

Tonometry is a common procedure employed by healthcare professionals to measure intraocular pressure (IOP) using a calibrated instrument. IOP is important in diagnosing, screening, and managing ocular hypertension and glaucoma. Instruments measuring intraocular pressure assume the eye is a closed globe with uniform pressure distributed throughout the anterior chamber and vitreous cavity. The normal range of intraocular pressure is 10 to 21 millimeters of mercury. This activity discusses the numerous past and present methods of tonometry available to assess intraocular pressure and identify potential diseases causing abnormalities in eye pressure.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications and contraindications of different types of tonometry. 
- Describe the equipment, personnel, preparation, and technique in regard to performing tonometry. 
- Summarize the appropriate evaluation of the potential complications of tonometry.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the proper use of tonometry and optimize patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Tonometry is a standard procedure employed by ophthalmologists to measure intraocular pressure (IOP) using a calibrated instrument. Devices used to measure IOP are based on the assumption that the eye is a closed globe with uniform pressure distributed throughout the anterior chamber and vitreous cavity. The normal range of intraocular pressure is 10 to 21 millimeters of mercury (mmHg), which is based on the average levels of IOP in normal individuals.

Treatment strategies, be it local IOP-lowering drops, laser, or surgery,

Numerous methods have been proposed since the development of the first tonometer in 1863 by von Graefe.

# Anatomy and Physiology

IOP is determined by a delicate equilibrium between aqueous humor production and outflow. Elevated IOP can arise from increased production and/or decreased outflow mechanisms. The most common cause of elevated IOP in glaucoma is reduced aqueous humor outflow. Many forms of glaucoma are defined by elevated IOP, including primary open-angle glaucoma (the most frequent), closed-angle glaucoma, and secondary glaucoma (i.e., steroid-induced, pseudoexfoliation, traumatic, pigment dispersion glaucoma, etc.), and congenital glaucoma.

Most forms of open-angle glaucoma are silent sight-threatening diseases considering that central visual acuity tends not to be influenced, there is no associated pain or irritation, and peripheral visual field loss normally occurs gradually over numerous years in eyes with high IOP. Asymptomatic chronic elevated IOP leads to irreversible glaucomatous optic neuropathy, retinal nerve fiber layer thinning, and visual field damage. Tonometry is of great importance in the screening, diagnosis, and management of all patients, especially those with risk factors for developing glaucoma.

# Indications

Tonometry is utilized to measure IOP, which is essential in all forms of glaucoma. Tonometers are most commonly employed as part of a routine clinic visit by the clinician to screen for and monitor IOP elevation in glaucoma.

- Screening for OHT and glaucoma in all adult patients, especially those with known risk factors.

- Diagnosis and management of patients with OHT or in therapy for glaucoma.

- Differential diagnosis and management of various ophthalmologic conditions can give rise to high levels of IOP, including pigment dispersion syndrome,

# Contraindications

Information regarding IOP is of clinical importance during the ophthalmologic examination. There are situations, however, in which tonometry is challenging to obtain with certain instruments or can worsen the clinical conditions of the patient in specific conditions, which include:

**Ruptured globe:**Contact tonometry should be avoided or limited in the setting of a ruptured globe or suspicion of one.

**Infection:**When an infection such as keratoconjunctivitis is suspected in one eye, the clinician should thoroughly disinfect or use a new cover before measuring the contralateral eye. This is also important when using the same tonometer between patients to prevent disease transmission.

**Unhealed corneal abrasions or ulcers, corneal scars, and elevated eyes with astigmatism:**Manipulation with tonometry can further aggravate active corneal lesions.

**Inability to administer or intolerance/allergies to topical anesthesia and/or fluorescein:**This contraindication is applicable to methods of tonometry requiring topical anesthesia before measurement of IOP.

**Difficulties or i****nability to use the tonometer:**Certain tonometry, like the gold standard Goldmann applanation, can only be used with a collaborative individual in an upright position. Other portable manual instruments, like iCare rebound tonometers, can be used in a supine position and require little patient collaboration, thus can be considered in bedridden and non-collaborative individuals and children.

# Equipment

**Methods**

**Applanation Tonometry**

**Goldmann Applanation Tonometer (GAT)**

In 1948, Hans Goldmann proposed GAT to measure IOP.

Eye clinicians use GAT as a standard component of a slit-lamp (See slit-lamp and GAT tonometer images) eye exam.

Several factors can influence the accuracy and precision of IOP measurements, which include central corneal thickness (CCT), elevated astigmatism, ocular rigidity, corneal hysteresis, tear film, corneal edema, the amount of fluorescein, previous refractive surgery, etc.

**Perkins and Draeger Applanation Tonometer**

The Perkins and Drager handheld tonometers use the same mechanism of applanation as the Goldmann.

**Non-contact Tonometers**

Non-contact tonometers (NCT),

**Ocular-Response Analyzer (ORA) and Corvis ST Tonometers**

ORA was developed in 2005 and represented a newer version of NCT that utilizes a column of air as the applanating force.

Corneal hysteresis is the ability of the cornea to absorb and dissipate applied forces based on its viscoelastic and elasticity properties. ORA was designed to theoretically improve IOP accuracy, allowing clinicians to account for the variability in corneal biomechanical properties seen among patients.

Corvis ST is an NCT based on the indentation of the cornea by a jet of air, which was proposed in 2011 by Oculus in Germany.

**Indentation Tonometry**

**Schiotz Tonometer**

The principle of indentation is based on the fact that weight or force will sink more into a softer object than a harder one. The Norwegian physician, Hjalmar Schiotz, invented the first clinically useful indentation tonometer in 1905.

**Tono-Pen Indentation/Applanation Tonometer**

The Tono-pen is a battery-powered, lightweight, portable handheld device that uses a small plunger to record the force needed to applanate the cornea. This tonometer is based on both the indentation and applanation principles. An early version of this instrument was introduced in 1959 by McKay and Marg.

It requires daily recalibration and topical anesthesia and uses disposable covers (See Tono-pen image). It can prove useful in portable screenings, emergency rooms, bedridden patients, or operating rooms to measure intraocular pressure. Advantages of this method include the ability to measure over a soft contact lens, on an irregular corneal surface, averaging multiple readings, and the potential to measure at the peripheral cornea if a central corneal scar or ulcer exists. It can also measure intraocular pressure independent of patient position.

**Pneumatonometer**

The pneumatonometer uses a stream of air to indent the cornea with a 5 mm diameter silicone tip on a piston that rides on the air.

The Pulsatile Ocular Blood Flow pneumotonometer is the newer version that provides pulse fluctuation and information regarding ocular blood pulse.

**Rebound Tonometry**

**iCare tonometer**

The iCare tonometer, based on the principles of rebound, is a portable battery-powered handheld device that is easy to use.

The HOME version can be used autonomously for at-home use in managing glaucoma patients, especially in suspect normal-tension glaucoma patients that tend to have normal IOP during clinical examinations.

Several studies have shown that when compared to GAT and other tonometers, iCare showed good agreement, specificity, reliability, and reproducibility, especially for low-to-moderate IOP measurements.

**Dynamic Contour Tonometry (DCT)**

DCT was developed in 2003 and calculates IOP based on the Pascal principle, which deals with the pressure of a fluid within an enclosed space.

Studies have shown DCT to have good precision, reproducibility, and correlatability compared to GAT and other tonometers.

**Continuous IOP Monitoring**

The routine clinical setting normally provides the ophthalmologist with only a few spot readings of IOP for each patient. Patients can have ophthalmologic examinations up to 4 times yearly; however, in normal cases, this tends to be biannual or annual for the most part. In the ideal world of glaucoma management, IOP would be continuously measured 24 hours a day to provide the true fluctuations of IOP and IOP spikes during the waking and sleeping hours, which could have a great impact on understanding the true target pressure, progression rates, and the best individually tailored treatment strategies for each patient.

Regarding sensors applied to contact lenses on the cornea surface, a company from Switzerland launched the Sensimed Triggerfish system.

The main limits of this system, however, include no direct correlation between corneal changes and IOP readings and poor correlation with GAT readings regarding measurements taken several hours after the device has been activated.

Implantable IOP-sensor devices, which can be positioned during cataract surgery in the anterior chamber, suprachoroidal space, or embedded in a foldable artificial intraocular lens, have been proposed; however, they remain experimental and not of widespread use yet.

# Technique or Treatment

**Technique Considerations**

- Care must be taken to not artificially raise the intraocular pressure by pressing on the eyelid during IOP measurement. Ensure the patient is comfortable and not attempting to squint, as this can raise IOP.

- Ensure that the patient is appropriately positioned for the specific tonometry method (seated versus supine). Table-top methods such as GAT can only be used in upright and seated patients. Rebound (I-Care) tonometry can only be used in the horizontal plane.

- Clean and disinfect all contact tonometers between patients unless they utilize disposable covers. This assists in preventing disease transmission and possible corneal abrasions from residual debris.

- Methods that rely on applanation are affected by the central corneal thickness and other biomechanical properties such as elasticity and hysteresis.

- GAT currently remains the gold standard technique in measuring IOP, especially in managing patients with OHT, risk factors, and in therapy for glaucoma. Elevated IOP measurements taken with alternative tonometers should be confirmed with GAT.

# Complications

Corneal abrasion, aggravation of globe rupture, the transmission of infection, and reaction to ocular drugs are potential complications of tonometry. The risk of these complications is considerably low (less than 1%). Non-contact methods and rebound tonometry can be considered in special cases, even if GAT remains the gold standard approach to tonometry.

# Clinical Significance

Measurement of intraocular pressure is important in the screening and monitoring of glaucoma, a progressive optic neuropathy that can be slowed with intraocular pressure reduction. Intraocular pressure is the only modifiable risk factor for glaucoma progression at this time.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In addition to an ophthalmologist, an optometrist, ophthalmic technician, nurse, or emergency medicine physician may use tonometry during an ophthalmic office visit, emergency room visit, or ambulatory settings as needed. Communication among these professionals, operating as an interprofessional team, regarding the particular tonometry method is important so eye pressure measurements can be accurately compared throughout time.

Portable techniques such as the Tono-pen and rebound tonometer are simple to use, while stationary methods such as GAT require more specialized training. Each medical professional mentioned above may use various tonometry methods based on comfort level and training. A point of emphasis among all professionals performing tonometry must be the proper use of topical anesthesia to minimize patient discomfort for methods including Tono-pen and GAT. Avoid any tangential movement across the cornea during tonometric measurement to prevent corneal abrasions. Additionally, ensure any disinfecting solution is rinsed from the tonometry surface that contacts the cornea to avoid potential toxic keratitis.

Tonometry readings may need to be re-measured among professionals to ensure consistency of readings. If there is a question about the accuracy of a reading or device, an alternative tonometry method may be used to help confirm or refute the reading. In an acute setting where acute-angle closure glaucoma is suspected, an emergent intraocular pressure reading must be acquired. This is typically initially done in the emergency room by a physician or nurse, with a consulting ophthalmologist confirming the pressure on arrival and administering pressure-lowering medication or performing additional interventions to save vision.