Computed tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen/pelvis will provide the best visualization of pelvic anatomy and allow for evaluation of any pelvic, retroperitoneal, or intraperitoneal bleeding. A CT scan will also allow for confirmation of hip dislocation and help determine whether or not there is an associated acetabular fracture.

The best screening test for a pelvic fracture however is an anteroposterior (AP) pelvic radiograph - this will reveal 90% of pelvic injuries.  Although most trauma patients undergo routine CT scans to the abdomen and pelvis, AP pelvic radiographs should be considered as a rapid diagnostic tool for hemodynamically unstable patients to allow for earlier intervention.

The pelvis should also be examined as part of the Focus Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST) examination - this may help identify intraperitoneal bleeding and potentially pinpoint a source of shock if it is present.

Retrograde urethrography may also be performed in patients suspected of having a urethral tear (e.g., males presenting with blood at the urethral meatus or females who, after careful attempts, are unable to have a Foley catheter inserted, or have a vaginal tear or palpable fragments adjacent to the urethra).

Individuals presenting with hematuria in the setting of an intact urethra (e.g., suspected of having a urinary bladder injury) should undergo a cystography.

Pelvic Angiography may be performed if a patient is experiencing persistent hemorrhage despite adequate intravenous fluid resuscitation and pelvic stabilization - this may detect occult or obvious injuries and allow for embolization of any damaged arteries in addition to helping visualize before manipulative reduction.