Multiple training tools now exist for use, particularly within the simulation to improve both team and individual communication skills.

**SBAR**

One type of communication tool that has proven to have a positive effect on communication is SBAR ('Situation,' 'Background,' 'Assessment,' 'Recommendation').

**Situation**– what is occurring with the patient

**Background**– what are the relevant background details /clinical context

**Assessment**– what do I believe the problem is

**Recommendation**– what needs to be done

An example of its use could be when a surgical nurse wishes to contact the surgical doctor as a patient under their care is deteriorating. In an example, SBAR could be used as such:

**Situation**– Dr. Wright, I am calling about Miss Green in bed, K4, who is having increasing pain postoperatively.

**Background**– She is an 18-year-old who is normally well, and this afternoon had an open appendectomy for a perforated appendix.

**Assessment**– She has a heart rate of 120, a blood pressure of 95/50, a temperature of 38.9, and a tight, painful abdomen.

**Recommendation**– I'm worried she has a complication after her operation, possibly a perforation/leak.

Concisely, SBAR delivers an essential set of information while actively promoting critical thinking by the message conveyor. One systematic review suggests that fundamental patient safety improved through the implementation of SBAR, particularly when used in non-face-to-face communication, such as when bleeping/paging a physician.

**Appropriate assertion**

One tool that specifically addresses the role of confidence, and therefore assertion within cross-professional communication, is the appropriate assertion tool.

- Get a person's attention

- Express concern

- State problem

- Propose action

- Reach decision

They also put forward the argument that a nurse should be able to contact a physician and plainly state, "I need you to come now and see this patient," and that the physician should respond each time.

**Huddles**

An additional tool used to promote clear communication across teams delivering health care is the implementation of huddles.

- Set times – e.g., beginning and end of shifts, or on the hour throughout a shift

- Mandatory attendance – across different roles

- Limited time – usually less than 15 mins

- Clear structure – same structure followed each huddle

An example of a huddle would be in the Emergency Department, where a brief huddle (< 5 mins) every hour to go through the minors patients and check there are plans in place for the patients, and any safety concerns/deteriorating patients are flagged up. However, although improvements can be shown by implementing huddles, Montague et al. (2019) argue that a multitude of factors affects the ongoing sustainability of such interventions past the initial set up.

**Debriefing**

Both team and individual debriefing is another tool used for improving communication, notably within simulation training.