The diagnosis of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations should be suspected in patients presenting with any of the following: characteristic chest x-ray findings, mucocutaneous telangiectasias, or unexplained symptoms and signs such as dyspnea, cyanosis, clubbing, hypoxemia, brain abscess, or cerebral embolism.

Macroscopic pulmonary AVMs typically present themselves on a chest radiograph as a round mass of uniform density that is usually lobulated and sharply defined. Its usual location is in the lower lobes.

The degree of right to left shunting can be estimated through shunt fraction measurement. A shunt fraction measurement can be obtained by arterial blood gas determination while breathing 100% oxygen. A shunt fraction of more than 5% is sensitive to 87.5%, although specificity is only 71.4% in the diagnosis of pulmonary AVMs.

Transthoracic contrast echocardiography is an ideal screening test for the evaluation of cardiac as well as intrapulmonary shunts. All patients diagnosed with HHT should undergo testing as sensitivity approaches 100%. If a pulmonary AVM is present, the contrast will be observed in the left atrium 3-8 cardiac cycles after its appearance into the right atrium due to the time needed for the difference to travel through the pulmonary vasculature. This delay distinguishes intrapulmonary shunts from cardiac shunts.

Once the intrapulmonary shunt has been suggested by echocardiography, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest should be performed to evaluate the exact location and anatomy of the lesions. CT is superior in identifying pulmonary AVMs than invasive angiography. However, pulmonary angiography is better at assessing individual AVM anatomy and is also used for treatment.

Other adjunct tests that can be used in the evaluation of pulmonary AVMs include radionuclide perfusion lung scanning as well as magnetic resonance imaging.