Trim the hair as necessary and scrub and drape the skin in the normal fashion. Anesthetize the intended area with 5 to 10 mL of lidocaine with epinephrine; extend the area to 1 cm lateral to the artery on either side. Using the No. 15 scalpel blade, incise the dermis directly over the artery such that the thin subcutaneous tissue is barely visible. Separate the edges of the incision using blunt-tipped dissecting scissors and skin hooks; dissect to uncover the superficial temporal fascia. Grasp this fascia with forceps a few millimeters lateral to the artery. Incise the fascia sharply with scissors and enlarge the fascial incision to expose the artery. Palpation of the arterial pulse may facilitate identifying the vessel.

Gently harvest approximately 5 centimeters of the vessel. Use suture or indirect electrocoagulation via forceps to ligate any small branches of the temporal artery prior to transection; this promotes a relatively bloodless surgical field. Ligate the proximal and distal portions of the main vessel using 4-0 or 5-0 polyglactin 910 suture, transect the vessel, and place the specimen in formalin. Apply electrocoagulation to the vessel ends in situ. Ensure that hemostasis is achieved. Approximate the skin edges with 5-0 poliglecaprone subcutaneous sutures, and complete the closure with either a cyanoacrylate skin adhesive or 6-0 gut sutures. (Video 2)

**Surgical Tips**

- Consider marking the safe zone before the procedure, as shown in the video.

- Avoid sharp dissection under the superficial temporal fascia; blunt dissection is preferred.

- After dissecting through the superficial temporal fascia to identify the temporal artery, avoid additional deeper or blind dissection.

- Once the artery is identified, identify any nerve branches in the area, as the temporal facial nerve may be very close to the temporal artery in some patients, even when the safe zones are marked.

- Plan to biopsy the frontal branch of the superficial temporal artery rather than the main trunk or the parietal branch.

- Gentle handling of the temporal artery before ligation and harvesting can be accomplished using muscle hooks.