The clinical significance of lipofuscin is yet to be fully elucidated despite its ubiquity in aging and a number of diseases. As discussed earlier, its hypothesized role in cellular degeneration via oxidative sequelae is likely widespread in many common pathologies; however, there are diseases in which lipofuscin accumulation is suspected to be a legitimate risk factor.

Congenital neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) have the strongest evidence for the implication of lipofuscin's direct role in pathology. These early onset lysosomal storage disorders cause a massive buildup of lipofuscin visible on biopsy. With NCLs such as Batten disease and Niemann-Pick C disease, inevitable and progressive accumulation leads to cell dysfunction and death at a young age.

Elderly patients often present with hyperpigmented macules and patches most frequently on their dorsal hands and other sun-exposed areas of the skin. These benign melanin and lipofuscin-rich areas are colloquially known as "age spots" or "liver spots," and have no clinical significance.

The role of lipofuscin in most other pathologies are much less defined. Age-related macular degeneration’s correlation to lipofuscin accumulation has been hypothesized but remains highly controversial. Most agree that lipofuscin accumulation inhibits phagocytosis of retinal pigment epithelial cells and that its fluorophores sensitize lysosomes to the visible light spectrum, leading to cellular instability.

Lipofuscin accumulation has been observed, but not implicated, in many other common diseases found in the clinical setting. A prominent area of investigation is underway in analyzing its presence and possible role in advancing some of the most prolific age-related neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease. Its accumulation has been noted in a number of other diseases including but not limited to atherosclerosis, Niemann-Pick disease, brown bowel syndrome, pigmented cysts, dermal hyperpigmentation, as well as numerous neoplastic processes such as pancreatic tumors, non-choroidal melanomas, and mammary gland carcinomas.

While these pathologies may have a unique relationship with lipofuscin, it is important to keep in mind that the clinical significance of finding lipofuscin in a biopsy of the prototypical patient is limited outside of signifying cellular senescence or oxidative stress. Seeing that lipofuscin can potentially be in any cell type of any patient of older age, incidental finding on biopsy does not require further workup unless there is a specific indication.