The rooting reflex is crucial to initiate feeding and promote neonatal growth. Clinicians and nurses should perform thorough neonatal neurological examinations to ensure that all primitive reflexes, including the rooting reflex, are intact. The persistence of the reflex after 4 to 6 months may suggest several conditions, including congenital cerebral palsy and autism. The medical community should educate parents to pay close attention to the child and evaluate whether the reflexes disappear after 4 to 6 months. Parents should be reminded to set up a follow-up appointment after the resolution period. Regular visits may help with the early detection of the disease and the prevention of possible complications. If an infant has congenital trigeminal anesthesia, their clinician should refer the patient to an ophthalmologist to prevent serious corneal disease.

When adult patients present with the recurrence of primitive reflexes, clinicians should order appropriate tests to make a correct diagnosis. Because patients with frontal lobe lesions show impulsive and risky behaviors, family members may show frustration and inability to cope with the patient's disease. Clinicians and nurses should fully explain the situation to the family members about the effects of brain damage and any treatments that may reverse or slow down the progression of the disease. Social services and programs should be employed in these cases to help the patient and the family cope with the progression of the disease and to provide support in the home as much as possible.