Managing antifungal prophylaxis in immunocompromised patients requires the entire interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs), infectious disease specialists in severe cases, nursing staff, pharmacists, and laboratory technologists. If itraconazole therapy is not adequately managed, patients are likely to contract life-threatening fungal infections or experience adverse side effects. Whether these patients are immunocompromised due to HIV, chemotherapy, or organ transplant, drugs like itraconazole can be lifesaving.

- Assessing the patient for any signs of current fungal infections

- Reviewing the patient’s cardiac history. If the patient has any history of arrhythmias or heart failure, consult cardiology.

- Ordering liver enzymes to evaluate the liver’s function.

- Consult with an infectious disease physician to ensure that itraconazole will provide adequate coverage for the patient.

- Consult with the pharmacist to ensure no drug-drug interactions exist between itraconazole and the patient’s current medication; in severe cases, an infectious disease specialty pharmacist can be a valuable addition to the interprofessional team.

The management of itraconazole prophylaxis does not stop after the initial visit and therefore requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, infectious disease specialists, nursing staff, pharmacists, and other healthcare personnel. Following ordering/prescribing and administration of the drug, itraconazole levels require regular monitoring, and the patients require monitoring for the development of any adverse reactions. These patients may also benefit from a mental health counselor; many of these patients are very sick, which can take a toll on their mental health. Furthermore, social workers should be involved in the care of these patients. Many immunocompromised patients use many costly medications, which can be a burden. Social workers can help get drugs covered or find other ways to assist these patients financially. Only by working together can an interprofessional team provide safe and effective itraconazole prophylaxis in immunocompromised patients. [Level 5]