Considering the high mortality and morbidity rates and various diagnostic challenges in CNS-TB, empiric treatment with anti-tuberculous therapy (ATT) and adjunctive corticosteroids must be commenced based on strong clinical suspicion.

In addition, it is essential to closely monitor the patient for prompt identification of adverse drug reactions and disease-related complications. There are no randomized clinical trials to ascertain the most favorable drug combination, dosage, and duration for the specific treatment of CNS-TB. Various guidelines are available that outline different treatment regimens.

Whatever regimen is used, it should be tailored to the drug susceptibility data (when available) and clinical response. The optimal duration of treatment is uncertain.

**Drug-susceptible CNS-TB**

The current guidelines use four orally administered drugs, isoniazid (INH) 5 mg/kg/d, rifampicin (RMP) 10 mg/kg/d, pyrazinamide (PZA) 25 mg/kg/d, and ethambutol (ETB) 15 mg/kg/d for first two months (intensive phase) followed by three drugs (INH, RMP, ETB) daily for a minimum of 7 months in the continuation phase. Directly observed therapy short-course, which involves intermittent administration of drugs (thrice weekly), is currently not followed for CNS-TB in India.

INH displays early bactericidal activity, and RMP has excellent sterilizing activity (clearing persisters). PZA penetrates the blood-brain barrier readily, and ETB, a weak drug, completes the regimen for drug-susceptible TB. In the maintenance phase, PZA and EMB may be discontinued. If PZA is omitted in the intensive phase, treatment should be extended to 18 months. Other drugs which may substitute ETB include streptomycin (SM), levofloxacin, or ethionamide. ETB is also avoided when the vision is compromised or cannot be assessed regularly. SM is avoided during pregnancy, kidney impairment, or hearing loss. Levofloxacin is superior to gatifloxacin or ciprofloxacin.

Higher doses of RMP or levofloxacin are not associated with better survival.

**Drug-resistant CNS TB**

Management of drug-resistant CNS-TB derives the guidelines from those of pulmonary TB. The key principle involves never adding a single drug to the failing regimen. Management is challenging due to the huge number of drugs with overlapping adverse drug reaction profiles. The newer agents, bedaquiline (BDQ) and delamanid, have received accelerated approvals for pulmonary TB but have not yet been approved for treating CNS-TB.

**Tuberculomas**

International guidelines recommend treating tuberculomas with standard ATT for CNS-TB for 9-12 months.

Additionally, every patient should receive adjunctive steroids as per guidelines, especially unequivocally for those that develop paradoxical responses.

**Spinal Arachnoiditis**

Spinal TB is managed on the lines of other extrapulmonary TB. Most international guidelines recommend daily therapy for 6-9 months. However, the treatment is extended for more prolonged periods, sometimes up to 24 months in clinical practice, as the response may not be satisfactory.

**Anti-inflammatory Drugs and Supportive Therapy**

Adjunctive steroid therapy benefits all patients with TBM, even those with HIV infection. Steroids are generally recommended for all stages of TBM, although in stage 1 with mild disease, the clinician may use his judgment. The daily dose of dexamethasone is 0.6 mg/kg/d and 0.4 mg/kg/d in children and adults, respectively. Prednisolone is the other alternative drug, used in doses of 2 to 4 mg/kg/d and 2.5 mg/kg/d in children and adults, respectively. This dosage is given for a minimum of 4 weeks, followed by gradual tapering over the next four weeks.

Due to its anti-inflammatory action, thalidomide may aid in the recovery of vision in OCA and cases of IRIS.

**Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (IRIS)**

In approximately one-third of patients with CNS-TB, clinical or radiological worsening may occur several weeks after initiation of ATT due to an aberrant immune response.

TB-IRIS is suspected when patients who initially improved on ATT develop deterioration of symptomatology, increase in size or number of tuberculous lesions on imaging (in case of tuberculomas), or aggravation of OCA while continuing on ATT. There is no confirmatory test to diagnose TB- IRIS.

IRIS is thought to represent a delayed type-IV hypersensitivity response to the substantial release of mycobacterial antigens and an increase in TNFα, and an increase in CSF lymphocytes or protein. During IRIS, cranial nerve deficits may emerge due to entanglement in the inflammatory exudates, and similarly communicating hydrocephalus, spinal arachnoiditis, and syringomyelia may start to manifest. However, the clinician's judgment is imperative in ruling out any alternate infection or possible treatment failure.

**HIV Coinfection**

Antiretroviral therapy (ART) naïve, HIV-infected patients with TBM should receive the ART after a delay of 8-10 weeks of ATT initiation. This is essential to avert early TB-associated IRIS, increasing the risk of potentially fatal neurologic complications. Among HIV-infected patients with CNS-TB, co-administration of ATT and ART is often complicated by numerous drug interactions and higher adverse drug reactions.

**Shunt Surgery in TBM**

In the initial stages, communicating hydrocephalus is treated with corticosteroids, the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide, and osmotic diuretics like mannitol, glycerol, and CSF drainage through temporary external ventricular drainage.

ETV may be beneficial over VP shunt due to lesser long-term complications. However, it is likely to fail during the initial stage of the illness; therefore, a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt needs to be placed.

Vellore and modified Vellore grading have been validated for patients with TBM with hydrocephalous to aid in surgical decision-making and predict the success of shunt surgery and ETV. The grades vary from 1 to 4, increasing in disease severity. The modified version incorporates the Glasgow Coma Scale score. The management of patients in grade 4 is still contentious.