The method of single-lung ventilation was first conceptualized by physiologists Eduard Pflüger and Claude Bernard, who studied gas exchange in dogs using a lung-isolation catheter.

Double-lumen tubes (DLT) paved the way for single-lung ventilation, offering better ventilation control and more efficient separation of the 2 lungs. Single-lung ventilation is achieved using special airway devices such as double-lumen tubes and bronchial blockers, which selectively direct the airflow to one lung. They are used to collapse one lung selectively for surgery on the ipsilateral side. The choice and type of device to achieve lung separation depend on the patient's anatomy, the procedure, and the operator's preference.

**Double-Lumen Tubes**: The most common design of the DLT used in the current practice of thoracic anesthesia is the Robertshaw design or disposable polyvinyl chloride (PVC). The Robertshaw design or PVC is available in left- and right-sided types and in varying sizes from 26 Fr to 41 Fr. The size denotes the external diameter of the tube in cm. The Robertshaw design of the DLT comprises 2 semicircles placed back to back to form 2 independent lumens that can be ventilated independently.

The lumens have different openings depending on which side of the DLT is present. The right-sided DLT has a curve to the right, and the left-sided DLT has a curve to the left. The DLT cuffs are high-volume and low-pressure cuffs.

**Connector:**The connector is an essential component of the DLT as it allows the user to selectively block either the lumen or ventilate bilaterally. The connector piece is composed of a Y-shaped piece with 2 openings—one each for the connection to the bronchial and tracheal lumen and a common portion that fits into the anesthesia circuit.

The connector usually has tracheal and bronchial lumen parts of different colors for ease of use. Manufacturers universally use the blue color to denote the endobronchial-lumen cuff. The cuffs are colored similarly to the connector tubes to maintain uniformity in identification. This safety mechanism ensures lung collapse and ventilation on the correct side, achieved by clamping the side on which the lung needs to collapse temporarily.

**Bronchial Blockers:**Bronchial blockers achieve single-lung ventilation by blocking either the left or right primary bronchus. Several manufacturers produce bronchial blockers with different designs. However, they have a simple design with an inflatable low-pressure, high-volume cuff at the end of a catheter.

The advantages of a bronchial blocker over a DLT include the ability to place through an existing endotracheal tube, to use in patients with airway trauma, and to perform selective lobar blockade if needed. Bronchial blockers are not without their disadvantages. They require a minimum of 7.5 endotracheal tubes in place for introduction into the airway. They allow the slower collapse of the lung. Owing to the variable take-off of the right upper lobe, bronchial blockers are often difficult to position to seal off the right upper lobe. They are also much more prone to dislodgement when compared to DLT.

**Fiber-optic Bronchoscope:**A fiber-optic scope is mandatory when placing a DLT because accurate positioning is essential to achieve a good seal and lung isolation. To avoid malpositioned tubes, the tube position is checked after the patient is in the final position for the procedure.

**Endobronchial Tubes:**Endotracheal tubes may be placed to provide single-sided ventilation. The major disadvantage of using these is the inability to access the nonintubated lung. Endobronchial tubes are preferred in specific clinical scenarios to a DLT, such as for patients with previous neck or oral surgery who present with a difficult airway and require adequate lung separation.

The placement of a DLT is more challenging than an endobronchial SLT. DLT placement has a higher chance of airway injury and bleeding. Endobronchial tubes may be mandatory in patients requiring lung isolation who have a short- or long-term tracheostomy present before the procedure.