The presentation of arteriovenous fistulas can vary depending on the location and etiology. Patients with an AVF for hemodialysis will present with evidence of a surgical incision on the lateral wrist, volar forearm, or upper arm. A working AVF will have a palpable thrill and continuous bruit. A patient with an AVF with an outflow obstruction may present with a pulsatile fistula or prolonged bleeding from a puncture site from hemodialysis. Superficial fistulas have a palpable thrill, a bruit, or even a pulsatile mass. It may be possible to auscultate a machinery-like murmur over the fistula.

Fistulas of the extremities, regardless of etiology, may present with signs of venous hypertension, including varicosities, pain, and swelling. If there has been a long-standing fistula, there may be a significant size discrepancy between the two limbs. If the patient reports a history of trauma, anywhere from weeks to years after injury, in particular with long bone fractures or ongoing neurologic deficits, the index of suspicion for AVF should be raised even in the event of a clinically normal exam.

Patients with congenital AVF may not present until later in life, and a history of trauma should be ruled out. Depending upon location, these fistulas may be low-flow at birth and become high-flow lesions in adulthood. Patients with brain arteriovenous malformations can present with headaches, neurologic deficits, seizures, or a combination. These patients can also be at risk for hemorrhage or ischemia to the parenchyma surrounding the AVM/AVF due to steal syndrome.

In severe, chronic, or high flow fistulas, patients can present in high output cardiac failure, which results in shunting of oxygenated blood back to the right heart. Due to the shortcut that the arterial blood takes through the venous system, this results in decreased peripheral resistance. In order to maintain blood pressure, the total circulating blood volume is increased, leading to heart failure. The Nicoladoni-Israel-Branham sign is a finding of reflex bradycardia with compression of the fistula due to increased afterload.

Cutaneous AVFs can present with a pink stain, a mass, dilated veins, unequal limb size, or skin ulceration. Patients may feel limb heaviness that aggravates with dependency and relieves with elevation. Almost one-half of patients experience pain.

On examination, there could be an increase in the size of the limb, swelling, discoloration, or prominent vessels with a murmur or palpable thrill. The lesions may also be pulsatile. Over the lesion, there could be hyperhidrosis, hyperthermia, hypertrichosis, or a bruit. Limbs and joints may be functionally impaired from mass effect or necrosis from prolonged tissue ischemia. Visceral AVFs can present with hematemesis, hematuria, hemoptysis, or melena. Occasionally patients may have an initial presentation of heart failure particularly in cases where the fistula is between a very large artery and vein.