**Laboratory Evaluation**

Marked elevation in acute phase reactants is the hallmark of giant cell arteritis. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is usually elevated, although normal ESR has been reported in biopsy-confirmed cases of GCA. In steroid-naive patients with biopsy-confirmed GCA, 90% of patients have ESR greater than 50 mm/hr, up to 10% of patients can have ESR less than 50 mm/hr, and only 3.6% of patients have ESR less than 30 mm/hr.

Complete blood counts may be normal or may initially show normocytic normochromic anemia and/or thrombocytosis. Serum albumin levels can be low, and elevated alkaline phosphatase can be present. Autoantibodies such as antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and ANCAs are negative.

**Histopathological Confirmation**

There is no specific serological or laboratory marker for diagnosis of GCA, and temporal artery biopsy is the "gold-standard" diagnostic test for GCA and must always be performed when clinical suspicion exists. When performed correctly and timely, temporal artery biopsy has a very high yield with a sensitivity of 90 to 95%. Only 5 to 10% of patients with negative bilateral temporal artery biopsy are later proven to have GCA and usually are cases with extra-cranial involvement such as aortitis.

**Timing of Biopsy**

Biopsy shall be performed earliest possible after suspicion of GCA has been raised. However, given the risk of irreversible visual loss, treatment with corticosteroids shall not be delayed in cases with high clinical suspicion. The yield of biopsy is still very high until 2 weeks after initiation of corticosteroids. In such cases, after prompt initiation of corticosteroids, temporal artery biopsy shall be performed within 2 weeks.

**Procedural Considerations**

In patients with headaches, the biopsy shall be performed first on the symptomatic side. The frozen section of the specimen can then be evaluated immediately evaluated, and if positive, no further biopsy is indicated. In cases with negative unilateral biopsy frozen section, the contralateral side shall be biopsied. The second biopsy can increase the yield by 5 to 14%.

**Biopsy Interpretation**

As mentioned above, negative bilateral temporal artery biopsy is very rarely associated with GCA when performed accurately and promptly. If suspicion still exists, further imaging studies such as angiography and evaluation of extracranial vasculitis are options. The absence of giant cells can be seen in up to 50% of cases of GCA and therefore does not exclude this diagnosis. More sensitive pathology features include lymphocytic and macrophage infiltration, disruption of the internal elastic lamina, luminal narrowing, and intimal proliferation. The presence of fibrinoid necrosis shall prompt a search for alternate diagnoses such as ANCA-associated vasculitis.

**Imaging**

Imaging of blood vessels has gained importance, especially in patients with extracranial GCA, 50% of whom can have negative temporal artery biopsies. Several imaging modalities have been utilized, including conventional angiography, computed tomography angiography (CTA), and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). Evaluation of the aorta and its branches, including the subclavian, axillary, vertebral, and carotid arteries, shall be pursued. Typical imaging findings are long-segment luminal narrowing with smooth tapering at the ends.

Color doppler ultrasonography is an evolving modality given the ease of performing and lack of radiation exposure. However, it is heavily user-dependant, and there is a lack of expertise in physicians to perform this test at most centers. The classic "hao sign" reveals a dark halo around the temporal artery lumen and has a sensitivity of 69% and specificity of 82%.

The utility of other imaging modalities such as MRI with vessel wall enhancement and FDG-PET is debatable but can be considered in rare cases with strong clinical suspicion and negative temporal artery biopsy.

**Classification Criteria**

The American College of Rheumatology (ACR) has developed a set of criteria for diagnosing temporal arteritis.

- Age greater than or equal to 50 at the onset of symptoms

- New headache

- Temporal artery abnormalities such as tenderness of the superficial artery or decreased pulsation

- ESR greater than or equal to 50 mm/hr

- Abnormal artery biopsy, including vasculitis, a predominance of mononuclear cell infiltration or granulomatous inflammation, or multinucleated giant cells.

It must be noted that while these criteria can help diagnose GCA, they are developed for research purposes, and a clinical diagnosis of GCA shall not be made or excluded solely based on these criteria.