Patients with pneumothorax can be either asymptomatic or symptomatic. In a small pneumothorax, many patients may present without symptoms. However, tension pneumothorax is typically symptomatic, and its features are more impressive than spontaneous pneumothorax. Occasionally, it can have a subtle presentation too.

Symptomatic patients will present with sharp pleuritic pain that can radiate to the ipsilateral back or shoulder. The severely symptomatic patients will present with shortness of breath. Upon history taking, it is essential to note whether the patient previously had a pneumothorax, as recurrence is seen in more than 15% of cases on either the ipsilateral or contralateral side.

On examination, it is essential to assess for signs of respiratory distress, including increased respiratory rate, dyspnea, and retractions. On lung auscultation, decreased or absent breath sounds on the ipsilateral side, reduced tactile fremitus, hyper-resonant percussion sounds, and possible asymmetrical lung expansion are suggestive of pneumothorax. With tension pneumothorax, patients will have signs of hemodynamic instability with hypotension and tachycardia. Cyanosis and jugular venous distension can also be present. In severe cases, or if the diagnosis was missed, patients could develop acute respiratory failure and possibly cardiac arrest. In some instances, subcutaneous emphysema can also be seen. The diagnosis of tension pneumothorax must be made immediately through clinical assessment as waiting for imaging, if not readily available, may delay management and increase mortality.