Management of HNC SCC is subdivided based on the anatomic region of the primary tumor:

- Nasopharynx

- Larynx

- Hypopharynx

- Oral cavity

- Oropharynx

- Nasal cavity

- Paranasal sinuses

Because each of these different anatomic locations has its own physiologic function(s) and approaches to surgical revision, each location has one or more unique treatment pathways. Lymphatic spread of HNC usually follows a certain pattern that depends on the primary HNC site.

The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (AAO-HNS) classify neck lymph nodes using seven ‘levels.’  This anatomic classification has remained stable since the 1990s, is important for use in PET-CT reports to enable consistency in communication, and is widely published and can be obtained elsewhere. The staging of HNC, which affects the recommended treatment options, depends on which lymph nodes are involved. Therefore, the physician interpreting PET-CT should attempt to define the primary tumor site and describe lymph node involvement or lack thereof using the AJCC/AAO-HNS lymph node anatomic classification.

The FDA-approved clinical application of PET for HNC uses a radioisotope of fluorine. The unstable isotope has 9 neutrons and 9 protons for an atomic mass of around 18 (18-F) instead of stable fluorine’s normal atomic mass of around 19. The 18-F atom is chemically bonded to a glucose molecule to substitute for an oxygen atom (deoxyglucose or DG). 18-FDG can be injected into patients with no adverse biological side effects and, as with normal glucose, localizes to hypermetabolic cells that use glucose for energy, such as cancer cells. 18-FDG undergoes normal cell membrane transport. Like glucose, 18-FDG is quickly phosphorylated upon entering a cell, which prevents its transport back out of the cell. Cells are not able to use phosphorylated 18-FDG for glycolysis or the electron transport chain, which delays molecular metabolism for several hours and allows enough time for imaging without concerns for image interpretation interference due to molecule breakdown or redistribution.

Normal tissues that conduct cell membrane transport of 18-FDG at high rates include: left ventricular myocardium, brain, gastrointestinal tract mucosa, and kidney tubules. In addition, brown fat, skeletal muscle, and breast ducts undergoing normal physiologic activity can also concentrate 18-FDG. If other tissue takes up 18-FDG, then it can be assumed that the tissue is undergoing a pathologic process, such as benign or malignant tumor growth, infection (e.g., abscess), or another type of inflammation (e.g., arterial wall atherosclerosis).

The degree of 18-FDG cellular uptake can be quantified and assigned a standard uptake value (SUV) value. The SUV represents a relative (not absolute) amount of 18-FDG uptake compared to background radiation. SUV is calculated by computer software based on values (body mass, 18-F dose, dose-to-scan time) recorded in the software at the time of the scan. SUVs vary due to scanner parameter calibrations, partial volume effects (i.e., SUV becomes less accurate with smaller lesions), and patients' rate of glucose metabolism (which depends on many factors such as blood glucose level). Therefore, despite the name including the word “standardized,” there is no standard value available to determine the normal range of 18-FDG uptake across a patient population for any given cancer or other inflammatory condition. SUVs also vary depending on the organ and physiology of the particular cancer involved. Thus, determining what SUV should be used as a threshold between ‘normal’ and ‘abnormal’ or between benign tumor cell activity and malignant tumor cell activity remains a subjective process that leads to false positive and false negative scan interpretations.