Health professionals should coordinate care in an interprofessional approach to evaluate and treat women with abnormal uterine bleeding. Nurses and physicians in primary care, such as family medicine and internal medicine, might be the first to discover AUB and should consult with obstetrics and gynecology early on. Patients should be informed of all of their options for control of AUB based on etiology. A detailed discussion concerning the desire for fertility, medical versus surgical management, and prognosis should be conducted. Physicians and pharmacists should educate patients concerning any possible side effects of medical management.

The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) has published a summary of recommendations and conclusions concerning abnormal uterine bleeding.

Level A Recommendations (Level I evidence or consistent findings from multiple studies of levels II, III, or IV):

- Sonohysterography is superior to transvaginal ultrasound in detecting intracavitary lesions, such as polyps or submucosal leiomyomas.

- For all adolescents with heavy menstrual bleeding and adults with a positive screening history for a bleeding disorder, lab tests should be performed, including a CBC with platelets, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time; bleeding time is neither sensitive nor specific and is not indicated.

Level B Recommendations (Levels II, III, IV evidence and findings are generally consistent):

- Testing for Chlamydia trachomatis should be considered in patients at high risk of infection.

- Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism are associated with AUB. Screening for thyroid disease with TSH in women with AUB is reasonable and inexpensive.

Level C Recommendations (Levels II, III, or IV evidence, but findings are inconsistent):

- Endometrial sampling should be performed in patients with AUB older than 45 years as a first-line test.

- The ACOG supports adopting the PALM-COEIN nomenclature system developed by FIGO to standardize the terminology used to describe AUB.

- Some experts recommend transvaginal ultrasound as the initial screening test for AUB and MRI as second-line options when the diagnosis is inconclusive. Further delineation would affect patient management, or coexisting uterine myomas are suspected.

- MRI may be useful to guide the treatment of myomas, particularly when the uterus is enlarged, contains multiple myomas, or precise myoma mapping is clinically important. However, the benefits and costs must be weighed when considering its use.

- Persistent bleeding with a previous benign pathology, such as proliferative endometrium, usually requires further testing to rule out nonfocal endometrial pathology or a structural pathology, such as a polyp or leiomyoma.