Across all three types of muscles, the individual muscle fibers are structured in parallel lines to allow for contraction, discussed in the function section.

Skeletal striated muscles attach to a bone through dense connective tissue called the tendon. The most superficial layer of a muscle is the epimysium which wraps together numerous fascicles wrapped with perimysium. Inside each fascicle are the individual muscle fibers wrapped around endomysium. Within the muscle fibers is where the functional unit of the fiber exists: the sarcomere. The sarcomere is where contraction occurs on the cellular level; all other layers are present to help facilitate tracking of these fibers.

The sarcomere appears as a net of parallel lines. The lateral boundaries of each net, or sarcomere, are the Z-discs. The Z-discs anchor one set of parallel lines called the thin filaments. Running from the opposite direction is the other set of lines is called the thick filaments, which are between the thin filaments. This overlap between the thin and thick filaments is the base of muscle physiology. The more the two filaments overlap, the more the muscle is contracted.

Smooth muscle lacks the striations skeletal muscle has and instead has a fusiform shape. Cardiac muscle is more structurally similar to skeletal muscle in that its striated and has sarcomeres. However, due to its automaticity and need to be synchronized, cardiac muscle cells have a feature called intercalated discs which facilitate the cells to be electrically coupled.