Treatment of cystocele is only suggested for women who report symptomatic anterior wall prolapse.

Broadly, management of the condition can be divided into expectant, conservative, and surgical. All the options should be offered to the patient and thoroughly discussed as part of a treatment plan. Better outcomes are noted if surgical objectives and the patient's expectations are discussed before treatment.

Cystocele management requires careful consideration of several factors such as a women's age, physical & sexual activity, future reproductive wishes, the nature and extent of the symptoms, the degree of the prolapse, associated uterine, or posterior wall prolapse, and incontinence symptoms. It also depends on surgical expertise & previous management outcomes.

**Expectant Management**

A ‘watch and wait’ approach may be a good option for a patient who is asymptomatic with low-grade cystoceles or for those who are able to tolerate mild symptoms. Some patients may not wish to have treatment for various reasons. In this case, high-grade cystoceles will require frequent assessments of their symptoms to ensure there are no complications or changes in symptom burden.

**Conservative Management**

There are two main types of conservative management, vaginal pessaries, and pelvic muscle exercises.  The benefit of conservative management is that it does not impose operative risks, such as infection, bleeding, pain, or a failed procedure, or anesthetic risk in a high-risk patient with co-morbidities.

Vaginal pessaries are the most popular conservative management option. Pessaries are plastic or silicone devices that are inserted into the apex of the vagina. They lift and support the vaginal walls, reducing the symptoms of pelvic organ prolapse. They are contraindicated with acute infection of the vagina or pelvis, in those who have allergies to pessary materials and in non-compliant women.

Kegel exercises (pelvic muscle exercises) can be advised for women with stage 1 or 2 prolapse. It is found that these exercises improve prolapses by 1-2 cm on average. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the effectiveness of Pelvic Floor Muscle Therapy (PFMT) showed that women involved in pelvic muscle training showed better outcomes regarding symptoms and reduction of the size of the prolapse compared to control groups.

Hormone Replacement Therapy is not a treatment for cystocele. There is no evidence that estrogen's topical or systemic use reduces the size of cystocele; the creams or estrogen-containing vaginal pessaries can still be used for women with cystocele for treating signs of vaginal atrophy, which may occur concurrently.

It is essential to encourage the patient to work on modifiable risk factors, such as a high BMI (>30), smoking, heavy lifting, chronic cough, or constipation.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical management is the next step for symptomatic women, those who require immediate relief, those who have declined conservative treatment, or for whom the conservative approach has failed to provide benefit. It should be noted that surgical management should follow the completion of the patient’s family as the pelvic support system can be further damaged during labor.

Surgical planning depends on whether the anterior vaginal prolapse is isolated or is combined with apical or posterior vaginal prolapse. A careful examination is required as a part of preoperative planning.

Anterior colporrhaphy

Anterior repair is performed trans-vaginally to repair central vaginal wall defects and to lessen the size of the anterior vaginal wall.

For this procedure, a patient is placed in the lithotomy position and catheterized; a Sims speculum is inserted to achieve a better view of the defect. An Allis forceps are placed at the midline of the anterior wall 1cm proximal to the urethra and two more forceps on each side next to the cervix or the vaginal cuff. Local infiltration with an adrenaline/lidocaine solution is commonly used to achieve hydro-dissection, analgesia, and to minimize intraoperative bleeding. With the use of Metzenbaum scissors, dissection of vaginal mucosa from the underlying vesicovaginal fascia is performed. When the mucosal layer is entirely free, a folding of the muscular layer and adventitia using figure-of-eight sutures is performed. Careful placement of the sutures is crucial in order not to damage the bladder.

2-0 Vicryl or PDS sutures are most often used. After successful plication, the excessive vaginal mucosa is removed, and the wound is closed with absorbable sutures.  The surgeon should be careful not to reduce the diameter of the vagina too much, as later it may cause pain during sexual intercourse. One study has reported the success rate of surgical approach ranging from 63% to 76.5%, depending on the procedure followed.

Sacral Colpopexy

The other way to repair a bladder prolapse is to perform a sacral colpopexy, which is usually done laparoscopically. This procedure aims to place a permanent mesh to the anterior and posterior walls of the vagina and then attach it to the anterior longitudinal ligament below the sacral promontory. The operation can be performed together with anterior colporrhaphy or on its own. The benefit of sacral colpopexy is that it avoids vaginal incisions and scarring, which results in a lower risk of vaginal shortening or dyspareunia. The success rate of this procedure is 60% to 89%.

In many countries, including the US and the UK, the use of mesh for cystocele repairs has been suspended since 2019, pending an investigation into their use.