Treatment of hyperesthesia and other neuropathic pain symptoms is challenging but is best achieved by using a multidisciplinary team approach that can focus on treating underlying causes, administering pharmacotherapy, applying interventional therapy, addressing functional impairments, and providing mental health services if needed.

For peripheral neuropathy, the most common treatable causes are diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and nutritional deficiencies.

Pharmacological treatments can be used to treat both central and peripheral causes of hyperesthesia. Of the pharmacological options available, antidepressants and antiepileptic drugs are the most widely used.

**First-line drugs:**These drugs have the most substantial evidence to support their treatment of neuropathic pain symptoms. This group contains two classes of antidepressants and one class of antiepileptic drugs.

- Antidepressants: all medications in this class have the added benefit of treating comorbid mood disorders.

- 
              
- TCAs: amitriptyline, imipramine, and nortriptyline
              
              
- 
                  
- Indications: painful diabetic neuropathy (PDN), postherpetic neuralgia (PHN), central poststroke pain (CPSP)
                  
                

              
              
- SNRIs: duloxetine and venlafaxine
              
              
- 
                  
- Indications: PDN, post-traumatic neuropathic pain, CRPS, radiculopathy, and central pain

- Antiepileptic drugs:

- 
              
- Gabapentinoids: Gabapentin and pregabalin
              
              
- 
                  
- Indications: PDN, PHN, central pain, posttraumatic neuropathic pain, CRPS, radiculopathy. Pregabalin has proven to be effective in the treatment of spinal cord injury central pain.

**Second-line treatments:**

- Topicals

- 
              
- Lidocaine 5% patch
              
              
- Capsaicin 8% patch: should ideally be applied by specially trained healthcare providers, as it requires pretreatment with topical lidocaine. May require postprocedural analgesics for 7-10 days. Relief may last up to 3 months. 
              
              
- 
                  
- Indications: PHN and HIV-associated neuropathy

- Analgesic

- 
              
- Tramadol: Nonspecific analgesic, Mu-opioid receptor agonist but also blocks serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake.

**Third-line treatments:**

- Strong Opioids

- 
              
- Indications: Phantom pain, CRPS, central pain, PHN, and PDN

- Botulinum toxin-A

- 
              
- Indications: PHN

Not all patients will respond to monotherapy; in fact, 45% of individuals with neuropathic pain are on two or more medications for their pain. If a patient fails first-line monotherapy, they can be used in combination (i.e., gabapentinoid + TCA or SNRI).

**Interventional Therapies:**

- Epidural steroid injections: considered third-line therapy.

- 
              
- Indications: Radiculopathies

- Sympathetic nerve block

- 
              
- Indications: CRPS patients who have failed other treatments.

- Neurostimulation: Fourth-line treatment

- 
              
- Spinal cord stimulation:
              
              
- 
                  
- Indications: CRPS and failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS)
                  
                

              
              
- Motor cortex stimulation:
              
              
- 
                  
- Indication: CPSP and facial pain

- Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)

Some interventional treatments currently being practiced lack robust trials to be recommended by the guidelines. Some of the interventions that require continued research are radiofrequency denervation of the dorsal root ganglion, adhesiolysis for FBSS, TENS, spinal cord stimulation, and motor cortex stimulation.