Addiction is a subset of opioid use disorder and is present in the most severe form. Addiction is continued drug use despite adverse consequences or events. Addiction to opioids occurs by sensitizing the drug reward system and amplifying compulsive drug-seeking. Primarily the effects of chronic opioids are in the orbitofrontal area, which is essential for regulating anxiety, emotional responses, and reward-related behaviors. The socioeconomic impact of opioid use disorder affects every aspect of a patient's life. Legal action, loss of impact, personal relationships, and significant morbidity and mortality are all consequences of long-term opioid use.

Dependence is associated with withdrawal syndrome that occurs upon cessation of repeated exposure to a drug stimulus. Providers must advise patients not to stop chronic opioids without tapering their medication dosage. Dependence is also a subset of a substance use disorder, manifesting as physical or psychological dependence or both. Opioid withdrawal onset varies with the type of opioid used but correlates with dependence. Withdrawal is a significant complication associated with opioid use disorder. Heroin withdrawal begins in as little as five hours, whereas methadone may be two to three days following the last dosage. Withdrawal symptoms may last days to weeks known as protracted abstinence syndrome.

The side effects of naltrexone include gastrointestinal upset, fatigue, and insomnia, as well as elevated levels on liver-function tests at higher doses. However, naltrexone is relatively safe in persons who consume large amounts of alcohol and those with hepatitis C or HIV infection.

If the methadone dosage increases too quickly during opioid replacement, it is associated with cardiac arrhythmias, including prolonged QT syndrome.

The mortality rate of patients on chronic opioids is ten times as high as the average population.