History and physical examination are paramount to assess Graves orbitopathy.

On physical examination, the first step is to inspect the eyes for proptosis and comment on whether it is symmetrical or asymmetrical and, if an exophthalmometer should make available, objective measures of the degree of proptosis. Also, evaluate for conjunctival injection, chemosis, and periorbital edema. Upper eyelid retraction (although not specific to Graves orbitopathy) is often present. After inspecting the eyes, then determine if the patient can fully close their eyes; this is very important as it may identify those at risk for corneal damage through exposure keratopathy. Next, test the extraocular muscles by asking the patient to look in all directions. This test will help elicit if the patient is experiencing pain in a particular direction of gaze or can fully move the eye in a specific direction, which will subsequently reveal any potential entrapment of an extraocular muscle. Lastly, testing both visual acuity and color vision should be included as part of the comprehensive examination.

There is a multitude of eponymous signs to be cognizant of on physical examination. Some of these include hyperpigmentation of the superior fold of the eyelid (Jellinek's sign), hyperpigmentation of the inferior eyelid (Tella's sign), and fine tremors of the eyelids when closed (Rosenbach's sign). When looking at a close object, one notices the lack of convergence (Moebius' sign); on fundoscopic examination, the retinal arteries can sometimes be seen to be pulsating (Beck's sign). When placing a stethoscope over the closed eyelid, one can sometimes hear a systolic murmur (Snellen-Rieseman's sign).