Clinicians should employ ATLS guidelines to manage patients with acute sternal fractures. After the patient's airway, breathing, and circulation have undergone evaluation, a primary survey assessing any life-threatening conditions should follow. The clinician should identify and treat any associated injury such as tension pneumothorax, hemothorax, cardiac tamponade, and flail chest. Upon stabilization, a secondary survey should take place. Rib fractures, pulmonary contusions, and blunt myocardial injury are among the many chest injuries associated with sternal fractures, which are manageable at this stage.

Electrocardiography and cardiac monitoring are necessary for patients with sternal fractures. Patients with signs of myocardial contusion require admission for further evaluation and management. Patients with associated intrathoracic injuries, hemodynamically instability, or uncontrolled pain should also be admitted for observation. It is also recommended that elderly patients receive close observation as these patients are at higher risk for respiratory issues.

Adequate analgesia is the mainstay of treatment for isolated sternal fractures. Admission for isolated sternal fractures is generally unnecessary, provided there are no identified concerns during the clinical evaluation. Patients should follow up with their primary care physician within the first 24 hours. Deep breathing exercises can help patients to avoid pulmonary complications during recovery.

For significantly displaced or unstable fractures, operative fixation may be necessary. Most isolated sternal fractures, however, will heal spontaneously over the average course of 10 weeks.