Treatment should be tailored to lower the serum calcium levels to treat the patient’s symptoms and target the underlying cause. The serum phosphorus levels need to be monitored and repleted, as hypophosphatemia is usually associated with hypercalcemia, increasing the difficulty in treating hypercalcemia. If the patient is not symptomatic, mild or moderate hypercalcemia does not require immediate therapy, but managing the underlying cause is necessary. Patients should be educated about diet, medications, and avoiding dehydration and physical inactivity. Symptomatic patients with severe hypercalcemia need emergent treatment.

Initial treatment includes intravenous (IV) normal saline (NS) along with calcitonin and bisphosphonates. NS acts immediately, and its effect lasts until the fluids are discontinued. The calcitonin acts within 4 to 6 hours and lasts for about two days, whereas the bisphosphonates exhibit their action in 2 to 3 days, and their effect lasts for 2 to 4 weeks. This approach is tailored to lower the serum calcium levels as well as maintain them within normal limits for as long as possible while the primary cause of the problem is being worked up and treated.

IV hydration with NS at the rate of 200 to 300 mL/hr is given to maintain an adequate urine output of more than 100 mL/hr, thus restoring intravascular volume and increasing urinary calcium excretion. IV hydration should be given cautiously to patients with heart or renal failure. Loop diuretics, which help promote urinary calcium excretion by inhibiting calcium reabsorption at the loop of Henle, should be given only after achieving adequate IV resuscitation.

Calcitonin (at a dose of 4 international units/kg) should be administered along with NS infusion to help prevent bone resorption and increase urinary calcium excretion. It is a very fast-acting medication, but its effect is limited.

Bisphosphonates, such as zoledronic acid (ZA) at a dose of 4mg IV over 15 to 30 minutes or pamidronate at a dose of 60 to 90 mg IV over 2 hours, are also recommended for patients without any kidney dysfunction. Zoledronic acid is preferred in hypercalcemia secondary to malignancy as it is more potent and can be given over a shorter course of time. Bisphosphonates are also given on a more regular basis to patients with bone metastases to prevent any skeletal complications. The main side effects of this category of drug therapy include osteonecrosis of the jaw and nephrotoxicity.

Denosumab acts by inhibiting RANKL and should be considered when there is no response to zoledronic acid or in patients with kidney impairment, as this drug is not cleared by the kidneys.

Glucocorticoid therapy should be considered in patients with increased 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D production, such as lymphomas or granulomatous diseases, as they decrease vitamin D production and calcium absorption from the intestines.

Calcimimetic agents, such as cinacalcet, are preferred in hemodialysis patients and hypercalcemia secondary to parathyroid cancer.

If all other strategies fail, then hemodialysis is done to treat the hypercalcemia. It should also be considered in patients with severe heart or renal failure who cannot tolerate adequate IV hydration.