an interprofessional approach to Raynaud phenomenon

Raynaud phenomenon is best managed with an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals. The key to improving the morbidity is education. Besides the physician, the nurse and the pharmacist are in a prime position to educate the patient about the hazards of smoking. In addition, patients have to be told to insulate their hands and fingers from the cold. The pharmacists must make sure that the patient is on no medication that can cause vasoconstriction of the blood vessels. When ulcers develop the patient should be told to seek medical help as soon as possible to avert gangrene. A wound care nurse should be consulted on educating the patient on the care of the wounds and the type of dressings to use. A dietary consult is recommended as there is some evidence that a diet rich in omega 3-fatty acids may be beneficial in preventing Raynaud phenomenon.

Outcomes

The prognosis for patients with primary Raynaud phenomenon in young people is good with little morbidity or mortality. However, if the patient does not change lifestyle or smokes, then ischemia may affect the distal tips of the fingers and lead to necrosis. There are reports that in the elderly population with Raynaud phenomenon, the risk of adverse cardiac events may be increased compared to the general population. For patients with secondary Raynaud phenomenon, the prognosis depends on the underlying disorder. In general, the quality of life for these patients is poor as they need to adopt a rigid lifestyle. Plus, many other secondary causes often have no cures and relapses are common.