It is worth noting that phenylephrine is often administered in a variety of hospital environments (ICU, operating room [OR], labor and delivery [L and D], emergency room [ER], among others) and may require the participation of various health care providers (pharmacists, nurses, PAs, NPs, CRNAs, and physicians) in its dilution and administration. Manufacturers most commonly provide intravenous phenylephrine in highly concentrated doses (10 mg/ml) that require dilution before administration. Phenylephrine is frequently associated with medication errors and can account to up to 10% of all errors in the perioperative setting. Because of this, pharmacists and nursing, in particular, must maintain an open line of communication to ensure proper dosing and administration.

All providers administering phenylephrine should familiarize themselves with the appropriate dilution.

If both pharmacists and nurses are familiar with the correct dosing and dilution, they can serve as a double backstop for the physician, and verify that dosing is appropriate. COmmunicaitonlines should be such that they are free to contact the ordering physician with any concerns.

It is important to remember that although "Rapid Response" and "Code Teams" likely reduce morbidity and mortality, they are composed of members of varying degrees of education and experience.

The basis of this information is a prospective observational study with intervention level II evidence. It does demonstrate that a collaborative interprofessional team approach is the best means by which to optimize therapy with phenylephrine and prevent medication errors. [Level V]