The genitourinary tract begins at the kidneys (Figure 1), a retroperitoneal organ located at T12-L3 whose primary function is to filter blood and secrete waste products as urine. Urine, produced in the glomeruli and modified in the tubules, eventually travels to the hilum of the kidney, which empties into the ureters. The ureters are 25 to 30 cm long muscular ducts that transport which urine to the bladder via peristaltic contractions. They travel down into the pelvis, crossing anteriorly to the common iliac artery (Figure 1). When the ureters reach the level of the ischial spine, they curve anteromedially to enter the bladder at an oblique angle. This angle prevents the backflow of urine by collapsing the ureters when the bladder fills.

The urinary bladder is a hollow, muscular organ composed of the detrusor muscle and lined with a specialized distensible epithelium urothelium (previously called the transitional epithelium). The interior of the empty bladder displays an undulating surface, except for a triangular-shaped region, the trigone, defined by the entrance of the left and right ureters and the internal urethral orifice. The trigone has stretch receptors for the sensation of bladder fullness.

The bladder is situated posterior to the pubic symphysis in the pelvic cavity. Between the bladder and the pubic bone is a potential space filled with fat called the pre-vesicle space or space of Retzius.

Sperm begins meiosis in the seminiferous tubules and travels through the rete testis, an anastomosing network located in the mediastinum testes, to the efferent ductules. The efferent ductules connect the rete testis to the epididymis, where the sperm matures. During ejaculation, mature sperm travel through the vas deferens, which ascends through the inguinal canal into the pelvic cavity, looping posterolaterally to the prostate.

The urethra consists of four segments named based on its location relative to other organs. The pre-prostatic portion of the urethra is between the prostate and the bladder. The prostatic urethra runs through the prostate. The membranous urethra is located in the deep perineal pouch, along with the bulbourethral gland and external urethral sphincter. Finally, the spongy urethra, surrounded by the corpus spongiosum muscle of the penis, is the last segment reached before expelling the fluid via the urinary meatus.

The prostate, a walnut-sized structure located between the bladder and penis, secretes an alkaline solution containing nutrients to mix with the incoming sperm and seminal fluid.

The internal urethral orifice has a smooth muscle sphincter, the internal urethral sphincter, that tonically contracts via the action of the sympathetic nervous system to control continence.