**1. Immunoglobulin replacement**

The mainstay of treatment is immunoglobulin replacement for those patients who have substantial impairments in its production (generally two standard deviations below the normal range for IgG) and a lack of response to protein and polysaccharide vaccines. Despite the high cost, immunoglobulin replacement can decrease the burden of recurrent infections and their complications.

Generally, after treating an active infection, therapy begins with adequate hydration. Subsequently, a slow infusion load of intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) must be administered until tolerance is appropriate, followed by maintenance doses.

In patients prone to reactions, diphenhydramine and acetaminophen (and sometimes hydrocortisone) can be premedication. The subcutaneous route is an optional alternative in maintenance therapy (normally, weekly, or every other week). The initial dose for IVIG is 300 to 600 mg/kg every three to four weeks.

The monitoring of IgG levels should take place every six months. Therefore, dosing adjustments may occur according to the patient's weight and IgG production.

**Adverse Reactions:**

Intravenous immune globulin adverse reactions can be seen in 20 to 50% of patients, most likely during the first infusion, but they depend on the dose, infusion rate, organ dysfunction, prothrombotic stimuli, and brand.

Subcutaneous immune globulin systemic adverse reactions are much lower than the first ones. Local reactions, such as pain and swelling are the most frequent ones.

- Inflammatory reactions can occur during IVIG administration. The management is generally symptomatic.

- Anaphylaxis is rare but may be life-threatening. The treatment basis is on common protocols (securing the airway, administration of epinephrine, oxygen, salbutamol, antihistamine agents, and glucocorticoids).

- Thromboembolic risk events (as myocardial infarction, stroke, and venous thromboembolism) can be diminished by adequate hydration, avoiding prolonged immobilization, spacing larger doses, slowing infusions.

- Headache is common and treatable with normal painkillers.

- Acute kidney injury risk can be minimized with adequate hydration and avoiding concentrated or sucrose-containing products in those with existing renal disease.

- Hemolytic anemia can occur due to passive antibodies in the IVIG product. Reactions can vary from a positive direct Coombs test, mild extravascular hemolysis, and infrequently, intravascular hemolysis.

- Neutropenia can occur but is normally mild and transient.

**2. Infections and antimicrobials**

Generally, active bacterial infections are treated with longer courses of antibiotics (sometimes 2 or 3 times longer).

Sputum examination or bronchoalveolar lavage is mandatory in all patients with sinopulmonary infections before antibiotic treatment.

Prophylactic antimicrobials are not a routine recommendation. However, exacerbation of sinopulmonary infections could be less frequent with the administration of 250 mg of azithromycin three times weekly in susceptible individuals who receive replacement therapy.

High-risk immunodeficient patients should be considered during seasonal influenza. Prophylactic treatment may include antiviral therapy.

**3.****Autoimmune disorders**

Glucocorticoids are the first-line treatment for immune thrombocytopenia and autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Higher doses are deliverable in patients that are currently on immune globulin replacement therapy.

Treatment for rheumatologic diseases is the same as for patients who are not immunocompromised, along with the addition of immunoglobulin replacement.

**4. Malignancies**

Treatment for malignancies has as its basis for general population protocols.

Unfortunately, there are no standardized monitoring protocols for cancer risk in these patients, therefore current recommendations of screening procedures must be age-appropriate, according to each country’s guidelines.

**5. Vaccinations**

Recommendations for vaccination is based on the antibody deficiency severity

- Routine schedule for inactivated or subunit vaccines in mild deficiency:

- DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus toxoid, acellular pertussis vaccine)
- HAV (Hepatitis A virus)
- HBV (hepatitis B virus)
- HIB (Haemophilus influenzae type B)
- HPV (human papillomavirus)
- Influenza
- Meningococcal
- Pneumococcal
- Polio (intramuscular)
- Anthrax
- JE (Japanese encephalitis)
- Typhoid (intramuscular).
- Rabies

- Routine schedule for inactivated or subunit vaccines in severe deficiency:

- HPV
- Influenza
- Anthrax
- Rabies

- Recommended administration of live-attenuated vaccines in mild deficiency (likely benefit but possible harm):

- MMR (measles-mumps-rubella)
- Rotavirus
- Varicella
- Herpes Zoster
- Smallpox (for pre-exposure)
- BCG (Bacille Calmette-Guerin)

- Live-attenuated vaccines are not recommended in severe deficiency.

**6. Other recommendations**

- Pulmonary diseases should be treated individually since there are no specific indications in CVID patients.

- Patients should no be given blood or blood components without testing for Cytomegalovirus.

- Regular dental care is mandatory. Prophylactic antibiotics are crucial before invasive dental procedures.

- Mental health following is crucial because patients are sometimes disintegrated from normal life activities.

- Audition care is essential given the fact that sensorineural loss frequently occurs probably because of recurrent bacterial otitis media, viral infections, periodic use of ototoxic antibiotics, and central nervous system infections.

- The patient's parents must receive genetic counseling about the possibility of future children with the same disease.