# Introduction

The two kidneys of the human body are typically drained of blood by a single vessel, the renal vein. Each renal vein courses through the abdominal cavity on either side of the body medially before reaching the inferior vena cava. Their paths parallel the trajectory of the renal arteries, and the left renal vein is longer than the right renal vein. There are many clinically significant anatomical variants of the course the renal veins may take and dissimilar distributions of the venous tributaries that drain into the renal veins. The renal veins are not symmetrical, as the left and right renal veins have considerably different paths as they travel away from the kidneys, draining the blood from each kidney as well as other organ systems, including the gonads, adrenal glands, and diaphragm. Owing to the increasing number of renal transplants, vascular surgeries, laparoscopic abdominal surgeries, and abdominal imaging being performed in the United States, having an understanding of the normal anatomic relationship of the renal vasculature and the prevalence of any possible variations is paramount.

# Structure and Function

In the fully developed human body, each kidney contains one renal vein and one renal artery.

Unlike the renal arterial system, the renal venous system has what anatomists refer to as a “free anastomosis” system in place. This system allows venous blood within the kidney to communicate and freely flow throughout all the segments of the kidney, allowing branches of the renal venous system to be severed or ligated without severely compromising the venous drainage of the renal parenchyma; this arrangement circumvents destruction of the renal tissue with the loss of minor branches of the renal venous system following injury.

The right renal vein is distinctly unlike the left renal vein. It begins anteriorly to the renal artery in the hilum of the kidney and courses medially toward the lateral aspect of the inferior vena cava. The right renal vein is typically about 2 to 2.5 cm in length and courses in an anterior-superior direction until it reaches the inferior vena cava. The right renal vein most commonly does not have extrarenal vessels join its course before it enters the inferior vena cava, unlike the left renal vein.

The left renal vein is typically 8.5 cm in length on average. It passes transversely toward the medial aspect of the inferior vena cava. Its course from the hilum of the left kidney to the inferior vena cava includes passing anteriorly to the aorta and inferiorly to the superior mesenteric artery close to each respective vessel. This anatomic relationship has important clinical implications, including whether or not the left or right kidney is preferable for transplantation. Owing to the longer length of the renal vein, it is commonly suggested that the left kidney be taken for transplant over the right kidney.

# Physiologic Variants

There are a plethora of case reports citing anomalous vasculature originating from the kidneys, with some vessels branching at wide angles, others bifurcating before reaching their destination, and others encircling structures found within the abdominal cavity

The normal anatomical arrangement of renal vessels should include only one vein and one artery. Both arise from the renal hilum and extend medially before reaching the inferior vena cava. In approximately 6% of patients, the right gonadal vein drains into the right renal vein before it enters the lateral aspect of the inferior vena cava, mirroring the normal anatomy of the left renal venous system. In about 31% of individuals, an accessory vein from the right adrenal gland drains into the right renal vein before it reaches the inferior vena cava. In about 3% of cases, the retroperitoneal venous vessels, such as lumbar or hemiazygos vessels, drain into the right renal vein before it enters the inferior vena cava.

The most common physiologic variant of the left renal vein is the “circumaortic left renal vein.” The circumaortic left renal vein is a variant that includes two branches of venous drainage from the left kidney. One branch courses anterior to the aorta, and one branch courses posterior to the aorta as they course toward the medial aspect of the inferior vena cava. Most of the time, the circumaortic branch begins as one renal vein at the hilum of the left kidney and then splits into the anterior and posterior branches; 25% of the time, a circumaortic left renal vein begins as two vessels at the hilum of the left kidney. In about 3% of the population, a retro-aortic left renal vein is present. This variant typically crosses posteriorly to the aorta and then drains into the inferior vena cava at a lower level than typical for anteriorly located left renal veins. A retro-aortic left renal vein has also rarely been known to drain into a common iliac vein instead of the inferior vena cava. About 25% of the time, there are no posterior tributaries of the left renal vein from the retroperitoneal space.

# Clinical Significance

The left renal vein transverses between the superior mesenteric artery and the aorta on its course toward the inferior vena cava. The superior mesenteric artery and the aorta typically form a 90-degree angle. However, specific anatomical variants of these arteries can reduce this angle. Constriction of the left renal vein between the superior mesenteric artery and the aorta leads to compression ischemia in a condition known as Nutcracker syndrome. The normal pressure gradient is 1 mmHg between the renal vein and the inferior vena cava. In Nutcracker syndrome, the pressure gradient can reach as high as 3 mmHg.

The blood supply from the left adrenal vein, left inferior phrenic vein, and left gonadal vein join the left renal vein at various sites along its trajectory before dumping into the inferior vena cava. These contributions may become clinically relevant when obstructed. Varicoceles in males can occur on the left side of the body owing to differences in venous drainage from the left and right gonadal veins. Because the left gonadal vein drains into the relatively high pressure left renal vein at an acute angle, impairment in blood flow due to impingement of the renal vein distally results in venous valve failure, leading to reflux of blood back into the gonadal vein. Venous engorgement transmits blood backward into the scrotum and causes varicocele. A classic example includes the extension of renal cell carcinoma into the renal vein, obstructing venous drainage from the left gonadal vein and causing a left-sided varicocele.