There are many emergent and non-emergent causes of eye redness. When considering a diagnosis of conjunctivitis, it is essential to rule out the emergent causes of vision loss. The differentials for conjunctivitis include:

- Glaucoma

- Iritis

- Keratitis

- Episcleritis

- Scleritis

- Pterygium

- Corneal ulcer

- Corneal abrasion

- Corneal foreign body

- Subconjunctival hemorrhage

- Blepharitis

- Hordeolum

- Chalazion

- Contact lens overwear

- Dry eye

Some signs and symptoms that point to diagnosis other than conjunctivitis include localized redness, redness that does not include the entire conjunctiva, ciliary flush, elevated intraocular pressure, vision loss, moderate to severe pain, hypopyon, hyphema, pupil asymmetry, decreased pupil response, and trouble opening the eye or keeping the eye open.

The clinician must not miss angle-closure glaucoma, iritis, infectious keratitis, corneal ulcer, foreign body, and scleritis, as they are sight-threatening and must have ophthalmologist management.

Compared to iritis, patients with infective keratitis will often complain of a foreign body sensation and trouble opening or keeping the eye open. These findings are symptoms consistent with corneal involvement and can present with other corneal disorders such as corneal ulcer, abrasion, or foreign body.

The final emergent condition not to miss is scleritis. Scleritis typically presents with severe pain radiating to the face that is worse in the morning and/or at night, associated with photophobia, pain with extraocular movement, tenderness to palpation, and scleral edema.

The remaining diagnoses are non-emergent. Pterygium and episcleritis are typically associated with localized redness, which differs from the diffuse redness seen in conjunctivitis. Blepharitis, contact overuse and dry eyes are similar in presentation to allergic conjunctivitis. All commonly present with a foreign body sensation, itching, or burning. History of contact use, lack of blinking, and allergies/atopy are important in differentiating contact lens overwear, dry eyes, and allergic conjunctivitis, respectively. Crusting of the eyelids and marked erythema, and edema of the eyelid margins are most consistent with blepharitis. Lastly, a subconjunctival hemorrhage is due to bleeding of conjunctival vessels and appears as blood in the subconjunctival space rather than the typical injection or vessel dilation seen in conjunctivitis.