Firm, dome-shaped papules present on the head and neck in several other syndromes. Multiple hamartoma syndromes (Cowden syndrome) presents with multiple trichilemmomas on the face, neck, and ears. It has an autosomal dominant inheritance and also is associated with oral papillomas, which create a cobblestone surface texture on the lips and mucosa. They also may have acral keratoses and cardiomegaly. Hornstein-Knickenberg syndrome (HKS) is in the differential diagnosis as well, which is also autosomal dominant and characterized by cutaneous, flesh-colored papules or perifollicular fibromas, but is further differentiated by a propensity for colonic neoplasms and polyps. Some experts also argue that perifollicular fibromas are the same lesions of BHDS but cut in different section planes and that HKS and BHDS are on the spectrum of disease.

Similarly, tuberous sclerosis and Brooke-Spiegler also can present with flesh-colored papules. Tuberous sclerosis, due to a defect in TSC-1 or TSC-2 gene, presents with angiofibroma, collagenomas, hypopigmented macules, and periungual fibromas. Angiofibromas also can occur in BHDS but are a less prominent feature. Additionally, they can have overlap features of fibrofolliculomas. Brooke-Spiegler syndrome results from a defect in the CYLD gene, and patients present with spiradenomas, trichoepitheliomas, and cylindromas. Trichoepitheliomas are firm, flesh-colored nodules that concentrate on the nasolabial folds, nose, upper lip, and scalp. Basaloid follicular hamartoma syndrome also presents with similar flesh-colored lesions; however, they gradually become pinker in color and plaque-like. Biopsy of the lesions and obtaining a thorough review of systems, past medical history, and family history often can provide clues to narrow the differential diagnosis of flesh-colored papules on the face.

Lung cysts and pneumothorax may also occur in lymphangioleiomyomatosis, emphysema, and pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Renal tumors are features of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and hereditary leiomyomatosis. Most pneumothoraces and renal carcinomas are sporadic.