**Surgery – Cervical Cancer**

Surgical resection is typically offered to patients with early-stage disease that is confined to the cervix. It can range from relatively noninvasive techniques such as cervical conization to radical hysterectomy. Surgery is the preferred treatment modality for early-stage cervical cancers, especially in younger patients where preservation of ovarian function and/or fertility is desired.

**Types of Surgery**

**Cervical Conization**

Cervical conization is typically indicated in patients with carcinoma in situ (CIS) disease or Stage IA1 invasive cervical cancer. It can be accomplished with a cold knife cone (CKC) which removes the transformation zone and a portion of the cervix with at least a 3mm margin. A scalpel or laser may be used for this procedure. Pathologic evaluation of the margins and the presence of lymphovascular invasion (LVI) is critical. If either of these features are present, then additional re-excision or more invasive surgical treatment may be required. If no LVI exists on the specimen, lymph node involvement is exceedingly rare, and therefore nodal evaluation is unnecessary. Patients without any adverse pathologic findings may be observed. Recurrence rates are typically <10% but they must be followed closely with periodic colposcopy and cytology. Five-year survival rates exceed 95%. Complications include hemorrhage, infection, infertility, cervical incompetence, and stenosis. The rate of complication ranges from 2-12%.

**Radical Trachelectomy**

Patients that are not candidates for conization due to adverse pathological features or more advanced disease but who desire fertility preservation can undergo a radical trachelectomy. The procedure consists of the removal of the majority of the cervix, resection of the parametria, and mobilization of the ureters, bladder, and rectum. A 5mm section of the cervix is preserved to allow for the placement of a cerclage to allow for future pregnancy. A lymph node evaluation with either a sentinel node biopsy or pelvic lymphadenectomy typically accompanies a radical trachelectomy due to the increased risk of nodal involvement. Adverse pathologic features such as positive margins, parametria involvement, and/or lymph node involvement or meeting Sedlis criteria would necessitate adjuvant treatment with radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy. A vaginal approach or laparotomy can be used but there is a lack of data on minimally invasive techniques. The 5-year recurrence rate is approximately 5% and an overall survival rate of 97%.

**Extrafascial hysterectomy**

Extrafascial hysterectomies, also known as Type A radical hysterectomies, have a narrow range of clinical indications.

**Radical Hysterectomy**

A Radical hysterectomy may be considered in almost all cases of early-stage cervical cancer when fertility preservation is not a priority. The older Piver-Rutledge-Smith classification has been replaced by the Querleu-Morrow system, which simplified the classification process based solely on the extent of lateral parametria resection.

**Lymph node evaluation**

The detection of lymph node involvement is essential as it yields important prognostic information and guides therapeutic decision-making. The decision to evaluate the lymph nodes should be guided by the risk of nodal involvement which is a function of the stage ( See Table Below). PA nodal risk is typically ½ the pelvic nodal risk by stage. While pelvic lymphadenectomies are considered the gold standard, sentinel node biopsies may also be pursued for selected early Stage I cervical cancer. Sentinel node biopsies are safe and feasible. They have been investigated in Stage IA1-IIA1 patients with a sensitivity of 92% and a 98.2% negative predictive value with less lymphatic morbidity and no differences in recurrence-free survival.

**Recurrent Disease**

**Pelvic Exenteration**

Pelvic exenteration is the most radical surgical procedure for cervical cancer. Indications are confined to patients with central pelvic recurrence after radiotherapy or Stage IVA patients that cannot receive radiotherapy. Classically, a total pelvic exenteration includes the removal of the uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, vagina, bladder, urethra, and rectum. Reconstruction consists of a double-barrel wet colostomy, ilial conduit, or continent diversion for the urinary system and a double-barrel wet colostomy or end colostomy for the GI system. Formation of a neovagina can be accomplished with a myocutaneuous flap or split-thickness skin graft with an omental J-flap. Variations of this technique include anterior and posterior exenteration which spare the rectum or the bladder respectively. Exenteration can be further classified into supra and infralevator depending on whether the urogenital diaphragm and levator muscles are removed. The posterior supralevator exenteration approach allows for the possibility of maintaining not only urinary function but fecal continence if a colonic anastomosis can be formed. The five-year survival rate for patients treated with exenteration range from 40-50% in the recurrent setting.

**Cervical Cancer in Pregnancy**

Cervical cancer is one of the most common malignancies discovered in pregnancy. The treatment of cervical cancer in pregnant patients has unique challenges in terms of staging and treatment. Regardless of their decision, patients should be evaluated by a maternal-fetal medicine specialist to aid discussion of risks to the fetus and potential pregnancy loss. Women must weigh the risk of delaying treatment until delivery or proceeding immediately.

The determination of gestational age is crucial. Minimum fetal viability is approximately 24 weeks gestation but there is a significant risk of neonatal death and long-term disability in those that survive. Disability-free survival at 25 years increases substantially with more advanced gestational age with 4% of infants born at 22 weeks versus 78% for those born at 28 weeks gestation.

While the radiation delivered during a PET/CT scan remains far below the threshold for the development of birth defects and loss of pregnancy, the use of ionizing radiation in imaging studies should be kept to a minimum in this population.

More invasive staging techniques may need to be employed. In patients with a high risk of nodal metastasis, laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy may be used in select patients to establish the stage.

Treatment strategies must be individualized and discussed in a multidisciplinary fashion with medical oncology, radiation oncology, OB-GYN, maternal-fetal medicine, and gynecologic oncology. In patients that wish to preserve their pregnancy and be treated, both the gestational age and the stage should first be established. In general, radiotherapy is contraindicated as the dose of ionizing radiation received will invariably lead to fetal demise or severe birth defects. While treatment approaches may vary, in general, those with gestational ages <22 weeks and Stage IA1 disease can be treated with conization but this carries a 15% risk of significant bleeding and spontaneous abortion. Gestational ages >22 weeks may be able to delay treatment until delivery if they have early-stage disease. Patients with more advanced disease (>IB1) may receive platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin/paclitaxel) until delivery followed by surgical resection. Limited data suggests this is a safe regimen for both mother and fetus.****

Immediate treatment is recommended in cases of documented lymph node metastasis, progression of the disease, or if the patient decides to terminate the pregnancy.

If the patient decides to terminate the pregnancy before treatment, then definitive treatment recommendations are the same as those of a non-pregnant patient.