Solitary TEs/TBs are benign and are cured with complete surgical excision. Multiple lesions, especially on the face (as seen with genetic syndromes), are more challenging to address. Mohs surgery may be warranted in centrofacial locations, especially in variants with deep dermal or subdermal infiltration.

Frequent facial surgery may be disfiguring (i.e., scarring) and cause significant distress. Furthermore, multiple TEs/TBs associated with underlying genetic familial syndromes may recur after surgery, leaving numerous scars and invasive treatments throughout a patient’s lifetime.

There is no universally accepted guideline or protocol for treating multiple TEs/TBs. Other than surgical excision, treatment options, such as electrosurgery, dermabrasion, cryotherapy, and radiation therapy, are limited and invasive. Moreover, radiation therapy is associated with an increased risk of other skin cancers. Besides scarring, pain, bleeding, infection, and lesion recurrence are additional risks of these and other invasive surgical therapies.

Laser treatments (such as carbon dioxide, erbium:YAG, and diode) may rapidly remove many lesions safely and effectively without lesion recurrence or causing cosmetic morbidity. Even though they may be minimally invasive, frequent treatments may result in hypertrophic scarring, post-inflammatory hypo- or hyper-pigmentation, and local skin-site inflammatory changes (e.g., edema, erythema, ulceration, burning).

Other pharmacologic agents may be considered, such as sirolimus, imiquimod, tretinoin, vismodegib, aspirin, and adalimumab. However, further clinical trials are warranted as current evidence for these and other medical therapies is anecdotal.