Esophagectomy with esophageal reconstruction is a large, complex operation. Complications after esophageal reconstruction are common. In a large systematic review with over 17,000 patients after esophagectomy, the overall morbidity was 50.8%, and mortality was 8.7%.

Procedure specific complications include anastomotic leak, conduit ischemia, or anastomotic stricture. The incidence of anastomotic leak after esophagectomy varies but is reported around 10%.

Patients with large undrained leaks or patients who become septic will likely need reoperation with thoracotomy for repair and drainage of the esophageal leak. If the esophageal conduit has large dehiscence, then the patient will need esophageal resection and diversion with a cervical esophagostomy and jejunostomy.

Conduit ischemia after esophagectomy is reported to be around 10%. Ischemia can be avoided by limiting hypotension and tension on the anastomosis. Ischemia can lead to anastomotic leakage and stricture. Anastomotic strictures occur in roughly 20-25% of patients. These strictures can be safely managed with serial dilation. Most strictures present within the first several months.

When using colonic interpositions for esophageal reconstruction, the most common late complication is colonic redundancy. This leads to mechanical dysfunction of the neo-conduit, causing disabling symptoms that may develop decades after the original surgery. When symptoms caused by food retention in the colonic loop occur, surgical correction may be necessary.