Localized Lyme disease is characterized by erythema migrans occurring 1 to 2 weeks after tick exposure in an endemic area. The differential diagnosis for early Lyme disease with erythema migrans includes other skin conditions such as tinea and nummular eczema. If not treated in the localized stage, patients may go on to develop early disseminated or late disease manifestations. Early neurologic Lyme disease manifestations include facial nerve (CN-VII) palsy, lymphocytic meningitis, or radiculopathy. Cardiac involvement includes myopericarditis and typically presents with heart block. Lyme arthritis is mono- or pauciarticular, generally involving large joints, most commonly the knee, and occurring months removed from the initial tick bite.

Because the symptoms are not very specific, one should consider other infections transmitted by ticks, like coinfection with Babesia microti and Ehrlichia. Co-infection has been reported in about 10% of patients.

Like syphilis, Lyme is classified into 3 stages: localized, disseminated, and persistent. The first two stages are part of early infection, and the third stage is part of persistent or chronic disease. Stage 3 usually occurs within 12 months of the infection.

Stage 1: Early localized disease that may present with erythema migrans and low-grade fever. This stage usually occurs within 1 to 28 days following the tick bite.

The classic rash is seen in 70% of patients and may develop between 5 to 7 days following the tick bite. The uniform rash usually occurs at the site of the tick bite and may burn, itch, or be asymptomatic. The rash tends to expand for a few days, and concentric rings may be visible. If left untreated, the rash persists for 2 to 3 weeks. About 20% may have recurrent episodes of the rash, and multiple lesions are not uncommon. At the same time, flu-like symptoms may be present. The fever is low-grade and may be associated with myalgia, neck stiffness, and headache. Visual problems include eye redness and tearing. About 30% of patients with the rash will have no further progression of symptoms.

Stage 2: Usually develops 3 to 12 weeks after the initial infection. Features may include general malaise, fever, neurological features (dizziness, headache), muscle pain, and cardiac symptoms (chest pain, palpitations, and dyspnea). Cranial neuropathy may present as diplopia. Eye pain and keratitis have also been reported. The knee, ankle, and wrist joints are often involved. These symptoms may last 12 to 20 weeks, but recurrence is rare. Often when a single joint is involved, it may be mistaken for septic arthritis. About 20% of patients have CNS involvement, including encephalopathy, meningitis, and cranial nerve neuropathy. Bell palsy is seen in about 5% of patients. When meningeal symptoms are present,  lumbar puncture is warranted to rule out other causes. Encephalopathy presents with deficits in concentration, cognition, memory loss, and changes in personality. Extreme irritability and depression are also common.

Borrelia lymphocytoma is a rare presentation of early Lyme disease that has been reported in Europe. It presents as a nodular red-bluish swelling that usually occurs on the ear lobe or areola of the nipple. The lesions can be painful to touch.

Stage 3: Late Lyme disease may occur many months or years after the initial infection. The typical features include neurological and rheumatological involvement. Many patients may not have a history of erythema migrans. However, these individuals may present with aseptic meningitis, Bell palsy, arthritis, or dysesthesias. Cognitive deficits are common. The key feature of late-stage Lyme is arthritis which tends to affect the knee. the neurological and psychiatric symptoms mimic fibromyalgia. Radicular pain is common. Borrelia encephalomyelitis is rare and can present with ataxia, seizures, hemiparesis, autonomic dysfunction, and hearing loss. Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans is typically seen in older women and tends to occur on the dorsum of the hands and feet.

Cardiac involvement may present with arrhythmias or transient heart block. Conduction abnormalities are not uncommon, but most cases are isolated and rarely last more than a few days. Rarely does a patient require permanent pacing