TEN is a clinical diagnosis that is confirmed by early histological analysis of the affected skin. Early skin biopsy confirms the diagnosis and guides the treatment plan.  A frozen section may be helpful to expedite the diagnosis. Histological evaluation of the skin biopsy should include immunofluorescent analysis to differentiate TEN from other dermatological diseases. There are no specific blood tests to diagnose TEN. However, a basic screen including (complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, coagulation studies, urea and electrolytes, and liver function) is essential to plan supportive treatment, detect organ failure, and assess the overall prognosis. Anemia and lymphopenia are common. However, the presence of neutropenia is an unfavorable prognostic factor.

Coagulation profile and blood count should be kept within the normal values, especially in patients with extensive mucosal affection, as this may put them at risk of severe bleeding, especially from the gastrointestinal system. Transfusion of blood or blood products may be considered in some cases.

Imaging studies are not essential for the diagnosis of TEN. However, it can be used to assess complications such as chest radiographs in cases of pulmonary affection. Another useful test is the patch test which may be helpful to identify the causative agent in around 50% of patients.

The score of TEN (SCORTEN scale) is a tool to assess the severity of illness and to predict mortality rate. It contains 7 independent variables assessed in the first 24 hours of presentation to the hospital, and it gives an indication of mortality rate. This includes the age of >40 years, heart rate of ≥120 beats per minute, presence of cancer or hematological malignancy, affected body surface area of ≥10% within the first day, serum BUN of >28 mg/dL, serum bicarbonate of <20 mEq/L, and serum glucose of >252 mg/dL.  According to these risk factors, a patient's mortality score can vary from 3.2% (if only one risk factor presents) to >90% (if 5 or more risk factors are present).

SCORTEN 0-1

SCORTEN 2

SCORTEN 3

SCORTEN 4