A potentially lethal dose of methanol is approximately 30 to 240 mL or 1 gram per kilogram. Permanent visual damage may occur with minimum ingestion of 30 mL of methanol. The parent compound, methanol, accounts for the increased osmolality. Unlike most other alcohols, methanol itself is not inebriating, and this may be related to its lower molecular weight. Formic acid is the primary toxic metabolite that accounts for the associated anion gap metabolic acidosis and end-organ damage. Therefore, as methanol is metabolized, the osmolar gap decreases, and the anion gap increases. The development of an anion gap metabolic acidosis associated with formate accumulation is multifactorial, due to the accumulation of organic acids that are not easily eliminated (for example, formic acid and formate), and the disruption of oxidative phosphorylation due to formate’s inhibition of cytochrome oxidase. Formate’s hindrance of mitochondrial respiration can also cause a degree of lactatemia, which can enhance formate’s ability to cross the blood-brain barrier as formic acid. Lactate is also elevated secondary to enhanced shunting of pyruvate to lactate from the increased NADH/NAD ratio associated with alcohol metabolism. End organ damage and retinal toxicity are primarily due to formic acid’s oxidative stress.  Also reported is parkinsonian-like symptomatology associated with observed basal ganglia lesions, particularly in the putamen and globus pallidus. This is potentially due to the parent compound, methanol.