After an incubation period of 1 to 3 weeks, pertussis infection typically progresses through three distinct stages: the catarrhal phase, the paroxysmal phase, and the convalescent phase.

The catarrhal phase presents similarly to other upper respiratory tract infections, with fever, fatigue, rhinorrhea, and conjunctival injection. The catarrhal phase lasts 1 to 2 weeks and is the most infectious stage of the disease.

The paroxysmal phase follows the catarrhal phase and is characterized by paroxysms of a staccato cough and the resolution of fever. The patient typically coughs repeatedly, followed by forceful inspiration, which creates the characteristic “whoop.” These episodes may be triggered by cold or noise and are more common at night. Patients are nontoxic-appearing in between paroxysms, but during coughing episodes, may exhibit cyanosis, diaphoresis, or apnea. Immediately following a paroxysm, patients may develop post-tussive emesis, syncope, or apnea.

Finally, during the convalescent phase, a residual cough persists for weeks to months, usually triggered by exposure to another upper respiratory infection or irritant.

Atypical presentations are common in infants, and fever may not occur. Rather, tachypnea, apnea, cyanosis, and episodic bradycardia may be the presenting features.

Increased intrathoracic pressure from coughing may result in petechiae above the nipple line, subconjunctival hemorrhage, and epistaxis.

Breath sounds are variable; auscultation may reveal clear lungs or rhonchi, while rales suggest superimposed pneumonia. The inspiratory whoop or gasp is usually heard in children between 6 months to 5 years.