Patients with fungal endophthalmitis should be promptly referred to a uveitis specialist after the disease is suspected or diagnosed. Mild cases that have flat choroidal lesions and minimal retinal or vitreous involvement can be managed with systemic antifungal therapy as the infection is predominantly outside the blood-retina barrier. Moderate or severe cases with raised retinal lesions and more significant involvement of the vitreous are best managed with combined intraocular and systemic antifungal therapies. Early vitrectomy decreases the incidence of late retinal detachment and is recommended in patients with severe vitreous involvement.

Because intraocular Candida infections are commonly part of a systemic infection, systemic antifungal therapy is mandatory. The agents must be able to cross the blood-retina barrier and achieve high ocular concentration, so fluconazole is the preferred agent.Candida endophthalmitis, particularly in patients with suspected or proven resistance to fluconazole including C. krusei, C. glabrata, and molds infection.Candida albicans species and molds.

Intravitreal therapy in fungal endophthalmitis relies on the use of intravitreal AMB or intravitreal voriconazole. While both are effective against fungal endophthalmitis, intravitreal voriconazole is associated with a lower risk of retinal toxicity, has a wider spectrum, and is currently the drug of choice.

The role of vitrectomy surgery to obtain a vitreous biopsy for diagnosis and for the treatment of complications of fungal endophthalmitis, such as persistent vitreous opacities and tractional retinal detachment, is well established. However, the therapeutic benefit of early vitrectomy to control inflammation remains unclear. According to a retrospective study of 44 eyes with endogenous Candida endophthalmitis by Sallam et al., early vitrectomy, within one week of presentation, did not significantly reduce the risk of profound visual loss (postoperative Snellen acuity of ≤ 20/200), yet it decreased the risk of retinal detachment by fivefold.