Clinically, LGV follows three stages. During the disease course, patients may have symptoms from initial infection, systemic dissemination, or the development of chronic inflammation. Symptoms vary depending on the stage at which a patient presents as well as the site of bacterial inoculation. (See Table 1)

**Primary lymphogranuloma venereum**

Primary LGV occurs following a 3 to 30 day incubation period, during which the first manifestations of the disease may become apparent. The resurgence of LGV has disproportionately affected men who have anal receptive intercourse. As such, the vast majority of new cases (approximately 96% in earlier estimates) present with signs and symptoms of proctitis.

**Secondary lymphogranuloma venereum**

Secondary LGV occurs 2 to 6 weeks after initial exposure to the pathogen as the pathogen invades the lymphatic system. In LGV proctocolitis, this manifests as an anorectal syndrome. Direct bacterial dissemination to the deep iliac and perirectal lymph nodes may cause lower abdominal and low back pain. Lymph node involvement is often less evident in this patient population as compared to genital LGV and may only present as local lymph node prominence on cross-sectional imaging.

Systemic spread via the lymphatic system can lead to the development of constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, generalized malaise, myalgias, arthralgias, pneumonitis, and hepatitis presenting with abnormal liver enzymes.

An inguinal syndrome may occur concurrently in some patients who have concurrently developed genital LGV. Classically, the inguinal syndrome was the first manifestation of disease in heterosexual males affected by genital LGV. The majority of cases would present with unilateral painful inguinal lymph node enlargement and abscess formation. The disease may be limited to isolated lymph nodes or groups of nodes which become involved and coalesce. A “bubo” forms as the nodes undergo necrosis, becoming purulent and fluctuant. One-third of “buboes” may rupture while the rest go on to develop into solid masses. This process may occur in the intra-abdominal, retroperitoneal, femoral, inguinal or cervical lymph node chains depending on site of inoculation.

**Tertiary lymphogranuloma venereum**

Tertiary LGV demonstrates progressive, local tissue destruction and chronic inflammation caused by ongoing, untreated infection. Chronic perirectal lymphatic obstruction can produce hemorrhoid-like swellings called “lymphorroids.” Fistulas, strictures, and stenosis may form as a result of chronic lymphangitis and progressive sclerosing fibrosis, closely mimicking inflammatory bowel disease. Patients with strictures as a result of persistent LGV proctitis can develop megacolon.