Congenital tracheobronchial anomalies such as tracheal bronchus should be a consideration in patients who present with recurrent respiratory infections, but they may also present as nonspecific pulmonary symptoms or may be asymptomatic altogether. Initial treatment should be focused on managing symptoms medically but may eventually require surgical intervention. MDCT with 3D is the most helpful diagnostic study in exploring the relationship between the tracheobronchial anomalies and surrounding vascular structures. Patients with tracheal bronchus should be handled with extra care during intubation as malposition may cause atelectasis, leading to hypoxia.

Managing tracheal bronchus requires an interprofessional healthcare team. The patient's primary care physician and pulmonologist should be well aware of tracheal bronchus and its relation to different syndromes. The anesthesiologist should be made aware of tracheal bronchus and be able to troubleshoot and diagnose a problem if the need arises. Nursing staff can assist during any procedure, counsel on medical management, and monitor symptoms and note patient compliance with any treatment, as well as assessing the effectiveness of the treatment. The pharmacist should have involvement with the medical management of the condition, ensuring that there are no contraindications, drug interactions and that dosing is age-appropriate. This interprofessional team paradigm, with open communication between disciples, helps ensure the best possible patient outcomes. [Level 5]