As with other causes of axial low back pain, a conservative approach with physical therapy and institution of home exercise is the first step in treatment. Regarding pharmacological therapy, NSAIDs may provide moderate efficacy, but long-term use should be monitored due to the impact on the gastrointestinal and genitourinary systems. Regarding opioids in the treatment of chronic back pain, evidence for efficacy is scant in systematic reviews. Additionally, randomized controlled trials are few. Though opioids appear to have short-term efficacy in treating chronic back pain, the improvements in function are unclear

There are a number of interventional therapies that are used to target discogenic pain that is unresponsive to conservative management. These include epidural steroid injection, nucleoplasty, intradiscal injection, intradiscal electrothermal therapy (IDET), and biacuplasty. Epidural steroid injection has been shown in a systematic review to have fair efficacy in treating discogenic pain.

Intradiscal injection with glucocorticoid and stem cell solutions are also proposed treatments. A randomized controlled trial performed by Nguyen et al. demonstrated poor long-term efficacy of discogenic pain treated with intradiscal corticosteroid.

Lastly, surgical fusion also is a proposed treatment for patients who have discogenic pain refractory to conservative and minimally invasive treatments. Currently, there is debate regarding the surgical management of discogenic pain with varying results according to different studies.