Antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) vasculitides, the patient usually complains of fatigue, fever, and weight loss.

However, ANCA vasculitides present with various clinical syndromes, as mentioned below.

- GPA :

- GPA typically involves upper and lower respiratory tracts in addition to the kidney.
- Symptoms of the upper respiratory tract include bloody nasal discharge, nasal ulceration, sinusitis, and chronic otitis media. Damage of the nasal cartilage can cause the characteristic saddle nose deformity.
- Symptoms of the lower respiratory tract secondary to lung nodules and alveolar hemorrhage sometimes can be severe and fatal. Rarely it can cause tracheal stenosis. 
- Renal involvement can cause rapidly progressive renal failure. The patient can present with high blood pressure, new-onset proteinuria, and active urinary sediments (hematuria, leukocyturia).
- Around**90 percent**of patients with multisystemic active GPA have ANCA positivity. Thus, an absence of ANCA not necessarily rules out the diagnosis.

- MPA :

- MPA causes necrotizing vasculitis (without granuloma formation) of small vessels, and it manifests commonly as glomerulonephritis that manifests with signs and symptoms of acute renal failure. Of note, kidney involvement is almost ubiquitous in MPA.
- Lung involvement is less common than in GPA. It manifests as capillaritis, causing severe alveolar bleeding, which can be severe as well. It can also cause pulmonary fibrosis.
- Around**90 percent**of patients are ANCA positive.
- Sometimes the disease is only limited to renal involvement (without any immunoglobulin and complements deposition), and that sometimes called **renal-limited MPA.**

- EGPA :

- It can eosinophilic granulomatous lesions involving the skin, cardiac and gastrointestinal tract, and involvement of the peripheral nervous system is also common.
- ANCA, both PR3, and MPO have been associated with variable frequencies in these patients.

- Drug-induced ANCA vasculitis:

- Many medication exposures are linked to the development of vasculitis (such as propylthiouracil, methimazole, carbimazole, hydralazine, and minocycline). 
- It often causes constitutional symptoms such as arthralgias, fatigue, and skin rash.
- However, the full range of clinical features, including rapidly progressive renal failure and alveolar hemorrhage, can also occur.