Select the preferred chart. The most widely used is the Snellen chart.

Position the patient in a well-lit area so that they are a standard distance from the chart. The testing distance is typically 20 feet (6 m), but this may vary. In smaller spaces, mirrors can be used to achieve the required distance. Additionally, a near Snellen chart may be used at 14 inches in some cases, which would require reading glasses if applicable. There are also many phone applications available that use 4.5 feet or approximately the length to the bottom of a hospital bed. While phone applications are becoming more frequently used for convenience, it is worth noting that they may not be as accurate at measuring visual acuity in a more classic manner. However, phone applications do appear to have reproducible results for tracking changes in visual acuity.

Cover the patient's eye with their hand or an occluder card. Some testers prefer to test the eyes in the same order on all patients. An alternative is to test the eye with worse vision first to reduce remembered letters. The second eye can also read the letters backward to reduce remembered letters. Depending upon the indication, visual acuity testing can be performed with corrective lenses or with and without corrective lenses. Pinhole testing can be used to reduce refractive error further if visual acuity remains impaired with corrective lens use. Typically, the goal is to determine the best-corrected vision.

Instruct the patient to read the top line of the chart left to right. Continue to the smallest line that the patient can read. If a patient misses one or two letters on the lowest line, they can still be considered to have vision equivalent to that line. To save time, some testers will have the patient start at the lowest line they can easily read.

Move the patient closer to the chart if they are unable to read to the top line, the new distance from the chart becomes the numerator in a fraction reporting system. For example, if able to read the top line at 10 feet, the patient's vision would be represented as 10/200.

Test the patient with finger counting if unable to read the chart at any distance. Visual acuity can be documented based upon the distance where they can accurately finger count.

Test the patient with hand motion if unable to finger count. This can again be documented based upon the distance the patient is able to recognize hand motion.

Test the patient with light perception if unable to recognize hand motion. This can then be documented as positive light perception or no light perception.

Switch eyes after the visual acuity is documented for the first eye and repeat the above steps to test the second eye. This can then be used to test both eyes.

Repeat with corrective lenses or pinhole occluder if necessary. Once completed, the visual acuity should be documented properly. If using a fraction to report the results, these can be made more precise by indicating errors. The ability to read a partial line can be marked by mistakes on the lowest line read, such as 20/40-1, for one mistake is made on the 20/40 line. Correct letters without completing the lower line are indicated by addition. For example, 20/40+3 for three letters correct on the line below 20/40 without qualifying for the lower line. Documentation will also occasionally use a shorthand from Latin derivatives when describing visual acuity in the eye. Commonly used abbreviations are listed below:

- CC-With corrections

- SC-Without corrections

- OD-Right eye

- OS-Left eye

- OU-Both eyes

- PH-Pinhole

- CF-Counting fingers

- HM-Hand motion

- LP-Light perception

- NLP-No light perception

For example, ccOD 20/30 indicates a 20/30 vision in the right eye using corrective lenses.

Testing a special population, such as children, may require some adjustments to the testing procedure. Verbal children older than three years old can have visual acuity testing with a chart attempted. Ensure to select an optotype chart to their level of comprehension. It is best to limit distractions and make the patient as comfortable as possible. This may include sitting on a parent's lap, having a parent cover the eye, minimizing distractions in the room, showing the chart one line at a time, and showing patience. Children under this age typically have vision indirectly tested with age-appropriate eye-tracking and movements.