Vitamin D is a hormone obtained through dietary consumption and skin production. Ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation, wavelength (290 to 315 nm), converts 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin to previtamin D. This previtamin D undergoes heat isomerization and is converted to vitamin D. Vitamin D from the skin and diet is metabolized in the liver to 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25 OH D), and 25-hydroxyvitamin D is useful in assessing vitamin D status. In the kidneys, 25 hydroxyvitamin D converts to the biologically active form: 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (1,25 (OH)) by the enzyme 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1 alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1). Renal production of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin is under the regulation of parathyroid, calcium, and phosphorus levels.

1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D binds to the vitamin D receptor, a hormone receptor present at the nucleus inside the cell. Gene transcription is modified through the binding of vitamin D to its receptor, resulting in the activation of certain genes and suppression of others. It stimulates intestinal calcium and phosphorus absorption. In the absence of vitamin D, approximately 10 to 15% of dietary calcium and 60% of phosphorus are absorbed. In the presence of vitamin D, this percentage of absorption is increased to 30% to 40% for calcium and 80% for phosphorus. In the kidneys, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin promotes calcium reabsorption.

Vitamin D has a physiologic function outside calcium metabolism. Vitamin D receptor is present in the small intestine, colon, T and B lymphocytes, mononuclear cells, brain, and skin. It stimulates insulin production, modulates the function of activated T and B lymphocytes, prevents inflammatory bowel diseases, and affects myocardial contractility.

Topical 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D has utility in the treatment of psoriasis. It reduces scaling and erythema in psoriasis. Keratinocytes in the skin, which function abnormally in psoriasis, have vitamin D receptors, and vitamin D inhibits their proliferation and induces differentiation.