**Urinary System**

Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) arises in the kidney due to a mutation in the WT1 gene on chromosome 11p13. The thought is that persistent cells of the metanephric mesenchyme/blastema are precursors for the development of 40% of Wilms tumor cases.WT1 and PAX6, which also features aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and intellectual disability. Common genitourinary anomalies associated with WAGR syndrome include cryptorchidism, a failure of at least one testis to descend, or hypospadias, which is an incomplete fusion of the urethral folds leaving an opening in the ventral aspect of the proximal penis in males. In females, it may present at streak ovaries, hypoplastic uterus, or septate vagina. Hypospadias commonly presents with chordee, involving the shortening and curving of the ventral penis.

Wilms tumor is also a feature in several other conditions such as Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Bloom syndrome, Denys-Drash syndrome, and Li Fraumeni syndrome.PKD1, and the remaining 15% are from mutations in PKD2.

Mutations in the GDNF-RET signaling pathway are implicated in the formation of a multicystic dysplastic kidney, in which multiple cysts are present and separated by parenchyma; when present bilaterally, it can cause impaired renal function since the collecting ducts within the nephrons fail to develop.

Oligohydramnios is the consequence of the inability of the kidneys to produce urine and is present in conditions such as multicystic kidney disease, bilateral renal agenesis, and renal dysplasia. Too little amniotic fluid causes the fatal Potter sequence, resulting in a fetus with craniofacial abnormalities (cleft lip, flattened face, low-set ears, recessed chin), pulmonary hypoplasia, and clubbed feet, although a child with unilateral renal agenesis can survive via compensatory hypertrophy of the functioning kidney.

If the kidneys cannot ascend properly from the pelvis into their proper lumbar position, a pelvic kidney close to the common iliac artery or a horseshoe kidney with fused lower poles may be present. The root of the inferior mesenteric artery is responsible for preventing the proper ascent of the kidneys, which commonly presents in Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18) and Turner syndrome.

The bladder exstrophy-epispadias-cloacal****exstrophy complex is a constellation of ventral wall defects caused by a developmental abnormality 4 to 5 weeks after conception. Bladder exstrophy exists concomitantly with epispadias, a failure of the lateral body wall folds to close in the midline, leaving the urethral meatus on the dorsum of the penis. Cloacal malformations result from the failure of anorectal and urogenital channels to separate during weeks 6 to 7 of gestation and result in a single perineal opening

A patent urachus involves the persistence of the embryological connection between the dome of the bladder and the umbilicus, as the allantois failed to break down. Urine can drain from the umbilicus if there is a urachal fistula present from the persistence of the lumen of the intraembryonic portion of the allantois, causing delayed cord stump healing and edema around the umbilicus of a newborn.

Several other urachal anomalies exist, such as a urachal cyst when a local area of the urachus persists, an umbilical-urachal sinus from a failure of the umbilical end of the urachus to obliterate, and vesicourachal diverticulum caused by incomplete obliteration of the urachus on the bladder side.

**Genital System**

There are many steps during urogenital formation from which anomalies can arise.

- Failure of the paramesonephric ducts to fuse can occur at any point in the line of normal fusion can result in uterine malformation, such as uterus arcuatus, a concavity at the uterine fundus due to failure of the fused midline segments to degenerate, and uterus didelphys, a complete duplication of the uterus from complete lack of fusion.

- Uterus bicornis is a uterine anomaly in which the uterus has two horns entering a common vagina as a result of only a partial fusion of the paramesonephric ducts.

- Failure of the sinovaginal bulbs to develop results in vaginal atresia, while the failure of them to fuse results in the presence of a double vagina.

- Hydrocele, the buildup of fluid around the testicle due to a remnant of tunica vaginalis, will present in males as painless scrotal swelling and can be transilluminated.

- The appendix testis is a vestigial remnant of the Mullerian duct located at the anterior-superior pole of the testis, and the Gartner’s duct, epoophoron, and paraoophoron are the remnants of the Wolffian duct in females.

- A congenital indirect inguinal hernia results from the failure of the connection between the abdominal cavity and the processus vaginalis to close, allowing loops of the bowel to descend into the scrotum.

The most common cause of ambiguous genitalia is congenital adrenal hyperplasia, most frequently caused by a 21-hydroxylase deficiency (needed in the formation of cortisol) due to mutations or deletions of CYP21A in 90% of cases.

17a-hydroxylase deficiency can also cause congenital adrenal hyperplasia, though less frequently, resulting in normal female internal and external anatomy at birth but primary amenorrhea and/or failure of secondary sex characteristics at puberty.

In androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), receptors are unresponsive to androgens and ineffective in inducing differentiation of the male genitalia.

A micropenis, described as 2.5 standard deviations below the mean penis length when stretched, results from insufficient androgen stimulation or defect in the HPG axis.

Inhibition or deficiency of the enzyme 5-a-reductase results in the inability to convert testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, resulting in underdeveloped, albeit external male genitalia.

Lastly, XY female gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome) results from point mutations or deletions of the SRY gene and will present as in females as a lack of menstruation and/or secondary sex characteristics at puberty.