**Exploitive Environments**

When healthcare workers encounter potential victims of trafficking, a detailed work and social history will assist in identifying red flags. A better understanding of the most common areas where persons are targeted for exploitation will help practitioners assess a potential victim.

Victims of labor trafficking tend to be near farms, fisheries, factories, or businesses such as nail salons, massage parlors, restaurants, and areas with high immigrant populations. Labor trafficking victims are in traveling sales crews, in peddling or begging rings, landscapers, construction workers, domestic workers, nannies, elder adult caregivers, and agriculture work. Victims who travel selling, peddling, or begging are vulnerable due to homelessness and working in unfamiliar settings. If left behind in an unknown city, they may resort to "survival sex." Immigrants may lack the power to communicate their situation due to language barriers; this enables handlers from similar backgrounds to approach them and speak for them.

Some common sex trafficking sites are hotels or motels, street-based locations, residences functioning as brothels, commercial-front brothels, escort-service companies, truck stops, bars, and strip clubs. Sex trafficking can happen at home with parents, intimate partners, or other family members being the perpetrators. Victims ay not see themselves as victims, and may refer to the trafficker as their “daddy” or "boyfriend."

**Labor Trafficking Considerations**

Common presenting complaints of victims of human trafficking are much like those of intimate partner violence but may vary depending if the patient is a victim of labor or sex trafficking. Labor traffickers prey on specific vulnerabilities to entice individuals to accept substandard working conditions. Workers in the agriculture industry, factories, and domestic servitude sectors are vulnerable to human trafficking due to their work visas and immigration status being controlled by one employer. This power over the individual and fear of deportation allows the trafficker to manipulate the worker, leading to victimization.

Agricultural and industrial workers who are forced to work long hours with substandard wages may be isolated and confined by using dogs, armed guards, barbed wire or other fences, or locks. The seasonal nature of their work and movement from place to place heightens their vulnerability due to regularly being subjected to unfamiliar surroundings.

Domestic workers are also isolated, forced to live on the premises, and may lack access to cell phones and other communication devices. Language barriers add to vulnerability and the inability to communicate their situation and needs. Workers in strip clubs and bars may have fraudulent work visas and ties to organized crime, rendering them vulnerable to trafficking. Drugs and alcohol are used as manipulation tools.

Labor laws may not apply to subcontractors or independent contractors, thus increasing vulnerability risk. A common theme among persons who are exploited and traffickers exists. The victim is kept isolated by proximity or language, vulnerable due to immigration status, without resources, indebted, without the protection of labor laws, controlled, and manipulated.

Trafficking in persons for labor exploitation may put a patient at risk for malnutrition, communicable diseases such as hepatitis and tuberculosis, pesticide and chemical burns, or exposure and work-related injuries due to lack of safety equipment such as safety belts, gloves, goggles, and masks.

**Labor Trafficking Red Flags**

Stop, Observe, Ask, and Respond (SOAR) will guide practitioners in determining whether red flags indicate a potential case of human trafficking. Healthcare providers must decide if a crime occurred or if all three elements of trafficking in persons exist: force, fraud, and coercion. The provider's role is to recognize a potential case of human trafficking, empower the person being exploited, educate the victim on resources and established support structures, and provide a framework for a trauma-informed, victim-centered approach to healthcare.

Providers should observe for verbal and nonverbal clues and ask open-ended questions in a private, non-judgmental way to determine if the patient is a potential victim of human trafficking. Questions to ask regarding labor trafficking suspicions may include, but not be limited to, the list below.

- Are you being paid the wages that were part of the initial agreement?

- Can you change jobs if you want to?

- Would anything happen to you if you quit your job?

- Can you come and go as you please, take bathroom breaks, and eat when you want?

- Do you live with others? What are your home conditions, and where do you sleep? Do you have a bed? Do you sleep on the floor? Is it too cold or too hot where you live?

- Did you pay a fee to get your job? Do you owe a debt to your employer?

- Do you have access to your money and your identification?

- Has your employer ever threatened you?

- Did you have eye protection, a mask, or a safety harness? Personal protective equipment such as gloves? Respirators?

- Does your employer provide your housing?

- Are you working in the job you were hired to do?

- Are you concerned about your safety? Your family or children's safety?

- How many hours do you work a day? How many days per week?

- Have you moved around a lot? Do you know your address? Can you give me directions or the location of your house?

- Do you take care of others?

- Are there locks on the doors or bars on the windows? Can you leave freely?

**Barriers to Identification of Victims**

Healthcare providers, for a variety of reasons, may fail to stop, observe, and ask questions to identify a potential victim of human trafficking. The absence of protocols, myths, stereotypes, biases, fear of no available resources, lack of education regarding human trafficking red flags, time constraints, lack of privacy, or an inability to separate the person from the potential trafficker all may play a part in the failure to identify victims. The victim declining to give a history and self-identify are hindrances in identifying human trafficking.

**Diagnostic Overshadowing**

A patient who presents with multiple visits and complains of pain that has no organic cause, a "frequent flyer" as labeled by some, may be an overlooked victim of trafficking. Patients who present with stress-related issues on multiple visits or who return over and over with psychological holds for overdoses or suicidal ideations may be victims of trafficking. They risk being released back into the trafficking situation and victimization each time. Providers must recognize the potential for "diagnostic overshadowing" and be attuned to their own emotions and potential for bias.

As front-line participants in the battle to combat human trafficking, healthcare workers must be aware of these potential barriers to victim identification. Often, providers rush from patient to patient or exam room to exam room, are caught between documentation and hands-on assessment and care, and treat patients in hallways, lobbies, or corridors. These practice realities add to the potential for a missed opportunity.

**Sex Trafficking Red Flags**

According to the National Human Trafficking Resource Center (NHTRC) and hotline, general indicators or red flags of trafficking in persons may include but not be limited to the following with some modifications:

- Inconsistent history or a history that appears coaxed. It may be difficult to determine if a language barrier is present.

- Resistant to answer questions about the injury or incident.

- Avoids eye contact, is nervous, fearful of touch.

- No idea of address or general area where they live.

- No control over their finances and lacks decision-making capacity.

- Accompanied by a controlling companion or family member that refuses to let the patient speak for themselves or be alone for care or insists on being the translator.

- Exhibits bizarre, hostile behavior. Resistant to care and assistance. May have initially consented but changes their mind after asked to undress for an exam.

- No identification or the companion has it in their possession.

- Under age 18 and involved in a commercial sex act.

- Tattoos or branding signs. Markings may say "daddy," "for sale," imply ownership, or read as an advertisement for a product.

- Multiple sex partners.

- Inappropriate attire for the environmental conditions of the area.

- Attempt to reason away bruises or ligature marks by claiming a bruising or rare blood disorder.

- Silent, afraid to speak, cringes at the sound of a loud voice.

- Uses trafficking "lingo" such as "the life" or other words common in the commercial sex industry.

- Has addiction issues such as opioids.

- Admits to a forced sexual encounter or being forced into sex acts.

- Has a cover story to avert suspicion, but details may vary or be inconsistent with a query. Law enforcement may refer to this as a "legend."

**Head-to-Toe Assessment**

A head-to-toe, full assessment in this patient population is vital. An examination may prove difficult due to the emotional and psychological state of the victim. These patients may appear as uncooperative or vague and give an inconsistent history. These reactions are manifestations of their trauma. Provider frustration or stereotyping may arise, leading to the desire to exit the room quickly, with a quick determination of probable diagnosis and treatment. As discussed above, the potential exists for "diagnostic overshadowing." As with any trauma patient, a high index of suspicion should be present for co-existing conditions and comorbidities.

Conduct the assessment in private, not allowing anyone accompanying the patient to be present. A chaperone may be present and a certified interpreter, if required, to facilitate a feeling of trust, establish rapport, and build a trusted network of people and organizations willing to help. If possible, provide a same-sex provider for the physical exam/assessment with the available staffing mix. During the exam, the patient may seem emotionally absent, hyperventilate, and not verbalize feelings of discomfort. Be alert to nonverbal signs. Reassure frequently and promote a relaxed, non-rushed atmosphere. Avoid interrogating the victim; ask only direct, pertinent, open-ended, yet neutral questions. Maintain eye contact with the victim, barring cultural considerations, and avoid writing while the victim speaks. Ensure the victim is entirely undressed and in a gown so a complete trauma assessment can be initiated. Specifically, examine for the following:

- Bruising; old, healing, or new lacerations; hematomas; signs of acute or chronic head trauma or a headache; missing hair or bald spots.

- Trouble hearing; damage to the auditory canal or eardrum; signs of trauma to the oropharynx such as lacerations or burns, blood in the mouth, ulcerations, tooth decay, broken teeth, gingival irritation, tongue abnormalities; signs of anemia or dehydration in the oral mucosa.

- Visual defects, sudden or gradual onset; tattoos or brands in the hairline or on the neck; signs of strangulation such as bruising.

- Signs of chest trauma, murmurs; cigarette burns; tattoos that imply ownership; bruising in various stages of healing; signs of stress-related cardiovascular issues such as arrhythmias or high blood pressure.

- Respiratory issues that would indicate inhalation injuries from chemical exposure, toxic fume exposure, asbestos exposure, or mold exposure.

- Signs of tuberculosis such as night sweats, coughing up blood, fever, and weight loss.

- Signs of stress-related respiratory or gastrointestinal problems.

- Damage to lung tissue due to prolonged exposure to chemicals or pesticides, aspiration pneumonia or other inhalation injuries; meth lab exposure can produce burning to the eyes, nose, and mouth, chest pain, cough, lack of coordination, nausea, and dizziness.

- Hypothermia or hyperthermia from environmental exposure from working in damp, cool, poorly insulated factories or buildings; mold exposure signs/symptoms.

- Signs of gastrointestinal issues such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, or abdomen pain; rectal pain, itching, trauma or bleeding; parasites in the feces or signs of abdominal trauma.

- Bruising to the back or scarring; tattoos that imply advertisement, ownership, or are sexually explicit in the pubic hair.

- Obstetrical and gynecological complaints such as sexually transmitted infections (STI) or recurrent STI’s. An STI, especially if recurrent, in a minor may be the first and only sign of sexual abuse; repeated unwanted or unplanned pregnancies or forced abortions; anogenital trauma; evidence of retained foreign bodies such as in the vagina from packing during menstruation, vaginal bleeding, discharge, rashes, itching, signs of injury or forced sex.

- Number of sexual partners; condom use; genitourinary symptoms present such as burning, frequency, odor, dark urine or history of frequent urinary tract infections.

- Signs of bruising or lower back scarring from repeated beatings; musculoskeletal issues such as signs of repetitive trauma; work-related injuries or injuries such as back problems from wearing heels for hours walking the streets or neck and jaw problems from frequent, forced oral sex.

- Fractures, old or new, any contractures. Cigarette or scald burns. Ligature marks/scars around ankles or wrists. Signs of scabies, infestations (scalp or body). Impetigo. Fungal infections.

- Signs of nutritional deficits such as Vitamin D deficiencies from lack of exposure to sunlight, anemia, or mineral deficiencies; brittle or fine hair.

- Signs of anorexia, bulimia, loss of appetite, malnutrition, and severe electrolyte abnormalities.

- Growth and development abnormalities in children, dental cavities, or misaligned poorly formed teeth.

- Neurological issues such as seizures, pseudo-seizures, numbness or tingling, migraines, inability to concentrate, vertigo, unexplained memory loss, and seizures.

- Insomnia, nightmares, waking up frequently.

- Signs of opioid or other addiction.

**Signs of Physical or Psychological Torture**

Signs of physical torture may present on a dermatological evaluation, such as abrasions over bony prominences, scratches or linear abrasions from a wire, or "road rash" to extremities from being thrown from or drug by a vehicle. Ropes and cords can leave elongated, broad-type abrasions. Ropes may leave areas of bruising mixed with abrasions. Belts or cords may leave loop marks and parallel lines of petechial with central sparing. Tramline bruising, two parallel lines of bruising, can result from being beaten with a heavy stick or baton. Cigarette burns tend to be circular with a 1-cm diameter and can fade in a few hours or days. Burns, in general, tend to take the shape of the object that inflicted the burn.

Trafficking victims may be beaten or subjected to torture for various reasons. The guerilla pimp may torture the victim due to not meeting a quota or breaking established rules, a displeased customer, or for no apparent reason other than to maintain control. Bruises, lacerations, marks, or scars may be present on the lower back where they are hidden more easily and do not disfigure the product/victim and inadvertently make the person being trafficked less marketable.

Cupping therapy may leave bruises or scars that may be mistaken for abuse. Correlate this finding with a detailed history as well as the presence of other red flags.

**Psychological and Mental Status Examination**

Mental health indicators of trafficking in persons may be missed or explained away as a panic attack. Again, one must stop and take an in-depth look, considering the red flags. Look for signs such as depression, suicidal ideations, self-mutilation injuries, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and feelings of shame or guilt. Shame, a control tool used by a trafficker, may keep a victim bound to a trafficking situation. Does the patient report nightmares, flashbacks, irrational fears, irritability, social isolation, suicidal ideations, or depression?

A trafficking victim may describe a situation as if they were an outsider looking in. This mind-body separation creates a safe, alternate reality to help them cope with the atrocities they are facing and feelings of shame and guilt. They use a third-person omniscient point of view in their storyline. Sometimes patients exhibiting this behavior are categorized as impersonal or devoid of emotion, numb to their surroundings, or detached. This point of view is their survival mechanism.

Addiction issues may be present and result in withdrawal. The addiction may be fueled by the trafficker for control or by the victim to cope with the physical or emotional pain surrounding the trafficking situation.

**Documentation of Assessment Findings**

Documentation of physical findings is important and may assist the victim in prosecuting their trafficker later if health records are subpoenaed. Follow established documentation guidelines and reporting requirements based on state and local statutes or federal law as addressed previously. Photo documentation may prove vital. Follow any protocols/policies specific to your institution regarding taking photos and their storage and obtain all required consent forms.