Due to the high prevalence of cardiovascular disease among the general population, effective management of anginal pain and heart failure with significant interprofessional communication plays a crucial role in reducing mortality and readmission rates with long-term benefits of improved exercise tolerance and quality of life. Isosorbide is used to manage anginal pain due to coronary artery disease, and it has approval for use in heart failure. The challenges of isosorbide therapy are drug interactions, adverse effects, and the development of tolerance during chronic isosorbide therapy. Multiple health care professionals such as cardiologists, general practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, home care workers, and dieticians can work together to overcome these challenges of isosorbide therapy. Some of the patient education strategies include educating regarding the following:

- The possibility of developing orthostatic hypotension in elderly patients

- The possibility of developing severe hypotension when combined with Phosphodiesterase(PDE) inhibitors in male patients

- The development of tolerance during chronic isosorbide therapy and drug-free intervals

- The possibility of developing anginal pain during drug-free intervals

Home care workers can help elderly patients prone to developing orthostatic hypotension with Home safety measures. Nurses and general practitioners should ensure that isosorbide therapy is not an option for patients with erectile dysfunction by taking phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors. Nurses and pharmacists can verify the compliance of the medication, appropriate drug-free intervals, common adverse effects, and drug interactions, and report appropriately to the prescribing general practitioner when needed. Isosorbide therapy in angina and heart failure requires an interprofessional team approach to achieve optimum results.