During heart development, the atria are separated from one another by the formation of an interatrial septum. The process of septation of the atria generally begins after the first four weeks of pregnancy and promotes the growth of distinct left and right atria.

Initially, muscular tissue originating from where the right atrium would be situated begins to expand. This unidirectional growth of the septum primum with a mesenchymal cap towards the endocardial cushion is the first step towards septation and the creation of the left and right atria.

Since the ostium secundum allows the movement of fluid to cross the wall of the atria, additional steps are made to reduce the hole size. In turn, the heart generates another budding tissue at the apex of the heart, on the anatomical right side of the interatrial septum that moves inferiorly. As the septum secundum extends and covers the majority of the ostium secundum, a remnant piece of the ostium secundum remains, referred to as the foramen ovale. As a result of the septum primum and septum secundum developing as separate entities, the muscular tissues do not fuse. Consequently, the foramen ovale acts as a one-way valve. The septum primum lays behind the opening of the septum secundum, allowing fluid to move from the right atrium to the left atrium by a pressure gradient and limits backflow by the septum primum being forced against the septum secundum by higher left atrial pressure.

When the fetus is born, the act of lung expansion during the initial respiration closes the ductus arteriosus and reduces the resistance along the pulmonary arteries. Increased flux of blood through the pulmonic circulation decreases pressure in the right atrium and increases the pressure in the left atrium. A net left-to-right force in the atria causes the septum primum to obstruct the opening of the foramen ovale. Over time, the foramen ovale tissues fuse to become the fossa ovalis, a closed remnant of the foramen ovale.