Almotriptan is the first FDA-approved drug used to treat migraine headaches in adults with or without an aura.

Almotriptan has approval for use as monotherapy and in conjunction with migraine-abortive medications such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., aceclofenac).

A randomized, double-blind study by Pascual J. et al. examined the therapeutic efficacy and side effect profile of almotriptan. It was given as a single dose of 6.25 mg or 12.5 mg, and it was compared with placebo in patients with three consecutive migraine episodes of moderate to severe presentation. Seven hundred twenty-two patients completed the study out of 1013 initially enrolled. Almotriptan was found to be superior to placebo in reducing the migraine pain from moderate-severe to mild-no pain at 2 hours after the dose, i.e., 60% (6.25 mg) and 70% (12.5 mg) vs. 38% (placebo). There appeared to be no clinically significant differences in side effects between the almotriptan-treated patients compared with placebo. The study recommends a dose of 12.5 mg to treat migraines because the risk/benefit ratio is optimal at this dose.

A randomized double-blinded study by Dalof C. et al. examined the therapeutic efficacy and side effect profile of almotriptan. It was given as a single dose of 2 mg, 6.25 mg, 12.5 mg, or 25 mg, and it was compared with placebo in patients with moderate to severe migraine pain intensity. Seven hundred forty-two patients completed the study out of 903 initially enrolled. Almotriptan was found to be superior to placebo in reducing the migraine pain at doses above 2 mg at 2 hours after dose, i.e., 30% (2 mg), 56.3% (6.25 mg), 58.5% (12.5 mg), 66.5% (25 mg) vs. 32.5% (placebo). There appeared to be no clinically important differences in side effects between the almotriptan-treated patients at doses of 2 mg, 6.25 mg, and 12.5 mg compared with placebo. The study recommends a dose of 12.5 mg to treat migraines because the risk/benefit ratio is optimal at this dose, and the 6.25 mg dose demonstrated a minimum effective dose.

A double-blind comparison study by Spierings L. et al. examined the therapeutic efficacy (24-hour abortive treatment) and side effect profiles of almotriptan vs. sumatriptan which is an older anti-migraine medication commonly used in comparison studies. Almotriptan was given at a dose of 12.5 mg, and sumatriptan was given at a dose of 50 mg in patients with moderate to severe migraines. The oral capsules of each medication appeared identical to ensure blinding of patients and investigators. One thousand one hundred seventy-three patients received either almotriptan (591) or sumatriptan (582). Almotriptan was found to be similar to sumatriptan in reducing migraine pain 58.0% vs. 57.3%, respectively. Rescue medications were taken by patients in the almotriptan treatment arm 36.7% and 33.2% in the sumatriptan treatment arm. Moderate to severe intensity migraines returned in almotriptan and sumatriptan-treated patients 27.4% vs. 24.0%, respectively. Side effects appeared in 15.2 % of almotriptan-treated patients and 19.4% sumatriptan-treated patients. A potentially significant side effect of chest pain occurred at a higher rate in sumatriptan-treated patients vs. almotriptan-treated patients, 2.2% vs. 0.3%, respectively. The study concluded that almotriptan was similar to sumatriptan in therapeutic efficacy and side effect profiles.

In pregnant women with migraines or headaches, triptan use is less frequent, whereas drugs like metoclopramide and acetaminophen are more common choices for migraines due to their effectiveness and safety.