Mature neutrophils are derived from precursor cells in the bone marrow. The total neutrophil count is divided into bone marrow, blood, and tissues. In blood, neutrophils are divided into either peripheral or circulating compartments. The peripheral neutrophils are attached to vascular endothelium, and circulating neutrophils are present in circulation through the bloodstream. Autoimmune neutropenia is a heterogeneous group of disorders with the destruction of neutrophils from the production of IgG antibodies against Fc receptors of neutrophils leading to peripheral destruction and splenic clearance.

In primary neutropenia, a decrease in the number of neutrophils leads to several infections with bacteria and fungi, but it is usually milder form than chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. The peripherally attached neutrophils to vascular endothelium play a vital role in the inflammatory response to a foreign antigen leading to an inflammatory response. For this, they need to get attached to the vessel wall, which is done by certain adhesion molecules called beta-2 integrin and spectrin. These molecules are deficient in a congenital disorder called leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) and lead to a disease ranging from recurrent infections to severe life-threatening infections and delayed cord prolapse etc.

Chronic granulomatous disease is another congenital abnormality that leads to recurrent infections with catalase-positive organisms: Staphylococcus, Serratia, Burkholderia, Aspergillus, etc. Because of the absence of NADPH oxidase enzymes complex, it helps in the formation of reactive oxygen species during the respiratory burst phenomenon.

The available evidence for inflammatory bowel disease suggests that the dysfunctioning innate and adaptive immunity pathways of the immune system are corresponding to an aberrant inflammatory response, and it was divided into two major types: Crohn disease has been considered to be associated with T-helper cells I response, and ulcerative colitis is considered to be driven by non-conventional T-helper cells II response.