**Breathing Artifacts**

The involuntary breathing motions cause the majority of PET or SPECT and CT misregistration issues. The CT acquisition can acquire the images in a single breath-hold and fix the position of organs such as the lung, liver, spleen, diaphragm, and heart, which move during respiration. But, PET or SPECT imaging (combinedly called emission scans) takes a longer duration, and respiratory blurrings are bound to occur. This causes misalignment of both images, particularly near the diaphragm area.

The same is also manifested in the attenuation correction factor map generated by the CT images. Many methods, including altering breath-holding patterns, mid-inspiration, or end-expiration during CT acquisition, have been tried to solve this problem. However, the best solution is simply acquiring the CT data without any instruction and allowing the patient to take shallow breathing with instruction for lying still with no other motion than involuntary.

**Contrast Agent Artifacts**

CT imaging with intravenous and oral contrast can help with anatomic localization. However, since the contrast is denser in attenuation, it can falsely alter the attenuation map generated by the CT data and inaccurately represent gamma photon attenuation in certain areas. This can result in artifacts in the final images.

Many solutions to this problem have been considered, including viewing non-attenuation corrected images and correlating them with attenuation corrected images. However, this can be cumbersome on many software. Another solution is acquiring low-dose non-contrast CT and using it attenuation correction. However, both solutions have their own merits and demerits. A software-based solution has been tried to generate an attenuation correction algorithm that does not generate artifacts, which is the most appealing solution to these artifacts.

**Orthopaedic Metallic Implants and Chemo port**

The orthopedic metallic implants and in-situ chemo ports cause photopenic areas in PET and SPECT images. When using CT data for attenuation correction, the concerned area is overestimated, and artifacts in the final image are observed. Though it is easy to correlate such areas of the artifact, when clinically relevant lesions are adjacent to such artifact, it becomes difficult to interpret, especially in cases of infection or loosening.

Dental implants or fillings can also cause such artifacts and obscure real lesions or create apparent lesions in a patient with head & neck malignancies with involvement of the oral cavity or tonsils.

Some other areas of concern that affect the image quality are patient size, positioning of arms, and calcified lymph nodes.