The hallmark clinical feature of IIM is symmetric proximal muscle weakness. It is manifested as difficulty in getting up from a sitting position, climbing stairs, lifting heavy objects, and overhead abduction of the arm.In addition to muscle weakness, patients with dermatomyositis often present with a characteristic skin rash. Gottron papule and heliotrope rash are the pathognomonic skin finding of dermatomyositis.

A description of the major skin findings in dermatomyositis is given below:

- Heliotrope rash: Violaceous rash on the eyelids sometimes associated with periorbital edema

- Gottron papules: Erythematous rash with variable papules on the extensor aspect of digits (metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal, and distal interphalangeal joints)

- Gottron sign: Erythematous papules, macules, or patches on sites other than hands, particularly extensor surfaces of elbows, knees, and ankles.

- Shawl sign: Erythematous rash on the anterior chest (in a V-sign) and upper back

- Mechanic’s hands: Dilated capillary loops at the base of the fingernails, irregular and thickened cuticles, and cracked palmar fingertips

- Holster sign: Poikiloderma on the lateral aspects of the thigh (areas protected from sunlight)

These lesions (except the holster sign) are photosensitive and may be aggravated by ultraviolet radiation. Other manifestations include dystrophic cuticles, peri-ungual erythema, abnormal nail bed capillary loops, diffuse flat erythema over the forehead, chin, and knees; photosensitivity; shawl sign; V-sign; panniculitis; and calcinosis cutis.

Dermatomyositis includes several clinically distinct phenotypes, and specific autoantibodies are associated with each unique phenotype.

Patients with dermatomyositis have little or no muscle involvement and are referred to as hypomyopathic or amyopathic dermatomyositis.

Extramuscular manifestations of IIM include arthritis, Raynaud phenomenon, dysphagia, and interstitial lung disease.