Evaluation of a patient with DRS is similar to any case of strabismus. This includes assessment of vision and cycloplegic refraction, inspection, motor evaluation, assessment of binocularity, and other supplemental tests.

A significant proportion (30% to 70%) of DRS patients has hypermetropia or hypermetropic astigmatism of more than 1.5D.

As patients adopt a compensatory head posture, strabismic amblyopia is not a common feature in patients with unilateral DRS. In contrast, up to 25% of patients with bilateral DRS have been found to have amblyopia.

Inspection and motor evaluation aids in determining the type of DRS. Based on electromyography, Huber classified the condition into three types:

Type 1 – Marked limitation of abduction with minimally defective or normal adduction. This is the most common type, accounting for 70-80% of cases. EMG recordings showed paradoxical innervation of LR on adduction and reduced impulses on attempted abduction, while MR had normal electrical activity.

Type 2 - Limitation of adduction with normal or slightly limited abduction. This is the least common type, accounting for 7% of the cases. EMG recordings showed innervation of LR in both abduction and adduction, while MR was innervated normally.

Type 3 - Limitation or complete absence of adduction and abduction. EMG recordings showed simultaneous innervation of LR and MR in primary position, adduction, and abduction.

Ahluwalia et al. modified the Huber classification by dividing each type based on the primary position deviation found. This classification is more useful in terms of surgical planning and management.

Bilateral DRS is less frequent than unilateral DRS, with a reported incidence between 10% and 24%. Zanin et al. classified bilateral DRS into three types based on the works of Jampolski: 1) Bilateral DRS with fusion – usually bilateral type I with a small angle of deviation or orthotropia with minimal eye movements, often without retraction or its equivalents, 2) Bilateral DRS without fusion – characterized by prominent eso- or exodeviation and 3) Bilateral DRS with an alphabet pattern.

As aforementioned, DRS is associated with many ocular and systemic anomalies. Hence, a thorough multi-disciplinary evaluation is necessary.