As the diseased posterior cortical vitreous and abnormal vitreoretinal surface interaction are the main culprits, vitrectomy was tried as a treatment option after 1989 by Kelly and Wendel.

Stage 1 MH: It can be observed as chances of spontaneous resolution is near 50%. Surgical intervention has a negligible role in prevention in macular hole formation and it has its own complications whereas it has a high anatomical success rate if done in stage 2. In the case of significantly reduced visual acuity, the patient is symptomatic in stage 1 and persists for a long duration, surgery is usually advised.

Stage 2/3 MH: Spontaneous closure of FTMH may take place in 4 to 11.5% of cases.

Usually, local anesthesia is preferred for surgery unless contraindicated otherwise. Pars-plana vitrectomy (PPV) is the mainstay of surgery following which the subsequent steps are performed. A standard 20/23/25/27-gauge core vitrectomy is performed initially. The posterior cortical vitreous is separated from the optic disc by using suction mode disabling cutter or by an extrusion cannula or bent needle which is a very important step. As posterior cortical vitreous is seen only after elevating it from the underlying retina triamcinolone acetonide assistance may be needed. Ocriplasmin, a serine protease, can also be used to separate vitreoretinal adhesion or to induce posterior vitreous detachment (PVD).

However, the induction of PVD remains the most crucial step in the management of stage 2 or 3 macular holes.

Only pharmacologic separation of vitreous from the retina by ocriplasmin intravitreal injection in a dose of 0.125 mg in 0.1 ml, is another way of treatment for a macular hole with a success rate of 40.6 - 67%.

Stage 4 MH: Apart from the induction of PVD all the steps are the same because in stage 4 MH PVD has already taken place.

In order to peel the ILM, to enhance visualization, and to have a precise less-traumatic surgery, ILM is stained using vital dyes i.e. indocyanine green (ICG 0.05%), trypan blue (TB 0.15%) (+/-) 10% glucose, and brilliant blue G (BBG 0.025%). Among them, ICG and BBG have selective affinity for ILM whereas TB stains ERM nicely than ILM. ICG has a contact period of 30 seconds and a concentration-dependent, osmolarity-dependent toxic effect on the retina along with light-induced damage that may take place when ICG is used.

TB has a contact period of two minutes with very minimum toxicity. TB is used to stain ERM. BBG is the best alternative to ICG with a brief contact period, a good safety profile, and better visual outcomes.

ILM peeling

ILM is peeled after a pinch and tear an ILM flap with end-gripping forceps in a circular fashion not damaging the optic nerve fiber creating a "maculorrhexis" keeping fovea in the center. A diamond-dusted scrapper can also be used to elevate the flap but the risk of injury to the retina may be there. After successful peeling of ILM, it is removed and vitreous substitutes are injected to produce the tamponade effect. Recent advancement in this context is the inverted ILM flap technique, first described by Michalewska and colleagues

After successful ILM peeling, intraocular gas tamponade by a fluid-air exchange which is usually followed by injection of isoexpansile gas enhances the chances of anatomical closure in the presence of proper head positioning.

Different gases have been used including perfluoropropane (C3F8), perfluoroethane (C2F6), sulfur hexafluoride(SF6), air, and their combinations. The duration of tamponade in an operated eye and the presence of break/retinal detachment are important determinants for the choice of gas. Gases work by dehydrating the MH edge and preventing interaction with fluids inside.

Initial postoperative days are most crucial for the closure of a macular hole. Longer tamponade may not be necessary for the closure of a macular hole.

A three-day tamponade in small MH is considered adequate and to have this effect 20% SF6-air mixture bubble or an air bubble alone is considered sufficient.

Head positioning is another important postoperative factor. It is considered that gas is needed to isolate the MH area from fluid interaction in the vitreous cavity in this period. If any mixture or gas can form a large bubble so that it would remain in contact with the large MH area for one week even in an upright position, then any head position can be chosen by the patient except supine.