**Triage**

Triage any allergic reaction with urgency as they are at risk for rapid deterioration with the development of anaphylaxis, if not already anaphylactic.

**Airway**

Airway management is paramount. Thoroughly examine the patient for airway patency or any indications of an impending loss of airway. Perioral edema, stridor, and angioedema are very high risk, and obtaining a definitive airway is imperative. Delay may reduce the chances of successful intubation as continued swelling occurs, increasing the risk for a surgical airway.

**Decontamination**

After the airway is secured, the decontamination of offending agents (if known) is the next priority to prevent continued exposure and clinical worsening. Remove any stingers, if present. Do not attempt gastric lavage in cases of ingestion, as this may not be effective and delays treatment.

**Epinephrine**

Epinephrine is given through intramuscular injection and at a dose of 0.3 to 0.5 mL of 1:1,000 concentration of epinephrine. Pediatric dosing is 0.01 mg/kg or 0.15 mg intramuscularly (IM) (epinephrine injection for pediatric dosage). Intramuscular delivery has proven to provide more rapid delivery and produce better outcomes than subcutaneous or intravascular. Note if intravenous (IV) epinephrine is to be given, the concentration required is 1:10,000; see the next paragraph. The thigh is preferred to the deltoid when possible. Repeat studies have shown that providers often wait too long before giving epinephrine; it is the treatment of choice, and the rapid benefit much outweighs the risks of withholding treatment. While most patients require only a single dose, repeat doses may be given every 5 to 10 minutes as needed until symptoms improve.

- If patients require multiple doses, a continuous infusion of epinephrine may be considered; start an initial IV infusion of 0.1 mg of 1:10,000, given over 5 to 10 minutes. If more is required, begin infusion at 1 microgram per minute and titrate to effect. Stop IV infusion if arrhythmia or chest pain develops. The risk of cardiovascular complications is much greater for IV epinephrine. For beta-blocked patients, close blood pressure monitoring is suggested due to the risk of unopposed alpha-adrenergic effects from epinephrine.

**IV Fluid Resuscitation**

Anaphylaxis induces a distributive shock that typically is responsive to fluid resuscitation and the above epinephrine. One to 2 L or 10 to 20 mL/kg isotonic crystalloid bolus should be given for observed hypotension. Albumin or hypertonic solutions are not indicated.

**Adjunctive Therapies**

Often when anaphylaxis is diagnosed, co-treatment is initiated with steroids, antihistamines, inhaled bronchodilators, and vasopressors. Glucagon can also be used if indicated. These agents can assist in refractory initial anaphylaxis or aid in the prevention of recurrence and biphasic reactions.

**Corticosteroids**

Corticosteroids are given for the reduction of length or biphasic response of anaphylaxis. There is minimal literature to support this use, specifically in anaphylaxis, but it has been proven effective in reactive airway diseases. Therefore, the use, dosages, and proposed mechanism of action mimic those of airway management protocols.

Methylprednisolone (80 to 125 mg IV) or hydrocortisone (250 to 500 mg IV) are the accepted treatments during the acute phase, after which oral treatment of prednisone (40 to 60 mg daily or divided twice per day) is continued for 3 to 5 days. Again, if the source is unknown and/or there is a concern for a prolonged time prior to physician follow up steroid taper of up to 2 weeks may be provided. Mineralocorticoid activity is responsible for fluid retention; in those at risk, dexamethasone and methylprednisolone are the preferred agents as they induce the least mineralocorticoid effect.

**Antihistamines**

Antihistamines are often routinely used; the most common is H­1 blocker administration of diphenhydramine 25 to 50 mg IV/IM. While the clinical benefit is unproven in anaphylaxis, its utility is evident in more minor allergic processes. In severe cases, H1 blockers such as ranitidine (50 mg IV over 5 minutes) or cimetidine (300 mg IV) may also be used in conjunction with H-­blocker as there is evidence suggesting histamine has crossover selectivity of receptors. Note that cimetidine has multiple precautions in at-risk populations such as renal or hepatic impaired patients or those taking beta-blockers. While IV is the initial route during stabilization, once the patient is stabilized, they may be switched to oral if continued therapy is desired.

**Bronchodilators**

Bronchodilators are useful adjuncts in patients with bronchospasm. Patients with previous histories of respiratory disease, most notably asthma, are at the highest risk. Treated with inhaled beta-agonists are the first-line treatment in wheezing; albuterol alone or as ipratropium bromide/albuterol. If there is refractory wheezing, IV magnesium is appropriate with dosage and treatment similar to severe asthma exacerbations.

**Vasopressors**

Vasopressors may be substituted when a patient requires more doses of epinephrine but has unacceptable side effects from the epinephrine IV infusion (arrhythmia or chest pain). In which case there has been no clear second line pressor identified, treatment guidelines would follow that of any other patient in hypotensive shock.

**Glucagon**

Glucagon is the reversal agent for beta-blockers and can be used as such if needed in cases where anaphylaxis is resistant to treatment in patients with beta-blockade. Known side effects include nausea, vomiting, hypokalemia, dizziness, and hyperglycemia.

A therapeutic agent under research:

**Sirtuin 6**

It is a NAD-dependent deacetylase that suppresses protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type C transcription. This, in turn, leads to negative regulation of the FcERI signaling cascade in mast cells. Hence, activation of Sirt6 can be tried as a therapeutic strategy for anaphylaxis.