Timely diagnosis and treatment of mood disorders can decrease the associated morbidity and mortality. The first step towards choosing an optimal treatment is a thorough assessment of the patient's safety and level of functioning. Distinct objectives of psychiatric management include solidifying and preserving a therapeutic alliance, educating the patient about signs and symptoms of mood disorders, reinforcing medication compliance, emphasizing the importance of regular sleep and appetite, foreseeing stressors, recognizing recurrences, and lessening social and functional impairment.

**Pharmacotherapy for Bipolar Disorder**

- If presenting episode is a manic episode with severe symptoms or is a mixed episode: Start with a mood stabilizer (lithium or valproic acid), and an atypical antipsychotic (risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, aripiprazole).

- If the patient presents with a less severe episode: Monotherapy with lithium, an anticonvulsant, or an atypical antipsychotic. Alternatives to lithium or valproic acid are carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine.

- If presenting episode is a depressive episode: Prescribe quetiapine or lurasidone or Lamotrigine or a combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine.

- **Lithium**— It is the primary mood-stabilizer. The mechanism of action of lithium is to inhibit the hydrolysis of inositol 1 phosphate by inositol monophosphatase. As a result, the supply of free inositol for the regeneration of membrane phosphatidyl–inositides, which are the sources of inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol, is reduced. It also inhibits enzyme glycogen synthase kinase, and the hyperactive neurons involved in manic states are preferentially affected because the supply of inositol from extracellular sources is compromised.

Dosage recommendation— In adults, the starting dose is 300 milligrams of the regular release formulation two-three times a day. In elderly persons with renal impairment, the starting dose is 300 milligrams once or twice daily. At a dose of 900 to 1200 milligrams, the plasma concentration of the drug is 0.6 - 1.0 milliequivalents/liter, which is effective in treating bipolar disorder. At a dose of 1200 to 1800 milligrams, the plasma concentration is 0.8 - 1.2 milliequivalent/liter.

Adverse effects—Gastrointestinal upset, fine tremors, polyuria, and polydipsia-reduction in urinary concentrating capacity leading to nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, increased risk of hyperparathyroidism, and cognitive impairment. Check sodium, calcium, phosphorus, electrocardiogram, creatinine, urinalysis, complete blood count, thyroid function test, renal function test, and a pregnancy test. Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index; therefore, it requires monitoring of blood levels.

- **Sodium valproate**— It blocks voltage-gated sodium channels and boosts the inhibitory transmission of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Dosage recommendation—For patients having acute mania, oral loading is 20 to 30 milligram/kilogram/day. Therapeutic plasma concentration is attained on a dosage between 1,200 and 1,500 milligrams/day given in divided doses. Sodium valproate can also be given as an intravenous (IV) infusion to stabilize a patient who comes with agitated behavior rapidly.

Adverse effects— Weight gain, gastric irritation, hair loss, thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, red cell hypoplasia, tremor, menstrual irregularities, polycystic ovaries, hyperandrogenism, hirsutism, obesity, insulin resistance, fatal hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis, hyperammonemia-induced encephalopathy.

- **Carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine**— These are anticonvulsant medications. These act by blockade of the sodium channels.

Dosage recommendation—The target dose for antimanic activity is 1,200 mg a day.

Adverse effects are dizziness, diplopia, drowsiness, ataxia, nausea and headache, dry mouth, edema, hyponatremia, and sexual dysfunction. Preliminary workup should include a CBC, liver function tests (LFTs), electrolytes, and ECG.

- **Lamotrigine**— It acts by blockade of voltage-sensitive sodium channels, which in turn modulate the release of glutamate and aspartate and a slight effect on calcium channels.

Dosage recommendation— 50 to 200 milligrams per day is used for bipolar depression. It is usually started at 25 mg daily, and the dose is titrated upwards gradually to reduce the risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

Adverse effects— Increased risk of rash (Stevens-Johnson syndrome /toxic epidermal necrolysis), which is associated with the speed of dose titration. The appearance of any kind of rash necessitates sudden discontinuation of the Lamotrigine regimen.

Other anticonvulsants which can be used as a mood stabilizer are riluzole, topiramate, zonisamide, gabapentin, pregabalin, and levetiracetam. Of these, topiramate is used most commonly and is associated with renal stones.

- **Benzodiazepines**acting as anxiolytic, sedative-hypnotic, anticonvulsant is a valuable adjunctive to a mood stabilizer. These can be useful adjunctive treatment as anxiety and panic disorder is significantly comorbid with bipolar disorder.

- **Thyroid hormone**: Triiodothyronine may stabilize mood in some bipolar patients. It is important to stabilize hypothyroidism with levothyroxine as thyroid abnormalities are associated with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder.

**Pharmacotherapy for Unipolar depression or dysthymia**:

- **Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)**: Sertraline, fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, citalopram, escitalopram, and paroxetine.

SSRIs are the first-line treatment option for depressive disorder, as they are tolerated better with lesser side effects. They normally take 4 to 5 weeks to display full effects. When on SSRI, it is important to monitor for suicidal thoughts, especially in young adults. The commonly seen adverse effects are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, loss of appetite, reduced sexual desire, anxiety, and insomnia.

-  **Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI)**: venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, milnacipran, and levomilnacipran

These are the next in line medication for the treatment of depression after SSRIs. This category of the medication has a dual-action and found to be beneficial in cases with comorbid pain. The common side effects include nausea, dry mouth, hypertension, fatigue, loss of appetite, insomnia, sweating, and anxiety.

-  **Atypical antidepressants**: bupropion and mirtazapine. Agomelatine is another atypical antidepressant, but it is unavailable in the United States.

Mirtazapine also acts as a second-line medication for depression. Side effects include somnolence, increased appetite, and weight gain. Bupropion lowers the seizure threshold and is contraindicated in cases with epilepsy, and in eating disorders.

-  **Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA)**: desipramine, nortriptyline, imipramine, and amitriptyline.

This category of medications can be effective, but no longer used as primary agents for depression due to the various side effects and toxicity due to overdose. Common side effects include weight gain, somnolence, orthostatic hypotension, increased heart rate, constipation, giddiness, and urinary retention.

-  **Serotonin modulators:**nefazodone, trazodone, vilazodone, and vortioxetine.

Serotonin modulators act as antagonists and agonists at postsynaptic serotonin receptors and inhibit the reuptake of postsynaptic serotonin. Nefazodone is contraindicated in liver disease. Priapism may be seen with trazodone.

-  **Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)**:

These include tranylcypromine, phenelzine, and selegiline. These are scarcely used due to their particular dietary regulations to avoid the hypertensive crisis and serotonin syndrome. Commonly seen side effects include orthostatic hypotension and decreased sleep.

Phototherapy (bright light therapy) is used in the treatment of seasonal affective disorder (SAD).

- **Newer medications**such as intravenous and intranasal ketamine (esketamine) have shown positive results in the treatment of mood disorders. Ketamine has also shown utility in rapidly reducing suicidal ideation though effects require repeat treatments and are not long-lasting.

- Somatic treatments like vagal nerve stimulation are used for patients with treatment-resistant depression.

- Antipsychotics like aripiprazole can be used for the adjunctive treatment of depression.

**Psychotherapy**

Apart from pharmacotherapy, patients suffering from depression and other mood disorders benefit from several types of nonpharmacological therapies.

- Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) and acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT): These seem to be beneficial in ameliorating mood symptoms and in curbing relapse.

- Interpersonal psychotherapy: It recognizes interpersonal problems and role transitions.

- Cognitive-behavioral therapy: It improves dysfunctional cognitions and attitudes that are considered to sustain depression. Amongst psychotherapies, CBT is the most extensively studied therapy for depression.

- Dialectical behavioral therapy: It is a form of CBT that involves mindfulness, distress tolerance, and emotional regulation.

CBT, interpersonal therapy, and behavioral activation are considered important psychological treatments for depression. Behavioral activation involves encouraging depressed patients to be involved in activities that uplift mood like exercise, new skills, chores, etc.

**Brain Stimulation Therapy**

- Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) has shown promising results in treating mood disorders. rTMS is a technique that utilizes a pulsed magnetic field to facilitate alteration in brain activity. Repeated cortical stimulation can enhance or lessen regional brain activity. rTMS procedure includes about 5 sessions delivered over a period of four to six weeks. The patient does not need a general anesthetic while undergoing rTMS, and it can be administered in the outpatient unit. Dissimilar to ECT, it does not cause cognitive side effects. The major adverse effects are headache and scalp discomfort at the site of administration.

- Electroconvulsive therapy is used in treatment-resistant cases, in severe depression when patients refuse to eat/drink, in pregnancy, and highly suicidal patients. Side effects include headache, cognitive deficits, and memory( both anterograde and retrograde) impairment is of chief concern to the patients while undergoing ECT.

**Healthy Lifestyles**

- Diet and mental health: Research has demonstrated that following a 'healthy' diet routine is correlated with decreased risk of mood disorders.

- Exercise and yoga: Regular exercise and yoga are protective against the development of mood disorders. People who are physically inactive are at a greater risk for the development of depressive disorders. A likely mechanism behind this seems to be the effect of regular workouts on brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).

- Smoking: Smoking cessation is related to an increased optimistic mood and quality of life and fewer chances of getting anxious and depressed compared with regular smoking.

- Omega-3 fatty acids: The antidepressant effects of omega 3 fatty acids are due to the regulation of neurotransmitters (serotonin, dopamine), and its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects.