A neuron consists of a cell body called the soma, and at least one branch called a neurite. Neurites that relay signals away from the soma are called axons, and neurites that r relay signals toward the soma are called dendrites. The soma contains organelles similar to other cell bodies, such as a nucleus, mitochondria, and lysosomes. The rough endoplasmic reticulum of a neuron, which is termed Nissl substance, is exceptionally prominent because it must synthesize a large amount of membrane for the neurites.

Most axons and long dendrites are coated with a protective covering called myelin, which is a membrane that acts as an electrical insulator to increase the speed of conduction of impulses. Myelin is made when a non-neuronal support cell called a glial cell wraps itself tightly around a neurite, squeezing the glial cell cytoplasm towards the periphery, leaving only its cell membrane in the inner layer. Myelin does not cover the neurite completely but leaves gaps called nodes of Ranvier, which will be discussed further in the Mechanism section. In the central nervous system (CNS), myelin derives from glial cells called oligodendrocytes, which synthesize myelin bundles for many axons. In the peripheral nervous system (PNS), the source of myelin is specialized cells called Schwann cells, with each Schwann cell creating just one myelin bundle of an internode of a single axon.

Axons of multiple neurons are bundled together into a structure called a nerve. Within a nerve, each individual axon is enclosed within a connective tissue layer called the endoneurium. The endoneurium creates endoneurial fluid, which protects the axon during times of injury. Many axons bundle together into a fascicle, and the covering fo each fascicle is a layer called perineurium. The outermost layer is the epineurium, which encloses multiple fascicles and blood vessels of the nerve.