In endemic areas with features of the classic rash and recent tick exposure, treatment can be started without waiting for blood work. However, in the vast majority of patients, the symptoms are vague, and testing is needed. Others may not recall a tick bite or develop the rash.

Serologic testing is insensitive during the first few weeks of infection, and patients presenting with erythema migrans rash and a history of residing in or traveling to an endemic region may be treated based on clinical findings. In later stages of the disease, a 2-step approach is recommended for the serologic diagnosis of Lyme disease. The first step is to perform a quantitative screening test for serum antibodies to B. burgdorferi using a sensitive enzyme immunoassay (EIA) or immunofluorescent antibody assay (IFA). A Western blot should follow specimens with positive or equivocal results. Serologic diagnosis is sensitive (greater than 80%) for patients presenting with neurologic or cardiac manifestations.

Sequential use of serological testing is not recommended in the acute state because antibody titers often remain elevated for a long time. Testing the tick is not recommended either. And biopsy of the skin is rarely done.

Other blood work may reveal elevated ESR, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Joint aspiration is only recommended if one suspects septic arthritis.

In children, Lyme meningitis is rare if:

- the headache is less than 7 days

- CSF has less than 70% mononuclear cells

- Absence of 7th or other cranial nerve palsy

The ECG may reveal an AV block. Brain imaging may show abnormality in 20% of patients with CNS symptoms. Most common are punctate lesions of the periventricular white matter.

Borrelia species are had to culture and not routinely done.