The exact etiology of a choledochal cyst remains unknown, which has led to the postulation of multiple theories. The most popular theory is Babbitt's, which states that the cyst develops from an anomalous pancreaticobiliary junction (APBJ). APBJ is when the biliary and the pancreatic duct join 1 to 2 cm proximal to the sphincter of Oddi. As a result, the long channel formed is not covered by the sphincter and allows for the backflow and mixing of pancreatic and biliary secretions, which leads to the activation of pancreatic enzymes. This results in a rise in pressure, which eventually causes dilation, inflammation, epithelial damage, dysplasia, and malignancy of the biliary tree.

This theory is supported by the presence of a high level of amylase, and few studies reported elevated levels of phospholipase A2 and trypsinogen in CCs bile.

On the other hand, some theories postulate that the etiology of this condition is purely congenital. Kusunoki et al. suggest the presence of scantier ganglionic cells in the distal common bile duct (CBD) of patients with CCs when compared to controls. This leads to the dilation of the proximal segment of the CBD, which is comparable to the pathogenesis of achalasia and Hirschsprung's disease.

These previous theories apply to CCs type I and IV. Regarding type II (true CBD diverticulum) and type III (choledochocele) CCs, it was suggested that the cause is related to biliary duplications cysts for type II and biliary or duodenal duplications cysts for type III CCs. It is suggested that a distal intramural bile duct localized dilation could be explained by a blockage at the ampulla of Vater.

The etiology of Caroli disease, also known as type V CC, is presumed to be a halt in the remodeling of the ductal plates. Caroli disease is associated with biliary atresia since it might share the same pathogenesis of ductal plate malformation, but is also associated with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (PKD) and less frequently with autosomal dominant PKD.