The diagnosis of Fournier gangrene may be assisted by a combination of both blood work and imaging, even though the diagnosis is primarily clinical. Clinicians must maintain a high index of suspicion for any inflammatory or infectious process involving the perineum or genitalia, particularly in older male diabetics and others at increased risk.

Blood work in suspected Fournier gangrene should include a complete blood count (CBC) with a differential and a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP). The CBC will often show elevated white blood count (WBC) with the potential for a left shift. The CMP may show electrolyte abnormalities such as hyponatremia or metabolic acidosis, as well as any concurrent renal failure. Serum lactate, c-reactive protein, and procalcitonin can help evaluate for associated bacteremia and sepsis.

While essentially a clinical diagnosis, imaging can aid in confirmation of the disease process and help determine the extent of involvement. However, imaging alone cannot make or rule out the diagnosis of Fournier gangrene and should not delay surgical intervention in hemodynamically unstable patients.

**Ultrasound imaging**helps visualize any subcutaneous gas or emphysema in the underlying soft tissue. It can be done quickly, help identify subcutaneous gas before it can be appreciated on physical examination, and is particularly useful in the scrotum. The presence of gas in the scrotum is considered a pathognomonic sign of Fournier gangrene.

Other typical ultrasonographic findings would include "cobblestoning" (individual subcutaneous fat globules surrounded by fluid), the "snow globe" effect (swirling appearance of heterogenous subcutaneous material), and "dirty shadowing" (a hazy appearance of the infected subcutaneous tissue caused by the shadowing effect of gas and reverberation artifacts from hyperechoic foci).

**X-ray imaging**of the area may similarly indicate subcutaneous gas in the affected area, which is present in 90% of all Fournier gangrene cases.

**Computed tomography (CT) imaging**has shown good sensitivity (88.5%) and specificity (93.3%) for Fournier gangrene.

**MRI scans**are excellent for soft-tissue imaging but are not recommended for the initial diagnosis of suspected Fournier gangrene due to the prolonged imaging time required as well as the cost.

The finding of gas on imaging is highly specific for Fournier but is not very sensitive at only 49%.

**In cases where the diagnosis is clear, and the patient is unstable or septic, surgical treatment should begin immediately and not wait for confirmatory imaging or laboratory diagnostics. In questionable cases, it is far better to perform a surgery that retrospectively might be unnecessary than to delay the procedure and allow a potentially life-threatening infection to progress.**