Acute myocardial infarction is managed by an interprofessional team that is solely dedicated to heart disease. Besides the cardiologist, the team usually consists of a cardiac surgeon, an interventional cardiologist, intensivist, cardiac rehabilitation specialist, critical care or cardiology nurses, and physical therapists. Because many patients die before even reaching the hospital, the key is to educate the patient on symptoms and early arrival to the emergency department.

The pharmacist, nurse practitioner, and primary care providers should educate patients on how to take nitroglycerin, and if there is no relief after three doses, then 911 should be called.

At triage, the nurse should immediately communicate with the interprofessional team as the time to reperfusion is limited. The cardiologist may consider thrombolysis or PCI, depending on the duration of symptoms and contraindications. All patients need ICU monitoring. Nurses should be vigilant about the potentially life-threatening complications and communicate with the team if there are abnormal clinical signs or laboratory parameters. No patient should e prematurely discharged because complications of an MI can occur up to a week after an MI. After stabilization, patients need thorough education by the nurse on the reduction of risk factors for coronary artery disease. Besides a nurse practitioner, the social worker should be involved to facilitate home care, cardiac rehab, and the need for any support services while at home. The pharmacist should address and provide education concerning appropriate medication dosing and discuss potential side effects.

After discharge, the patient needs to enter a cardiac rehabilitation program, eat a healthy diet, discontinue smoking, abstain from alcohol, reduce body weight, and lower cholesterol and blood glucose levels. The patient should be educated on the importance of compliance with medications to lower blood pressure and blood cholesterol.

**Outcomes**

Acute myocardial infarction continues to have high mortality out of the hospital. Data indicate that at least one-third of patients die before coming to the hospital, and another 40%-50% are dead upon arrival. Another 5%-10% of patients will die within the first 12 months after their myocardial infarction. Readmission is common in about 50% of patients within the first 12 months after the initial MI. The overall prognosis depends on the ejection fraction, age, and other associated comorbidity. Those who do not undergo any revascularization will have a poorer outcome compared to patients who undergo revascularization. The best prognosis is in patients with early and successful reperfusion and preserved left ventricular function.