The blood to the brain receives vascular supply by the left and right internal carotid arteries and the left and right vertebral arteries. The two vertebral arteries course posteriorly and combine to form the basilar artery. The internal carotid and basilar arteries join at the base of the brain, where they form an anastomosis called the circle of Willis. From the circle, an anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral artery branches off and supply different areas of each hemisphere. The internal carotid arteries supply blood to the anterior and middle arteries. The vertebral arteries supply blood to the posterior cerebral arteries.

The anterior cerebral artery supplies the anteromedial surface of each hemisphere. The anteromedial surface of each hemisphere contains the motor and somatosensory region that controls the contralateral lower limb motor and senes. The middle cerebral artery delivers vascular supply to the lateral surface of each hemisphere. Important areas within the lateral surface are the motor and somatosensory region of the contralateral upper limb and face. Additionally, there are also Broca's area, Wernicke's area, dominant hemisphere, and nondominant hemispheres. The posterior cerebral artery supplies the posterior and inferior surfaces of each hemisphere. The posterior cerebral artery supplies the occipital lobe. Watershed regions are areas in the brain that sit between two cerebral arteries. These regions receive dual supply from distal branches of the cerebral arteries.

Vein drains the cortex and the deeper brain into a series of sinuses that eventually flows into the internal jugular veins. The venous system divides into a superficial and deep system. Draining the superficial surface of both hemispheres is the sagittal sinuses. The posterior region gets drained into the transverse sinuses. Deeper structures get drained into the great cerebral brain of Galen and straight sinus. These sinuses drain into the internal jugular veins and the right heart.