Acromegaly screening is appropriate in patients presenting with the typical phenotypic features but can also be considered in those patients with multiple disorders commonly associated with acromegaly, such as sleep apnea, hypertension, uncontrolled type 2 diabetes, debilitating arthropathy, and carpal tunnel syndrome. However, screening is not recommended in patients with isolated sleep apnea, type 2 diabetes, or hypertension because of the relative rarity of the syndrome.

Screening is biochemical. IGF-1 is used as it does not vary with sleep patterns, exercise, or throughout the day like GH does. Increased IGF-1 level confirms GH excess, and imaging should be done next to localize the source. If the IGF-1 is normal, acromegaly can essentially be ruled out at this point.

The next step in evaluating these patients is obtaining imaging of the brain as a somatotroph adenoma is the most common cause of acromegaly. The imaging modality of choice is a pituitary MRI. Adenomas have a hypointense signal on T2-weighted images of the MRI.

Other tests to be done include evaluating other pituitary hormones. Adenomas can co-secrete more than one hormone and sometimes multiple hormones. Also, depending on the size of the adenoma, compression of the normal pituitary gland can result in deficiencies of other hormonal cell lines.

As a result of common comorbidities, a hemoglobin A1c should be measured for the screening of diabetes and a lipid panel, as these patients commonly have elevated triglyceride levels and low HDL. If they have symptoms suggestive of sleep apnea, they should be referred for a sleep study. Any concerning heart failure symptoms on physical examination should prompt referral to a cardiologist and an electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. Any visual concerns or adenomas close to or compressing the optic chiasm should be referred to an ophthalmologist for formal visual field testing. Depending on the guidelines followed, a colonoscopy should be done at diagnosis (or age 40).

A SAGIT (Signs/Symptoms, Associated comorbidities, Growth hormone levels, IGF-1 levels, and Tumor features) evaluation has been developed, and it has been proven to be a valuable tool in recognizing the response in the treatment as well as giving potential information on the course and prognosis of the disease.