ECMO machinery consists of a mechanical pump, a membrane oxygenator (membrane lung), and a heat exchanger. The circuit generally involves blood drainage from a patient’s large blood vessel through an outflow cannula to a mechanical pump, pushing this blood towards a membrane lung. Gas exchange (oxygenation and decarboxylation) and rewarming of the blood both occur in this artificial lung. The membrane lung comprises thin, semipermeable, hollow fiber tubes that mimic alveoli within the human body and simulate diffusion across the interface.

A patient’s physiologic milieu is maintained by monitoring the pressure gradient between the patient’s blood flow and the sweep gas flow. The rate of sweep gas flow, which is the gas flow to the membrane lung in liters per minute, positively correlates with removing carbon dioxide from the blood. ECMO blood flow rate (blood volume passing through the circuit in liters per minute) positively correlates with the oxygenation of blood. Based on Poiseuille’s law, flow can be maximized by a cannula size with a larger diameter and shorter length. For neonates and infants weighing up to 15 kg, flow rates are typically 80 to 120 ml/kg/min and can range up to 1.7 L/min; for children above 15 kg, flow rates can reach 7.0 L/min. Blood that has been fully saturated with oxygen is then returned to the patient via an inflow cannula placed into a vessel. The patient’s cardiac output and hemoglobin concentration become ever more important as oxygenation relies on these factors.

There are two primary modes of ECMO, with each dependent on the physiologic state of the patient. Venoarterial (VA) ECMO is necessary if the patient is in cardiac failure. The presence or absence of respiratory compromise is arbitrary because the heart’s ejection fraction is diminished. Therefore, perfusion of the lungs through the pulmonary artery is insufficient, and the patient’s lungs become minimally involved in gas exchange. The drainage cannula is inserted into a large systemic vein (e.g., internal jugular vein) or the right atrium. Poorly oxygenated blood is taken from this site, which then travels to the membrane lung of the circuit, where it is oxygenated and warmed. Subsequently, it is infused back into the patient through an arterial line placed into a large systemic artery (e.g., internal carotid artery), bypassing the heart. By mixing this oxygen-rich blood with the patient’s oxygen-poor blood, the patient’s overall arterial oxygen concentration improves. The patient receives complete mechanical hemodynamic support, which is not possible in venovenous (VV) ECMO.

Venovenous (VV) ECMO provides oxygenation-ventilation support for isolated respiratory failure. It ultimately allows a patient’s impaired lungs to recover. Eligibility for this mode requires preserved cardiac pump function that can maintain pulmonary and systemic perfusion. VV ECMO also differs from VA ECMO in that the infusion catheter is placed in a venous line. Cannulation can be either be accomplished by separate cannulae that drain and infuse, or a single, dual-lumen cannula placed within the internal jugular vein, thus allowing both drainage and reinfusion through the same cannula. A single VV dual-lumen cannula has several pros, including the decreased risks with multiple access points (e.g., surgical site bleeding or infection), support for pediatric patients whose femoral vessels are otherwise not large enough, less sedation, and more freedom to ambulate out of bed.

Recirculation is a phenomenon exclusive to venovenous ECMO, in which reinfused oxygenated blood is withdrawn through the drainage cannula without passing through the systemic circulation. The problem of recirculation is usually diagnosed when there are low patient oxygen saturation and high pre-oxygenator saturations and can be identified by the proximity of the drainage and the reinfusion cannulae on the X-ray. Recirculation can be reduced by increasing the distance between drainage and reinfusion ports in a two-site venovenous ECMO configuration by withdrawing one or both cannulae.

Factors determining oxygen saturation during VV ECMO include pump flow, degree of recirculation, hemoglobin concentration, residual lung function, and patients' systemic venous return and oxygen saturation. For persistent hypoxemia, strategies include increasing ECMO blood flow, increase hemoglobin concentration and cardiac output, reduce oxygen consumption by using sedation and neuromuscular blockade, and therapeutic hypothermia and reducing recirculation.