Patients must be carefully selected when prescribing THC formulations approved by the FDA for medical use. Due to the sedation and euphoria effects of THC, physicians should consider a history of drug abuse or dependency and polypharmacy. Furthermore, the psychoactive effects of THC, such as hallucinations, dysphoria, and paranoia, are intolerable to some patients.

However, the legal status of THC is constantly in flux. Marijuana is federally classified as a class I scheduled drug, and there is no federally recognized use of medical marijuana. Even so, no formal legal decision has addressed this inconsistency between state and federal law. Thus, healthcare providers must stay up to date about specific state and federal regulations to protect both the patient and the prescriber.

Randomized clinical trials have shown that THC was more efficacious in patients given these chemotherapy agents than other second-line antiemetics such as prochlorperazine and metoclopramide. However, with highly emetogenic chemotherapy regimens such as high-dose methotrexate, cisplatin, or doxorubicin, THC was not more effective.

Furthermore, other potential uses of THC are being explored, and its off-label use may help manage some patients. The most promising research includes THC's use in the management of OSA and chronic neuropathic pain. Randomized control trials have shown that THC can be effective in improving OSA and chronic neuropathic pain. However, these studies were small in size with unclear results. As such further research is necessary on the tolerability and side effect profile of THC in treating these conditions.

As research grows, there is a good possibility that additional indications will be approved for medical use by the FDA. There must be a thorough discussion between the prescribing/ordering clinician and patient over the benefits and harms of THC. Additionally, interprofessional communication between all healthcare team members, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists, can help improve patient outcomes in patients who receive treatment with currently approved indications for THC formulations. Everyone on the interprofessional team needs to keep abreast of the latest data-driven evidence for these agents to properly assess their appropriateness for a given patient case.