Hereditary colorectal cancer (HCRC) is not a single disease; it is a group of diseases or syndromes with a mutational genetic component; these generate a clinically differentiated phenotype. It subdivides into two large HNPCC groups and the HPCC:

**Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)**is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome; the incidence of this syndrome is 1.7 to 4.2% among all CRCs patients (represents 3 to 8 cases per million inhabitants in the world, according to Globocan 2018).

- Lynch syndrome (LS) is the commonest of hereditary cancers and correlates with an increased risk of colorectal, endometrium, ovary, stomach, and small bowel cancer. LS has associations with mutations of DNA mismatch repair (MMR)as MLH1(76%), MSH2(40%), MSH6, PMS2, and EPCAM.

- Sporadic colorectal carcinomas, MLH1-/PMS2-deficient.

- Muir-Torre syndrome:( The genes most commonly mutated MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2). Its incidence represents 2 cases per ten million inhabitants, according to Globocan 2018).

- Turcot syndrome type I: The frequency is approximately 20% to 25% among all TS. It is related to mutations of the MMR gene.

**Hereditary polyposis colorectal cancer (HPCC)**accounts for approximately 3 to 5 % of all CRC cases.

- Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is related to the germline mutations of the APC gene. FAP incidence represents 2 to 3 cases per million inhabitants, according to data from the Danish Polyposis Registry 2017.

- Adenomatous polyposis syndromes (APC and MUTYH).

- Juvenile polyposis coli: (BMPR1A and SMAD4).

- Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: (STK11/LKB1), is incidence represents 1.2 per one million inhabitants.

- PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: (PHTS; PTEN).

- Cowden syndrome:(affecting the PTEN-gene).

- Turcot syndrome type II: The frequency is approximately 75% to 80% among all TSs. It is related to the APC gene mutation.

- Gardner syndrome: (involved APC gene).