The upper and lower motor neurons together comprise a two-neuron pathway that is responsible for movement. Upper and lower motor neurons utilize different neurotransmitters to relay their signals. Upper motor neurons use glutamate, while lower motor neurons use acetylcholine.

To perform a movement, a signal must begin in the primary motor cortex of the brain, which is in the precentral gyrus. In the primary motor cortex are the cell bodies of the upper motor neurons, referred to as Betz cells.

The lower motor neuron is responsible for transmitting the signal from the upper motor neuron to the effector muscle to perform a movement. There are three broad types of lower motor neurons: somatic motor neurons, special visceral efferent (branchial) motor neurons, and general visceral motor neurons.

Somatic motor neurons are in the brainstem and further divide into three categories: alpha, beta, and gamma. Alpha motor neurons innervate extrafusal muscle fibers and are the primary means of skeletal muscle contraction. The large alpha motor neuron cell body can be either in the brainstem or spinal cord. In the spinal cord, the cell bodies are found in the anterior horn and thus are called anterior horn cells. From the anterior horn cell, a single axon goes on to innervate many muscle fibers within a single muscle. The properties of these muscle fibers are nearly identical, allowing for controlled, synchronous movement of the motor unit upon depolarization of the lower motor neuron. Beta motor neurons are poorly characterized, but it has been established that they innervate both extrafusal and intrafusal fibers. Gamma motor neurons innervate muscle spindles and dictate their sensitivity. These neurons primarily respond to stretch of the muscle spindle. Despite being named a “motor neuron,” these neurons do not directly cause any motor function. It is thought that they get activated along with alpha motor neurons and fine-tune the muscle contraction (alpha-gamma coactivation). A disruption in either alpha or gamma motor neurons will result in a disruption of muscle tone.

Lower motor neurons also play a role in the somatic reflex arc. When muscle spindles detect a sudden stretch, a signal travels down the afferent nerve fibers. These nerve fibers synapse either directly onto the alpha motor neuron (monosynaptic reflex arc), or onto interneurons, which then synapse onto the alpha motor neuron (polysynaptic reflex arc). The lower motor neuron innervates the effector muscle, allowing for a quick muscle response. A reflex arc allows for interpretation of and reaction on the stimulus immediately through the spinal cord, bypassing the brain, resulting in a faster effector response.

Branchial motor neurons innervate the muscles of the head and neck that derive from the branchial arches. They are in the brainstem. The branchial motor neurons and sensory neurons together form the nuclei of cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XI.

Visceral motor neurons contribute to both the sympathetic and parasympathetic functions of the autonomic nervous system. In the sympathetic nervous system, central motor neurons are present in the spinal cord from T1-L2. They appear in the intermediolateral (IML) nucleus. Motor neurons from this nucleus have three different pathways. The first two pathways are to the prevertebral and paravertebral ganglia, from which peripheral neurons go on to innervate the heart, colon, intestines, kidneys, and lungs. The third possible pathway in this system is to the catecholamine-producing chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla. By targeting these three pathways, the visceral motor neurons in the sympathetic division contribute to the “fight-or-flight” response. On the other hand, in the parasympathetic system, the visceral motor neurons help give rise to cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X. Besides in the brainstem, these visceral motor neurons contribute to the parasympathetic system in the spinal cord at levels S2-S4. Similarly to the sympathetic division, these motor neurons directly innervate ganglia in the heart, pancreas, lungs, and kidneys. Thus, in both divisions of the autonomic system, these lower motor neurons take on a different role than somatic motor neurons in that they do not directly innervate an effector muscle, and instead innervate ganglia.