HTN results in the deposition of atherosclerotic plaque in arteries. Coronary artery disease (CAD), sometimes combined with plaque rupture, leads to myocardial ischemia and infarction. Increased afterload due to HTN increases the works of the heart, resulting in left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and CHF. The hypertrophied heart requires more oxygen, but the flow of oxygenated blood is impaired in CAD by luminal narrowing of the coronary arteries. Myocardial infarction results in decreased contractility, which decreases blood flow to the systemic circulation in systole. Coronary blood flow occurs in diastole, and coronary perfusion is decreased in the presence of hypertension-induced LVH because LVH results in decreased compliance and increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP). Examining the equation for coronary perfusion pressure (CPP), CPP = DBP – LVEDP, makes it readily apparent that increased LVEDP results in decreased coronary blood flow (CBF) in diastole. One way to improve coronary perfusion is to slow the heart rate, which increases the proportion of cardiac cycle time spent in diastole. This explains why tachycardia can result in myocardial ischemia. Although CBF can also be increased by increasing DBP, excessive increases in DBP, whether achieved with volume infusion and/or vasoconstrictors, can result in increased lung water and even APE.

Diastolic dysfunction (DD) may be present for years, with structural and physiologic changes, before symptoms develop. Older literature refers to diastolic heart failure. This language has been replaced with the term heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). DD that leads to HFpEF is most commonly caused by HTN. The underlying pathophysiology relates to the increased wall thickness and collagen, resulting in a stiff LV with decreased compliance, impaired relaxation, a smaller cavity, and increased LVEDP. LV filling is impaired in diastole, and elevated left atrial pressure may be transmitted to the alveoli, resulting in fatigue and/or dyspnea.

Atherosclerosis in cerebral vessels can impair blood flow to the brain, causing an ischemic stroke. Atherosclerotic vessels in the brain may also burst, resulting in a hemorrhagic stroke. Hemorrhagic stroke on the surface of the brain causes a subarachnoid hemorrhage, while a ruptured vessel within the brain results in intracerebral bleeding. HTN may also result in embolic stroke when atherosclerotic plaque in the ascending aorta dislodges and travels to the brain where it occludes a blood vessel. Embolic stroke may also occur if atherosclerotic emboli originate in the venous circulation, but subsequently, enter the arterial circulation via a patent foramen ovale.

Atherosclerosis of arteries to the kidneys impairs oxygen delivery to the nephrons. In time, the glomerular filtration rate decreases, and damaged kidneys lose the ability to filter the blood. In fact, HTN is the second most common cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) after diabetes. Damaged kidneys also result in an impaired renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway, further elevating BP.