# Continuing Education Activity

Posttraumatic syringomyelia refers to the development of a cerebrospinal fluid-filled cavity within the spinal cord several months or years after a known trauma. It is distinct from the type of syringomyelia that is often associated with congenital malformations such as the Chiari type 1 malformation, where obstruction of the normal cerebrospinal fluid flow can result in a syrinx occurring as a secondary phenomenon. This activity reviews the presentation and management of posttraumatic syringomyelia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the recognition and management of this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of posttraumatic syringomyelia.
- Describe the epidemiology of posttraumatic syringomyelia.
- Describe the evaluation of posttraumatic syringomyelia.
- Incorporate a structured interprofessional team approach to provide effective care and appropriate surveillance of patients with posttraumatic syringomyelia.

# Introduction

Posttraumatic syringomyelia (PTS) refers to the development of a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) filled cavity within the substance of the spinal cord. As the name suggests, this particular type of syringomyelia occurs after a previous trauma with or without clinical spinal cord injury. It is distinct from syringomyelia occurring due to congenital malformations, where obstruction of normal CSF flow can result in a syrinx occurring as a secondary phenomenon. Other terms that are found in literature in traumatic cases include cystic myelomalacia, or spinal cord cysts. As the name suggests, it is a cyst or cavity within the spinal cord. Management of PTS is complicated as it can result in slow, progressive, and potentially devastating loss of sensory and/or motor function in many cases. Most patients will have chronic pain which can affect their daily living function and emotional health.

# Etiology

Obstruction of normal spinal CSF flow dynamics is felt to be important in the generation of a spinal cord syrinx. This can occur due to vertebral fractures, scar tissue, arachnoid adhesions, penetrating injury, posttraumatic kyphotic deformity, and arachnoid scarring without obvious recognized trauma. The presence of spinal canal stenosis and bony deformity such as kyphosis is known to increase the likelihood of syrinx formation. Blood products may be a contributing factor.

# Epidemiology

There is no known racial or ethnic predisposition for PTS. It is more common in males as they are involved more frequently in motor vehicle accidents and extreme activities that give origin to the spinal trauma. Around 1-7% of persons with spinal cord injury have been reported to develop clinically symptomatic syringomyelia.

# Pathophysiology

The precise pathophysiology is not completely understood, but several theories have been proposed. All relate to abnormalities of CSF flow dynamics.

# Histopathology

Syrinx cavities may take a variety of forms. Some persons may have a single cavity but others may have a second cavity as well. Syrinx cavities may be multiloculated with tissue septations seen on imaging and pathologic specimens. Syrinx cavities are not composed of pure CSF but contain varying amounts of cellular elements and debris. Chronic syrinx cavities may show surrounding gliosis. Syrinx cavities have traditionally been believed to dissect under pressure through intramedullary tissue.

# History and Physical

The median duration of post-injury to diagnosis is 9-15 years. Pain is the most commonly reported symptom and present as localized to the zone of injury or diffusely below the injury level. It is neuropathic and can be aching, burning, stabbing, and may be tender to light touch or pressure.

Neurologic examination is critical as these can reveal increased numbness, weakness, changes in tone or spasticity, or autonomic changes (hyperhidrosis, heart rate, or blood pressure instability). Selective loss of pain and temperature with relative preservation of dorsal column function (touch and pressure) are classic findings. This is known as "sensory dissociation". Motor weakness may occur early but it is more often a late finding. Some patients may retain motor function despite very large syrinx cavities.

# Evaluation

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the imaging of choice for the initial diagnosis of PTS. There is a lack of correlation between symptoms and cavity size. The cavity is usually found at the site of spinal column fracture or abnormal angulation. Computed tomographic scan myelography may be necessary for persons who cannot undergo MRI as it can delineate and obstruction to dye flow due to cord tethering/dural adhesions. Plain radiographs, including flexion-extension views, are used to detect spinal instability, spinal kyphosis, fractures, and dislocations. Electromyography may include findings of various forms of abnormal spontaneous activity. These are nonspecific, and electrodiagnosis is best used for the exclusion of other causes producing similar symptoms. Motor evoked potentials can be used to demonstrate and follow prolongation of central motor conduction time and should be used intraoperatively for incomplete patients, however, this technology is not widely available. MRI is used to follow up patients and evaluate the surgical treatment.

# Treatment / Management

Syringomyelia is difficult to treat.

A promising therapy is being recently investigated in which autologous bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells are injected in the syrinx of posttraumatic syringomyelia.

Serial neurologic examinations are critical for following patients with known syringomyelia. Handheld dynamometry of key muscle groups can provide a useful objective adjunct to manual muscle testing. The patient's report of changes in function, such as ambulation, wheelchair propulsion, or transfers, can be the most important factor to determine the progression of the condition. Patients with cervical syringomyelia need monitoring of pulmonary function to assess for worsening of vital capacity. Interdisciplinary evaluations by rehabilitation teams can assess the need for changes in mobility devices, seating/walking activity, and activities of daily living. The team will help to mitigate increasing risks of complications such as pressure ulcers, a decline in mobility, and falls.

# Differential Diagnosis

Spinal instability

Tethered spinal cord

Spinal hematoma

Glial scar formation with mass effect

Subacute progressive ascending myelopathy

Apoptosis of spinal tissue

# Prognosis

Conservative treatment usually leads to progressive neurological deterioration within a year in those patients who present with deficits.

Small cysts in asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic patients do not need initial surgery.

For those symptomatic patients who undergo a surgical procedure, most have good results for radicular symptoms but less encouraging results for autonomic symptoms or spasticity. Cessation of symptoms or improvement occurs in nearly 90% of the patients.

# Complications

Progressive numbness

Progressive weakness

Increased spasticity

Hyperhidrosis

Blood pressure instability

Postural hypotension

Pressure ulcers

Decline in mobility

Falls

Neuropathic arthropathies (Charcot's joint)

Burns to senseless areas

Progressive scoliosis

Loss of bowel and bladder function

Sensory-motor deterioration if surgery is performed

Emotional instability

# Consultations

Neurosurgical consultation is indicated when surgery is being considered

Electrodiagnostic consultation can be helpful to evaluate for other causes or concomitant radiculopathy

Spinal cord injury specialists

Physical and occupational therapists to address mobility, seating, self-care, neurogenic bowel

Pain specialists

Neuro-urologic specialists if a neurogenic bladder develops

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Most of these patients have emotional and physical challenges due to their initial primary spinal cord injury. As syringomyelia causes new deficits, patients should be encouraged that it is a treatable condition, and outcomes are good in the majority of patients with pain symptoms. Patients may need an aggressive rehabilitation phase to improve motor and spastic symptoms.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Collaboration shared decision-making, and communication are key elements for a good outcome. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of all joint activities. An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to postoperative care can help achieve the best possible outcomes. Posttraumatic syringomyelia is a difficult disease to evaluate and treat. It requires a coordinated team approach of multiple specialists, and supportive care of physical and occupational therapists, nurses, and clinicians. [Level V]