Patient-centered care is important in the management of heavy menstrual bleeding. The literature emphasizes the improvement of quality of life in patients who undergo treatment for heavy menstrual bleeding with medical or surgical management. It has been found that women with HMB have a decreased quality of life equivalent to a loss of half a year of full health.

The minimally invasive surgical option of endometrial ablation in HMB needs to be considered a treatment option for women who do not desire hysterectomy. However, endometrial ablation is not without complications or failure. Studies have shown that endometrial ablation has similar efficacy and is more cost-effective to a hysterectomy in the short term, but with long term follow up women ultimately need definitive management with hysterectomy for persistent bleeding or pain to improve outcomes, proper patient selection, thorough preoperative evaluations including ultrasound and histological sampling, and realistic patient expectations need to be addressed before performing the procedure. Care coordination by physicians with preoperative and postoperative nursing, anesthesiology, radiology, and endometrial ablation device representatives is necessary for patient safety and overall team performance in the operating room.

A cohort study that looked at amenorrhea and treatment failure with EA found patient factors associated with poor outcomes. Patient factors that lead to treatment failure include age less than 45, parity greater than 5, prior tubal ligation, and history of pelvic pain. Factors that assist in amenorrhea include age greater than 45, uterine length less than 5, endometrial thickness less than 4mm, and use of radiofrequency ablation.

An interprofessional team approach to abnormal uterine bleeding cases, including those resulting in endometrial ablation, is necessary and will involve the primary care clinician, gynecological specialists, and nursing staff coordinating their activities and openly communicating to best guide successful patient outcomes. [Level 5]