Loratadine is proven to be an effective and safe medication for alleviating symptoms of allergic rhinitis and treating urticaria. The drug is available as an over-the-counter medication; thus, it is essential to have a pharmacist educate the patient on the therapeutic dose of the drug and check their medication profile for any potential interactions. The primary care clinician (MD, DO, PA, NP) must counsel the patient on the importance of reading labels to avoid taking more than the recommended dose to prevent any drug-related toxicities. While loratadine is a relatively safe drug, healthcare providers should inform patients of all the side effects associated with the medication, and medication reconciliation is necessary as with the addition or discontinuing of any drug.

Healthcare providers should also check liver and kidney function before prescribing the medication to individuals with hepatic and renal impairments. Nurses should take a complete mediation history from the patient at each visit, including OTC agents and supplements, and chart these, so all interprofessional healthcare team members have complete patient information. Nursing can also reinforce counseling to the patient on proper dosing and administration of loratadine and watching for adverse effects and patient compliance. Pharmacists can reinforce dosing and administration parameters and check for drug-drug interactions. All members of the interprofessional team, as cited above, need to practice collaborative communication to ensure the best possible patient outcomes for loratadine therapy. [Level 5]