There is a lack of guidelines for the evaluation of patients with Turcot syndrome in screening or diagnosis. Of greatest importance is family history. Children of parents, either one parent or both, who were diagnosed with colorectal cancer at early age should certainly be monitored for pre-cancerous polyps.

The utility of genetic screening is debatable. Some argue that it should be performed on patients who are found to have pre-cancerous colorectal polyps to detect the presence of Turcot syndrome and thus anticipate the development of a primary brain tumor and render early treatment, and vice versa. Those in favor of genetic testing refer to the preventability of death in this disease if it is anticipated. A pitfall of this kind of genetic testing is cost-effectiveness since no real statistics show many people with inherited or sporadic genetic mutations resulting in colorectal cancer develop brain tumors and even less information vice versa. Turcot syndrome can also manifest with several genotypes, making genetic testing more complex. If a family member is identified with disease-causing mutations, then genetic testing either prenatally or during preimplantation could be beneficial.

Other opinions state that the manifestation of either colorectal cancer or primary brain tumor at a young age should warrant screening for the other, depending on which comes first. Again, there is little data to guide the decision to screen. There is a recommendation for upper gastrointestinal (GI) surveillance every 3 years for peri-ampullary cancer in the duodenum in patients who have had a colectomy.

Early serial colonoscopies should be a mainstay in patients with a family history of FAP, HNPCC, evidence of APC or MMR gene mutations. Screening until age 35 with proctosigmoidoscopy or testing DNA from peripheral mononuclear cells for mutation has generally been performed.

The goal of screening in TS, whether genetic or clinical, would be to prevent complications of the disease. Detecting genetic mutations in a patient identified with a primary brain tumor can allow for adequate screening for and thus prevention of colorectal cancer. Detecting genetic mutations in a patient with early diagnosed colorectal cancer can help us screen for primary brain tumors, allowing for early detection and treatment. Detecting these mutations in a patient with family history and without any disease manifestations can allow for the prevention of any manifestations of the disease at all, which would be optimal.

Since TS is very closely related to FAP and HNPCC, screening guidelines for these two diseases apply as well. The most important thing to do is recognize that there is inherited CRC in the family and that depending on the specific mutations, any of the syndromes can arise. Therefore, genetic screening can be a useful tool in the future to help prepare for the different manifestations of these various mutations, namely malignant brain tumors in the case of Turcot syndrome.

Diagnosing Turcot syndrome is helpful because making correlations between brain tumors and colorectal cancer can help guide preventative action for either condition.

One of the most comprehensive guidelines for using a clinical presentation to diagnose patients with either TS1 or TS2 was suggested by Paraf et al. in 1997. They suggested the categorization of patients based on the presence or absence of 4 factors: (1) the phenotype of the polyps, (2) type of brain neoplasm, (3) presence of skin lesions, and (4) consanguinity.