Mood stabilizers represent a class of medications that can be expertly used in treatment regimens for bipolar mania and bipolar depression when used and managed correctly. The evaluation of specific mood-stabilizing agents must be tailored to each patient’s diagnosis and needs; this is where a team-based approach to pharmacologic management of bipolar disorder is well-deserved. The fact that the common medications included in this class have significant drug-drug interactions merits close scrutiny. Therefore, the patient’s clinician should always confer with a pharmacist to decide which agent would perform best, given the patient’s current needs.

Aside from the initial council necessary before initiating a mood stabilizer regimen, the patient will need to follow up regularly for monitoring. Nursing can play a significant role in both of these activities. This will ensure that the agent is both functional and efficacious for the patient and not causing any untoward side effects or toxicities. In this way, clinicians and their teams of vital nursing and aid staff can keep a close watch on patients to ensure that the drugs they are taking are still working in their favor.

Overall, everyone on the interprofessional healthcare team: clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, can benefit from broadening their knowledge on the distinguishing characteristics of the different major mood stabilizers. Regarding the receiving and admitting process of patients, medical staff should be clinically knowledgeable about the various agents that their patients might be on, for it could be a reason or, at the very least, a related etiology as to their hospital or outpatient clinic visit in the first place. A more widespread knowledge about these agents would be beneficial to have or learn from any hospital standpoint.

In short, interprofessional management of mood-stabilizing medications will lead to better patient outcomes with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]