The classical anatomy textbooks, like Testut, describe the psoas major muscle originating at the top of the lateral face and the base of the transverse processes of the first four lumbar vertebrae and from the twelfth thoracic vertebrae and interposed intervertebral discs. The insertion on the discs and on the transverse processes is through short tendon tongues, which insert on the vertebral body with a medially concave arched tendon to allow passage of the lumbar vessels and the communicating branches of the ortho-sympathetic nerves.

From the lumbar spine the numerous muscular bundles move forward, downwards, and laterally to form a single, cylindrical and fusiform muscular body, it presents the maximum thickness at the sacroiliac joint. The muscle crosses the lumbar region and the iliac fossa, from which it emerges through an incisura on the upper margin of the ilio-pubic branch between the inferior anterior iliac spine and the iliopectineal eminence (lacuna musculorum). At this level, the posterior fascicles attach firmly to the pelvic brim, and the muscle fibers change direction taking it posteriorly and laterally to insert itself through a thick tendon on the posterior face of the small trochanter of the femur.

The iliacus muscle has a fan-shaped triangular shape that occupies the internal iliac fossa. It originates on the upper two-thirds of the iliac fossa, on the medial edge of the iliac crest, on the ilium-lumbar ligament, where it blends with the bundles of the quadratus lumborum muscle, on the base of the sacrum, anteriorly on the upper and lower anterior iliac spines, and finally on the anterior capsule of the hip joint. The muscular bundles move towards the lateral side of the psoas major muscle tendon on which they are inserted. Few lateral and inferior muscle bundles are inserted directly on the femur.The psoas minor muscle is an inconsistent and small muscle bundle that often turns into fibrous tissue, it is present in around 60-65% of the population.

Psoas bursa. The psoas muscle is separated from the bony margin of the ilium and from the fibrous capsule of the hip joint by a serous fluid bursa (the iliopectineal bursa) of considerable size that sometimes communicates with the synovial space of the hip joint. A smaller bursa is located between the muscle tendon and the anterior surface of the lesser trochanter of the femur.

**Fascial Relationship**

The iliopsoas muscle has important fascial relationships in its upper or lumbar abdominal portion, in its medial portion in the iliac fossa near the inguinal ligament, and in its femoral portion in the lower limb.

Lumbo-pelvic portion. The psoas major muscle sits in a posterior relationship to the diaphragm, to the psoas minor muscle, to the kidney and the renal vessels, to the ureter, to the gonadal vessels, to the ascending colon on the right and descending to the left. It is positioned anteriorly to the inter-transversal muscles of the transverse apophysis of the vertebrae on which it is inserted, with the quadratus lumborum muscle, from which it is separated from the deep sheet of the thoracolumbar fascia,

Inguinal portion. The iliopsoas muscle passes under the inguinal ligament, filling all the space between the ligament, the iliopectineal band and the anterior border of the iliac bone: a space called the lacuna musculorum. The iliopectineal band separates it from the artery and femoral vein. The femoral nerve is located on the anteromedial side.

Femoral portion. The lateral surface of the iliopsoas muscle constitutes the lateral portion of Scarpa's triangle. Its posterior side rests above the fibrous capsule of the hip joint. Its medial margin corresponds to the lateral edge of the pectoral muscle with which it forms a groove for passaging the femur artery. Its lateral margin is related to the sartorial muscle and the rectus femoris muscle.

**Function**

The function of the psoas muscle is to connect the upper body to the lower body, the outside to the inside, the appendicular to the axial skeleton, and the front to the back, with its fascial relationship. Combined with the iliopsoas muscle, the psoas is a major contributor of flexion of the hip joint. Unilateral contraction of the psoas also helps with lateral motions and bilateral contraction can help elevate the trunk from the supine position. The psoas muscle also works in conjunction with the hip flexors to elevate the upper leg towards the body when the body is static or pull the body towards the leg when the leg is in a fixed position.

The biomechanical and postural function of the psoas complex muscle is to flex the hip, to adduct the femur and to externally rotate the hip. In an upright position, the muscle takes a fixed point on the femur and acts on the pelvis and on the lumbar spine. Its action is to flex the spine, to side-bend ipsilateral and to rotate it towards the opposite side. The proper role of the psoas major muscle is to stabilize the lumbar spine in the sitting position and to flex the femur in a supine or standing position.

The psoas major is in relationship with the medial arcuate ligament and continues with the thoracic diaphragm and the endo thoracic fascia: the psoas major muscle seems able to exert influence on the balance of the dynamics of respiratory function and the functional relationship between the diaphragm and the pelvic floor. The fascia of the muscle appears to exhibit continuity with the fascia of the crus of the diaphragm, blending with the anterior longitudinal ligament; while the inferomedial fascia of the psoas muscle becomes thick and is continuous with the deep fascia of the pelvic floor