The treatment of brow ptosis is dependent on brow morphology, ptosis etiology, severity, and, most importantly, patient goals.

The endoscopic brow lift also called the "endobrow" procedure, is the most commonly employed approach to brow lifting (see image).****Dissection is performed via a median and two paramedian incisions in the subperiosteal plane and via two temporal incisions in a plane between the fascia of the temporalis muscle and the temporoparietal fascia to release the periosteum around the superior and lateral orbit at the arcus marginalis. The procedure typically involves visualizing and preserving the supraorbital neurovascular bundles as well as the medial zygomaticotemporal veins, known as the "sentinel veins," which are located within approximately 10 mm of the frontal branches of the facial nerve and serve to warn the surgeon of their proximity.

The endoscopic brow lift is best suited for patients with low or average brow height, defined as six or fewer centimeters from the brow to the hairline, and those without significant curvature or bossing of the forehead. A significant benefit of this procedure is that it can address glabellar rhytides, a common comorbidity of brow ptosis, through the division of the corrugator supercilii and/or procerus muscles. Some limitations include the risk of damage to the frontal branch of the facial nerve (which would exacerbate brow ptosis), risk of damage to the supratrochlear and supraorbital nerves (which would cause forehead numbness), difficulty in correcting brow asymmetry, and limited ability to achieve a dramatic elevation. The most significant limitation on the degree of lift achieved with the endobrow procedure is downward traction from the closure of concomitantly performed upper eyelid blepharoplasty.

Open coronal approaches constitute a more traditional category of options. Pretrichial incisions are placed at or just in front of the hairline, while trichophytic incisions are hidden within the hairline; the classic coronal incision passes directly over the vertex of the scalp. Dissection is carried forward in the subgaleal plane until diving subperiosteally 1 to 2 cm superior to the orbital rim. The flap is elevated, the excess skin and soft tissue are excised as necessary, and the incision is closed (see image). As with the endoscopic brow lift, division of the arcus marginalis is important, and avoiding injury to the supraorbital neurovascular bundles is critical. While most supraorbital bundles exit the skull through notches, roughly 25% will exit via foramina, which obstruct access to the orbital rim and often require osteotomies for complete forehead flap mobilization; performing these osteotomies to convert foramina into notches may place the supraorbital nerves at increased risk of injury. Coronal brow lifts allow for more dramatic lifts than the endoscopic option provides, and they do not require expensive endoscopic equipment; however, they result in significant scars that may be revealed by hair loss and more commonly cause minor complications like forehead numbness, pruritus, and alopecia, as well as long-term anesthesia or hypesthesia posterior to the incision in nearly all patients.

The direct brow lift is performed through an incision just above the hair-bearing brows. Excess skin and soft tissue are excised to create a considerable lift with a relatively minor procedure that can easily be performed in the clinic under local anesthesia (see image). This procedure is the most effective option for heavy lateral hooding and is the most straightforward procedure with which to correct brow asymmetry. Its drawbacks include the risk of visible scarring - particularly over the medial brow, where the skin is more sebaceous - and an increased chance of excessive elevation that may result in a surprised look, but because this technique addresses each brow separately, it is ideally suited for alleviating most cases of brow asymmetry.

For severe brow asymmetry, particularly for patients with facial paralysis and very heavy soft tissues, unilateral suture suspension of the ptotic brow to a titanium miniplate fixated to the frontal bone at the level of the hairline may be effective. As a side benefit, the sutures can potentially be tightened under local anesthesia in the future if the brow ptosis recurs or worsens.

The transblepharoplasty browpexy is a way to combine the treatment of upper lid dermatochalasis or blepharoptosis with the treatment of brow ptosis. These conditions are often comorbid, so this approach is becoming more common. An upper eyelid blepharoplasty is performed first; then, dissection is carried superiorly along the orbital septum until the pericranium above the supraorbital rim is reached. This periosteum can be used as an anchor to suspend the brow using either a suture or an absorbable implantable device. Similar to the results of the endoscopic approach, the results obtained with this procedure are limited.

The mid-forehead brow lift is mostly a procedure of historical interest, in which an incision is hidden within a deep, transverse forehead rhytid (see image). The excess skin and soft tissue are excised, and the incision is closed similarly to the direct brow lift. It has been largely abandoned because the scars it produces are challenging to hide, and other options allow for a similar amount of lift.

Nonsurgical treatment may be pursued in particular cases. Botulinum toxin injections effectively treat spastic brow ptosis or even slightly elevate the brow by weakening the depressor supercilii muscle; more systemic etiologies like myasthenia gravis will require specialized medical therapy.