**Barium Esophagography -**This is often the first study obtained in the workup of dysphagia, dyspepsia, or regurgitation. It is non-invasive and used primarily to assess the structural integrity of the esophagus, identifying hiatal hernias, leaks, diverticula, obstructions, and other structural malformations. This study can grossly assess esophageal motility, but a modified barium swallow performed with a speech pathologist more accurately assesses functional swallowing. While barium provides better contrast than water-soluble solutions, in cases of suspected esophageal perforation, the use of barium increases the risk of inflammatory mediastinitis. A barium esophagogram should not be obtained in cases of acute chemical injury.

**Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)**- Upper endoscopy allows for the direct visualization of the pathology in question. It is particularly useful in assessing reflux esophagitis, Barrett metaplasia, strictures, masses, suspected upper GI bleeds, varices, and hiatal hernias. Endoscopy allows for select interventions, including biopsy, foreign body removal, stricture dilation, ligation of bleeding vessels, and pharmacologic injections. The most serious risk of this procedure is esophageal perforation, which occurs in < 1% of cases.

**Esophageal pH Monitoring**- This is the gold standard for the diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease. This test allows for 24-hr pH monitoring of the lower esophagus, measuring 6 data points to determine the Demeester score (DMS). The DMS is a composite score of acid exposure during prolonged pH monitoring, with a score of >14.72 indicating reflux.

- Percentage of total time pH<4

- Percentage of upright time pH<4

- Percentage of supine time pH<4

- Number of reflux episodes

- Number of reflux episodes lasting > 5 minutes

- Longest reflux episode

The calculation can usually be performed via phone app or website; however, for completeness, the scoring value equation is SVn = (X-A)/SD+1

X= detection value, A = mean value, SD = standard deviation

A composite DMS score is then obtained by adding the six values, such that DMS = SV1 + SV2 + SV3 + SV4 + SV5 + SV6

Score interpretation:

- DMS < 14.72 GERD negative

- DMS 14.72 - 50 mild GERD

- DMS 51 - 100 moderate GERD

- DMS > 100 severe GERD

**Esophageal Manometry (EM)**- This is a direct measurement of the intraluminal pressure at multiple levels within the esophagus. EM assesses UES function, LES function, and motility within the esophageal body. Manometry is most useful in the workup of suspected achalasia, esophageal spasm, and GERD.