Idiopathic pulmonary hypertension is a life-threatening disorder that significantly affects the quality of life and, over time, leads to right heart failure. A timely evaluation, proper treatment, regular follow-up, and patient education can positively affect the outcome of the disease. For this, integrated, interprofessional care with the involvement of different subspecialties is required. The physician, along with a team of nurse specialists, pharmacists, and social workers, functioning as an interprofessional team, should coordinate closely to provide the best possible care and counsel these patients.

Non-specific symptoms of the disease usually result in a delay in diagnosis. The family physician suspects the disease based on non-invasive tests (echocardiogram, X-ray). Once the presumptive diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension has been made, it is very critical to classify the type of pulmonary hypertension as the treatment for one group may cause deleterious effects if used for another group. These patients are, therefore, referred to different subspecialty physicians to determine the cause. A referral to the pulmonologist is essential for sleep studies and pulmonary function tests to exclude lung disease as a cause. To rule out left heart disease, patients are referred to a cardiologist. Right heart catheterization to confirm the diagnosis is also done by the cardiologist. Similarly, to rule out other causes, the patients are also referred to rheumatologists and other doctors. It is also important to counsel the patients so that they can live with this disease. The pharmacist should examine all current medications, as well as verify the dosing and interactions of any new medications prescribed for the condition, and report back to the team should any issues arise.

Treatment of the cause of pulmonary hypertension is the key to managing the disease. Hence, collaboration with physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners in different specialties, working as a cohesive interprofessional team, is essential to manage pulmonary hypertension.