# Introduction

The Na+ K+ pump is an electrogenic transmembrane ATPase first discovered in 1957 and situated in the outer plasma membrane of the cells; on the cytosolic side.

The sodium and potassium move against the concentration gradients. The Na+ K+-ATPase pump maintains the gradient of a higher concentration of sodium extracellularly and a higher level of potassium intracellularly. The sustained concentration gradient is crucial for physiological processes in many organs and has an ongoing role in stabilizing the resting membrane potential of the cell, regulating the cell volume, and cell signal transduction.

Na, K-ATPase is a crucial scaffolding protein that can interact with signaling proteins such as protein kinase C (PKC) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K).

# Cellular Level

Structurally, the Na+ K+ ATPase is composed of a catalytic alpha subunit and an auxiliary beta subunit.

# Function

Sodium and potassium gradients function in various organ systems' physiologic processes.

Sperm cells also use the Na, K-ATPase, but they use a different isoform necessary for preserving fertility in males. Sperm needs the Na, K ATPase to regulate membrane potential and ions, which is necessary for sperm motility and the sperm’s acrosome functioning during penetration into the egg.

The brain also requires NA, K ATPase activity. Neurons need the Na, K ATPase pump to reverse postsynaptic sodium flux to re-establish the potassium and sodium gradients which are necessary to fire action potentials. Astrocytes also need Na, K ATPase pump to maintain the sodium gradient as the sodium gradient maintains neurotransmitter reuptake. Na, K ATPases in the gray matter consumes a significant amount of energy, up to three-quarters of energy is absorbed by Na, K ATPases in the gray matter while merely a quarter of the total energy gets utilized for protein synthesis and molecular synthesis.

# Pathophysiology

The Na+-K+ ATPase plays a prominent role in thyroid pathophysiology. In hyperparathyroidism, there is an increase in heat intolerance, increased sweating, and increased weight loss due to the increased synthesis of Na+-K+ ATPase induced by the excessive thyroid hormone. This increased synthesis of Na+-K+ ATPase then increases basal metabolic rate, which then increases oxygen consumption, respiratory rate, body temperature, and calorigenesis.

# Clinical Significance

As the Na+-K+ ATPase is essential for maintaining various cellular functions, its inhibition could result in diverse pathologic states. Studies show that patients with heart failure have a 40% lower concentration of total Na, K-ATPase.

Another significant clinical application includes the effect of beta-adrenergic agonists in increasing the number of Na+/K+ ATPase channels; this is because beta-adrenergic agonists can enhance the gene expression of the Na+-K+-ATPase pump, which ultimately results in an increased quantity of the enzyme and therefore increased the activity of the enzyme. Because of this increased quantity of Na+/K+ ATPase, more potassium is pumped into the cell, causing a buildup of intracellular potassium. Therefore, extracellularly, this inward shift of potassium results in hypokalemia in the extracellular blood. Thus beta-adrenergic agonists can cause increased Na+ transport out of the cell as well. Increased Na+ transport extracellularly across alveolar epithelial cells for example, which would then cause lung liquid to follow this flow of Na+, ultimately stimulating lung liquid clearance.

Insulin also causes clinically significant effects on the Na+/K+ ATPase. Insulin increases the number of Na+/K+ ATPase pumps in the membrane as well, this leads to an intracellular shift of potassium, causing hypokalemia in the extracellular space of the blood.

There are reports of abnormal expression levels, or activity of the Na+K+ pump in diabetes, hypertension, Alzheimer's disease, and in various tumors including glioblastoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma, breast cancer, melanoma, colorectal carcinoma, and bladder cancer.

Na+ K+-ATPase and its endogenous regulators, the endogenous cardiac steroids (ECS), play a role in the etiology of bipolar disorder and are a potential target for drug development for the treatment.

Both RNA and DNA viruses can directly affect Na, K-ATPase function, in particular, viral infections targeting the host cell components. Na, K-ATPase holds promise as an antiviral strategy to minimize the resistance to antiviral drugs and has been shown to be effective.

There is evidence of a Na/K-ATPase oxidant amplification loop in the process of aging, obesity, and cardiovascular disease.