Von Willebrand disease (VWD) can be inherited or acquired.

Inherited phenotypic forms of Von Willebrand disease are:

- Type 1: This is an autosomal dominant disease (AD, incomplete penetrance approximately 60%) and is caused by a partial quantitative deficiency of von Willebrand factor.

- Type 2: This is an autosomal dominant disease caused by several qualitative defects in von Willebrand factor. It has four subtypes (2A-AD or AR, 2B-AD, 2N-AR, 2M-AD). 2A is the most common variant.

- Type 3: This is an autosomal recessive disease (AR) and is caused by a complete quantitative defect. The von Willebrand factor levels are not detectable, and the severe bleeding disorder characterizes this variant.

The VWF gene is highly polymorphic, and this polymorphism leads to a big variation in the normal spectrum of von Willebrand levels function. Subsequently, there is a spectrum of presentations and disease severity.

Acquired von Willebrand disease occurs when secondary (acquired) processes lead to a functional impairment of von Willebrand factor, either by decreasing its available quantity or interfering with the physiological hemostasis pathway. The most commonly associated conditions are lung cancer, Wilm's tumor, gastric cancer, MGUS, multiple myeloma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), plasma cell dyscrasias, lymphomas, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Felty syndrome, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, or other autoimmune disorders, metabolic disorders (hypothyroidism), drug side effects, and states of high-vascular flow such as AS, VSD, VAD (ventricular assist devices), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), or metallic cardiac valves. The von Willebrand factor is a large multimeric glycoprotein, and it is susceptible to the shear stress associated with high flow states.

The autoimmune spectrum can be quite varied as von Willebrand factor occurs as a multimer, and this heterogeneity means that certain multimer sizes may escape the immune-mediated antibody response. The mechanism in malignancy includes the formation of non-specific antibodies that bind the von Willebrand factor forming an immune complex and hence increase clearance by the reticular endothelial system. The other mechanism is the absorption of the von Willebrand factor on the surface of malignant cells, such as the case in multiple myeloma or solid tumors or proteolysis of von Willebrand factor multimers as is usually seen in MPN.