Spinal cord stimulator implantation is an outpatient procedure and can provide pain relief to patients with various chronic pain syndrome. The procedure has minimal serious complications, but lead migration and breakage are common. It is imperative to identify the risk factors to the procedure and perform a thorough mental health assessment of the patient before any surgery. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Before and following surgery, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluation of the patient's back pain and symptoms of peripheral neuropathy by the primary care provider. Conservative management options should be exhausted before stimulator implantation.

- Workup and treatment of the primary pain complaint often include the need for further evaluation by a neurologist, orthopedic surgeon, or neurosurgeon.

- Following unsuccessful back surgery, the surgeon should address the possible need for a spinal cord stimulator for pain further pain relief.

- A pain medicine specialist should be consulted for spinal cord stimulator implantation.

- An interprofessional team should address comorbid mental health disorders before implantation of the stimulator.

- Before implantation, anticoagulation is typically held. The duration of holding anticoagulation should be coordinated with the primary care team, and for high-risk patients, the patient's cardiologist.

- Patients with pacemakers and cardiac defibrillators require approval by cardiology before stimulator implantation.

- Postoperative complications should be monitored closely, including postoperative infection and spinal epidural hematoma formation.

- Following implantation, stimulator settings should be adjusted to provide optimal pain relief.