Medical versus surgical management of mitral regurgitation depends on the severity, chronicity, comorbidities, and etiology. While some pharmacologic agents are used in MR, the evidence for their use is not strong, and they do not have a recommendation from the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association (AHA).

**Medical**

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB) have been used to delay MR progression in asymptomatic patients.

Beta-blockers in the setting of MR treatment have also been studied. There is little to no benefit demonstrated with beta-blocking agents in primary MR; however, there have been some studies showing increased survival benefit with these agents in secondary MR.

With medical management, loop diuretics are believed to be useful also with other pharmacologic agents to further decrease afterload and regurgitant volume; however, further studies are necessary to support this association properly.

**Surgical**

The decision to operate is dependent on the underlying cause of MR. Patients with valvular damage due to chordal or papillary muscle rupture or infective endocarditis require MR surgery. Patients with functional causes of MR, such as ischemia, generally require coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).

Mitral valve repair has two aims: have an acceptable surface area of mitral valve leaflet coaptation, 5 to 8 mm being essential and correct annular dilatation.

The American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association (AHA) generally recommend mitral valve repair over replacement due to decreased recurrence of MR after repair.

Mitraclip is another surgical procedure proven to be effective and has low morbidity and mortality in patients considered high-risk for repair or replacement.