The suprascapular nerve is a branch from the upper trunk of the brachial plexus, it innervates the infraspinatus and the supraspinatus muscles. It originates in the posterior triangle of the neck, where it runs to the upper part of the scapula downward and laterally parallel to the belly of the omohyoid muscle, then it runs under the suprascapular ligament to the supraspinatus fossa. Here it provides muscular innervation to the infraspinatus and supraspinatus muscles.

The suprascapular nerve is a mixed nerve, it has both a motor and sensory parts. The suprascapular nerve gives sensory branches to the acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joints, which serve as sensory innervation. The motor part of the suprascapular nerve innervates the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles, respectively. The suprascapular nerve originates from the upper trunk of the brachial plexus, the ventral rami of the fifth and sixth cervical nerves from the upper trunk of the brachial plexus join to form the suprascapular nerve, and in approximately 18% of the population, the ventral ramus of the fourth cervical nerve is also involved. The suprascapular nerve branches from the upper trunk and runs along the posterior triangle of the neck. During its course, it runs to the upper part of the scapula downward and laterally parallel to the belly of the omohyoid muscle, then it runs under the suprascapular ligament to the supraspinatus fossa. In the supraspinous fossa, it runs under the supraspinatus muscle and branches twice for innervation before curving around the lateral border of the spine of the scapula, through the spinoglenoid notch, and into the infraspinous fossa. In the infraspinous fossa, the nerve branches innervate the infraspinatus muscle.