All patients with T1DM require insulin therapy. Multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) using a basal/bolus insulin regimen or continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion through an insulin pump are the preferred treatment. The patient’s weight in kilograms is multiplied by 0.5 to 0.6 units to calculate the initial total daily insulin dose (TDD) in an adult. In general, 40% to 50% of the total daily dose comprises the patient’s long-acting insulin needs. The other half approximates the daily short-acting insulin that needs to be given before or with meals. Dosing is modified based on many factors, including diet and physical activity. Adjustments can also be made based on self-monitoring of blood glucose or continuous glucose monitoring results. When possible, patients should be taught carbohydrate counting and instructed to use an insulin-to-carbohydrate ratio that approximates the grams of carbohydrates that will be covered by one unit of insulin. A carbohydrate-consistent diet is helpful if carbohydrate counting is not realistic due to poor numeracy or other reasons. Patients should be taught which foods contain carbohydrates and benefit from meeting with a dietician. It is also recommended to calculate a correction factor, which can be initially estimated using the formula 1800 divided by the TDD. This estimates the fall in blood glucose for every 1 unit of insulin given. This number will need to be adjusted per subsequent glucose monitoring results.

It is important to note that insulin requirements vary across the lifespan and under specific circumstances. For example, larger insulin doses are normally required during puberty, pregnancy, when steroids are given, and with the development of obesity. Individuals need less insulin when they are engaged in aerobic exercise and during the “honeymoon period.” The honeymoon period occurs soon after diagnosis when there is a temporary recovery of beta-cell function.

Multiple types of insulin can be used for diabetes management. Rapid-acting insulin (lispro, aspart, glulisine) will generally have an onset in 10 to 30 minutes, peak in 30 to 90 minutes, and have a duration of 3- to 5 hours. Insulin aspart injection is more rapidly acting. Short-acting insulin (regular insulin) has an onset in 30 minutes to 1 hour and peaks in 2 to 4 hours with a duration of 6 to 8 hours. Intermediate insulin (NPH, NPL) will have an onset in 1.5 to 4 hours, peaks around 4 to 10 hours, and with a duration of 12 to 18 hours. Long-acting insulin is often given once a day (glargine, degludec) or 1 to 2 times daily (detemir). Glargine does not have a peak and lasts approximately 20 to 24 hours. U-300 glargine lasts more than 24 hours, and degludec has a longer duration of action, up to 42 hours. When MDI is used, the patient will ideally use rapid insulin with each meal and for hyperglycemic correction and long-acting basal insulin. If using insulin pump therapy, a continuous infusion of rapid-acting insulin will be used.

Blood glucose readings should be monitored throughout the day. Patients should check their blood glucose pre-meals, 2 to 3 hours post meals (when adjusting prandial dosing), before bedtime, and when they suspect hypoglycemia. It is beneficial to check a 2 am to 3 am glucose reading if the morning glucose value is high to determine the underlying cause of hyperglycemia. It is important to educate patients about the symptoms of hypoglycemia, which include diaphoresis, tachycardia, lightheadedness, confusion, visual changes, and tremors. 15 to 20 g of glucose should be given orally for blood glucose levels below 70 mg/dl. Patients should then recheck their blood glucose 15 minutes later and consume a snack once the value has normalized to prevent a recurrence. Glucagon should be prescribed for emergency use when patients have a severe hypoglycemic episode and are unable to consume carbohydrates by mouth.

Continuous glucose monitors (CGM) are extremely useful tools for people with T1DM. Sensors are inserted into the subcutaneous tissue and measure interstitial glucose levels, which are transmitted to a receiver and displayed in real time. One can examine trends and use alarms to prevent serious hypoglycemia episodes. There are continuous glucose monitoring systems (CGMs) that transmit glucose readings every 5 minutes and can alarm the patients if readings are too high or too low or if there is a rapid change in glucose value (thresholds set by the patient). These CGMs can communicate with insulin pumps. Readings from certain CGM sensors can be transmitted to smartphones and can be shared with relatives, friends, or caregivers. Other sensors communicate with insulin pumps, providing a hybrid artificial pancreas. Another CGM is a less expensive option worn for ten days at a time. This “flash” CGM records glucose readings every 15 minutes, does not have an alarm feature and uses a “reader” (a device the user scans over the site of sensor placement) to visualize recent glucose readings and trends. All these devices make it easier to monitor glucose values throughout the day. Users examine trends and are provided with vital information to guide insulin therapy and food intake to help avoid wide glycemic variation.

In addition to insulin therapy, diet, and physical activity, individuals with T1DM should generally have an annual eye exam by an eye care specialist. Those with foot deformities, neuropathy, a history of foot ulcers, or peripheral arterial disease should see a podiatrist, be educated in proper foot care/footwear, and be evaluated for orthotics if necessary. Other specialists, such as psychologists, nephrologists, and cardiologists, may also be needed.

More advances in T1DM management can be expected soon. “Closed-loop” systems are anticipated in which CGMs directly communicate with insulin pumps and automatically direct insulin infusion rates. Research is also being conducted on islet cell transplantation. Individuals who receive islet-cell transplantation require immunosuppressive therapy, and many islets do not have a long lifespan. Encapsulated islets unrecognizable by the immune system would obviate the need for immunosuppressive therapy and are a promising future therapy. These and other research initiatives give hope to the increasing number of youth and adults with T1DM that a cure is in their future.