# Continuing Education Activity

Night eating syndrome is a type of eating disorder that is characterized by hyperphagia in the evening with 25% or more of daily caloric intake after dinner with not less than two nocturnal awakenings during the week to eat food. The prevalence is 1.5% in the general population of the United States. The syndrome is complicated with obesity problems such as diabetes. Patients respond to variable treatment modalities such as SSRI, Light therapy, and progressive muscle relaxation treatment. This activity examines the diagnosis and management of night eating syndrome so that health care practitioners can help patients with this disorder.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the clinical evaluation of night eating syndrome.
- Describe the pathophysiology of night eating syndrome.
- Review the differential diagnoses of night eating syndrome.
- Summarize the appropriate management of night eating syndrome with prognosis.

# Introduction

Night eating syndrome (NES) is a type of eating disorder related to eating after dinner and when awake at night. It was first discovered by Wolff, Stunkard, and Grace in a group of patients seeking weight loss treatment.

# Etiology

The etiology of night eating syndrome has remained unknown.  Recent research has proposed a link between a psychological course, neurological, and/or genetic processes. A study by Lamerz and colleagues conducted on children in Germany showed that patients were more likely to develop night eating syndrome if their mothers had night eating behavior.  These patients were compared to children of mothers who did not have night eating behavior.

A recent study compared night eating behaviors in families who had a person with the condition to those families who did not. The results showed that those with NES had first-degree relatives with the disorder more often than the control group suggesting a heritability aspect to the disorder.

Stress can exacerbate the symptoms of the disorder, and symptoms can be alleviated by decreasing stress levels.

# Epidemiology

In the United States, the prevalence of night eating syndrome is 1.5%. NES prevalence is similar to other binge eating disorders like bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa.

A prevalence between 6 to 64% of NES was found among obese individuals looking for weight loss surgery in a review conducted by de Zwaan, Mitchell, Burgard, and Schenck. A study showed up to 55% of individuals seeking bariatric surgery have reported some symptoms of NES.

Those with night eating syndrome are more likely to have another eating disorder than the rest of the non-NES population, with a 5 to 44% prevalence.

# Pathophysiology

Researchers believe that cognitions and a wide range of emotions might play a major role in having NES. Most symptoms occur at night due to the belief that the individual can not sleep without eating. Patients also will feel a need to control the anxiety associated with that belief through eating.

A study was done by Birketvedt and colleagues on 33 participants, 12 with NES and 21 control subjects. The subjects were fed regular intervals of meals over a 24-hour period and given no food after 8:00 pm.

# History and Physical

Some studies have determined criteria to include hyperphagia in the evening with 25% or more of daily caloric intake after dinner with not less than two nocturnal awakenings during the week to eat food.

- Breakfast and/or morning eating are missed due to a lack of desire

- The urge to eat between the evening meal and bedtime sleep

- Difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep occurring for four or more nights per week

- The belief that the individual must eat to return to sleep

- The mood that worsens at night or is frequently depressed

# Evaluation

In a randomized control trial done by Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study, the diagnosis of NES was found to be related to more patients with a depressed mood.

In previous studies, a significant predictor of HbA1c >7 was discovered in individuals with type 1 and type 2 diabetes that reported evening hyperphagia along with two or more diabetes complications and obesity.

# Treatment / Management

Psychotherapy has been shown to decrease night-eating symptoms. Twenty-five patients were treated with cognitive behavioral therapy by Allison and colleagues within 12 weeks of diagnosis.

The serotonin system contributes to the regulation of eating, mood, and sleep. Therefore, it was assumed that reduced serotonin could lead to reduced satiety and circadian rhythm disturbances leading to an increased level of evening hyperphagia and nocturnal ingestions.

The rate for remission was 29%. However, the response rate was 67%.

In a randomized study on 44 patients from both genders divided into three groups: education, education plus Progressive muscle relaxation PMR or PMR plus exercise, Vander Wal and colleagues concluded there was the percentage of food eaten was significantly different between the three groups of study with the group doing PMR having the greatest reduction.

On a 51-year-old female with depression and NES, Freidman and colleagues conducted a study using paroxetine and bright light therapy. The results showed that discontinuation of the phototherapy made her NES symptoms return.

# Differential Diagnosis

Night eating syndrome is usually confused with sleep-related eating disorders. The main differential criterion between NES and sleep related-eating disorders is the nature and the component of nocturnal eating. While the NES is composed of both hyperphagia and nocturnal eating along with awareness, sleep-related eating disorders are mainly characterized by repeated involuntary eating habits during sleep.

Night eating syndrome can be classified as an insomnia-related disorder as patients are awake, aware, and able to recall their eating habits. Generally, patients with NES do not report underlying sleep disorders. However, some patients might report both syndromes.

Sharing the behavior of evening hyperphagia between NES and binge eating disorder does not necessarily mean they share the same etiology. Unlike binge eating disorder, evening hyperphagia in NES patients is mainly correlated to nocturnal anxiety.

# Prognosis

Patients treated for NES with pharmacological, cognitive therapy, and lifestyle changes have noticed a significant improvement in their symptoms.

# Complications

Patients with NES commonly become overweight due to increased calorie intake before bedtime. The increased caloric intake results in complications such as diabetes, high blood pressure, cardiac disease, and obesity. Without psychotherapy, psychiatric disturbances can develop.

An association between NES and various psychopathologies, particularly depression, was found in most studies.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

NES is a type of eating disorder characterized by excessive night eating habits (after dinner) or awakening from sleep to eat (nocturnal ingestions).

The prevalence in the United States is 1.5%, about the same as binge eating disorder.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Since most patients will not bring up issues with night eating either due to shame or guilt, it is recommended to use screening questions. The primary care provider should refer the patient to a psychiatric specialist for appropriate treatment.