The safe ranges for therapeutic disopyramide concentrations are from 2 to 5 mg/mL. Of note, in a patient with cirrhosis, lower concentrations are preferable due to increase free form.

Due to relatively small volume distribution (Vd), low protein binding at toxic concentrations, and low intrinsic clearance, extracorporeal drug removal techniques (hemoperfusion/ hemodialysis) can be useful to remove disopyramide from the circulation in the setting of intoxication.

Generally, the initial priority is to decontaminate the patient's gastrointestinal system with lavage, repeat doses of oral activated charcoals, and cathartic. These are done even when several hours have passed since the first ingestion because it can significantly delay the absorption of class Ia antiarrhythmics. Followed by admission to the intensive care unit for continuous electrocardiographic monitoring. Hemodialysis/hemoperfusion can be useful if the patient has ingested large doses or with high drug concentration or in the setting of circulatory collapse or renal insufficiency. Symptomatic drugs should be given accordingly. For seizures, administration of diazepam, phenytoin, or phenobarbital can be useful. In hypotensive patients, fluid challenge and intravenous inotropic and vasopressor agents should be used, and mechanical supports such as intra-aortic balloon pumps or cardiopulmonary bypass are taken into consideration in refractory cardiogenic shock. Lastly, in the setting of arrhythmia, whether it is bradyarrhythmia or ventricular tachycardia (torsade de pointes), the appropriate medication should be given.

Although only based on theoretical considerations, NaHCO3 50 mmol can be given intravenously and repeated every 5 to 10 minutes. The main goal is to maintain the arterial pH at 7.4 to 7.5. The drug reversal mechanism possibly multifactorial, such as increasing blood pH, increasing blood plasma sodium concentration, and lowering plasma potassium concentration.