Diagnosing the type of diabetes insipidus is essential for making the optimal treatment decision. A potential misdiagnosis and the resultant treatment can cause catastrophic consequences.

The various polyuria-polydipsia syndromes often show overlapping features. This makes the diagnosis and classification of DI difficult. The water deprivation test or the indirect water deprivation test generally helps distinguish between different forms of diabetes insipidus. This interpretation is complicated in partial central DI, nephrogenic DI, or chronic primary polydipsia. Typically, patients with partial central or nephrogenic DI retain some amount of response to water deprivation and desmopressin administration.

An algorithmic approach can help diagnose and classify suspected cases of DI.

**1. Confirmation of hypotonic polyuria**

The primary objective in this step involves differentiating between conditions that give rise to polyuria resulting from osmotic diuresis (such as in hyperglycemia) and DI/primary polydipsia, in which polyuria predominantly involves water diuresis.

The first step is to confirm if the patient indeed has polyuria. Calculate the total 24-hour urine volume to confirm polyuria. Obtain baseline values of plasma electrolytes, random serum, and urine osmolality.

Polyuria is defined as the excretion of a urinary volume >150 ml/Kg/24 hours at birth, >100-110 ml/Kg/24 hours up to the age of 2 years, and >50 ml/Kg/24 hours in older children or adults. Patients need not hold any medications that can cause polyuria, such as diuretics or sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors, for this step, as the goal of this step is to establish the presence of polyuria. Once polyuria is confirmed and other causes are ruled out, we measure the urine osmolality.    Hypotonic urine is typically defined as an osmolality of <300 mOsm/Kg.

If the urine osmolality is >800 mOsm/Kg, this indicates optimal plasma AVP levels and appropriate renal response to AVP, thereby ruling out any DI.

Similarly, a high plasma osmolality (≥300 mOsm/Kg) is typically seen in DI, while a normal or low plasma osmolality (≤280 mOsm/Kg) is usually seen in primary polydipsia.

**2. Diagnosis of the type of polyuria-polydipsia syndrome**

To differentiate central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and primary polydipsia, perform a water deprivation test and desmopressin (DDAVP) trial. Typically a 7-hour deprivation test is adequate to diagnose diabetes insipidus. Primary polydipsia may require longer dehydration periods. The basic principle behind the water deprivation test is that in individuals with normal posterior pituitary and renal function (or those with primary polydipsia), an increase in plasma osmolality from dehydration stimulates AVP release from the posterior pituitary, which then leads to water reabsorption in the nephrons, thus resulting in concentration of urine and an increase in urine osmolality. In central or nephrogenic DI, the urine fails to concentrate optimally with water deprivation, and there is persistent excretion of hypotonic urine.

In adults, the water restriction test should be discontinued when one of the following is reached:

- Urine osmolality reaches the normal reference range.

- Urine osmolality is stable on two to three consecutive hourly measurements, even with rising plasma osmolality.

- Plasma osmolality greater than 295 mosmol/kg to 300 mosmol/kg

- Plasma Na greater than 145 mEq

If nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is suspected in newborns and young infants, the diagnostic test of choice is DDAVP (1 mcg subcutaneously or intravenously over 20 minutes, maximum dose of 0.4 mcg/kg).

In children, the water deprivation test should be closely monitored. If one of the following endpoints is reached, discontinue the trial:

- Urine osmolality reaches the normal reference range.

- Plasma osmolality greater than 295 mosmol/kg to 300 mosmol/kg

- Plasma sodium greater than 145 meq/L

- Loss of 5% of body weight or signs of volume depletion

Once the diagnosis of DI is established, desmopressin administration can distinguish between central and nephrogenic DI. In central DI, once the deficient action of AVP is substituted with desmopressin administration, the urine osmolality should increase, while in nephrogenic DI, as the desmopressin is ineffective due to lack of renal response to its actions, the low urine osmolality persists.

The water deprivation trial is most accurate when DDAVP is not given. After water deprivation, studies have demonstrated that desmopressin can increase urine osmolality by greater than 100% incomplete central diabetes insipidus and up to 50% in partial central diabetes insipidus.

In cases of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, water deprivation suboptimally increases urine osmolality. DDAVP minimally increases urine osmolality in partial nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, with no increase in urine osmolality in complete nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.

Central diabetes insipidus is diagnosed when there is evidence of plasma hyperosmolality (greater than 300 mosm/l), urine hyperosmolality (less than 300 mosm/l or urine/plasma osmolality less than 1), polyuria (urinary volume greater than 4 mL/kg/hr to 5 mL/kg/hr for two consecutive hours after surgery).

Limitations of measuring plasma AVP levels include rapid clearance with wide fluctuations due to the instability of AVP in plasma.

Measurement of plasma copeptin:

Copeptin (carboxy-terminal-Pro-vasopressin) is the C-terminal peptide of pro-vasopressin co-secreted with AVP from the posterior pituitary.

Hypertonic saline infusion test:

- Hypertonic saline (3% saline, 513 mOsm/L) infusion coupled with plasma copeptin measurement is an alternative test that is now being recommended by many experts in the field of DI as the preferred test to be used in place of the water deprivation test.

**3. Identification of the cause of Diabetes Insipidus**

Once the type of polyuria-polydipsia syndrome is identified, efforts must be undertaken to diagnose the underlying pathology. In conditions of central DI, a detailed clinical history with an exam should be performed to check for hormonal deficiencies. Biochemical tests should be conducted as per protocol following clinical evaluation.

Nephrogenic DI, in the majority of cases, is acquired, usually in the setting of certain drugs like lithium, demeclocycline, and others.

Primary polydipsia or dipsogenic DI is likely secondary to mood disorders or schizophrenia treatment. Various hypothalamic diseases like sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, trauma, and neoplasms alter the thirst response by lowering the thirst threshold, causing polydipsia. The anticholinergic nature of these drugs also leads to dry mouth and excessive water intake.

Gestational diabetes insipidus occurs due to the enzymatic breakdown of the endogenous AVP by a placental cysteine aminopeptidase.