In evaluating the suspected anoxic injury, there should always be a thorough investigation of confounding metabolic abnormalities. Testing should include a comprehensive metabolic workup including serum electrolytes, hepatic studies including ammonia, blood gas analysis for acid-base disturbances, and hemoglobin measurement to ensure adequate delivery capacity for oxygen. Potential causes such as infection or drug overdose should also be considered using cultures and drug and toxicology screens, respectively. If the precipitating event was cardiac arrest, a cardiac evaluation, including an echocardiogram and cardiac biomarkers, could be considered. Discussing a further toxicology or cardiology evaluation with the team is essential.

Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the brain is typically performed, which may demonstrate acute findings of subarachnoid or intracranial hemorrhage as the source of the patient's decreased level of consciousness. In cases without intracerebral hemorrhage where there is cardiac arrest-related hypoxic injury, initial CT imaging of the brain is frequently normal. However, repeat CT imaging is recommended by post-arrest day three as this will often show manifestations of anoxic injury such as cerebral edema and/or inversion of gray-white matter density.

The utility of electroencephalogram (EEG) is somewhat unclear in the routine diagnosis of anoxic encephalopathy due to the potential for interpretation variability due to sedation or drug use, metabolic abnormalities, or sepsis. There are specific findings that may suggest the presence of anoxic injury. However, the extent remains unclear. These findings include alpha-theta pattern, intermittent or continuous seizures, burst suppression, generalized periodic complexes, complete or near-complete suppression, as well as generalized or focal low-voltage output.

Knowing the limitations, there are EEG classification systems for anoxic encephalopathy that have been proposed. One system classifies encephalopathy into four different grades utilizing global waveform patterns on EEG. Grade I anoxic encephalopathy has the most favorable prognosis and consists of alpha-wave activity. Grade II anoxic encephalopathy consists of predominantly theta wave activity on EEG. For grade III, a predominant delta wave pattern is typical, and this extends into grade IV, where the low amplitude delta waves approach an isoelectric EEG.