Giant condylomata acuminata of Bushke-Löwenstein (GCBL) frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as pain, bleeding, abscesses, and a penile/anogenital mass. The cause of such a mass may be a myriad of lesions, including condyloma acuminatum, cutaneous SCC (including papillary carcinoma, warty carcinoma, and carcinoma cuniculatum), primary rectal adenocarcinoma, Bowenoid papulosis, and lymphangiomas. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient has a cauliflower-like mass with fistulization, the cause is difficult to know with certainty without proper histopathological and imaging studies.

While the general surgeon is almost always involved in the care of patients with GCBL, it is important to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that includes a primary care clinician, a radiologist, a histopathologist, and an oncologist. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family. The radiologist and histopathologist play a vital role in determining the cause. Without the patient providing a proper history, the radiologist and histopathologist may not be sure what to look for or what additional radiologic exams may be needed. This problem gets even more complex when immunocompromised or pregnant patients present with a GCBL lesion, in which case an OB/GYN specialist and/or an immunologist will also be an integral part of the healthcare team.

To derive good outcomes, the goals and objectives of GCBL excision surgery have to be defined prior to taking the patient to the operating room. In some cases, a chronic infection may preclude definitive repair in a single stage - thus, the importance of incorporating assistance from an infectious disease specialist. As with any other complex procedure, the preoperative workup must be thorough, and the patient should be seen by a pulmonologist and cardiologist to optimize lung and cardiac function. Sometimes the lesion may be too extensive or involving the underlying soft tissues or bone, and an oncology consult may be required for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. When GCBL is extending into the penile urethra or the anal canal, a urology or colorectal consult is recommended. Plastic surgery may be consulted to reconstruct any surgical defects.

With the ongoing and evolving debate about the best approach to GCBL management, there is no disputing the fact that with each attempt at GCBL treatment, there is presently a 68% risk of recurrence. Thus, further emphasizing the need for an interprofessional approach to the management of GCBL lesions. The need for meticulous planning and discussion with other professionals involved in the management of the patient is highly recommended to lower the morbidity and improve outcomes. At the same time, the role of a primary care clinician in educating patients about consistent condom use, newborn circumcision, and immunization against HPV as potential preventative strategies against giant condylomata acuminata of Bushke-Löwenstein must be emphasized.