The family history of patients suspected of having Apert syndrome is crucial due to its autosomal dominant inheritance. A lack of family history does not rule out the diagnosis due to the possibility of de novo mutations; however, a positive family history makes the diagnosis much more likely.

Patients with Apert syndrome have craniosynostosis, midface hypoplasia, and symmetric syndactyly of the hands and feet. The craniosynostosis is more severe than that found in Crouzon syndrome, and the additional finding of syndactyly helps confirm the diagnosis between multiple, similar syndromes in regards to their phenotype. However, features of hypertelorism (wide-set eyes), proptosis (bulging eyes), and down-slanting palpebral fissures are facial features found in several of the craniosynostoses that cannot be used to differentiate the syndromes but are helpful.

In regards to the hand, a short, radially deviated thumb, complex syndactyly of the index, long, and ring finger, syndactyly of the fourth webspace, and symphalangism (congenital stiffness of the fingers due to failure of the bone to fully separate as typically happens during fetal growth) are characteristic findings of the hand. There are three specific subtypes of hand findings in Apert syndrome based on the overall shape of the hand. They are spade (side-to-side fusion with flat palm), mitten (fusion of fingers resulting in concave palm), and rosebud (tight fusion of all digits). There are other craniofacial deformities found in Apert syndrome and other craniosynostosis, such as acrocephaly (cone-shaped calvarium), proptosis, prominent forehead, hypertelorism, down slanting palpebral fissures, and a flattened nasal bridge. Oral findings included dental crowding, high-arched palate, narrow palate, and pseudo-clefts. Internal organs and other skeletal anomalies, such as cervical fusions, can be seen. Mild to moderate intellectual disability is also possible.