Pre- and post-reduction radiographs are standard when evaluating a shoulder dislocation. When there has been significant trauma, dislocation and fracture-dislocation can have similar findings on physical exam. Post-reduction radiographs are necessary to confirm reduction and rule out any injury or fracture during the reduction procedure. In very select cases of atraumatic chronic dislocation, radiographs may be omitted.

A three view shoulder series is standard when evaluating a painful shoulder. Anterior-posterior (AP) and scapular "Y" view radiographs should be obtained to assess for posterior shoulder dislocations; however, approximately 50% are initially missed on standard AP views. Therefore, the scapular "Y" view can help confirm the diagnosis with the humeral head displaced posterior to the glenoid, with the glenoid being at the center of the "Y" of the scapula.  However this view is sometimes obscured by the soft tissues of the shoulder girdle and the bony anatomy of the scapula and the ribs. The most accurate radiographic image to diagnose a posterior shoulder dislocation is the axillary lateral view. This view eliminates most of the overlying bony and soft tissue structures that could obscure the relationship between the humeral head and glenoid.

On AP views, the normally visualized humerus is internally rotated, this causes the humeral head to appear symmetrical, and it has been compared to the shape of a light bulb or drumstick. A "rim sign" can occur when the space between the articular surface of the humeral head and the anterior glenoid rim exceeds 6 mm; also occasionally seen is a "trough sign", which may appear as a dense line on the medial aspect of the humeral head that represents a compression fracture. Further, it is important to identify if there is a reverse Hill-Sachs deformity which may lead to chronic pain and ultimately to avascular necrosis.

CT scan can be considered when suspected posterior dislocations are not seen on radiographs. More recently bedside ultrasound has also successfully been used to diagnose dislocations with high accuracy, but fracture diagnosis is limited.