- Differential diagnoses include disorders that present with chylomicronemia or hypertriglyceridemia.

- Lipoprotein lipase deficiency, Apo C II deficiency, Apo AV homozygosity, and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored HDL-binding protein 1 (GPIHBP1) mutations all present with chylomicronemia. 
            Syndromes presenting with hypertriglyceridemia: 
            
              
- Familial combined hyperlipidemia is marked by elevated VLDL and or LDL. The phenotype varies from isolated hypertriglyceridemia to isolated hypercholesterolemia. Regardless, increased apo B concentration is seen and is used to distinguish from familial hypertriglyceridemia. It is associated with premature cardiovascular disease. 
              
              
- Familial hypertriglyceridemia is more common and is associated with the secretion of large VLDL particles, typically with low LDL and HDL. There is increased VLDL production and decreased VLDL catabolism, resulting in saturation of lipoprotein Lipase. It has an autosomal dominant inheritance. It is usually not associated with the premature cardiovascular disease unless the TGL levels are very high but can present with pancreatitis. 
              
              
- Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia (type III hyperlipoproteinemia) is due to defective Apo E. It is characterized by the build-up of chylomicrons and VLDL remnants. Elevation in both cholesterol and triglycerides and roughly similar levels should raise suspicion for this syndrome. It is associated with premature cardiovascular disease and peripheral vascular disease.