The basic technique involves catheter-guided radiofrequency currents through an electrode placed nearby a nociceptive pathway to interrupt the pain impulses. This is done under fluoroscopic guidance. Interestingly, the tissue around the electrode is heated by the currents, whereas the electrode itself is heated passively by the surrounding tissue. During conventional radiofrequency technique, once the desired temperature is reached, the current is switched off. The current is then switched on to maintain the tissue temperature at a predetermined setpoint. The cycling between on-and-off currents maintains the selected tissue temperature. At temperatures above 45 degrees Celsius, nerve tissue begins to be destroyed; however, care is taken not to raise temperatures above the point of tissue gas formation (80 to 90 degrees Celsius). While early studies suggested the selective destruction of unmyelinated C- and A-delta fibers at certain temperatures, further data revealed undifferentiating destruction of all nerve fibers during radiofrequency application. To avoid thermal injury to sensory and motor fibers, the utility of high-temperature radiofrequency ablation has generally been limited to facet denervation; however, an arbitrary range of 55 to 70 degrees Celsius is used for dorsal root ganglia lesioning. During PRF, radiofrequency currents are cycled for 20 milliseconds, at 2 Hz, for 120 seconds. The voltage is controlled so that the highest temperature remains below 42 degrees Celsius.

Presently, the use of WCRF is limited to clinical presentations in which the pain generator is considered to have several sources of innervation. There are two basic techniques of WCRF. The monopolar technique is used for sacroiliac joint dysfunction, and the bipolar technique is used for discogenic pain. For sacroiliac joint dysfunction, a 17-gauge electrode with a 4-millimeter active tip was used to apply 150 seconds of current with a temperature target of 60 degrees Celsius. Due to a larger projected lesion size, the introducer needle is distanced 8 to 10 millimeters from the lateral edge of the posterior sacral foramen. To avoid injury to the segmental spinal nerves, WCFR is not typically used on the lumbar dorsal rami, and conventional radiofrequency is used instead. For discogenic pain, bipolar WCRF is applied to the posterior-lateral disc annulus. In this case, two 17-gauge introducer needles are placed with electrode temperature raised to 55 degrees Celsius over 11 minutes and temperature sustained for an additional 4 minutes.

Cooling techniques have been known to cause analgesia since ancient times; however, to get lasting neurolytic effects, a critical temperature of -20 degrees Celsius must be reached. In addition, the efficacy is dependent not only on temperature, but the duration of cryosectioning, probe size, the proximity of the probe to the target nerve, and the number of freeze cycles applied. The modern cryoprobe is a double-lumen aluminum tube that links to a gas source of either carbon dioxide or nitrous oxide. The probe temperature target is typically between -50 and -70 degrees Celsius.

The gas is delivered with 600 psi of pressure through the inner lumen and returns to the unit through the outer lumen. A dramatic drop in pressure, approximately 600 psi to 10 psi, allows for gas expansion and a consequent ice ball formation around the probe tip. The cryoprobe size correlates with the size of the ice ball formed. A 14-gauge (2mm) probe forms a 5.5-millimeter ice ball, and an 18 gauge (1.4 mm) probe forms a 3.5-millimeter ice ball. To facilitate placement of the probe and offer skin protection from the probe, an introducer is typically used. Typically, a 12-gauge angiocatheter needle is used to introduce a 2 millimeter (14-gauge) probe, and a 14 to 16-gauge angiocatheter needle is used to introduce a 1.4 millimeter (18-gauge) probe. Because the location of the target nerve is paramount to nerve disruption, most cryoprobes are furnished with a built-in nerve stimulator that allows for both sensory (100Hz) and motor (2Hz) testing. Further, gas flows must be accurately regulated. Inadequate gas flows are ineffective, while excessive flows may lead to unwanted freezing along the probe length. Lastly, before removing the probe, the ice ball must be thawed. An unthawed ice ball can cause local injury and nerve avulsion if withdrawn prematurely.