The ankle joint bony and ligamentous structures from a complete ring. Whenever the ring is broken, it happens in two places. Based on the evaluation of ankle fractures, a full assessment of the whole ankle ring is necessary to avoid missing any bony or ligamentous injury. Different systems have been developed to classify ankle fractures.

**Anatomical Classification**

Classifies ankle fractures depending on the anatomical location into

- Isolated medial malleolus fracture

- Isolated lateral malleolus fracture

- Bimalleolar ankle fracture; two malleoli are fractured, either the medial and lateral malleoli or less commonly the poster and lateral malleoli.

- Trimalleolar ankle fracture; the three ankle malleoli (medial, lateral, and posterior) are broken.

**Danis-Weber Classification**

This system categorizes ankle fractures based on distal fibula fracture line localization relative to the syndesmosis into three types:

- Weber type A; the distal fibula fracture is below the level of the syndesmosis. This type of fracture is usually stable and can be treated conservatively.

- Weber type B; the distal fibula fracture is located at the same level of the syndesmosis. Injuries of this type could be treated conservatively if it is a stable injury (no deltoid ligament injury nor syndesmotic injury). Unstable weber B fracture requires surgical fixation.

- Weber type C; the fibular fracture is located above the level of the syndesmosis. This type of fracture is usually unstable and requires surgical fixation.

**The Lauge-Hansen Classification**

This classification depends on the foot position and the direction of the force causing the injury. This classification categorizes ankle fractures into four types. The first word of each type describes the foot position at the time of the injury and the second word describes the movement of the talus in ankle mortise relative to the tibia. When the foot is pronated, medial ligaments are stretched and prone to injury. When the foot is supinated, lateral ligaments are stretched and prone to injury.

**Supination-Adduction (SA)**

- Distal fibula transverse fracture

- Medial malleolus vertical fracture

**Supination-External Rotation (SER)**- most common ankle injury (60% fractures)

- Anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament injury

- Spiral (or oblique) fracture of the distal fibula

- Posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament injury OR posterior malleolus avulsion

- Fracture of medial malleolus OR deltoid ligament injury

**Pronation-External Rotation (PER)**

- Fracture of medial malleolus OR deltoid ligament injury

- Anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament injury

- Spiral (or oblique) fracture of the fibula (aspect proximal to tibial plafond)

- Posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament injury OR posterior malleolus avulsion

**Pronation-Abduction (PA)**

- Fracture of medial malleolus OR deltoid ligament injury

- Anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament injury

- Comminuted or transverse fibular fracture (proximal to tibial plafond)

Injuries always occur in a cumulative pattern; for example, a SER4 injury includes injuries of SER1, SER2, and SER3.

**Other Types of Ankle Fractures**

**Maisonneuve Injury**

It is an unstable ankle injury caused by pronation external rotation injury. Maisonneuve injury combines a proximal fibular fracture with tibiofibular syndesmosis and deltoid ligament injury with or without medial malleolus fracture. This unstable injury requires operative treatment.

**Pilon Fracture**

This injury is the comminuted fracture of the tibial plafond (distal end of the tibia, including the articular surface). Pilon fracture usually results from high energy axial loading trauma, e.g., fall from a high distance causing impaction of the talus against the tibial plafond.

**Bosworth Fracture-Dislocation**

This is a rare type of ankle fracture dislocation where the fibula is posteriorly dislocated. The poster tibial border blocks the fibula reduction. Therefore operative treatment is required to reduce and fix the fibula in the incisura fibularis.