Most often, abusive pediatric head trauma begins with anger and frustration over a screaming infant that will not stop crying. Triggers include:

- Feeding problems

- Toilet-training

- Medical problems such as chronic colic

An incident of abusive head trauma forever changes the lives of caregivers and families. Abusive head trauma is one of the most dangerous forms of child abuse. It is the number one cause of death in children younger than 2 years old. The majority of fatal injuries related to child abuse occur as a direct result of abusive head trauma.

The mechanism of abusive head trauma is shaking injuries that occur from repetitive rapid flexion, extension, and rotation of the head and neck. The rapid movement of the brain striking the skull can tear vessels resulting in bleeding around the brain and a hematoma. An enlarging hematoma may cause pressure within the skull, resulting in more brain damage.

Sheering forces across the brain injure nerve axons resulting in diffuse axonal injury. Infant’s heads are large and heavy, and the neck muscles are still too weak to support a large head. Rapid and repetitive flexion, extension, and rotation result in greater movement. When the impact of the head occurs against an object, additional injuries such as lacerations, bruises, and fractures are seen. Even impact against soft objects can result in significant injury.

Abusive head trauma typically causes:

- Cerebral edema

- Retinal hemorrhage

- Subdural hematoma. It is the primary cause of subdural hematoma in children.

Infants and young child are more susceptible to head injuries than older children for many reasons:

- In proportion to the rest of the body, the head is larger, which means children land headfirst when they fall.

- A child’s brain has a higher water content than adults, so the brain is more likely to suffer acceleration-deceleration injuries.

- A shaken child is more susceptible to primary injuries, including contusion, hemorrhage, and skull fracture. Secondary injuries are biomolecular inflammatory changes causing the disintegration of neurons and interruptions in the brain's microcirculation.

- Primary injury in infants may result in increased intracranial pressure (ICP), ischemia, and hyperemia.

- Cerebral blood flow is impacted as increased ICP leads to tissue destruction.

- The head and neck are unstable, depending more on support more from ligamentous structures than fully developed bony structures.

- The unmyelinated brain in an infant is more likely to experience shearing injuries.

- Autoregulation of cerebral blood flow is impaired, causing further damage.

- The skull is not fully developed and easily deformed. In trauma, it may compress brain tissue when impacted, causing coup rather than the contrecoup injuries more commonly seen in adults.

- Axons are more easily disrupted because of the shearing of long white matter tracts with acceleration-deceleration injuries resulting in cell death.