**TBM**

The presentation in patients with TBM is often that of subacute, progressive febrile illness beginning with a prodrome of constitutional features. These include lassitude, malaise, night sweats, and intermittent headache. The illness develops into a well-defined meningitic phase in the following fortnight or more. This phase includes protracted headache, vomiting, personality change, confusion, and symptoms of meningismus. The condition may deteriorate rapidly to varying degrees of confusion and coma. Seizures, multiple cranial nerve (CN) deficits, focal neurological deficits, and stroke syndromes may supervene.

Children may have prominent irritability and vomiting, and focal or generalized convulsions. Untreated TBM patients may not survive beyond 5 to 8 weeks of illness. CN palsies are seen in 20-30% of patients with TBM, mostly involving the sixth nerve.

**Tuberculoma**

Usually seen in young individuals, this form of CNS-TB presents like a space-occupying lesion. The usual clinical manifestations are headache, seizure, progressive neurological deficit, and papilledema with or without meningitis.

**Spinal Arachnoiditis**

These patients present with radiculomyelopathy secondary to entrapment of nerve roots and encasement of the cord due to severe arachnoiditis at single or multiple levels. The patient complains of radicular pain, hyperesthesia, flaccid paralysis, and urinary or stool incontinence. Cord infarction may occur due to arteritis and thrombosis of the anterior spinal artery.

**Atypical Presentations**

CNS-TB as a presentation of miliary tuberculosis can be seen in 10 to 30% of adult patients with miliary TB as a part of hematogenous dissemination; however, this pattern is mostly seen in immunocompromised patients. In these cases, brain parenchyma may show multiple scattered tiny granulomatous foci, which may or may not show ring enhancement.

Very rarely, TBM may manifest as progressive cognitive dysfunction or as psychosis. Rarely may it mimic acute encephalitis or typical pyogenic meningitis. Atypically, the patients may present with florid complications of cranial polyneuropathy or hydrocephalus that precede the signs of meningitis.

**TBM and HIV Infection**

Coinfection with HIV in CNS-TB does not affect the clinical manifestations, CSF picture, or prognosis. However, HIV-seropositive TBM may have a normal CSF. Therefore radiographic clues hold greater importance. Also, cryptococcal meningitis is a close differential diagnosis and may sometimes occur concurrently. Intracerebral tuberculomas are more likely to occur in HIV patients, often as multiloculated tubercular abscesses. CNS lymphoma or toxoplasma encephalitis closely mimics these lesions, but a cisternal enhancement, basal ganglia infarction, and communicating hydrocephalus favor the diagnosis of CNS-TB.