# Continuing Education Activity

Myxedema coma is a rare fatal condition resulting from long-standing hypothyroidism with loss of the adaptive mechanism to maintain homeostasis. Hypothyroidism due to any cause, including autoimmune disease, iodine deficiency, congenital abnormalities, or medications like lithium and amiodarone, can precipitate myxedema coma if left untreated. Even with early diagnosis and treatment of myxedema coma, the mortality rate is variable, with some reports as high as 60% and others as low as 20 to 25% in the presence of advanced intensive support care. Early recognition, a thorough history, physical exam, and early treatment are paramount in managing myxedema coma. This activity reviews the cause, pathophysiology, and presentation of myxedema and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the history and physical exam of a patient with myxedema coma.
- Identify the etiology of myxedema coma.
- Outline the management options available for myxedema coma.
- Review the importance of an interprofessional team for improving outcomes of myxedema coma.

# Introduction

Myxedema coma is a rare and extreme complication of hypothyroidism with multiple organ abnormalities associated with altered sensorium, it can be fatal. Hypothyroid patients exhibit multiple physiologic alterations to compensate for the deficiency of thyroid hormone. Factors like infection can overwhelm these homeostatic mechanisms and can lead to myxedema coma. Myxedema coma can be an initial presentation of any form of hypothyroidism, irrespective of the cause.

Myxedema is commonly used often in the context of hypothyroidism and myxedema coma, it also means edema of the skin and soft tissue in hypothyroidism.

A high index of suspicion, early recognition, admission to intensive care units, and treatment with intravenous levothyroxine and hydrocortisone are paramount in the management of myxedema coma.

# Etiology

Disrupted homeostatic mechanisms in hypothyroid patients lead to myxedema coma. There are many Precipitating factors. The most important are:

- Infections: urinary tract infection, pneumonia, viral infections, influenza, etc.

- Burns, carbon dioxide retention, and trauma

- Hypothermia and hypoglycemia

- Hypoxemia and cerebrovascular accidents

- Drugs: amiodarone

- New case reports with anti-TNF therapy causing myxedema have documentation in the literature.

- Congestive heart failure

- Gastrointestinal bleeding

- Surgery (given the effect on pituitary-thyroid axis with decrease thyroid hormones secretion after surgery in response to stress)

- A case report in 2019 showed that diabetic ketoacidosis precipitated myxedema coma in a patient after total thyroidectomy.

# Epidemiology

The exact incidence and prevalence of myxedema coma are not known, but some authors estimate an incidence of approximately 0.22 per 1000000 per year in the western world; however, there is no sufficient epidemiological data from other countries.

# Pathophysiology

The thyroid gland begins development during the fourth gestational week as an endodermal thickening of the floor of the primitive pharynx. Its final resting place is located in the anterior inferior visceral compartment of the neck and lies deep to the omohyoid, sternohyoid, and sternothyroid muscles. It is encased in the pretracheal fascia and accompanied by the pharynx, trachea, esophagus, and recurrent laryngeal nerve.

The metabolically active hormones the thyroid secretes are T4 and T3 (around 93% T4 and 7% T3). T3 is four times more potent than T4, and the vast majority of T4 converts to T3 in the tissues. The half-life of T4 is seven days, while T3 has a much shorter half-life. Multiple proteins bind to T3 and T4. These proteins include thyroxine-binding globulin, transthyretin (TTR), and albumin. Production of the thyroid hormones by follicles lined by cuboidal epithelial cells occurs inside the thyroid gland. These follicles secrete colloid, which is composed of thyroglobulin and contains the thyroid hormones T3 and T4. At least 50 milligrams of iodine per year or 1 milligram per week are necessary for adequate hormone production.

Iodine is concentrated within the thyroid cell by a sodium-iodide symporter that pumps one iodide molecule and two sodium ions. The serum TSH level highly influences the activity of this symporter. A peroxidase enzyme then oxidizes iodide ions to iodine.

Thyroid hormone influences virtually all cells in the body by activating or repressing a variety of genes after binding to thyroid hormone receptors. Ninety percent of the intracellular thyroid hormone that binds to and influences cellular function is T3, which has been converted from T4 by the removal of an iodide ion. The thyroid hormone receptors associated with the DNA within the target genes are bound to retinoid X receptors at specific thyroid hormone response elements. Once bound, the transcription process begins, and hundreds of new intracellular proteins, mostly enzymes, are formed. One particular gene of importance is the gene that regulates the expression of calcium ATPase, which is especially important in maintaining efficient cardiac output.

Myxedema coma is a potentially fatal complication, and prompt diagnosis is an important factor in reducing mortality.

A brief description of organ system-specific pathologic manifestations is described below.

**Cardiac Manifestations**

Diastolic hypertension is one of the cardiovascular compensatory mechanisms in hypothyroidism. Hypothermia and decreased respiratory drive cause peripheral vasoconstriction, resulting in loss of protective mechanism and development of hypotension. Common cardiovascular symptoms include hypotension, shock, arrhythmia, and heart block. Myxedema causes decreased myocardial contractility and reduced cardiac output, which leads to hypotension.

**Neurological Manifestations**

Myxedema coma course is commonly a slow progression to coma. Typically patients do not present with coma, especially in the early phase, but they present with lethargy. Hence the name of myxedema coma itself can be misleading. Other findings may include depression, disorientation, decrease deep tendon reflexes, psychosis, slow mentation, paranoia, and poor recall.

**Respiratory Manifestations**

Hypoventilation in myxedema coma is due to impaired hypoxic and hypercapnic ventilatory response and the associated diaphragmatic muscle weakness.

**Gastrointestinal Manifestations**

Myxedema coma commonly causes abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, ileus, anorexia, constipation, and ascites.

**Renal and Electrolyte Manifestations**

Typical findings in myxedema coma are hyponatremia and decreased glomerular filtration rate.

**Hematologic Manifestations**

Patients with myxedema coma have an increased risk of bleeding due to an acquired von Willebrand syndrome type 1 and a decrease in factors V, VII, VIII, IX, and X.

# History and Physical

Patients most commonly present for emergency services with altered mental status and hypothermia, below 35.5°C (95.9° F). The lower the body temperature, the worst is the prognosis.

The salient features in the examination are as follows.

- Altered mentation - can be very subtle, like depressed affect, apathy, decreased intellectual capacity, confusion, short attention span, and disorientation. Rarely psychosis and coma. All patients with decreased alertness need to be screened for depression.

- Hypoventilation and sleep apnea

- Hypothermia - hypoglycemia and cold weather may present as severe hypothermia. Not every patient is hypothermic, and some patients may be normothermic.

- Dry, cool, and doughy skin (nonpitting edema, puffiness)

- Alopecia

- Decreased mobility

- Delayed reflex relaxation

- Diastolic hypertension followed by hypotension

- Bradycardia

- Bladder dystonia and distention

- Abdominal distention, paralytic ileus causing megacolon

- Fecal impaction (always perform rectal examination)

# Evaluation

A high index of clinician suspicion for myxedema coma is important. As discussed above, patients who present will most likely be women in the winter months with a history of thyroid disorders and a precipitating illness. The two most common findings will be altered mental status and hypothermia, along with common findings of hypothyroidism. Other common signs include hyponatremia, hypotension, bradycardia, and hypoventilation. Laboratory results in primary hypothyroidism will show severely low or undetected low serum total T4, free T4, free T3, and elevated TSH. The underlying etiology for most patients is a primary thyroid failure, but secondary, tertiary, and sick euthyroid should be in the differential diagnosis.

**Laboratory Abnormalities in Myxedema Coma**

- Anemia (either normocytic or macrocytic anemia) and leukopenia

- Elevated creatinine phosphokinase can lead to misdiagnosis of myocardial infarction

- Elevated transaminases

- Hyperlipidemia due to inhibition of lipoprotein lipase enzyme

- Hypoglycemia due to downregulation of metabolism)

- Hyponatremia with low serum osmolarity and elevated creatinine (increase ADH with a decreased ability of kidneys to excrete water)

**Other Required Investigations**

- Septic workup to rule out infection, including cultures and chest X-ray, etc.

- EKG can show bradycardia with non-specific changes, decrease voltage, variable block, or prolong QT interval

- Arterial blood gases can show hypoxia, hypercapnia, and respiratory acidosis.

- If cardiomegaly is present on imaging studies, further investigations to rule out pericardial effusion are necessary (echocardiogram)

- Neurological investigations like lumbar puncture usually show elevated protein with non-specific EEG changes.

A retrospective study in 2014 proposed a diagnostic score on 14 patients with myxedema coma and seven patients without myxedema coma, where a score greater than or equal to 60 in the proposed scoring system is potentially diagnostic. Lower scores between 45 and 59 demonstrate a risk of developing myxedema coma. The scoring system consisted of alterations of thermoregulatory, central nervous, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and metabolic systems and the presence or absence of a precipitating event.

# Treatment / Management

Since myxedema coma has a high mortality rate of up 60%, all patients require admission to the intensive care unit.

Hypothermia should be managed with warming blankets and increasing the temperature in the room. Care in warming the patient is advised as this will cause peripheral vasodilation and may lead to hypotension and shock. As the patient receives treatment with thyroid replacement, the hypothermia will slowly resolve. Hypotension requires careful management due to multiple issues commonly present concurrently, such as hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, and hypothermia. As stated above, rapid rewarming of the patient will increase vasodilation, worsening hypotension. This action necessitates the use of fluids to maintain hemodynamic stability. If hypotension is refractory to IV fluid resuscitation, then vasopressors should be initiated until Levothyroxine has time to act. If hypoglycemia is present, 5 to 10% dextrose with half normal saline should be administered carefully. The dilemma occurs if the patient presents with hyponatremia as well. Hypotonic fluids should be avoided. Low sodium can precipitate altered mental status, and correcting the deficiency is vital. There is a careful balance between fluid restriction and the need for fluids. A central venous line is also a recommendation.

Prompt initiation of thyroid hormone therapy is of paramount importance when myxedema coma is highly suspected, even before having thyroid hormone results back (even though results usually come back quickly in most clinical institutions).

According to the most recent American Thyroid Association (ATA) guidelines, the recommended initial dose is 200 to 400 mcg IV once (lower dose for elderly, or underlying cardiac disease or arrhythmia with some reports up to 500 mcg). Subsequently, dosing is 1.6 mcg/kg/day, reduced to 75% when given IV as a preferred route, for patients may not be able to tolerate PO, and the absorption could be impaired secondary to intestinal impaired motility and edema. TSH, FT4, FT3 should be measured at baseline and then every 24 to 48 hours until the patient's mental status starts to improve.

One case report in 2017 split dose of levothyroxine to 200 mcg LT4 every 8 h in five consecutive doses (total dose of 1 mg) resulted in significant restoration of depleted thyroid status and clinical improvement within 48 hours after treatment initiation.

The severity of myxedema coma should not rely solely on higher levels of TSH, for it does not always correlate either secondary to suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis in critically ill patients, a slower response in the elderly, or secondary hypothyroidism from pituitary causes. The expectation for serum FT4 to show normalization in 4 days after starting therapy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis has its basis on signs and symptoms; for example, the differential diagnosis of altered mental status

- Sepsis

- Shock

- Stroke

- Drug overdose

- Diabetic ketoacidosis

- Seizure

- Hypothermia

# Prognosis

The prognosis for myxedema coma is difficult to establish due to the small number of cases reported. The mortality rate is variable, with some reports as high as 60% and others as low as 20 to 25% in the presence of advanced intensive support care.

# Complications

If left untreated, myxedema coma is fatal.

# Consultations

An endocrinology consult is warranted once the diagnosis of myxedema coma is suspected.

If the patient is experiencing arrhythmia, respiratory distress, or multiorgan failure, an interprofessional team should be on board, including the cardiology team, pulmonary team, intensivists, and endocrinology team.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patients should receive education about the importance of compliance with medications and monitoring thyroid function tests after starting certain medications like amiodarone, lithium, anti-TNF, etc.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Myxedema coma is often a fatal complication, and prompt diagnosis is an important factor in reducing mortality.

These patients need care in an ICU setting. Besides the clinicians, ICU nurses play a critical role in management. Hypothermia requires management, and patients need IV hydration. The airways must remain patent, and any respiratory distress requires mechanical ventilation. Continuous cardiac monitoring is vital, as well as hemodynamics. Nurses should communicate any deviation from normal parameters to the team immediately. Also, patients required IV thyroid hormone replacement and corticosteroids. Other specialists involved in the care include pharmacists, endocrinologists, and pulmonologists. Since most patients are not able to eat, a dietary consult for parenteral or enteral nutrition is needed. Pharmacists specializing in nutritional management must be involved and report to the team as challenges arise.

The medications used in the management of myxedema coma require the intervention of a pharmacist to ensure proper dosing, drug-drug interaction checking, and overall medication reconciliation; the pharmacist should communicate any concerns to the rest of the interprofessional team.

Prompt recognition of the condition by checking thyroid function tests and rapid intervention is essential for survival.

After discharge, clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists should educate patients about the need to take the thyroid hormone and undergo regular testing. Patients should be advised to report any new medication that may interfere with thyroid function or metabolism.

In summary, myxedema coma requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

Myxedema is a serious disorder with high mortality. Most patients die from GI bleeding, sepsis, or respiratory failure despite optimal treatment. Poor prognostic factors include advanced age, persistent hypothermia, and altered mental status.