Evaluation begins in the prenatal period. Frequently color Doppler is used during the echocardiographic examination of the heart. Infants with a lack of Doppler flow through the aortic valve should be immediately considered to be at high risk of aortic valvular atresia. A key point when assessing these patients is the risk of development of HLHS, as patients with even a normal-sized or slightly dilated left ventricle can develop HLHS at birth.

Initial chest radiography after birth can show a “globular” heart pattern or the heart shape associated with truncus arteriosus. This includes a narrowing of the heart base along with a rounded apex and a “shoulder” on the left heart border. Though a “bulge” for the pulmonary artery might be expected, it is only present in a small minority of cases. Chest radiography also reveals pulmonary edema in many cases, and sometimes patients can have upper or middle lobe lung collapse.

The initial electrocardiogram classically shows right axis deviation, right ventricular hypertrophy, and right atrial enlargement, though it can also show a pattern considered normal for patient age. This is generally attributed to the hypoplastic left side of the heart, but there are a few reported cases of left axis deviation and rarely, left ventricular hypertrophy. There are occasionally problems with bundle branch conduction, and Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern, as well as right bundle branch block, have been reported. There is a reported lack of a Q wave in lead V6, and this has been reported as a possible exclusion marker for aortic valvular atresia. It should be noted, though, that the lack of this finding is not specific for aortic valvular atresia, as other congenital heart conditions or even normal infants may lack the Q wave in this lead. T wave depressions in leads I and II, as well as ST-segment depressions in the left precordial leads, have also frequently been reported.