Ocular discomfort - is the most common presentation in thyroid eye disease patients.

Eyelid retraction is the most common clinical sign of TED, presenting up to 74% of TED cases.

**Eyelid Changes**

- Lateral flare – the altered contour of the upper eyelid is a pathognomonic sign.

- Lid lag – on a vertical downward pursuit, the excursion of the upper eyelid lags behind the globe.

- Lagophthalmos – incomplete eyelid closure is a classical sign of TED

- Lower lid retraction is seen in up to 49% of TED cases

- Upper lid retraction is seen in around 90 to 98% of TED patients. The mechanisms proposed are as follows:

- Enlargement and fibrosis of levator muscle - the most common muscle targeted by the immune cascade

- Scarring between levator aponeurosis and surrounding soft tissues

- Overaction of levator muscle to counteract the ipsilateral tight inferior rectus muscle

- Increased sympathetic stimulation of Muller’s muscle

**Ocular Surface Changes (Active TED Phase)**

- Eyelid-tear film-cornea - the interface is destabilized following inflammatory damage to the conjunctival mucous glands.

- Lacrimal gland inflammation - alters the protein profile of the tear film and reduces the tear secretion rate.

- Persistent lagophthalmos disturbs the ocular surface, elevates the tear production rate, and elevates the tear osmolarity.

- Dry eye symptoms and watering occurs in 13 to 20% of patients.

- Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis is seen in 0.9% of patients.

- Persistent dry eye with exposure-keratopathy - 1 to 8% of cases

- Corneal ulceration, perforation, endophthalmitis - in very severe cases

**Orbital Changes**

- Hypertrophy of the orbital fat and EOM within the bony orbit - raises the intraorbital pressure

- Forward protrusion of the eyeball - proptosis

- Constriction of the superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) by enlarged EOM - venous stasis in TED

- Venous congestion - redness and swelling of the eyelids, chemosis, caruncular edema

- Elevation of the episcleral venous pressure - raised intraocular pressure (IOP), open-angle glaucoma

- Venous and lymphatic stasis in the orbit - prolongs the half-life of inflammatory cytokines, causing a vicious cycle of inflammation

- Spontaneous fracture of the medial or inferior wall of the orbit - a true, bony ‘auto-decompression’

**EOM Changes**

- Inflammation of EOM - during active TED

- Infiltration of EOM - accumulation of hyaluronate and late-onset fibrosis

- Most commonly involved muscle - inferior rectus (IR), followed by the medial rectus (MR), superior rectus (SR), lateral rectus (LR), and oblique muscles

- Restrictive strabismus and loss of binocular single vision

- Diplopia at presentation - in 6 to 18% of cases

- Fluctuation of diplopia with worsening in the morning - during active disease

**Optic Nerve Changes**

Dysthyroid Optic Neuropathy (DON) is a potentially reversible optic nerve dysfunction in 4-10% of TED patients

- Compressive optic neuropathy - most common cause, compression by the enlarged EOM at the orbital apex

- Optic nerve stretching - in cases of severe fat hypertrophy with proptosis

- Ischemic optic neuropathy - due to increased resistance to the orbital arterial blood flow, leading to diminished perfusion

- Enlargement of the superior ophthalmic vein - raises the retro-bulbar pressure and impairs tissue oxygenation.