Traditionally, initial supportive care which includes controlling the blood pressure, salt restriction, ACE-I/ARB, statins, and diuretics should be provided for all patients with MN. Treatment of secondary MN should be achieved by treating the underlying cause. For patients with primary MN, the addition of immunosuppressive (IS) therapy to the supportive care is indicated for patients with progressive loss of GFR (greater than 50% in serum creatinine or a level greater than 1.5 mg/dl) or refractory proteinuria. Toronto risk score can be used to categorize patients in low (less than 4% g per day), moderate (4 to 8 g per day), and high risk (greater than 8 g per day) after 6 months of supportive care. Moderate and high-risk patients should be provided with IS therapy. Other criteria suggest starting IS therapy right away (without waiting six months) in the patient with positive serum anti-PLA2R/THSD7A antibodies and greater than 3.5 g proteinuria per day.

For IS therapy, KDIGO recommends initial 6 months of “Ponticelli Regimen” which includes the alternating monthly cycle of oral/intravenous (IV) corticosteroids and oral cyclophosphamide. For patients on whom Ponticelli Regimen cannot be applied, KDIGO recommends the use of cyclosporine or tacrolimus. Monotherapy with corticosteroids and MMF is not recommended for initial therapy. Rituximab has been used in patients resistant to cytotoxic drugs and calcineurin inhibitors and has been shown to be safe and more efficacious compared to the conventional treatment.