**Manufacturing Techniques**

**Lathe Cutting**

The lathe is employed to curve the anterior and posterior surface in the technique. There are various lathes used for each surface.

Hard contact lens - These lenses are polished with convex (posterior surface) and concave (anterior surface) wax lenses.

Soft contact lenses are polished with aluminum oxide and lubricated with distilled paraffin.

This is followed by edges, the peripheral, and the intermediate curve modification. Contact lenses are then modified and verified based on these parameters. The significant advantage of lathe cutting is that in soft lenses, the lenses can be modified and engraved for identification, good quality surface finishing can be obtained nearly equal to that of PMMA lenses, the dimensional accuracy can also be maintained by lens evaluation in the dry state.

**Molding**

This means that the lens can be heated and curved to a mobile phase, and then it can be placed on a mold to obtain a desired shaped contact lens.

**Spin Casting**

In this technique, centrifugal forces modify the hydrogel lenses and polymerization. The monomer component, a cross-linking agent, and the initiators are placed in the concave mold that rotates constantly. The polymerization and change in shape result from the spinning of the mold. The lens's outer surface is spherical, the inner surface is aspherical, and the curvature is determined by the shape and speed of rotation of the mold. The lens is swollen, and the unpolymerized component can be removed by lens placement in water for 24 hours.

**Stages in Contact Lens Manufacturing**

- Stage of contact lens blank-  It includes a section of clear PMMA, ethyl acrylate, or copolymer of methyl and ethyl acrylate rod or sheet, which has a diameter of 12.7 and 15.9 mm with a thickness of 3 and 6.5 mm

- Stage of semifinished blank- Contact lens blank having a posterior curve

- Stage of semifinished blank- This includes an anterior and posterior curve with a polished surface having optical quality

- Stage of finished corneal contact lens- This is a finished lens with modified peripheral and intermediate areas on the posterior surface and the diameter and edge of the lens.