**Oxygen**used short-term as a supplement in ventilated patients has few adverse effects. Neonates with suspected ductal-dependent cardiac lesions are an exception to this rule since high concentrations of supplemental oxygen could result in the closure of a patient ductus arteriosus. Consult with a pediatric cardiologist or pediatric critical care specialist before withholding supplemental oxygen. The concentration of supplemental oxygen is adjusted to maintain the desired oxygen saturation based on the clinical setting.

**Fentanyl**can cause respiratory depression and decreased blood pressure. In the setting of sepsis or other conditions that can reduce blood pressure, other agents should be considered. Sinus tachycardia, hypertension, palpitations, and bradycardia also are reported. Chest wall rigidity is an uncommon but serious adverse effect of fentanyl that can make it exceedingly difficult to ventilate patients. Paralytic medications may be needed to allow for effective ventilation in the setting of fentanyl-induced muscle rigidity. Fentanyl exposes patients to the risk of opioid addiction. The risk of CNS depression is increased with concomitant use of other CNS depressing agents like benzodiazepines or ethanol. As with other medications, allergic reactions can occur.

**Midazolam**can decrease respiratory drive and reduce blood pressure. Common adverse effects include hiccups, nausea, vomiting, coughing, headache, drowsiness, pain during injection, and "oversedation." In the setting of sepsis or other conditions that can reduce blood pressure, other agents should be considered. As with other medications, allergic reactions can occur.

**Etomidate**can cause elevated or decreased blood pressure, apnea, laryngospasm, tachycardia, bradycardia, hypoventilation, myoclonia, adrenocortical insufficiency, and hypoaldosteronism. It can also cause injection site reactions, nausea, vomiting, and hiccups. As with other medications, allergic reactions can occur.

**Ketamine**increases myocardial oxygen consumption, raising concerns for its use in patients with coronary artery disease. There are concerns that ketamine may increase intracranial or intraocular pressure, so in the setting of possible increased intracranial or intraocular pressure, other agents may be preferred. Common adverse effects of ketamine include rash, diplopia, vomiting, involuntary movements of the head and extremities, increased secretions and emergence reactions, hypertension, and allergic reactions. One of the most concerning potential adverse effects of ketamine is laryngospasm, which may be severe. Ketamine is usually given over 60 seconds to reduce the risk of respiratory depression, apnea, and increased pressor response. As with other medications, allergic reactions can occur.

**Rocuronium**may require dosing adjustments in patients with hepatic or renal impairment. Certain pathologic states like acid/base imbalances, dehydration, hypothermia and electrolyte abnormalities can increase the risk of a prolonged neuromuscular block with rocuronium. Patients with a family history of malignant hyperthermia should be treated with extreme caution as rocuronium may contribute to this reaction, especially in the presence of halogenated anesthetics. As with other medications, allergic reactions can occur. It is important to assure adequate sedation in paralyzed patients. Some sedating medications may where off before paralytics, especially when repeated doses are given.

**Succinylcholine**can trigger malignant hyperthermia in susceptible individuals. There are rare reports of rhabdomyolysis with hyperkalemia, ventricular dysrhythmias, and death in children found to have undiagnosed skeletal muscle myopathy. It may cause increased intraocular pressure, increased intracranial pressure, flushing, hypotension, and bronchoconstriction. As with other medications, allergic reactions can occur. It is important to assure adequate sedation in paralyzed patients. Some sedating medications may wear off before paralytics, especially when repeated doses are given.