Managing decubitus ulcers is complicated as there is no fixed treatment regime or algorithm. Once it has developed, there should be no delay in treatment, and management should start immediately.

Prevention is clearly the best treatment with excellent skincare, pressure dispersion cushions, and support surfaces. Support surfaces decrease the amount of pressure on the wound. Support surfaces can be either static (e.g., air, foam, and water mattress overlays) or dynamic (e.g., alternating air overlay). Repositioning and turning the patient every two hours can also lessen pressure on the area, but some patients may require more frequent repositioning, while others may require less frequent repositioning.

In some cases, urinary and fecal diversion may be necessary depending on the site of the ulcer, being prone to urine or fecal contamination.

Hydrocolloid dressings should be used. Good antibiotic cover decreases septicemia.

The depth and severity of the ulcer determine whether surgical management may be required. The ulcer must be thoroughly cleaned and drained to remove any dead tissue and debris. Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) may be a preoperative option to provide a favorable wound for the surgical closer.

There is also some evidence to suggest that hyperbaric oxygen therapy can help with wound healing, as it improves oxygenation in and around the area of the wound.

Thus, the treatment of decubitus ulcers has its basis on the following:

- Prevention of additional ulcers

- Decreasing pressure on the wound

- Wound management

- Surgical intervention

- Improving the nutritional status

For the most part, stage I and II ulcers do not require operative measures. Stage 3 and 4 ulcers may require surgical intervention.