“As low as radiation exposure” (ALARA) is the guiding principle of diagnostic and interventional procedures using radiation. The application of the principle is limited to the reduction of radiation exposure and includes the use of personal protective equipment (PPE). In an interventional lab, the greatest radiation exposure source to health care workers is scattering from the patient. Anything that reduces patient radiation exposure will indirectly reduce the health care worker’s radiation exposure. On the other hand, the reduction of radiation exposure should not affect the quality of the procedure. In general, a reduction in radiation exposure can be made by implementing the following principle while performing any procedure:

**Reduce Time:**Duration of procedure and timing of contact with patients is an important factor determining the radiation exposure to the health care workers. Minimization of time during which the patient is exposed to radiation minimizes radiation exposure to the operator and other staff members. Similarly, taking a history before the radiologic procedure rather than after the procedure also reduces exposure.

**Increase Distance:**Radiation exposure is inversely proportional to the distance between the operator and radiation source. It decreases the inverse square root of distance between both. Positioning oneself on the patient side opposite the radiation source decreases radiation exposure substantially.

**Use Shielding**: This exposure control method reduces the effect of radiation exposure by placing a physical object providing hindrance to radiation transmission from a radiation source to the person. These Shielding methods are not only limited to the personal level, i.e., use of PPE, but are also employed during the construction of hospitals. PPE includes protective eyeglasses, lead aprons, gloves, scrub caps, thyroid collars.

**Role of the Hospital Facility**

For facilities participating in the Medicare program, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has established minimum standards for hospital radiologic services and accreditation requirements for freestanding advanced diagnostic imaging facilities. States and/or accreditation organizations may have additional requirements that go beyond the CMS requirements. In complying with these requirements, facilities can ensure the adoption of quality assurance and quality control modalities for each of their programs. Some practical suggestions for minimization of radiation exposure are given below:

- First and foremost, the duty of hospital management is to minimize radiation exposure. One possible method of achieving it is by implementing shielding methods both at the architectural level, e.g., placement of heavy aggregate concrete around the walls of x-ray rooms to absorb radiations, and at the personal level by providing a sufficient supply and also ensuring usage of PPE inside the facilities.

- Every hospital facility should assess the radiation exposure of workers and provide periodic feedback to them. Also, each worker who is expected to receive more than 10% of the applicable dose limit should be required to wear one or more dosimeters. Any interventionalist whose monthly dosimeter reading exceeds occupational dose limits should be asked to avoid performing further procedures for the next few weeks. The International Council on Radiation Protection recommends that the advice of a medical physicist be sought to interpret monitoring results.

- Hiring staff members having adequate knowledge and training to ensure the production of quality images at appropriate patient doses resulting in a decreased probability of repeating procedures. The equipment’s operating manual should be made available at any time and should be operated according to the manual’s instruction.

- Optimization of radiation exposure in relevance to the imaging system performance should be done. The goal here should be that the optimal dose should neither too high nor too low and should not affect the quality of the imaging study.

- Facilities should use diagnostic reference levels and achievable doses as quality improvement tools by collecting and assessing radiation dose data and comparing them to diagnostic reference levels and achievable doses. Each facility should also submit its radiation dose data to a national registry.

- The radiation safety officer must strictly enforce badge compliance, monitor and record fluoroscopy time, review individual radiation exposure, and investigate higher radiation exposure causes in case of higher readings.