Nocardial infection often poses a diagnostic dilemma. Nocardiosis exhibits signs and symptoms that vary greatly based upon the location of the infection (cutaneous, pulmonary, CNS, disseminated).  Additionally, there is a myriad of differential diagnoses that present similarly to nocardial infection and are often more commonly occurring, including fungal and other bacterial etiologies. The history and physical exam are important in assessing a patient's risk for nocardiosis. Imaging may allow the clinician to rule down their differential diagnosis honing in on Nocardia as a potential source of the infection. The most important diagnostic step is obtaining a sample of the infection (skin biopsy, sputum sample, abscess aspirate) in order to run a gram-stain, acid-fast stain, and culture of the organism. Finally, newer PCR and DNA sequencing methods may allow for a faster species-specific diagnosis.

If the diagnosis of nocardiosis is confirmed, it is important to look for dissemination from the primary source of infection. Patients with Nocardia infections are best managed by an interprofessional team. Radiology should be consulted for further workup, which includes brain imaging. Radiologists play an important role as 44% of the time disseminated pulmonary infections are found to have CNS involvement. Brain imaging may reveal one or more cerebral abscesses consistent with CNS nocardiosis.Nocardia to TMP-SMX and other sulfonamides, it is important to consult infectious disease specialists for the best combination of antibiotics for the patient.

Since Nocardia infections are very rare, there is limited knowledge regarding the outcomes of Nocardia treatment. The outcomes of nocardial infections depend on the site of infection and the immune status of the host. However, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended so that appropriate treatment can be started.