Treatment of hyperthyroidism depends on the underlying etiology and can be divided into two categories: symptomatic therapy and definitive therapy. The symptoms of hyperthyroidism, such as palpitations, anxiety, and tremor, can be controlled with a beta-adrenergic antagonist such as atenolol. Calcium channel blockers, such as verapamil, can be used as second-line therapy for patients who are beta-blocker intolerant or have contraindications to beta-blocker therapy.

Transient forms of hyperthyroidism, such as subacute thyroiditis or postpartum thyroiditis, should be managed with symptomatic therapy alone, as hyperthyroidism in these clinical situations tends to be self-limiting.

Three definitive treatments of hyperthyroidism predispose the patient to potential long-term hypothyroidism: radioactive iodine therapy (RAI), thionamide therapy, and subtotal thyroidectomy. Clinical assessment and monitoring of free T4 are imperative for patients who undergo any of these treatments. TSH-monitoring status after definitive therapy is of poor utility since TSH remains suppressed until the patient becomes euthyroid. Thus, TSH monitoring for thyroid status is not recommended immediately following definitive therapy.

The choice of which definitive treatment modality depends on the etiology. Due to its high efficacy, RAI therapy is considered the treatment of choice in almost all patients with Graves disease. Despite the relative safety and high efficacy, RAI is contraindicated in patients who are pregnant or patients who are breastfeeding.

In RAI therapy, radioactive iodine-131 is administered with subsequent destruction of thyroid tissue. A single dose is sufficient to control hyperthyroidism in a significant portion of patients, and the effects on other parts of the human body are essentially negligible due to the high thyroid uptake of the radioactive iodine-131. In a female patient of reproductive potential, it is highly recommended to obtain a beta-hCG to rule out pregnancy prior to initiation of RAI therapy. Patients on a thionamide (methimazole or propylthiouracil) should be instructed to discontinue this therapy approximately one week before RAI therapy since thionamide administration can interfere with the therapeutic benefit of RAI therapy. Several months are typically needed status post-RAI therapy to achieve euthyroid status. Typically, patients are evaluated in 4 to 6-week intervals with increased time intervals for stable, plasma-free T4 levels. Failure to achieve euthyroidism after RAI therapy may indicate the need for either repeat RAI therapy (for symptomatic hyperthyroidism) or the initiation of thyroxine therapy (for hypothyroidism).

RAI therapy involves the release of stored thyroid hormone, leading to transient hyperthyroidism. This is generally well tolerated, although this transient hyperthyroidism is of concern in patients with significant cardiac disease. For patients with cardiac disease, pretreatment with a thionamide to deplete the stored hormone is recommended to avoid the potential exacerbation of cardiac disease.

Thionamide therapy is used as a definitive treatment for hyperthyroidism inpatient unwilling to undergo RAI therapy or have contraindications to RAI therapy, for example, allergy or pregnancy. Methimazole and propylthiouracil both inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis by thyroid peroxidase. Thyroid peroxidase is the enzyme responsible for converting dietary iodine into iodide. Propylthiouracil (PTU) also lowers peripheral tissue exposure to active thyroid hormone by blocking the extrathyroidal conversion of T4 to T3. Thionamide therapy has no permanent effect on thyroid function, and remission of hyperthyroidism is common in patients who discontinue thionamide therapy.

Establishing a euthyroid status typically requires several months after initiation of thionamide therapy. Although methimazole and PTU are equally effective, methimazole is preferred due to a relatively better safety profile. An exception to this recommendation is in pregnant patients, in which PTU is preferred. Methimazole is associated with an increased risk of congenital defects; thus, PTU is preferred in managing gestational hyperthyroidism.

Side effects of thionamide therapy include agranulocytosis, hepatitis, vasculitis, and drug-induced lupus. Although these are rare side effects, patients should be warned about the potential for these side effects. Patients should also be advised to discontinue the thionamide immediately and notify their physician if symptoms suggestive of agranulocytosis occur (fever, chills, rapidly progressive infection, sore throat, among others). Routine monitoring of leukocyte counts is not recommended when starting a patient on a thionamide due to the rapid onset of agranulocytosis. A baseline comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) to assess hepatic status would not be unreasonable due to the potential for hepatitis.

Subtotal thyroidectomy is utilized for long-term control of hyperthyroidism. Preparation of the patient for a subtotal thyroidectomy includes pretreatment with methimazole to achieve a nearly euthyroid status. Supersaturated potassium iodide is then added daily approximately two weeks before surgery and discontinued postoperatively. Alternatively, atenolol can be started 1 to 2 weeks before surgery to reduce resting heart rate. Supersaturated potassium iodide is also dosed and discontinued postoperatively. The rationale behind these management plans is to reduce complications associated with perioperative exacerbation of hyperthyroidism.

Complications of subtotal thyroidectomy include hypothyroidism due to the decreased secretory potential of T4. Hypothyroidism remains the most common complication associated with subtotal thyroidectomy. The proximity of the parathyroid glands to the thyroid gland can result in the removal of parathyroid glands along with thyroid tissue, resulting in hypoparathyroidism. Due to the risk of iatrogenic injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, vocal cord paralysis is also a complication of subtotal thyroidectomy. All of these complications should be discussed with the patient, and the discussion should be documented.