Caring for women with substance use during pregnancy can be rewarding, challenging, complex, and time-consuming. A holistic approach to comprehensive care requires an interprofessional team. Nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, physicians, midwives, social workers, pharmacists, and mental health and addiction medicine specialists who work together as a cohesive interprofessional team can improve outcomes for mothers and their children. Prenatal screening for substance use can be performed by nursing staff in the office setting. Nurses can also educate pregnant women about substance use, medication-assisted treatment, NOWS, and the advantages of breastfeeding.

Many hospitals employ the LDRP model, where the same nurses care for the mother during labor, delivery, recovery, and postpartum. Nurses are often the first to notice a new mother having difficulty caring for her newborn, especially if experiencing side effects of medication-assisted treatment, such as falling asleep while holding her child. Pregnant women, due to a greater volume of distribution and rate of metabolism, often require more methadone during pregnancy, and the dose might need adjustment after delivery.

Many programs conduct multidisciplinary rounds regularly, with professionals from obstetrics, pediatrics, pharmacy, and social work discussing the care of all mothers and their newborns. Social workers assist with assessing the social determinants of health, including housing, food insecurity, and transportation, and preparing mothers for the possible involvement of Child Protective Services.

A model perinatal program at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center combines midwifery services and addiction treatment. This model provides specialized care for women during pregnancy and the postpartum year and recognizes this population's unique and challenging needs. The program has led to better access to prenatal care, continuity of care, and family planning services.

The interprofessional healthcare team can improve care for pregnant women with substance use and SUD. SUD is a complex medical condition requiring empathy, knowledge, and skills from a team of caregivers working together. Implementing universal screening, overcoming barriers to treatment, addressing psychosocial needs, establishing an early diagnosis, and initiating medication-assisted treatment when appropriate will result in healthier outcomes for mothers and their children.