Different etiologies, both with or without structural abnormalities of the brain, have been associated with ESES. An early developmental lesion, such as perinatal infarct involving thalamus, has been particularly correlated with the development of ESES. In a case-control study, 14% of the patients with epilepsy and sleep activated EEG had early developmental lesion involving thalami such as stroke, periventricular leukomalacia, and cortical malformation; however, only 2% of the patients had a thalamic lesion in the control group (patients with epilepsy but not with sleep activated EEG).

Recently several genetic etiologies (monogenic mutations or copy number variants) have been correlated with the development of ESES. Among monogenic mutations (SCN2A, SLC9A6, DRPLA/ ATN1, Neuroserpin/SRPX2, OPA3, KCNQ2, KCNA2, GRIN2A, CNKSR2, SLC6A1, KCNB1), GRIN2A mutations, with possible dysfunction of NMDA-receptor mediated signaling, have most commonly linked with ESES.  Recurrent copy number variants were reported in association with ESES, such as Xp22.12 deletion, 16p13 deletion, 15q11.2-13.1 duplication, 3q29 duplication, 11p13 duplication, 10q21.3 deletion, 3q25 deletion, and 8p23.3 deletion.

The exact reason for the sleep activation of EEG abnormality is unknown. Some researchers correlated abnormal EEG with the abnormal hyperactivation of the thalamic oscillatory circuit: an interplay between inhibitory GABAergic reticular thalamic neurons and excitatory glutaminergic dorsal thalamic neurons. Researches also hypothesized that the change in the thalamic oscillatory circuit might be due to a substitution from the GABAA to GABAB mediated post-synaptic inhibition. Sleep potentiation of epileptiform discharges may disrupt the cortical information processing and trigger learning and memory impairments.