Neonates with severe right ventricle outflow obstruction presenting with profound hypoxemia and cyanosis may need prostaglandin therapy to maintain ductal patency and pulmonary flow before surgical repair. Tet spells require a rapid and aggressive approach including positioning (knee-chest) to increase systemic vascular resistance, oxygen therapy to cause pulmonary vasodilation and systemic vasoconstriction, intravenous fluid bolus to improve the right ventricle filling and pulmonary flow; morphine, intravenous beta-blockers to help improve the right ventricle outflow obstruction by relaxing the muscle, and intravenous phenylephrine to increase systemic afterload. If heart failure is developed, digoxin and loop diuretics are good pharmacological therapeutic options.

Following the recommendation of the American Heart Association guidelines, all patients with unrepair cyanotic congenital heart disease should receive subacute bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis for dental procedures, respiratory procedures, or infected skin procedures. Other reasons for prophylaxis are prosthetic cardiac valves, previous history of endocarditis, and completely repaired congenital heart disease with prosthetic material or device for 6 months post-procedure.

The comprehension that tetralogy of Fallot involves only the subpulmonary infundibulum, “the monology of Stensen,” had important diagnostic and surgical repercussions. With the recognition of tetralogy of Fallot, the age of cardiac surgery to repair congenital heart defects took place. The first surgical treatment was achieved at John Hopkins with Dr. Helen Taussig. She observed that children with cyanotic heart conditions had a better prognosis if the ductus arteriosus remained open. In 1939, after reading the first report of successful closure of a patent ductus arteriosus by Dr. Robert Gross, she thought of creating a ductus for cyanotic children. She approached Dr. Alfred Blalock and Vivien Thomas, Blalock’s laboratory surgical technician, and proposed a surgical solution for tetralogy of Fallot. In 1944, Dr. Blalock, with Thomas by his side, successfully achieved an artificial ductus through a left anterolateral thoracotomy, anastomosing the proximal end of the left subclavian artery to the left pulmonary artery in a critically ill 15-month-old female with cyanosis and a weight of 4 kg. The Blalock-Taussig shunt or systemic to pulmonary arterial shunt, originated by Blalock, Taussig, and Thomas marked the genesis of the era of congenital heart surgery, becoming an acceptable palliative therapeutic option for cyanotic defects with decreased pulmonary blood flow. Most congenital surgeons perform a modified BT shunt via posterolateral thoracotomy or median sternotomy or a central shunt via a median sternotomy. The modified BT shunt uses a prosthetic tube graft (made of polytetrafluoroethylene) that is interposed between a systemic artery and the pulmonary artery, which differs from what was first described as a direct anastomosis more likely to thrombose.

From 1950 to 1970 there was an increased understanding of tetralogy of Fallot, with standardization and advancement of surgical repairing techniques conducting a cardiopulmonary bypass, and better postoperative management translating into a better survival rate (85% to 90%) and a decrease in perioperative mortality by the early 1960s, from 60% to 7% to 14%. Until the 1970s, very few surgeons were performing complete repair in children younger than 3 to 5 years of age. Bonchek and Starr concluded that it was beneficial to perform a complete repair earlier in life, preventing a worse obstruction from fibrosis and undergrowth of the right ventricle outflow tract. Barrat-Boyes, Kirklin, and Castaneda contributed with the support of an early complete repair in neonates and infants with low mortality. At present, early survival after a complete primary repair in large centers is reported to be between 98% to 100%. Despite this fact, primary complete repair in neonates and infants, in general, is still controversial. Since the 1970s, surgeons have recommended the complete repair by 6 months of age and no later than 12 months, for nonductal dependent, asymptomatic infants. Controversy lays within symptomatic neonates undergoing a primary repair versus a two-stage procedure starting with shunt placement. Relative indications for a shunt include those patients with severely hypoplastic pulmonary arteries, anomalous left anterior descending from a right coronary artery crossing the right ventricle outflow tract, or associated non-cardiac anomalies. Those who support complete repair think it promotes normal somatic growth and development, elimination of chronic hypoxemia, improved late ventricular function, decreased incidence of late dysrhythmias, and lower risk of hypercyanotic spells and their sequelae. Those opposed believe there is a higher incidence of the transannular patch and long-term consequences (pulmonary insufficiency), suggesting that a two-stage repair may increase the growth of the pulmonary valve and branch pulmonary arteries, decreasing the chance of a transannular patch. Fraser et al., after trying to make an individualized surgical strategy, found no significant difference between primary and two-stage repair regarding time to extubation, intensive care unit stays, or hospital length stay.

Transannular patching and ventriculotomy started as another therapeutic option for tetralogy of Fallot associated with pulmonary insufficiency and right ventricle dysfunction presenting with exercise intolerance, ventricular dysrhythmias, and a small incidence of sudden death. In 1963, the first transatrial transpulmonary repair by Hudspeth and colleagues was performed. This approach was revisited in the 1990s and is frequently used today in all age groups with a survival rate of greater than 99% and a low incidence of early intervention. In 1978, a monocusp valve was first described by Zavanella et al. as an innovation to create right ventricular outflow tract competence and decrease or prevent pulmonary insufficiency in a patient needing a transannular patch. Monocusp valves made from autologous or bovine pericardium, allograft pulmonary valve cusp, or polytetrafluoroethylene membrane became popular in the 1990s because they reduce pulmonary insufficiency with long-term survival of 98%, no progression greater than a moderate insufficiency in 53%, and no reoperation within ten years in 88%. Valved right ventricle to pulmonary artery conduits are used in patients with tetralogy of Fallot and pulmonary atresia or those who require reoperation for severe pulmonary insufficiency or recurrent stenosis. Pulmonary or aortic homografts are used in infants with the risk of reoperation of 50% in 5 years and when used with neonates in 3 years. Heterografts valved (bovine jugular vein graft) and autologous pericardial valved conduits are other alternatives.