**IV Uses**

- Intravenous TXA for hemorrhagic shock, including postpartum hemorrhage and trauma patients.

- Adult dose: one gram bolus in 100 mL of normal saline over 10 minutes (slow intravenous push). Rapid infusion may cause hypotension. May repeat a 1 gram dose over the next 8 hours, but do not exceed a total of 2 grams.

- Pediatric dose: Weight-based, an initial dose of 20 mg/kg intravenous bolus over 10 minutes. May repeat a 10 mL/kg/hr over the next eight hours.

- Elective cesarean section: Intravenous (IV) TXA 1 g over 5 minutes at least 10 minutes before skin incision.

- Hip fracture surgery: IV TXA 15 mg/kg at the time of skin incision, followed by a similar second dose three hours later.

- Non-traumatic SAH: IV TXA 1 g at diagnosis of SAH then 1 g every 6 hours until the aneurysm is occluded.

- Unilateral and bilateral knee arthroplasty: IV TXA 10 or 15 mg/kg over 10 minutes before deflation of the first tourniquet, 3 hours after the first dose.

- Bleeding associated with cervical conization 1 g IV during the procedure followed by 1 g oral three times a day for 14 days, or 1.5 g every 8 hours the evening after the procedure for 12 days.

- Cardiac surgery: IV 50 mg/kg administered > thirty minutes after anesthesia.

- Spinal surgery: IV 2 g over 20 minutes before incision followed by 100 mg/hour during surgery and continued 5 hours postoperatively.

- Dental extraction in patients with hemophilia (with factor replacement therapy): IV 10 mg/kg immediately before surgery, then oral 10 mg/kg 3 to 4 times daily.

**Oral Uses**

- Oral TXA for cyclic heavy menstrual bleeding: 1300 mg TID for up to 5 days during menstruation.

- Oral TXA for HAE for long-term prophylaxis: oral 1g to 1.5 g 2 to 3 times daily. May reduce to 500 mg/dose once or twice a day when attacks reduce in frequency.

- Oral TXA rinse: Dental procedure in patients on oral anticoagulants. Oral rinse of 4.8% solution. Rinse 10 mL in the mouth for 2 minutes, then spit. May repeat 4 times. Avoid eating or drinking for 1 hour after administration.

**Other Uses**

- Nasal packing dipped in TXA applied into nares for nosebleed once.

- Nebulized TXA for massive hemoptysis: 1000 mg in 20 mL normal saline nebulized.