**Nervous System**

Enkephalins are known to be distributed extensively throughout the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems in mammals. Both leu-enkephalin and met-enkephalin have been detected in 82% of the brainstem tracts/and nuclei of the squirrel monkey. Met-enkephalin has been detected via immunoassay in the CNS in the globus pallidus, hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray area (PAG), amygdala, and spinal cord. Additionally, PENK gene expression has been noted in the posterior pituitary and the spinal cord.

**Cardiac Systems**

Patients with heart failure have increased pro-enkephalin levels proportional to the severity of their condition. Both pressure overload and beta-adrenergic stimulation increase the expression of enkephalin in experimental models. The effects of opioids on the cardiac system are multifactorial and seem to have a shorter-term effect of decreasing heart rate and blood pressure while having a longer-term effect of increasing myocardial contraction.

**Respiratory System**

Respiratory depression is a well-known and potentially fatal side effect of exogenously administered opioids and appears to be primarily mediated by mu-opioid receptors located in the hypothalamus. Nevertheless, fear of respiratory depression must not limit the use of opioids. For instance, in the context of cancer pain management, experience suggests that opioids can be used safely with a reduced risk of respiratory depression.

**Gastrointestinal****System**

The primary opioid receptors in the gastrointestinal tract are mu and delta-opioid receptors, which are found in the submucosal and myenteric plexus levels, respectively. Activation of mu-opioid receptors both inhibits motility in the colon and increases fluid absorption, which can cause constipation.

**Endocrine System**

Glucocorticoids have shown to directly upregulate the transcription of pro-enkephalin (PENK) mRNA by binding to a DNA sequence termed the glucocorticoid response element.

**Immune System**

Met-enkephalin has shown to have immunomodulatory effects on various cell types. These include the upregulation of CD8+ T cells, inhibiting regulatory T cell activity, stimulating phagocytosis in macrophages, increasing proliferation of CD4+ T-helper 1 cells, and stimulating the natural killer cell response.