**Vaccination**

Vaccines for diphtheria are in the form of toxoids. Toxoid is the denatured protein (a bacterial toxin) with an intact receptor binding site and has the ability for antibody production. Generally, vaccination against the diphtheria is given in combination with other vaccines against tetanus and pertussis. Some of the forms of the combined diphtheria vaccine are as follows:

- DTaP: Consists of vaccination against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis.

- Tdap: Consists of vaccination against tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis.

- DT: It consists of vaccination against diphtheria and tetanus.

- td: It consists of vaccination against tetanus and diphtheria.

In the United States, the DTaP vaccination schedule is followed for the neonate. For the infants, the vaccination schedule for the diphtheria vaccination includes 2, 4, 6 months. The 4th dose of the vaccination is given in between 15 to 18 months, and the 5th dose is given between the age of 4 to 6 years of age. The booster dose is given at the age of 11 to 12 years. During this time, the Tdap form of the vaccine is used. After that, the booster dose of Tdap or td is given every ten years for the remainder of the life. In the case of pregnancy, previously fully immunized females should receive a Tdap vaccine between 27 to 36 weeks of gestation.

Vaccination is the most crucial step in preventing the disease. Parents should be advised about the benefits of routine immunization to prevent the disease. In case of a missed vaccination schedule or lost vaccination records, the parents should immediately contact the primary care provider and report the case. As the immunity against diphtheria wanes off with time, the booster dose of vaccination is of utmost importance in the general population as well. People in the community must be made aware of the benefits of immunizations. In case of contact with the suspected case, the individual must immediately contact the health care professional to seek proper consultation. Similarly, a patient diagnosed with diphtheria must be made aware of the importance of isolation and limiting contact with the general population until cleared to do so by the healthcare professional.

In the case of close contacts who had recent exposure to diphtheria, management includes close surveillance for any respiratory or cutaneous symptoms. Patients should be kept under isolation, swabs should be taken for culture, and erythromycin utilized for 7 to 10 days. If the immunization status of the individual is unknown, the booster dose of the diphtheria toxoid should be given as well.