Oxybutynin is an anticholinergic medication with antispasmodic activity against smooth muscle, including the bladder smooth muscle. The active metabolite is N-desethyloxybutynin.

Oxybutynin acts by competitive acetylcholine antagonism at postganglionic muscarinic receptors, resulting in the relaxation of bladder smooth muscle. Several dosage forms are approved by the FDA: immediate oral release, oral extended-release, topical gel, and transdermal patch. Oxybutynin is developed for intravesical instillation, and as a rectal suppository, a vaginal preparation is currently under development. Each formulation has different efficacy and adverse-event profiles.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Oxybutynin is quickly absorbed following oral administration of oxybutynin chloride immediate-release tablets and has an absolute bioavailability of about 6% (ranges between 1.6 to 10.9%). It achieves Cmax within one hour and has approximately 2 to 3 hours of plasma half-life. The for the tablets.

Food Effects: When co-administered with food, clinical data in the literature shows that oxybutynin solution has a slightly delayed absorption and increased bioavailability by 25%.

Distribution: Oxybutynin has a large volume of distribution (193 L) following intravenous 5 mg oxybutynin chloride administration. In addition, both enantiomers of oxybutynin (R and S) are highly protein-bound (99%).

Metabolism: In the liver, oxybutynin gets metabolized by the cytochrome P450 enzyme systems (mostly via CYP3A4). As a result of metabolism, two metabolites are formed, metabolite phenyl cyclohexyl glycolic acid is inactive, and desethyl oxybutynin is pharmacologically active.

Excretion: Oxybutynin is mainly metabolized in the liver, and less than 0.1% of the administered dose gets excreted unchanged in the urine and less than 0.1% as desethyloxybutynin metabolite.