Nonorganic functional hearing loss may result from conscious or unconscious motives along a spectrum from malingering to conversion disorder. The Austen-Lynch model describes the causative factors of nonorganic functional hearing loss based on the patient’s level of intent in demonstrating the hearing deficit.

The three categories described are conversion disorder (low level of intent), factitious disorder (moderate level of intent), and malingering (high level of intent). These three entities exist on a continuum. The lower the level of intent, the more internal and unconscious the rewards of the hearing deficit.

The frequency of the etiologies of nonorganic functional hearing loss differs between children and adults. Etiologies also differ among subpopulations within these groups. In adults, nonorganic functional hearing loss is frequently due to malingering motivated by monetary gains or compensatory claims.

In children, emotionally or physically traumatic events may cause nonorganic functional hearing loss to present as conversion disorder.

The Austen-Lynch model also hypothesizes that the motives behind nonorganic functional hearing loss may not remain static. It posits movement up the continuum, from greater to lesser intention, or movement down the continuum from lesser to greater intention. An example of movement down the continuum would be an individual that begins with a conversion disorder; however, the increased sympathy shown by peers may cause conscious awareness of the external gains.

These gains serve as motivations for the perpetuation of the symptoms. Depending on whether the gains are internal or external, the individual may begin to feign the symptoms, progressing from a conversion disorder to malingering or a factitious disorder.