**Motor Pathways**

The primary motor cortex is located within the precentral gyrus and is responsible for the regulation of voluntary motor movements. Due to its significant role in motor movements, the precentral gyrus is the initiating point for several motor pathways, including, the corticospinal tract, the corticobulbar tract, and the cortico-rubrospinal tract.

**The Corticospinal Tract**

Voluntary motor movements are largely under the control of the corticospinal tract.

Fibers that do not cross contralaterally in the pyramidal decussation, travel down the spinal cord in the anterior funiculus, creating the anterior corticospinal tract. These fibers decussate in the anterior white commissure and also synapse directly and indirectly, through interneurons, on alpha and gamma lower motor neurons. Axons in the anterior corticospinal tract usually synapse on lower motor neurons supplying more medial muscles.

**The Corticobulbar Tract**

The corticobulbar tract is a similar pathway to the corticospinal tract, except instead of supplying the muscles of the body, it supplies the muscles of the face and head. This tract primarily starts in the lateral aspect of the primary motor cortex, located within the precentral gyrus. From there it travels through the genu of the internal capsule, cerebral peduncle, basis pontis, and on to the medullary pyramids on the ipsilateral side. Fibers then go on to synapse on the motor nuclei of cranial nerves, both directly and indirectly through interneurons. The corticobulbar tract sends direct bilateral fibers to the hypoglossal nerve, facial nerve, and trigeminal nerve motor nuclei. The motor nucleus of the facial nerve is a special case in this tract. The part that supplies the muscles around the mouth and lower face receives only contralateral fibers from the corticobulbar tract. While the part that supplies the forehead and muscles of the upper face receives bilateral fibers originating from both sides.

**Cortico-Rubro-Spinal Tract**

The cortico-rubrospinal tract is a motor pathway that aids in the regulation of flexor muscle movements of the extremities. This corticospinal system controls spinal cord lower motor neurons indirectly. It begins as the corticorubral tract in the primary motor cortex within the precentral gyrus and sends fibers down to the ipsilateral red nucleus of the midbrain. From there, it continues as the rubrospinal tract, as the fibers cross over in the ventral tegmental decussation and continue down the lateral brainstem. The fibers then intermix with fibers from the lateral corticospinal tract and travel down the spinal cord in the lateral funiculus. The axons from the rubrospinal tract then synapse on alpha and gamma motor neurons of the muscles associated with the flexion of the extremities.