Evaluating a patient’s writing ability is part of the complete neurologic workup for language, including fluency, comprehension, repetition, naming, and reading. The complete evaluation of both verbal and written language is essential to elucidating the cause of agraphia.

To assess writing in an English-speaking patient, the examiner should provide the patient with a writing instrument, a blank sheet of paper (or a writing board), and a flat writing surface. Patients lying in bed should be positioned upright. The examiner should then ask the patient to write a complete and grammatically correct sentence. This can be as simple as asking the patient to “Please write me a sentence,” but it can be helpful to offer open-ended prompts such as “What did you do today?”, “Why are you here?” or “Tell me something about yourself.” The examiner should encourage the patient to make their handwriting clear and legible.

Clinicians should observe the patient for correct orientation to the page and writing instrument in space. The act of writing should be observed for the general ease and speed of the task. The letters should be relatively uniform in size, spacing, and stroke quality. The examiner should note any errors in writing, including duplication of letter strokes, incorrect placement of spaces, or physical overlapping of words. Writing content should be analyzed for sentence length, word choice, accurate spelling, and correct use of grammatical elements and punctuation. Given the natural variation in individual handwriting, the examiner should compare pre-morbid writing samples if these are available or ask the patient if their handwriting appears different than it was previously.

The presence or absence of other neurological exam findings may help include or exclude different etiologies of agraphia. Patients with central agraphia often have concomitant aphasia. There may be a pertinent absence of paresis on manual muscle testing in patients with apraxic agraphia. Ideomotor apraxic agraphia may be accompanied by impaired use of other tools, and there can be deficits in mimicking tools such as a hammer or a toothbrush. Drawing an Archimedes spiral can help distinguish essential tremors from Parkinsonian tremors.

Micrographia can be accompanied by cogwheeling rigidity, decrements in fast finger tapping, or other features of Parkinsonism. An intact ability to copy a complex figure, such as the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure test, may help exclude constructional apraxia when assessing apraxic agraphia.