Oxytocin is an oligopeptide hormone that contains nine amino acyl residues, or in other words, a nonapeptide hormone. It is one of the two hormones stored and released from the posterior pituitary gland but created in the hypothalamus. It is specifically released from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus into the posterior pituitary gland for later use. This specific part of the posterior pituitary gland that stores oxytocin is called the pars nervosa, also known as the neural or posterior lobe. Most hormones create negative feedback loops after they are released, but oxytocin is one of the few that exhibit positive feedback loops, i.e., that the release of oxytocin leads to actions that stimulate even more of a release of oxytocin. This feedback contrasts with antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also known as vasopressin (the second and only other hormone stored and released from the posterior pituitary), which exhibits a negative feedback loop after release. Less of this hormone will be released after it exhibits its effect on the body.

Exogenous oxytocin causes the same response in the female reproductive system as that of endogenous oxytocin. Both types of oxytocin stimulate uterine contractions in the myometrium by causing G-protein coupled receptors to stimulate a rise in intracellular calcium in uterine myofibrils. Oxytocin receptor activation causes many signals that stimulate uterine contraction by increasing intracellular calcium levels, which is where positive feedback comes into play. When oxytocin is released, it stimulates uterine contractions, and these uterine contractions, in turn, cause more oxytocin to be released; this is what causes the increase in both the intensity and frequency of contractions and enables a mother to carry out vaginal delivery completely. The head of the fetus pushes against the cervix, the nerve impulses from this action travel to the mother’s brain, which activates the posterior pituitary to secrete oxytocin. This oxytocin is then carried through the blood to the uterus to increase uterine contractions further, and the cycle continues until parturition.

Not only does oxytocin stimulate uterine contractions, but it also causes contractions of the myoepithelial cells in the female breasts. This activity occurs in the alveolar ducts. Such contractions are what force milk from these ducts into even larger sinuses, which enable milk expulsion. Positive feedback is also relevant to this milk-ejection reflex. A baby attempting to latch on to his mother’s breast signals oxytocin secretion into the blood in the same manner as vaginal delivery, except, instead of uterine contractions, milk is ejected from the breast. The oxytocin makes its way to the brain at the same time to increase more oxytocin secretion.

Lastly, oxytocin also has both antidiuretic and vasodilatory effects, increasing cerebral, coronary, and even renal blood flow.