**Laboratory Studies**

Monoclonal proteins in serum or urine are detected. According to the diagnostic criteria, no M-protein should be detected on immunofixation of the serum and urine. Still, approximately 50% of patients show a small M-protein in the serum or urine.

Uninvolved immunoglobulins and other blood tests are in average values.

**Histol****ogy**

Lesional biopsy or fine-needle aspiration techniques are used to diagnose plasmacytoma. In the case of the spine, fluoroscopic guided biopsy or CT guided lesional biopsy is used.

Tissue biopsy in SPB shows infiltration of monoclonal cells, and EMP shows submucosal growth and may require excision or tissue biopsy according to the location. A biopsy is done to check the phenotype of plasma cells. Additionally, bone marrow aspiration or trephine biopsy is done to rule out multiple myeloma. Furthermore, an immunohistological analysis is performed to check the presence of CD138 and CD38 markers.

**Imaging Studies**

Plain film radiography, MRI and PET CT are used to assess the lesion. Whole-body CT/MRI is used to detect other primary lesions elsewhere in the body.

MRI due to better soft-tissue contrast and multiplanar images is a better modality for evaluating radiation volumes in plasmacytomas and the staging of the disease. It is also helpful in the verification of tumor reduction after therapy.

Features suggesting plasmacytoma include bulky soft tissue mass and features of high cellularity exhibited by relatively isointense T2 weighted MRI images.

Other imaging techniques include flow cytometry or kappa lambda labeling to check the degree of clonal plasma cell infiltration. Moreover, endoscopy is used to detect any associated lesions, resectability, mass effect, and destruction of surrounding tissue in EP. In addition to CT, which is used to detect underlying bony abnormalities, 18 fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET/CT is used in patients when MRI cannot be done.

Patients with plasmacytoma should be evaluated to exclude systemic disease by performing skeletal surveys, bone marrow biopsy, and blood tests. MM should be ruled out by performing the recommended tests, including spine MRI or FDG-PET, multicolor flow cytometry (MFC), immunoglobulins levels, and free light chain levels. Evaluation and diagnosis of systemic disease in this way may reduce the percentage of patients with plasmacytoma evolving into MM.

According to the international myeloma working group, the diagnostic criteria for plasmacytoma is as follows:

**SPB**

One bone lesion containing clonal plasma cells, absence of M-protein in serum and urine (may be present in some cases), bone marrow histology not consistent with MM, normal skeletal survey, no end-organ damage.

**EMP**

Extramedullary tumor of clonal plasma cells, absence of M-protein in serum and urine (may be present in some cases), normal bone marrow, normal skeletal survey, no end-organ damage.

**MSP**

More than one bone lesion or extramedullary tumor of plasma cells that may be recurrent, absence of M-protein in serum and urine (may be present in some cases), normal bone marrow, normal skeletal survey, no end-organ damage.