With preparation complete and the patient prone position.  A standard “time-out” is performed.  The skin mark on the lumbar spine is identified. Not every disc can be entered bilaterally.  The side on which the physician stands is a matter of right- or left-handedness, personal choice, room set-up, and equipment set-up flexibility.

The patient is prepped with Chloraprep and draped in the usual sterile fashion using a fenestrated drape.  A radiopaque marker is placed about mid-region on the lumbar spine as a point of reference. A single anteroposterior (AP) view is commonly performed. The first level intended to be injected is noted. Next, the C-arm is tilted towards or away from the head to line up the endplates of the intended vertebral level.  The radiopaque marker is often moved to be more in line with the entry point if the initial estimate is off point. The C-arm is then angled towards the side of the skin entry. An image is obtained to align the anterior edge of the superior articular process with the mid-portion of the disc. Depending on lateral disk collapse, rotation of the vertebral body, and/or scoliosis, the C-arm angles may need to be adjusted. It may be necessary to switch back and forth between AP, lateral, and oblique views for the best estimate of this entry point.

Care should be taken not to enter too far lateral, such as in cases where the vertebra is rotated anterior on that side.  In such cases, contralateral disk entry should be considered. Skin anesthesia is accomplished with a local anesthetic, usually lidocaine without epinephrine. An 18-gauge 1 or 1.5-inch needle is initially inserted through the skin in the track towards the center of the disk, and then the 22-gauge 5 or 7 inches needles with or without a bent-tip are inserted through the 18-gauge needle in a "needle-over-needle" technique. Additional lidocaine is administered for infiltration as needed.  When the needle is at the outer annulus of the disk on AP and lateral views, the patient is informed that they will feel some discomfort.  The needle should have a "rubbery feel" as it comes up against and enters the annulus.  The needle is then advanced in the center of the nucleus.

At this point, the C-arm is usually rotated to a lateral view, magnification visualizing the anterior and posterior aspect of the disk and spinal canal is obtained. The stylet is removed from the needle while not advancing or retracting the needle.  The cap on the end of the short IV extension of the contrast syringe is removed and attached to the needle that is in the disc.  The physician is now ready for the provocative portion of the discogram.  Multiple "sham" injections are usually performed.  The syringe is held and sometimes even tapped while asking the patient if they feel anything. If a pain response is elicited at this stage, it should be noted as a sham response. Otherwise, pain provocation at this stage should not occur.

If using manometry, the manometer should read zero pressure and zero volume at this point.

Verbal communication is essential. The patient should be made aware that they are going to feel pressure and potentially pain.  There is a subjective, almost artistic component to this phase. Every physician will have their own way of interpreting and asking what happens next, but some suggestions/examples are as follows:

- "OK, here is the part we discussed. Tell me when you feel something." At this point, a tapping or other gentle movement for a sham injection is performed. Then, slow pressure and observation of the disc on the lateral view, usually with magnification, is performed.

- "OK, I know that hurts, and I'm sorry about that, but is it the same pain or different?" The patient response or answers are noted.

- "Is that the same pain that you have when it hurts? Is that the same pain that brought you in to see us in the first place?" The patient response or answers are noted

Under real-time fluoroscopy, the contrast is administered, and initial flow into the disc is noted.  If using a manometer, the opening pressure and volume are noted. Pressure and gradually increased, and pain location and intensity are noted.  The terms concordant and discordant are often used.  The volume at which pain may change from concordant to discordant is noted if such a change occurs.  While a manual discogram has no pressure transducer, volumes can still be reasonably noted at different times of the procedure.  Likewise, manometer volumes and pressures are noted as well.  Basic Dallas classification I-IV should be possible to discern on the lateral view, especially later on diagnostic quality lateral plain films.

It is important to finish one level before moving on to the next and not confuse data from one disc with another. Many clinicians inject a small amount (e.g., 0.5 ml) of bupivacaine into the most painful discs for post-procedure palliation.  As with any spinal injection, caution should be exercised to avoid inadvertent vascular uptake.

Upon completion of the series, the final AP and lateral view are taken, covering all discs. The sterile skin prep solution is cleaned off the patient. A dry sterile dressing is applied after hemostasis is obtained with direct pressure. The IV is discontinued only after the patient is off the table and stable in the post-procedure suite.

The concept is the same if using a biplane unit or two C-arms set up at 90 angles. An oblique view may not be available based on the equipment, and the AP and lateral views may need to be taken together. The clinician would need to conceptualize the three-dimensional image this creates. This is a separate skill that the proceduralist should be familiar with before attempting.