# Continuing Education Activity

Jacobs syndrome is a rare genetic abnormality in which a male receives an extra Y chromosome from his father. While many patients go undiagnosed due to mild symptoms, the disease does seem to confer an increased risk for certain comorbid conditions such as asthma, seizure disorders, autism spectrum disorder, learning disabilities, and behavioral problems. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of patients with Jacobs syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the patient history associated with Jacobs syndrome.
- Outline the management considerations for patients with Jacobs syndrome.
- Explain how to counsel a patient with Jacobs syndrome.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by Jacobs syndrome.

# Introduction

Jacobs syndrome, also known as 47,XYY syndrome, is a rare genetic condition that occurs in about 1 out of 1000 male children. It belongs to a group of conditions known as "sex chromosome trisomies", with Klinefelter's syndrome being the more common type.

# Etiology

Jacobs syndrome is not an inherited condition. It most commonly arises during meiosis II in the father, at which time an extra Y chromosome is attributed to the resultant sperm.

# Epidemiology

Jacobs syndrome is relatively rare, occurring in approximately 1 out of 1000 newborn males.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of this disease normally begins with erroneous spermatogenesis in the patient's father, resulting in an extra Y chromosome in the patient. Disease symptoms may be quite vague during childhood, and for this reason, most children go undiagnosed.

# History and Physical

When obtaining a history of a patient with Jacobs syndrome, it would not be unusual to elicit a history of mild learning disabilities and behavioral disturbances.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of 47,XYY syndrome may occur as early as the prenatal period using cell-free fetal DNA.

# Treatment / Management

Families who receive a prenatal diagnosis of 47,XYY syndrome should receive genetic counseling to aid in their understanding of the disease. Treatment of this syndrome is generally only supportive, with attention given to the comorbidities of the patient. Boys who are diagnosed with Jacobs syndrome may benefit from speech therapy and behavioral interventions from qualified professionals. Occupational therapy may be needed if hypotonia is present. Patients may benefit from supplemental or special educational resources if learning disabilities exist. Appropriate medical treatment for any comorbid condition such as asthma or seizure disorder should be elicited from a licensed clinician. Men with infertility should receive a comprehensive evaluation from a qualified reproductive endocrinologist. Hormonal imbalances, if found, may need to be corrected. Patients who are having difficulty achieving pregnancy due to low sperm counts may need to undergo in-vitro fertilization or intracytoplasmic sperm injection.

# Differential Diagnosis

As boys with Jacobs syndrome are often tall for their age, another condition that should be ruled out is Marfan syndrome, a disease that also presents with tall stature.

# Prognosis

Studies have shown that the lifespan of a patient with Jacobs syndrome may be approximately 10 years less than that of age-controlled peers without the disease.

# Complications

Patients with Jacobs syndrome have been found to have an increased incidence of certain diseases. These include asthma, seizure disorders, and tremors.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with Jacobs syndrome should be reassured that most patients with this disease go on to live long and fulfilling lives. The fact that up to 85% of these patients are never diagnosed is a testament to how mild symptoms often are and the wide range of phenotypic presentations possible.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Jacobs syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that often presents with mild symptoms. It is grossly underdiagnosed, with up to 85% of these patients never receiving a diagnosis.