Because labyrinthectomy necessarily causes total hearing loss in the operated ear, one of the primary contraindications for this procedure is serviceable hearing in the diseased ear. This contraindication becomes even stronger if the ear to be operated is the only hearing hear. More recently, however, this contraindication has eased somewhat because cochlear implantation has been shown to be an effective means of rehabilitating hearing in an ear that has undergone labyrinthectomy.

Generally, patients with a pure tone average threshold of at least 70 dB or greater, along with a word discrimination score of 30% or less, would be considered as candidates for labyrinthectomy. Nevertheless, serviceable hearing is subjective to the patient, and ultimately the decision to proceed with labyrinthectomy is based on the patient’s and the physician’s thoughtful discussion of risks versus benefits of surgery.

A successful labyrinthectomy procedure depends not only on the complete removal of diseased neuroepithelium from all five vestibular organs but also on the adequate central compensation to normal vestibular function on the opposite side. Therefore, preoperative vestibular testing is imperative to verify normal vestibular function in the non-operative ear. Preoperative counseling in patients undergoing labyrinthectomy for Meniere disease will need to consider the 10 to 40% possibility of future disease of the opposite ear despite normal function at the time of surgery.

The preoperative evaluation will also need to consider the possibility of poor central compensation. Negative indicators for central compensation are mostly centered on a patient’s ability to participate in the course of vestibular rehabilitative physical therapy. These negative indicators include increased age, visual problems, cognitive impairment, and contributors to a sedentary lifestyle such as obesity, arthritis, or lower limb dysfunction.