**Anatomical Location**

The **parotid gland (PG)**is the largest of the three major salivary glands. It is located between the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the masseter, extending from the mastoid tip to just below the angle of the mandible. A small tail projects from the inferior edge of the gland, separated by the submandibular space only by the stylomandibular ligament. From superficial to deep, the gland is superficial to the facial nerve, an area of crucial surgical relevance, followed by the retromandibular vein and the external carotid artery.Stensen’s duct, the main excretory duct of the PG, projects from the anterior portion of the gland over the masseter. In its trajectory, it pierces the buccinator muscle to open into the oral cavity at the level of the buccal mucosa of the second maxillary molar

The submandibular gland (SMG), the second-largest gland, is about one-half the weight of the parotid and is found inferior to the mandible, between the anterior and posterior bellies of the digastric muscle. The SMG has a smaller anterior lobe and a larger posterior lobe. The lobes are connected in the posterior free edge of the mylohyoid muscle. The main excretory duct, referred to as Wharton’s duct, arises from the smaller, deep lobe inferior to the mucosa of the floor of the mouth to enter the oral cavity an open into the frenulum linguae at the sublingual caruncle. The hypoglossal nerve runs parallel and inferior to Wharton's duct

The sublingual gland (SLG) lies beneath the mucosa of the floor of the mouth and superior to the mylohyoid muscle (between the mandible and genioglossus muscles). Medially, between the base of the tongue and the sublingual gland, the submandibular duct, and the sublingual nerve can be found. Rather than having one main duct, it contains a series of short ducts that project directly into the floor of the mouth, the ducts of Rivinus, and a common duct, known as Bartholin's duct that connects with the submandibular gland's duct at the sublingual caruncula

While the major salivary glands produce 92% to 95% of saliva, the remainder is made by roughly 600 to 1000 minor salivary glands. They can be found in almost any part of the mouth (except for the gingiva and anterior part of the hard palate) but present most commonly in the lips, buccal mucosa, palate, and tongue. Each gland has exactly one duct, and although it contains both serous and mucous acini, their secretion is mainly mucous. Unlike the major salivary glands, they are not encapsulated by connective tissue but merely surrounded by it. Von Ebner glands, a subset of the minor salivary glands, are found surrounding the circumvallate papillae on the dorsal surface of the tongue. They secrete a serous fluid that helps with lipid hydrolysis and also plays a role in taste perception

**Architecture and Function**

Salivary glands contain three major cell types: acinar cells, ductal cells, and myoepithelial cells. Despite their different locations, each of these glands shares the same fundamental structure, branched ducts that open into the oral cavity and glandular secretory end pieces, called acini, that produce saliva. Myoepithelial cells display 4 to 8 processes that wrap around the acini and intercalated ducts. They rhythmically contract to squeeze saliva from the acinar units through the duct system to release it into the oral cavity. In addition to myoepithelial cells, acinar cells are also surrounded by an extracellular matrix, immune cells, stromal cells, myofibroblasts, and nerve fibers

There are three main types of acini: serous, mucinous, and seromucous. Serous acini are relatively spherical and produce a watery secretion containing proteins modified and stored in secretory or zymogen granules, abundant at the cell's apex. In contrast to serous acini, mucinous acini store a significantly more viscous secretion rich in glycoproteins (or mucins), which becomes hydrated upon exocytosis to form mucus. Lastly, seromucous acini contain secretions of both types, although one kind of secretion may predominate. Each of the major salivary glands has different proportions of each acinus, affecting the composition of its secretions. The parotid contains serous acini and makes watery serous saliva. The submandibular and sublingual glands contain mucous and serous acini; therefore, they are known as mixed glands. The submandibular gland primarily presents serous acini, with only 10% of acini being mucinous. These mucinous acini contain crescent-shaped, serous demilune cells that wrap around the top of the cells. Similarly, the sublingual gland has mixed acini and demilunes but predominately mucinous acinar cells

An integral function of the ductal system is modifying the electrolyte content of the secretion as it passes through the ductal system. Ductal structures are categorized and differentiated by their cellular composition, location, and function, forming three main types: the intercalated, striated, and excretory ducts. The intercalated ducts project directly from the acini and are formed by a single layer of cuboidal cells. Here, bicarbonate is secreted while chloride is absorbed from saliva. The intercalated ducts empty directly into the striated ducts, which are comprised of columnar cells with deep basolateral membrane invaginations that give it its characteristically striated appearance. These cells function mainly in reabsorbing sodium and adding potassium to the secretory product. The excretory duct has the largest diameter, and its epithelial lining is comprised of pseudostratified columnar cells. At this point, salivary fluid is relatively hypotonic to plasma because the rates of sodium and chlorine resorption are greater than that of potassium and bicarbonate secretion within the ducts. In addition, the luminal accumulation of ions within the ductal system creates an osmotic gradient responsible for the passive travel of water throughout the ducts