**Visual field:**The visual field is the extent of an area visible to an individual during steady fixation of the eye in any one gaze or direction. Harry Traquair defined it as "an island of vision surrounded by a sea of blindness," also known as the hill of vision, considering its three-dimensional aspect. The apex of the hill of vision is the area with the highest retinal sensitivity and represents the fovea. The sensitivity decreases as we move to the periphery of the retina.

The extent of a uniocular visual field was given by Thomas Young.

**Measurement of visual field or perimetry:**The measurement of the retina's sensitivity to light is shown at a given location in the visual field printout. The sensitivity of the retina of a healthy individual is highest at the fovea and then reduces towards the periphery.

The intensity of the light stimulus is measured in apostilb. However, apostilb and retinal sensitivity are inversely proportional to each other. Also, the human eye responds to a wide range of apostilbs. Therefore, the sensitivity to light is measured in decibels (0-50 in standard automated perimetry). Decibel is the logarithmic representation of the intensity of the light stimulus. It has a direct correlation to the sensitivity of the retina. Zero decibels (dB) represent the brightest light stimulus, and 50 dB represents the dimmest stimulus. So a zero decibel stimulus will be visible to a point on the retina with the lowest sensitivity and vice versa.

The decibel value is relative, so it varies from machine to machine. A 0 dB reading represents 10000 apostilbs on the Humphrey visual field analyzer, whereas it represents 4000 apostilbs on the Octopus perimetry. A 40 dB reading represents one apostilb on the Humphrey visual Analyzer, whereas it represents 0.4 apostilbs on the Octopus perimetry.

**Threshold:**It is the intensity of the light stimulus, which, when presented at a particular location, "n" number of times is detected by the corresponding retinal point at least 50% of the time.

The threshold is measured by using the staircase method "4-2-1". There can be two ways to use this method. If the initial stimulus is not seen, then the intensity of the stimulus is increased by 4 dB steps until it is seen. Once it is visible, the intensity is reduced by 2 dB steps till it is again not visible. Then the intensity is increased by 1 dB till again it is visualized. This final dB reading is the threshold.

Alternatively, the intensity of a seen stimulus is reduced by 4dB till it is not visible. Then the intensity is increased by 2 dB till it is seen, and then the intensity is reduced again by 1 dB till it is not seen.

If the threshold at each retinal point was evaluated in 1 dB steps, it would take a lot of time, and the process will tire out the patient easily. Therefore the staircase method is used.

**Kinetic perimetry:**The test is actively performed by the examiner where they move the target on an arc, and the patient responds by localizing the target when it enters the visual field of the patient. In this test, the intensity of the target remains the same throughout the test, whereas the color or the size of the stimulus can vary. So this test is useful in assessing the two-dimensional extent of the visual field. The commonly used kinetic perimeter is the Goldmann perimeter.

**Static perimetry:******This test is automated.

**Strategy:**These are testing algorithms used so that the test does not take too much time and the results are not affected by the patient's fatigue.

**Program:**To reduce the time taken for the test and to enable the patient to carry out a test more attentively, a limited number of points on the retina are checked for their retinal sensitivity. The location and the pattern of the points tested on the retina are decided by the different programs available on the machine. For example, 30-2, 24-2, 10-2, and the macular program are available on Humphrey Field Analyzer (HFA).

The 30-2 tests the central 30 degrees field of the retina with fovea as fixation. This gives a round printout with 30 degrees around the fovea (the radius of the field is 30 degrees). The digit 2 in this test denotes that the points are not located exactly on the vertical or horizontal midline (points are located at the midline in the 30-1 test in the HFA-1 machine). Instead, the points are equidistant from this line. This helps to better document the visual fields obeying the horizontal midline (glaucoma) and vertical midline (visual pathway lesions).

A total of 76 points are tested on the retina, with each point at a distance of 6 degrees from the other in the 30-2 test. This leaves a bare area between the points. This bare area is a circle with a radius of 3 degrees between any four points. This bare area remains unevaluated.

The 24-2 test is a subset of 30-2 where the outermost points are eliminated, retaining two nasal points (specifically to look for nasal steps in glaucoma). It tests 54 points. This may be a better program for the elderly as it reduces the time taken for the test. It also reduces the number of false negatives due to the patient's fatigue, as the outer points are the last ones to be tested. Also, the points eliminated from the 30-2 field are not considered when diagnosing glaucoma. The distance between any two points remains 6 degrees.

Because the distance between two points is 6 degrees, paracentral scotomas can be missed on 24-2 or 30-2 programs. Therefore, any defect close to the fixation on these programs should be retested with the 10-2 program.

A new program 24-2c has been recently introduced in the Humphrey Field Analyzer 3. Additional points have been added to the 24-2 program within the central 10 degrees to be able to detect the paracentral scotomas. However, the resolution of 10-2 is not achieved.

The 10-2 tests the central 10 degrees of the retina. It consists of 68 closely placed points with a distance of 2 degrees between any two points. This means that a circle with a radius of 1 degree is the area of the retina that remains unevaluated between any four points. Glaucoma hemifield analysis is not done during this program, and the visual field index is also not calculated during this program.

Thus the number of points tested in various programs of the Humphrey visual field is

- 68 points in 10-2,

- 54 points in 24-2, and

- 76 points in 30-2.

The Macular program is the central 16 points of the 10-2 program. The points in the macular program are tested twice, and this is depicted as a second numeral in brackets below the points tested.