Opioid use and misuse/abuse for acute and chronic pain are significant problems in the United States (US).

Over one-quarter of United States citizens suffer from chronic pain.

The International Association for the Study of Pain defines chronic pain as pain lasting longer than three months.

Unfortunately, studies have revealed an inherent lack of education regarding pain management in most medical schools and training programs.

Appropriate opioid prescribing includes prescribing sufficient opioid medication through regular assessment, treatment planning, and monitoring to provide effective pain control while avoiding addiction, abuse, overdose, diversion, and misuse. To be successful, clinicians must understand appropriate opioid prescribing, assessment, the potential for abuse and addiction, and potential psychological problems. Inappropriate opioid prescribing may involve not prescribing, under-prescribing, overprescribing, or continuing to prescribe opioids when they are no longer effective. These concerns are particularly prominent in patients with chronic pain. To make the challenges even worse, chronic pain patients often develop opioid tolerance and significant psychological, behavioral, and emotional problems, including anxiety and depression related to under or overprescribing opioids.

Clinicians who prescribe opioids face challenges involving medical negligence in either failure to provide adequate pain control or risk of licensure, or even criminal charges if perceived they are involved in drug-related diversion or misuse. All providers that prescribe opioids need additional education and training to provide the best patient outcomes and avoid the social and legal entanglements associated with over-and under-prescribing opioids.

**Provider Opioid Knowledge Deficit**

There are substantial knowledge gaps around appropriate and inappropriate opioid prescribing, including deficits in understanding current research, legislation, and appropriate prescribing practices. In addition, providers often have knowledge deficits that include:

- Understanding addiction

- Populations at risk for opioid addiction

- Prescription vs. non-prescription opioid addiction

- The fallacious belief that addiction and dependence on opioids are synonymous

- The belief that opioid addiction is solely a psychological problem, while in reality, it is likely a complex psychological and physiological issue that may be related to a chronic, painful disease

With a long history of misunderstanding, poor societal and provider education, and inconsistent laws, the prescription of opioids has resulted in significant societal challenges that will only resolve with significant education and training.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD. Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.

**Definitions**

- Abuse - Use of an illegal substance and/or maladaptive pattern of substance use for a non-medical purpose other than pain relief (i.e., for the sake of altering one's state of consciousness)

- Addiction* - Pursuit of a chemical substance to find relief or reward associated with diminished control over drug use, compulsive use, craving, and/or continued use despite harm

- Dependence - Physiologic reliance on a drug resulting in a withdrawal syndrome with cessation or reduction in the amount of drug administered

- Diversion - Transfering a controlled substance from an authorized person's use to an unauthorized person's use for distribution or possession

- Misuse - Use of a medication in a manner different than how it was prescribed

- Pseudoaddiction - Pursuit of additional medication due to poor pain control, with the cessation of drug-seeking behavior upon achievement of appropriate pain control

- Tolerance - The lessened effect of a substance after being exposed to that substance or the need to escalate doses to achieve the same effect

*The American Society of Addiction Medicine describes addiction as a treatable chronic disease that involves environmental pressures, genetics, an individual's life experiences, and interactions among brain circuits. Individuals who become addicted to opioids or other medications often engage in behaviors that become compulsive and result in dangerous consequences. The American Society of Addiction Medicines notes that while the following should not be used as diagnostic criteria due to variability among addicted individuals, they identify five characteristics of addiction:

- Craving for drug or positive reward

- Dysfunctional emotional response

- Failure to recognize significant problems affecting behavior and relationships

- Inability to consistently abstain

- Impairment in control of behavior

Unfortunately, most health providers' understanding regarding addiction is often confusing, inaccurate, and inconsistent due to the broad range of perspectives of those dealing with patients suffering from addiction. While a knowledge gap is present among healthcare providers, it is equally prevalent in politicians writing laws and law enforcement attempting to enforce the laws they write. Additionally, payers are responsible for the expenses associated with the evaluation and treatment of addiction. Persistent lack of education and the use of obsolete terminology continue to contribute to a societal lack of understanding for effectively dealing with addiction challenges.

In the past, the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders defined "addiction," "substance abuse," and "substance dependence" separately. Over time, the manual has eliminated these terms and now uses "substance use disorder," ranging from mild to severe.