Rumination syndrome is considered relatively rare because there is a lack of good data. Patients can have long-standing, nonspecific symptoms that manifest similarly to other conditions like GERD or gastroparesis. It is essential to rule out any potential structural cause of the symptoms using additional testing if necessary. Diagnosing rumination syndrome can be challenging, as it is a clinical diagnosis based on the Rome IV criteria and many distractors are often present. Esophageal impedance and high-resolution manometry can help in identifying rumination syndrome but is not readily available in each hospital. The correct diagnosis is required before helpful, noninvasive treatment modalities like diaphragmatic breathing can be used. These treatment modalities can greatly improve clinical outcomes for these patients.

Once the diagnosis is made, clinical psychologists and behavioral therapists play a crucial role in treating these patients with intensive cognitive behavioral therapy, especially if they have underlying/associated psychiatric diseases. The clinical nurse helps educate the patients about the benign nature of this disease and helps augment medical therapy by ensuring patient understanding of the behavioral therapies. The nurse can also help the clinical team by educating the patient on proper diaphragmatic breathing techniques and ensuring compliance with them at every visit. A collaborative interprofessional team of physicians, behavioral therapists, and nurses can optimize existing treatment strategies for these patients and greatly improve their clinical outcomes.[Level 5]