The vast network of blood vessels is involved either directly or indirectly in many pathological disease states. The most common of which is atherosclerotic disease. This pathology begins with low-density lipoprotein (LDL) being taken up by the endothelial cells of vessels. As LDL begins to accumulate in the intima, macrophages work to digest the oxidized it. When the LDL is present in the intima in excessive amounts, the macrophages become overwhelmed and turn into foam cells. A ‘Fatty streak,’ composed of these foam cells, begins to form in the subendothelial space between within the tunica intima. The smooth muscle cells in the tunica media being to proliferate due to inflammatory cytokine signaling and secrete fibrous cap that entombs to fatty streak. The risk of such changes to the vascular wall includes thrombotic events, embolic events, and restriction of flow, which progresses in severe cases to occlusion of flow. In some instances, these fatty streaks can be so impressive that they are visible with the naked eye on a gross specimen.

Cytokine response to stress or inflammation will cause separation of the endothelial lining of the vessel, which allows fluid extravasation into the surrounding tissue. These cytokines induce endothelial cell retraction, allowing otherwise impermeable large molecules, to pour out into the surrounding extravascular space. Similar changes within this functional array of hyperpermeability, angiogenic growth, and endothelial proliferation carries implications in angiomas and angiosarcomas.

Diabetic neuropathy is thought to be secondary to sclerotic changes and increased resistance in the small blood vessels that supply the peripheral nerves, the nervi vasorum.

On histology, myocardial fibers are sometimes visible, extending into the pulmonary veins and vena cava walls. These continuations of myocardial tissue into the vessel wall are what are known as myocardial sleeves and are possible foci for the generation of atrial fibrillation.