Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) is for those who want to quit smoking, as abruptly quitting can cause withdrawals and cravings. Nicotine withdrawal occurs after suddenly discontinuing smoking cigarettes. Typical withdrawal symptoms include mood changes, diaphoresis, headaches, insomnia, and poor cognition. These symptoms usually peak two to three days after quitting smoking. Using NRT helps reduce the motivation to smoke cigarettes because the body still gets nicotine from another safer method. Evidence has shown that using NRT helps increase the chances of quitting by about 50% to 70%. Withdrawals include restlessness, more than usual hunger, feeling depressed or irritable, and craving another cigarette.

- Nicotine comes in a patch, lozenge, inhalers, spray, and gum forms and can provide the body the dose of nicotine that it previously got from cigarettes. Using these forms of NRT increases the chances of success of quitting smoking and is FDA-approved.

- NRT contains less nicotine than the average cigarette and has a slower effect on the body. In addition, it does not contain the harmful chemicals of cigarettes, such as tar.

- It is a strong recommendation to start using an NRT either 1 to 2 weeks before quitting or right after quitting cigarettes.

- Bupropion is also an antidepressant with smoking cessation effects and can be combined with the nicotine patch for a higher chance of success.

- According to the American College of Cardiology guidelines, clinicians can use NRT plus varenicline for smokers who do not succeed with NRT or varenicline alone.