A thorough history and a detailed physical examination are crucial in evaluating patients presenting with dysarthria. A comprehensive initial speech evaluation is comprised of (1) history, (2) oral motor/speech mechanism exam, (3) screening of subsystems (respiration, phonation, articulation, resonance, and prosody), (4) perceptual assessment, and (5) intelligibility evaluation.

The water glass manometer test provides a gross assessment of pressure-generating capabilities for speech production. The patient must blow into a water-filled drinking glass with the straw secured at a certain depth inside the glass. If the patient can maintain a stream of bubbles for 5 seconds, breath support is adequate for most speech purposes. To be valid, the patient must maintain velopharyngeal closure and a tight lip seal around the straw.

Perpetual assessment of speech helps observe the function of all speech subsets. This assessment provides insight into deficits and serves as a comparison tool. Passages such as "my grandfather" and "caterpillar passage" help assess perceptual speech.

**The Caterpillar Passage**

"Do you like amusement parks? Well, I sure do. To amuse myself, I went twice last spring. My most MEMORABLE moment was riding on the Caterpillar, which is a gigantic roller coaster high above the ground. When I saw how high the Caterpillar rose into the bright blue sky, I knew it was for me. After waiting in line for thirty minutes, I made it to the front, where the man measured my height to see if I was tall enough. I gave the man my coins, asked for change, and jumped on the cart. Tick, tick, tick, the Caterpillar climbed slowly up the tracks. It went SO high I could see the parking lot. Boy, was I SCARED! I thought to myself, "There's no turning back now." People were so scared they screamed as we zoomed fast and faster along the tracks. As quickly as it started, the Caterpillar came to a stop. Unfortunately, it was time to pack the car and drive home. That night I dreamt of the wild ride on the Caterpillar. Taking a trip to the amusement park and riding on the Caterpillar was my MOST memorable moment ever!"

**Speech Intelligibility Evaluation**

Assessment of intelligibility in dysarthric speakers (AIDS), sentence intelligibility test (SIT), and word intelligibility test are used to assess speech intelligibility. AIDS is the most commonly used and comprises word and sentence tasks. The patient reads or imitates 50 unsystematically chosen words from 12 phonetically similar words for each word. In the sentence task, the patient reads or imitates two sentences each for 220 words. The sentences are chosen from a collection of 100 sentences of each length. The judge derives an intelligibility score based on the percentage of words transcribed accurately.

SIT is an improved Windows version of the sentence portion of AIDS. It examines the intelligibility of words and sentences and estimates efficiency by examining the rate of intelligible words per minute in sentences.

The onset and progression of dysarthria and associated neurological complaints, such as tremors, dysphagia, and gait instability, can provide clues for the diagnosis. A medication list review should include potential overdoses and exposure to toxins, such as alcohol and cocaine. Having the patient count from 1 to 100 can bring out respiratory muscle fatigue in myasthenia gravis. Counting numbers without interruption (1–30) is another bedside tool to assess respiratory status.

Imaging techniques, such as computed tomography (CT) of the head and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, are helpful initial tools in evaluation. In patients suspected of neuromuscular junction disorders, electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) are indicated. CBC (complete blood count), basic metabolic profile (BMP), and urine drug screening are indicated based on history and pretest probability. If GBS is suspected, evaluation of pulmonary function (vital capacity and negative inspiratory force) is indicated.

**Speech Assessment Tools**

Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment is one of the most commonly used commercially available tools for dysarthria assessment. It was initially devised in 1980 and revised in 2008. It incorporates a series of tasks used to identify the dysarthria subtype. Speech pathologists rate the patient's speech employing a 5-point scoring system on the following (a) reflexes, (b) respiration, (c) lips, (d)palate, (e) laryngeal, (f) tongue, and (g) intelligibility, (h) influencing factors.

For subjective assessment, self-report questionnaires such as Living with Neurologically Based Speech Difficulties (Living with Dysarthria - LwD) may be used. The severity of dysarthria may not always correspond to the extent of perceived communicative difficulties.