Adult T cell leukemia is uncommon and aggressive neoplasm caused by HTLV-1 infection that infects 10 million people in the world. Of them, 5% of infected people eventually develop symptomatic ATL. HTLV-1 is the first human retrovirus discovered and is endemic in Japan, the Caribbean region, Africa, and some parts in the Middle East, South, and Central America. HTLV-1 transmission is through breastfeeding, sexual interaction, and blood transfusion. The overall prognosis is poor. Hence, preventive measures are of utmost importance. ATL is clinically classified into four subgroups defined by the Shimoyama criteria: acute, chronic, lymphoma, and smoldering. The treatment is chosen based on clinical and patient characteristics. Currently, chemotherapy or the antiviral regimen is the first-line treatment for aggressive type (acute, lymphoma, and chronic with unfavorable features).

An antiviral regimen or watchful waiting is a reasonable first-line for smoldering and favorable chronic subtypes. Different chemotherapy regimens are used in clinical practice including VCAP-AMP-VECP (vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, prednisone-doxorubicin, ranimustine, and prednisone-vindesine, etoposide, carboplatin, prednisone), modified EPOCH (etoposide, prednisolone, vincristine, carboplatin, and doxorubicin; carboplatin is substituted for cyclophosphamide), CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), CHOEP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, vincristine, and prednisone), hyper-CVAD (hyperfractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone). ATL patients are increased risk of opportunistic infections due to severe immunosuppression, therefore, appropriate screening, prevention, and prompt recognition are essential. These patients are likely encountered by primary care physicians. Early recognition and referral to a specialist are important to avoid delay in treatment. Researchers are working on novel approaches and focusing on clinical trial participation. Collaborative work is important to find effective therapeutic strategies to improve survival in ATL.