The diagnosis and management of venous gas embolism are usually with an interprofessional team that consists of an anesthesiologist, internist, hyperbaric chamber specialist, cardiologist, ICU nurses,  and neurologist. The treatment of venous gas embolism is largely supportive. Besides providing oxygen and managing hemodynamic instability, observation for complications is important.

While hyperbaric oxygen therapy is commonly used in arterial gas embolism, its use in venous gas embolism is not routine. Most patients with small venous gas embolisms have few, if any, symptoms and do not require treatment. Generally, with smaller venous gas embolisms, the embolus will eventually reach the lungs, become trapped, and diminish in size as the patient breathes. In cases of severe hemodynamic instability, hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be considered, but there is no data clearly demonstrating benefit.

During central venous line insertion, the nurse should educate the patient not to take a deep breath for a few seconds. The nurse should ensure that the hub is on the catheter at all times. In addition, the connections to the central line must be checked frequently. Anytime IV infusions are administered, the nurse must make sure that the line is free of air bubbles. Attention to detail is vital if one wants to prevent venous air embolism. Anytime venous air embolism is suspected, the nurse should stop all infusions and immediately call the clinician in charge.

The outcomes of patients with venous gas embolism depend on the amount and presence of neurological symptoms. Patients without symptoms have a good prognosis, but those who develop neurological symptoms may have residual deficits even after treatment. When large volumes of gas are involved, death is common.