The surgical procedure of craniotomy has become one of the essential procedures in modern healthcare for neurological disorders. Before the advent of this procedure, many patients were not able to survive conditions that today are treated daily. Disorders ranging from brain tumors, vascular pathologies, and trauma are routinely treated, which could produce devastating damage to the patient if access to the intracranial cavity was limited. The procedure itself has been modernized and will continue to do so with the advent of new technology as it is developed. Since its beginnings, it has produced a revolution in neurosurgical and neurological patient care.

Depending on the specific type of pathology to be addressed and the clinical judgment of the physician, it is determined if a craniotomy is necessary for the patient. Even with the new endovascular techniques to treat intracranial vascular disorders and the radiosurgery technique to treat intracranial tumors, craniotomy remains the primary tool for the treatment of the majority of neurosurgical pathologies.

**Scores used in assessing postoperative outcomes include:**

- Preoperative American society of anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification

- Karnofsky performance score (KPS)

- Charlson co-morbidity score

- Modified Rankin Scale and

- Sex, KPS, ASA physical status classification, location, and edema (SKALE).****

KPS has the strongest evidence for predicting surgery-related outcomes.No scores strongly predict nonsurgical outcomes after elective craniotomies. KPS and ASA physical status classification predict early (≤ 30-day) morbidity in tumor patients. The Charlson co-morbidity predicts mortality of elective aneurysms.