To some extent, the management of spontaneous abortion also depends on the type. However, expectant, medical, and surgical management is generally shown to be equally effective. Two notable exceptions are excessive bleeding and infection, in which case, surgical management is preferred.

The conventionally accepted regimen for medical management consists of misoprostol 800 mcg vaginally, with a repeated dose if needed any time from three hours to seven days after the first dose. Premedication with mifepristone 200 mg orally 24 hours before the first dose of misoprostol may result in a higher success rate than misoprostol alone. Surgical management consists of dilation and suction curettage with sharp curettage, as needed, in either the operating room or office setting. There is evidence that suction curettage alone, without sharp curettage, is sufficient and decreases the risk of intrauterine adhesions, as long as there is reasonable certainty that the uterus is empty. Due to a lack of evidence on the safety of expectant management of second-trimester miscarriage, medical or surgical management is preferred beyond 12-13 weeks gestational age.

Although there is a lack of consensus, complete abortion is often defined as the absence of a gestational sac on ultrasound with an endometrial stripe thickness of less than 30 mm. This ultrasound is usually performed 7-14 days after the initiation of medical management for spontaneous abortion. Patient-reported resolution of cramps and bleeding is also useful in confirming complete abortion.

Hormonal contraception may be initiated immediately after the resolution of early pregnancy loss, including the placement of an intrauterine device, which is only contraindicated in the setting of septic abortion