The major depressive disorder affects more than 17.3 million Americans in the U.S.; 75% of individuals who suffer from mental disorders remain untreated, and about 1 million people commit suicide. Therefore, an interprofessional team approach is necessary to provide the best quality care to patients to accurately diagnose, treat, and manage patients with psychiatric disorders.

Studies have shown that individuals' beliefs about their mental illness can significantly influence their treatment plan and medication adherence.

Nursing can coordinate between the therapist, pharmacist, and the clinician. The pharmacist can watch for drug interactions, verify dosing, and consult if treatment is unsuccessful, recommending other medication options, notably a pharmacist with psychiatric certification. A mental health specialty nurse will have significant contact with the patient and monitor medication side effects, informing the doctor of any concerns.

Doxepin has been used to treat major depressive disorder since 1969; however, patients should receive education about medication compliance, side effects, toxicity, and possible interactions with other medications. Patients should be encouraged to follow up and communicate with their primary care provider, pharmacist, psychiatrist, and therapist if they experience any changes or feel like their medication is not beneficial. The interprofessional approach to depression and doxepin therapy increases the odds of successful treatment for these patients. [Level 5]