There are 92.1 million Americans currently affected by some form of cardiovascular disease, and 43.9% are expected to have a type of cardiovascular disease by 2030.

The bundle of His directly contributes to the pathophysiology of cardiovascular disease. Therefore, specific tools have been developed to reduce the risk of disease by manipulating the bundle of His.

His-bundle pacing (HBP) is a method in which leads are placed directly on the AV Node. This stimulates the bundle of His, generating conduction synchronization through the ventricles.

Studies show permanent direct His bundle pacing (DHBP) may be utilized in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation and dilated cardiomyopathy.

In addition to detecting conduction delays, the His bundle electrocardiogram can also be utilized to examine the effect of drugs on the cardiac conduction system.

The following findings have been reported

- Vagolytic drugs, such as atropine, demonstrate a shortening between atrial depolarization and His bundle depolarization interval (P-H interval); however, they do not affect the interval between His bundle and the ventricular activation (H-Q interval)

- Isoproterenol, a sympathomimetic drug, works similarly to vagolytic drugs; a shortened P-H interval is observed, and there is no effect on the H-Q interval

- Propranolol, a sympatholytic drug, increases P-H interval without an effect on H-Q interval

- Antiarrhythmics drugs, such as lidocaine, either shorten or prolong the P-H interval with a variable effect on the H-Q interval; some patients demonstrate a modest prolongation of the intraventricular conduction

Findings from the His bundle electrocardiogram studies suggest that the P-H interval is the most susceptible region of the conduction system to therapeutic drugs.