Brexanolone is only available through a restricted program called the Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy Program. This program requires brexanolone to be administered intravenously at a certified health care facility under the close supervision of a health care provider. Patients are required to enroll in this program before drug administration. Brexanolone is administered as a continuous IV infusion over a period of 60 hours, for approximately 2.5 days.

The prescribed dosing regimen is as follows:

- 0 to 4 hours: Start with a dose of 30 mcg/kg/hour

- 4 to 24 hours: Increase the dose to 60 mcg/kg/hour

- 24 to 52 hours: Increase the dose to 90 mcg/kg/hour

- 52 to 56 hours: Decrease the dose to 60 mcg/kg/hour

- 56 to 60 hours: Decrease the dose to 30 mcg/kg/hour

If the patient does not tolerate the dose of 90 mcg/kg/hour, dose reduction to 60 mcg/kg/hour is the recommendation. Brexanolone is available as 100mg/20ml single-dose vials and requires dilution before administration.

Brexanolone exhibits dose-proportional pharmacokinetics over a dose range of 30 mcg/kg/hour to 270mg/kg/hour. After administration, brexanolone is extensively bound to plasma proteins, approximately 99%, and has an elimination half-life of 9 hours. Brexanolone has a volume of distribution of  3L/kg, suggesting extensive distribution in tissues. Brexanolone is metabolized by extra-hepatic, non-CYP pathways mainly through keto-reduction, glucuronidation, and sulfation; therefore, no dosage adjustment is necessary with hepatic impairment. Excretion is mostly in feces and urine, approximately 47% and 42%, respectively, with the remaining 1% as unchanged brexanolone. The FDA prohibits the usage of brexanolone in patients who have an eGFR of less than 15 mL/minute/1.73 m^2 due to the possible accumulation of solubilizing agent, betadex sulfobutyl ether sodium, in brexanolone.

Brexanolone transfers to breastmilk; however, the relative infant exposure to the drug is considered low. A concentration of less than 10ng/ml of brexanolone was present in breast milk 36 hours after the completion of infusion, suggesting the maximum relative infant dose for brexanolone during the infusion was 1% to 2%.