The presence of the HLA-B27 allele varies by geographic region, with more prevalence at northern latitudes. In the United States, the estimated prevalence is six to eight percent. The vast majority of patients with this allele will not develop an HLA-B27 associated syndrome. Over 100 subtypes or HLA-B27 have been characterized, with varying associations with spondyloarthritis.

The presence of the HLA-B27 allele is not essential for the development of spondyloarthropathy, but it is highly associated with the development of the disease. Research has identified more than forty other genetic loci in genome-wide mapping studies. HLA-B27 contributes to approximately thirty percent of the heritability of ankylosing spondylitis.

Based on various studies, approximately 0.5 to 1% of the US population is affected by axial spondyloarthropathy.

Acute anterior uveitis is a common extra-articular manifestation and may affect more than twenty percent of patients with spondyloarthropathy.

Psoriatic arthritis occurs with an incidence rate of 6 per 100000 annually, with a prevalence rate of 1 to 2 per 1000 people, affecting men and women equally.

Reactive arthritis, similar to psoriatic arthritis, affects men and women equally, and like ankylosing spondylitis, it is a disease of young adults. Enteric organisms, including Campylobacter, Shigella, Yersinia, Salmonella, Clostridium difficile, and urogenital organisms, particularly Chlamydia trachomatis, are common triggers of reactive arthritis.Shigella-induced reactive arthritis than other enteropathic infections.