During embryological development, the upper limb starts to develop before the lower limb and occurs approximately in the sixth week of intrapartum development. As a result of the proliferation of the mesenchymal cells, the limb buds start to appear. At this stage, there are two borders, each innervated by a specific segment of the brachial plexus, cephalic portion mainly supplied by the lower five cervical nerve, and the caudal portion, which will be innervated by the eighth cervical and first thoracic nerve. The cephalic portion will differentiate into the upper arm as part of embryonic development.

The upper limbs develop from a proliferation of the mesoderm of the somatopleure in the lateral region of the body, which forms outgrowths in correspondence of the cervical tract (5 degrees to 8 degrees somite cervical).The individual growths, consisting of a core of mesenchymal cells covered by a layer of cubic ectodermal cells, constitute the outline of the limb. When this bud lengthens, the cells of the ectodermal surface at the distal edge proliferate and synthesize bone morphogenetic factors (BMP), forming a thickened apical ectodermal crest (AER). AER overlooks a vascular canal whose integrity is essential for limb growth. The development of the limb is dependent on the interaction between the mesenchyme of the limb bud and the AER, which induces proliferation of the underlying mesenchyme and ensures growth and differentiation of the draft of the limb along the near-distal axis.

The proliferating mesenchyme zone immediately below the apical ectodermal crest is called the advancement zone (PZ). The AER induces the proliferation of the underlying mesenchyme thanks to the production of fibroblast growth factor (FGF). The dorsal epidermis supports this mechanism by expressing the factor Wnt family member 7a (Wnt7a). The distal growth of the limb completes via the cells of the progression zone (ZP), which produces large quantities of FGF factors. The medial-lateral specification of the limb is regulated by the polarizing zone (ZPA), which expresses the sonic hedgehog factor (Shh). The muscular component of each limb originates from the abaxial myotomes in the corresponding region. Myoblasts comprise the abaxial myotome, in the portion of the somite furthest from the neural tube.