The presentation of carcinoids depends on where they are located, hormonal activity and aggressiveness of the tumor. Carcinoid syndrome from hypersecretion of vasoactive amines is most common with small intestinal carcinoids (up to 80%) but can also occur in foregut carcinoids in the lung and ovaries. The most common clinical manifestations are episodic flushing (84%), watery diarrhea (70%) and heart disease (37%). Most of the episodic flushing occurs spontaneously, but physical and emotional stress, alcohol, and tyramine-containing foods like blue cheese, chocolate, and red wine can provoke it. Flushing associated with carcinoids is characteristically dry flushing, as opposed to common causes of flushing such as panic attacks and menopause which are associated with sweating. Leonine facies may result over time due to telangiectasia and hypertrophy of the skin. Diarrhea is secretory in nature and key in the history is its persistence with fasting. Other presentations could be bronchospasm, arthropathy, neuropathy, and edema. Bowel ischemia with abdominal pain and bleeding could result from mesenteric fibrosis associated with midgut carcinoids. Local mass effect of the tumor can cause bowel obstruction.

Chronic exposure to these amines can cause fibrous endocardial thickening of the right side of the heart with resultant tricuspid and pulmonary valve regurgitation leading to right heart failure. Left heart disease is uncommon due to the clearance of 5HT by monoamine oxidase present in the lung.

Patients can also present with Pellagra as tryptophan is diverted from niacin synthesis to serotonin synthesis. These patients present with glossitis, angular stomatitis, a characteristic skin rash with rough, scaly skin, and confusion.