The jugular foramen is a cavity formed by the petrous part of the temporal bone anteriorly and the occipital bone posteriorly. Its major function is to act as a conduit for essential structures to pass through.

When viewing the skull inferior to superior from an extracranial aspect, the foramina exists lateral to the occipital condyles. Additionally, it sits directly posterior to the carotid canal. Lateral and superior to the jugular foramen sits the external acoustic meatus, which resides within the temporal bone.

Intracranially, the jugular foramen lies at the proximal end of the sigmoid groove. As the occipital bone accommodates the sigmoid sinus within this groove, the sigmoid sinus is led directly into the jugular foramen forming the jugular vein. The internal auditory meatus sits superiorly and slightly medial from the jugular foramen within the petrosal portion of the temporal bone. Closely medial to the jugular foramen sits the hypoglossal canal, which itself is directly lateral to the foramen magnum bilaterally. Superior to the groove of the sigmoid sinus sits the superior margin of the petrous, in which the superior petrous sinus lies. Posterior to the jugular foramen and the sigmoid sinus is the posterior cranial fossa, which accommodates the occipital lobe of the brain.

The foramen is divided by a fibro-osseous bridge that connects the jugular spine on the petrous part of the temporal bone and the jugular process of the occipital bone into two parts. The anteromedial compartment, the pars nervosa, contains the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve, Jacobsen nerve, and the inferior petrosal sinus. The pars vascularis contains the jugular bulb, the vagus nerve (X), Arnold nerve, and the spinal accessory (XI) nerve. The pars vascularis is typically larger on the right causing asymmetry of the jugular foramina.