**Obesity: An immune Disease?**

Obesity is a state of malnutrition by excess that leads to defective immune function. Excess body fat is associated with changes in leukocyte count such as monocyte, lymphocyte, and neutrophil counts but lower B- and T-cell mitogen-induced proliferation.

There are two types of phenotypic macrophages described that have been related to obesity: M1 (classically activated) acts as pro-inflammatory, and M2 (alternatively activated) acts as an anti-inflammatory. In obesity, there is a switch from M2 to M1 phenotype, which is pro-inflammatory.

**Obesity and Inflammatory Markers**

Obesity is also referred to as chronic-low grade inflammation or “metabolic inflammation,” which is often the focus in the pathogenesis of several diseases such as coronary artery disease, atherosclerosis, and insulin resistance, etc.

Adipocytes produce and secrete several proteins called adipokines which play important roles in inflammation. These adipokines include TNF-α, leptin, resistin, visfatin, IL-6, and adiponectin.

The role of increased pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion in obese patients is currently unknown. It is speculated that the answer to this question is correlated with the enlarged, lipid-rich adipocytes seen in obese individuals. Physiological processes likely exist within the adipose cells that allow for the maintenance and restoration of energy homeostasis in the occurrence of an overwhelmingly large introduction of nutrients. A regulatory mechanism should exist in which the local production of certain adipokines limits the hypertrophied adipocyte(s) from storing excess lipids.

**Role of Hormones in Obesity**

Several studies suggest adipose tissue can collectively secrete more than 50 hormones and signaling molecules termed adipokines. These adipokines play a vital role in immunity and glucose metabolism.

Leptin, a hormone that plays a role in appetite and energy balance regulation, along with pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), are secreted by adipose tissue cells.

Both leptin and adiponectin are associated with the cardiovascular risk profile. The ratio of leptin and adiponectin has been associated with adipose tissue malfunction. Another hormone secreted by adipose tissue is resistin, a pro-inflammatory adipokine characterized as an insulin antagonist.

A key difference in resistin production in different species is that humans produce adipokine by only mononuclear cells, such as macrophages and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. In rodents, resistin production can come from both macrophages and adipocytes.

The concentration of visfatin in circulation is positively correlated with the amount of white adipose tissue (WAT). There are a number of other hormones and cytokines produced by adipose tissue. We still do not know the role of increased cytokine production in obesity. We can only speculate that there must be mechanisms operating within and from the adipose cell to maintain or restore energy homeostasis in a situation of excessive energy storage. There should be a regulatory mechanism constituted by the local production of these cytokines to stop lipid-loaded adipocytes from storing more lipids. The problem arises when this becomes a systemic chronic state from a local reaction when the inflammatory response cannot be resolved due to sustained obesity. The mechanisms between obesity and chronic inflammation are not completely understood, but different likely explanations have been proposed.