The osmometer is a device used in clinical laboratories for measuring the concentration of particles in a solution, known as the osmolar concentration. This quantity can be expressed as osmolality (in units of mmol/kg) or osmolarity (in units of mmol/L). Clinical laboratories usually measure osmolality. Osmolality is considered more precise because weight is temperature-independent.

Four colligative properties of a solvent change if a solute is dissolved into a solvent. These properties are:

- Osmotic pressure

- Vapor pressure

- Boiling point

- Freezing point

These properties are tied to osmolality and depend on the solution's number of solute particles. Dissolving a solute into a solvent generally increases the osmotic pressure and boiling point and decreases the vapor pressure and freezing point of a solution. While any of the four colligative properties could be used to determine the osmolality of a solution, technical limitations restrict the commercial measurement of osmolality to freezing point, vapor pressure, and membrane osmometers. The freezing point depression method is the most common in clinical laboratories because it is the most accurate and simple method.

The general principle of freezing point depression osmometers involves the relationship between the number of moles of dissolved solute in a solution and the change in freezing point. For example, one mole of a dissolved solute reduces the freezing point of water by approximately 1.86 degrees Celsius (~35.35 degrees Fahrenheit).

The setup of a freezing point depression osmometer includes a temperature-controlled bath to allow for sub-freezing temperatures, a thermistor probe connected to a Wheatstone bridge circuit to measure the temperature of a clinical sample, and a thermistor readout circuit, which represents a combination of a galvanometer and a potentiometer.

On the other hand, membrane osmometers measure the flow of solvent (often water) from a pure solvent container across a semipermeable membrane into a solution containing a solute and the same solvent. The flow across the semipermeable membrane can be measured as the osmotic pressure of a sample and is related to the concentration of solute in the sample solution.

Alternative methods to osmometers can be used to measure osmolality, including electrical conductivity and specific gravity.