Myopia is a condition of nearsightedness in which parallel rays from infinity are focused before they reach the retina with the accommodation at rest. Various refractive surgical procedures are used to treat myopia namely laser in situ keratomileuses (LASIK), photorefractive keratectomy (PRK), laser-assisted subepithelial keratectomy (LASEK) or Epi-LASEK, intracorneal ring segments (ICRS or INTACS), clear lens extraction (CLE) or phakic intraocular lens/IOL (PIOL) implantation.

Excimer laser procedures are effective for the treatment of low and moderate myopia. Intracorneal ring segments may be used to treat low myopia, but their results are highly unpredictable. Highly ametropic eyes are not suitable candidates for laser procedures or ICRS and require options such as phakic IOL implantation. This provides for a better quality of vision not available with other techniques. The preservation of accommodation and minimal manipulation of the crystalline lens are other advantages.

**History of Phakic IOLs**

In 1953, Benedetto Strampelli implanted an anterior chamber IOL (ACIOL) for the correction of severe myopia in phakic eyes. These did not come into practice due to endothelial complications, iritis, pupillary block, and glaucoma. Joaquin Barraquer introduced an IOL with elastic loops better adaptable to the anterior chamber for myopic phakic eyes. These IOLs also caused similar complications and thus did not become very popular.

Over time phakic AC-IOLs progressively improved. Important contributions in the development of phakic IOL’s include the contribution by:

Fechner and Worst – iris fixed IOLs

Baikoff – angle supported AC-IOLs

Fyodorov - posterior chamber IOLs (PC-IOLs) with ciliary groove fixation