Optimal positioning can be patient-dependent; however, most patients will be positioned supine with their arm externally rotated. The transducer is placed on the skin perpendicular to the axis of the biceps tendon (Fig. 1). This will result in an image with the bicipital groove appearing as a semicircular trough with the tendon having a circular or oval appearance (Fig. 2). The approach is from lateral to medial with an in-plane technique. The patient’s skin is marked at the planned injection site. The skin is then prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. A sterile US probe cover is placed on the selected probe. The subcutaneous soft tissues are then infiltrated with 1% lidocaine as the needle is advanced towards the biceps tendon under US guidance. Optimally, one should enter the tendon sheath in an area where the bicipital groove is shallow, allowing the needle to be positioned somewhat parallel to the transducer. The more parallel the needle is to the transducer, the more clearly it will be visualized on US. A steeper approach will lead to decreased reflection of sound waves returning to the transducer and poorer visualization. If the needle tip is positioned superficial to the tendon, the subdeltoid bursa can fill with fluid mimicking the tendon sheath; thus, the ideal positioning is beneath the tendon to avoid this pitfall (Fig. 3).

The in-plane technique, in which there is a parallel orientation of the needle with respect to the transducer, allows for improved visualization of the entire needle and limits the risk of damage to surrounding structures. If using an out-of-plane technique, one would only see a small portion of the needle, making it difficult to appreciate the position of the needle tip (Fig 4). Some options to increase needle visibility include beam steering, heel-toe maneuver, use of a larger gauge needle, and entering the skin farther from the target, which allows for more parallel orientation but a longer needle path.

Given the superficial nature of the biceps tendon, the use of a higher frequency ultrasound transducer (10 to 15 MHz) will allow for better near field resolution. The probe should be maintained perpendicularly to the tendon to maximize the reflection of sound beams and decrease anisotropy, which can result in poor visualization of the tendon.