**Traditional ECMO Circuits**

**1. Veno-Venous (VV) ECMO**

Cannula Configurations

- Femoro-atrial: Femoral vein for drainage cannula with the tip advanced to the diaphragm and return cannula in the right internal jugular vein with the tip at the superior vena cava-right atrium junction. Rich et al. performed a comparison between atrio-femoral and femoro-atrial flow for VV ECMO suggested femoro-atrial cannulation had less recirculation and improved flow.

- Femoro-femoral: Drainage cannula in the femoral vein that is advanced to the distal inferior vena cava and returns cannula into the contralateral femoral vein that is advanced to the right atrium.

- Double-lumen drainage and return cannula, which is placed in the jugular vein with the tip advanced to inferior vena cava.

- Opening of the atrial cannula should be directed towards the tricuspid valve.

- The position of the cannula should be checked every day or in case of a significant drop in ECMO flow.

- During right ventricular failure, switching over to VA ECMO is encouraged.

**2.****Peripheral Veno-Arterial (VA) ECMO**

- The drainage cannula can be placed ipsilateral or contralateral to the femoral vein, and the return cannula can be placed into the femoral artery.

- The arterial and venous cannula should be put in the different groins, insertion of the arterial cannula should be on an end to side graft, and insertion of the only tip of the arterial cannula is advised to prevent distal limb ischemia.

- If the Seldinger technique is used, peripheral VA ECMO is discouraged in cases of peripheral vascular disease.

- Monitoring for compartment syndrome is required.

- In cases of left ventricular dysfunction or poor ventricular contractility or non ejecting left ventricle or atrium leads to distention of the left ventricle. In such a scenario switching over to central VA ECMO is advised.

3. **Central Veno-Arterial (VA) ECMO**

- In case of LV dysfunction addition of the LV vent to the ECMO circuit is recommended.

- The arterial and venous cannula should be inserted in a separate incision to help with the temporary closure of the chest, and that helps in the early ambulation of the patient.

**Hybrid ECMO Circuits**

**1. V-AV ECMO**

- Venous drainage through a venous cannula and return cannula to both arterial and venous circulation

- In VV ECMO patients, the addition of arterial cannula through either femoral or axillary artery. In VA ECMO, additions of venous return cannula through either right internal jugular vein or femoral veins.

- The additional cannula is connected to the existing ECMO circuit with a Y-connector.

- This technique can be used in harlequin syndrome or to treat profound upper body hypoxia.

**2. VV-A ECMO**

- It requires two or more drainage cannulas. Additional venous drainage cannula inserted to the right internal jugular vein in case of the existing femoral venous cannula or contralateral femoral vein can also be used. The left subclavian vein is another alternative.

- This technique is useful to patients with ongoing end-organ malperfusion.

- Stohr et al. mentioned improved outcomes in ARDS patients with V-AV ECMO compared to isolated VV or VA ECMO. Mortality mentioned in various literature ranges from 27 to 61%

**Parallel ECMO circuits**

- In the case of VV ECMO for respiratory failure, when the inability to capture an adequate fraction of cardiac output that results in refractory hypoxia, additional drainage and return cannula connected to a separate circuit provides additional oxygenation.

- With VA ECMO, when flows are insufficient to provide adequate end-organ perfusion, an additional VA ECMO circuit provides additional systemic flow.

- In case of cardiac and respiratory failure, in addition to traditional VA and VV ECMO circuits, parallel circuits serve as an alternative to V-AV ECMO.

- Adequate distance between drainage and return cannula of both circuits is recommended to prevent cross circulation. Also, the possibility of capturing the majority of cardiac output that culminate in the reduction of blood flow through the heart and lungs should be considered.

In general, survival is less with hybrid or parallel circuits compared to traditional circuits (32% with V-AV compared to 60% with VV support; 32% with V-AV support compared to 41% with VA support.)

**Post ECMO Placement Care**

- Monitor ECMO circuit blood flow. A decrease in flow gives an indication of possible intraabdominal or thoracic hemorrhage, cardiac tamponade, or left ventricular distention with pulmonary congestion.

- Refractory arrhythmias should be controlled with electric cardioversion. In the case of LV distention, LV venting through either intra-aortic balloon pump, impella, or atrial septostomy should be considered.

- Mechanical ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure of >10 cmH2O is suggested to decrease the LV afterload and prevent or treat pulmonary edema. The mixture of ECMO fresh gas with air and oxygen prevents hyperoxia. Targeted temperature management with heat exchanger, 33 to 36 C for initial 24 hours followed by gradual rewarming to 37 C is suggested. Peak inflation pressure 20 to 25 cm H2O, FiO2 <0.5, respiratory rate 4-8 breaths/minute, and tidal volume of < 100mL have been suggested.

- To prevent limb ischemia in the case of VA ECMO distal perfusion cannula should be inserted on the side of the arterial cannulation.

- Cardiac arrests should be treated with cardiac catheterization post ECMO cannulation.

- Imaging with CT brain, CT pulmonary angiography, CT abdomen/pelvis is recommended post-cardiac arrest if etiology is unclear or falling ECMO blood flow. Early echocardiography to assess ventricular function and valvular assessment.

- Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) is considered a first choice when mechanical circulatory support is indicated. IABP increases pulsatility, decreases the ventricular afterload, and improves coronary perfusion. Doll et al. mentioned improved survival with IABP.

Setting and goals for the initial stage of ECMO

Circuit flow

50-80 mL/kg/min

Sweep gas flow

50-80 mL/kg/min

pH

7.35-7.45

Fractional inspired oxygen

100%

Inlet pressure (centrifugal pump)

>100 mmHg

Arterial carbon dioxide tension

35-45 mmHg

Arterial oxygen saturation

VV: 85-92%, VA: >95%

Oxygen saturation (drainage cannula)

>65%

Oxygen saturation (return cannula)

100%

Mixed venous oxygen saturation

>65%

Mean arterial pressure

65-95 mmHg

Hematocrit

30-40%

Platelet count

>100,000 mm

**Weaning off ECMO**

- In the case of VV, ECMO assessment of native respiratory function is performed by altering the gas flow through the ECMO circuit 5 to 65 %. Usually, recovery of pulmonary functions takes around 1 to 3 weeks. Signs of recovery of pulmonary function can be a progressive increase in SaO2 greater than SvO2; improvement in SaO2 for a given circuit flow or requirement of a reduced circuit flow to achieve the target SaO2; improvement in chest X-ray or improving lung compliance.

- Weaning is considered when the gas exchange can be maintained with low FiO2 (<30%); <2 L/MIN fresh gas flow rates into the circuit at the respiratory rate of <25 breaths/minute and <15 cm H2O of PEEP.

- In the case of VA ECMO, once the etiology of cardiac arrest is addressed and native cardiac function is returned, weaning off ECMO can be planned. Factors indicating cardiac recovery are decreasing central venous and/or pulmonary pressures; increasing blood pressure which requires vasodilators; return of pulsatility on the arterial pressure waveform; or decrease in pO2 by a right radial arterial line.

- Cardiac function assessment is performed by reducing flows in the ECMO circuit, changes to the ventilator and oxygen flow settings, and increasing heparin dose requirement to prevent thrombosis at low ECMO flow rates. To assess cardiac function and response to reduced flow rates, a trans-esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) is used.

- Inotropic weaning is usually started several hours before the weaning. Reduction in-circuit flow should be 1 to 2 L/min. Weaning of VA ECMO is achieved with a gradual reduction in blood flow until the flow of 0.5 to 1.0 L/min is met. Close hemodynamic and serial echocardiographic monitoring is required. For temporary separation of ECMO from the patient, clamping or arteriovenous bridging within the circuit is used.

- After 1 to 2 hours of minimal support or without any support, if the patient is stable, they can be decannulated in a surgical setting.

- There is no definite timeline for weaning and decannulation, but typically, 3 to 4 days of ECMO support is usually seen.

- Premature decannulation may need recannulation or hemodynamic compromise or cardiovascular collapse and death. Unnecessary prolongation of ECMO is a futile effort; in fact, it increases morbidity and mortality.

- For patients who fail to recover myocardial function for weaning and decannulation and are neurologically intact, mechanical support through the ventricular assisted device (VAD) or heart transplantation should be considered.

- For some patients who cannot be weaned and are not candidates for VAD or heart transplantation, terminal decannulation and palliative care should be considered. Discussion of organ donation in case of brain death is also advised.