The technique associated with SCS is considered one of the most challenging procedures in interventional pain management. The implantation of the SCS device divides into two steps, the trial and the permanent SCS implantation. Even though the same or similar equipment is used for these procedures, the technique utilized for each step changes significantly. The trial allows the patient to evaluate the effect of the SCS device on their particular pain pattern. Typically, patients return to the clinic within ten days after the trial procedure. If they have over 50% pain relief, increased activity level, and/or decreased medication use during this time, the trial is considered successful, and they can be scheduled for a permanent SCS procedure.

Both the trial and the permanent SCS placement are sterile procedures performed in the operating room under sedation. Patients should receive instructions to shower with chlorhexidine before these procedures. Preoperative cefazolin or clindamycin are prescribed before the permanent SCS placement for coverage of skin flora. On the day of the procedure, the patient is placed prone on the operating table. Skin prep is with an alcohol-based chlorhexidine scrub and then covered with towels and a full surgical drape. An epidural needle is placed on the skin. A lead is inserted into the epidural space via the epidural needle under fluoroscopic guidance. Epidural needle placement is at an angle of fewer than 45 degrees to facilitate threading of the lead. A perpendicular angle needs to be avoided at all times since this would require bending the lead as it is introduced into the epidural space. The lead is advanced through the posterior paramedian epidural space until the appropriate location providing coverage of the patient’s pain region, which may require one or more leads. Most commonly, this location ranges between T8 and T10.

- There are two types of SCS trial, percutaneous lead trial (most common) and permanent lead trial:

- SCS percutaneous trial

- In this approach, after placement of the lead or leads in the appropriate location on the spine, the epidural needle is removed. The lead is then adhered to the skin using a suture, surgical adhesive, or skin glue. The remaining portion of the lead connects to an external pulse generator, which is also secured to the skin using a suture or skin glue, a chlorhexidine patch, and a sterile dressing. The device is programmed perioperatively and once again in the recovery room before discharging the patient home.
- Even though this procedure requires the patient to return to the OR for a permanent lead placement if the trial is successful, it is the preferred method by most providers. It avoids a second incision and postoperative pain during the trial. It also decreases the risk of infection when compared to the permanent trial.


- Permanent SCS trial

- In the permanent trial method, once the leads are in the appropriate location, a local anesthetic is injected around the epidural needle. A midline incision is made through the skin down to the supraspinous fascia. The leads are anchored in this space using a nonabsorbable suture and an anchoring device. This device is placed as close as possible to the fascia, with the tip protruding into the fascia, which minimizes bending the leads. The anchoring device is secured using a nonabsorbable suture. Two approaches are possible to tunnel the leads and secure the IPG. In the first approach, the midline incision is made larger. An extension wire is connected temporarily to the permanent lead, and it helps to tunnel the lead from the incision to the overlying skin. In the second approach, there is a lateral skin pocket made in the flank, where the IPG is placed. Less commonly, this pocket can be in the posterior superior gluteal area, the lower abdomen, or the pectoral areas. The permanent lead is tunneled from the midline incision into the lateral pocket. At this point, an extension wire is connected to the permanent wire to tunnel the lead away from the lateral pocket.
- This method is more cost-effective since it uses the same device if the trial is successful. It also ensures that the leads remain in the same location if the SCS is permanently implanted.


- Permanent placement with paddle-type electrodes

- This trial can take place via a percutaneous paddle introduction technique, which utilizes a wide flat introducer. It can also be implanted via a laminotomy, allowing the paddle to enter the epidural space. This approach is usually by neurosurgery, typically as a permanent step.


- Permanent percutaneous SCS implantation:

- If using the permanent trial approach, the IPG incision is opened on the day of the implant.  The lead extension is cut, pulled out through the skin, and discarded. The permanent lead is attached to a new extension and connects to the IPG.
- If the percutaneous trial was used, follow the same steps used for the trial approach on the day of the implantation procedure. The permanent lead is tunneled to an appropriately sized (for the IPG used) subcutaneous pocket, where the lead directly connects to the IPG device. The IPG is then placed in the pocket. The incisions are stapled and covered with a sterile dressing. The staples are removed in the clinic 14 days later.
- When sizing the pocket, often, a radiopaque template can be used. Typical pocket locations are on either side and either above or below the beltline. The laterality of the pocket is determined beforehand utilizing a variety of methods. Most commonly, location determination is by patient comfort, i.e., the side opposite of where they sleep or the side that the patient can reach better (for reprogramming or recharging).