Cicatricial pemphigoid is an antibody-mediated blistering disorder. The antibodies target molecules responsible for adhesion within the basement membrane zone of the mucosa and/or skin. This disrupts the normal structure and function of the basement membrane, which allows for the epidermis to separate from the dermis. Clinically, this manifests as blisters and erosions. Several target molecules are associated with the pathogenesis of cicatricial pemphigoid.

Laminin 332 is a transmembrane protein that connects alpha-6-beta-4 integrin of the hemidesmosome of the keratinocyte to the non-collagenous 1 (NC1) domain of collagen VII. Collagen VII is the attachment for the anchoring fibrils that secure the basement membrane to the dermis. Laminin 332 assists in strengthening the attachment of the epidermis to the dermis from shearing forces.

BP180 is a transmembrane collagen, also referred to as collagen XVII. It is a component of the hemidesmosome of the epithelial cell. The dense plaque of the hemidesmosome binds keratin 5 and keratin 14 within the keratinocyte. BP180 spans the lamina lucida. The non-collagenous portion of the domain (N-terminus) is located near the cellular membrane and the collagenous portion of the domain (C-terminus) spans the lamina lucida and projects into the lamina densa. Sera from patients with bullous pemphigoid mainly target the N-terminus of BP180 whereas sera from cicatricial pemphigoid patients target the C-terminus. The variability in the target may explain the clinical differences seen among bullous pemphigoid and cicatricial pemphigoid patients.

Alpha-6-beta-4 integrin is a component of the hemidesmosome that binds the transmembrane laminin 332 which attaches to collagen VII. Sera and IgG fractions from patients with cicatricial pemphigoid have been shown to target the intracellular portion of alpha-6-beta-4 integrin suggesting that this may have a pathogenic role in cicatricial pemphigoid.