The etiology behind this condition is usually unknown. Different causes have been postulated.

- Ischemic stroke (infarction): Bilateral occlusion of the supraclinoid segments of the internal carotid artery (ICA) and, in some cases, the middle cerebral artery (MCA) can occur - usually between the 8th and 12th weeks of gestation. This leads to the absence of structures perfused by the ICA/MCA and preserved structures perfused by the posterior cerebral artery and the basilar artery.

- Infectious: An intrauterine infection may cause necrotizing vasculitis and lead to hydranencephaly. Intrauterine infections such as toxoplasmosis and viral infections (enterovirus, adenovirus, parvovirus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, Epstein-Barr, and respiratory syncytial viruses) may be responsible.

- Hypoxia: Fetal hypoxia, especially with severe maternal carbon monoxide exposure. This leads to diffuse hypoxic-ischemic brain necrosis.

- Syndromic/genetic: Mutations in the COL4A1 gene, LAMB1 gene, and the PI3K-Akt3-mTOR pathway.

- Leukomalacia: An extreme form of leukomalacia that develops multiple cystic cavities that end up coalesced inside the cranial cavity.

- Toxic exposure: Maternal exposure to toxins, such as cocaine, smoking, estrogens, and sodium valproate, may cause hydranencephaly.

- Twin pregnancy: The death of a co-twin in utero may lead to the development and accumulation of embolic material from the deceased twin.

- Other: Rare syndromes (Fowler syndrome), deficiency of factor XIII (fibrin stabilizing factor), and intracerebral hemorrhage may be a cause.