**Routes of Administration**

Erythromycin base filmtab tablets (erythromycin tablets, USP) are supplied as pink, unscored oval tablets. Erythromycin can also be administered intravenous, topical, and ophthalmic routes.

**Adults**

The oral form of the medication is available in 250 mg tablets and 500 mg tablets. For maximal absorption and minimal side effects, the patient should avoid alcohol, take the drug on an empty stomach (1 hour before or 2 hours after meals), take a full glass of water, and avoid grapefruit juice.

**Children**

The usual dosage for children is 30 to 50 mg/kg/day in equally divided doses. The maximum recommended dosage is 4 grams per day for more severe infections.

**Pregnancy**

For urogenital infections during pregnancy, the recommended dose is 500 mg of erythromycin by mouth four times a day on an empty stomach for at least seven days.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer's labeling has provided no information regarding adult patients with renal impairment. However, elderly patients with reduced renal function may be at increased risk for ototoxicity.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No information has been provided in the manufacturer's labeling. However, clinicians should prescribe erythromycin with caution, given the hepatotoxic potential of erythromycin.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**According to the manufacturer's labeling, there is no evidence of teratogenicity or other adverse effects on reproduction in female rats administered erythromycin, approximately twice the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) based on a body surface area.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Erythromycin is excreted in human milk, and the small amounts in milk are unlikely to cause adverse effects in the infant. Monitor the infant for irritability and possible effects on the gastrointestinal flora, such as diarrhea and candidiasis (thrush, diaper rash). One case report and epidemiological evidence indicate hypertrophic pyloric stenosis in infants.