As with most dopamine agonists, ropinirole's most frequently reported adverse effects are nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, hallucinations, somnolence, dizziness, leg edema,  viral infection, syncope, orthostatic hypotension, and asthenic condition (i.e., asthenia, fatigue, and/or malaise).

Rare cases of hypersensitivity reactions, falling asleep during activities of daily living, and somnolence, especially if concomitantly using CNS depressants, hallucinations, compulsive behaviors, augmentation, early morning rebound RLS, fibrotic complications, and retinal degeneration is, also reported in clinical trials and postmarketing experience.

**Peripheral Edema**

Reports exist of peripheral edema in patients in up to one-third of the patients on the extended-release form.

**Anterocollis**

The definition of this condition is the head positioned in flexion, resembling a "drooping head," a very rare side effect reported in a patient taking ropinirole. Discontinuation of the medication progressively reversed the symptoms over about four months.

**Pisa Syndrome**

Cases of ropinirole-induced Pisa syndrome also referred to as "pleurothotonus," have appeared in the literature. It is characterized by an abnormal lateral flexion of the trunk to the right or left. After about a year on the medication, this condition occurred among the cases described. The posture disappeared about there months after discontinuing the medication. However, Pisa syndrome is reportedly irreversible despite discontinuing this medication.

**Reversible Dyskinesias**

Another movement disorder observed with ropinirole is severe reversible dyskinesias, very rare. This dose-dependent choreoform dyskinesia occurred in ropinirole monotherapy up to a dose of 15 mg daily but was also observed at a dose of 6 mg daily.

**Dermal Eruptions**

Like many D2 agonists, ropinirole, in rare cases, caused fixed dermal eruptions thought to be due to the inactivation of T cells.

**Withdrawal Symptoms**

Withdrawal-emergent hyperpyrexia and confusion are reported in patients where ropinirole treatment is abruptly stopped, or the dose is rapidly tapered down. It resembles the neuroleptic malignant syndrome without specific etiology. Withdrawal Symptoms include insomnia, anxiety, apathy,  depression, sweating, fatigue, and pain, which do not respond to treatment with levodopa. It is recommended to inform patients about the potential for withdrawal symptoms and monitor symptoms during taper down and after treatment cessation.

**Drug Interactions**

- CYP1A2 enzyme is induced by omeprazole and smoking and can decrease the plasma concentration of ropinirole.

- CYP1A2 is inhibited by fluoroquinolones (such as ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin), fluvoxamine, and mexiletine and can increase the plasma level of this drug.

- Hormone replacement therapy (HRT, high dose estrogens) reduces the clearance of ropinirole, and hence dose adjustment may be required when starting or stopping HRT.

- Dopamine antagonists phenothiazines, thioxanthenes, butyrophenones, and metoclopramide can reduce the efficacy of ropinirole.