It is important to note that a late phase reaction can develop 4-6 hours post first signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis or type I hypersensitivity. As such, patients with moderate to severe anaphylaxis who do not respond initially to epinephrine should be admitted for observation, while patients who do respond to epinephrine should be observed for a minimum of four hours. Furthermore, treatment errors can occur with improper administration of appropriate doses of medications. For instance, epinephrine should be given as soon as anaphylaxis is suspected post-exposure to the allergen. It is important to recognize that antihistamines and other therapies are used as adjunctive treatment and never as monotherapy.

The risk for annual recurrence for anaphylaxis was found to be about 18% in over 300 patients identified in a prospective study.**S**eek support,**A**llergen identification, and avoidance,**F**ollow-up for specialty care,**E**pinephrine for emergencies.

Prevention is the most important treatment for allergic responses, which includes contact avoidance and elimination of the offending agents. There is conflicting data that suggests breastfeeding can be beneficial in preventing asthma and atopic dermatitis. In addition, the expert panel (EP) as part of the guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food allergies in the United States suggests that breastfeeding may also help prevent food allergies. This same EP also suggests that solid foods should be introduced into the child’s diet before 4 to 6 months of age to help with the prevention of allergies.