As a clinician, it is essential to understand how prerenal kidney failure differs from other causes of AKI. To make this distinction, many tests must be obtained. Some of these tests include a urinalysis, urine sodium/fractional excretion of sodium (FENa)/fractional excretion of urea (FEUrea), and the gold standard is the response of the AKI to volume resuscitation (however this does not apply to prerenal AKI secondary to hepatorenal/cardiorenal syndromes).

It is important to remember that in prerenal AKI, the urine analysis (UA) should be normal or near normal. The only exception for this rule is if there is an underlying or superimposed renal disease. Occasionally, it is normal to see hyaline or granular casts. In contrast, patients who have ATN have muddy brown casts, epithelial casts, or renal epithelial cells. In a 2008 study by Perazella et al.

The next most important diagnostic tool in distinguishing the types of AKI is the urine sodium and the fractional excretion of sodium (FENa). The premise behind the concept of FeNa is that in a hypovolemic state, the urine sodium should be less than 20 mEq/L, and this, in turn, preserves serum sodium concentration. The exception to this concept is during states in which the patient has a sodium wasting predisposition. Therefore in prerenal AKI, the urine sodium should be less than 20 mEq/L. However, the problem with urine sodium is that it is affected by the volume of urine, and is not a good predictor of the total body sodium excretion. Fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) is, therefore, a better predictor for urine sodium excretion as it is not affected by urine output and measures only the percent of sodium excreted. FENa is usually less than one percent in prerenal AKI and greater than two percent in ATN.

FENa is also not without its limitations. For example, in patients with superimposed heart failure, or cirrhosis, FENa may remain low. FENa of less than one percent is also seen in vasculitis, contrast-induced nephropathy, and acute glomerulonephritis. In these conditions, the GFR decreases, but the tubular function of the kidney is maintained. Finally, in the patient who is on diuretics, the FENa will be falsely elevated, as the diuretics increase the urine sodium load. In these situations, the fractional excretion of urea provides a better diagnostic tool. The excretion of urea occurs in the proximal tubules. In prerenal AKI, the FEUrea is less than 35 %, whereas, in intrinsic AKI, it is greater than 50%.

The reported gold standard in differentiating prerenal from other causes of AKI is responsiveness to fluid administration. When a sufficient amount of fluid is given to correct for volume depletion, then the serum creatinine should trend down to baseline within 24 to 72 hours. Intravascular depletions should be managed with isotonic saline. The rate of saline repletion is dependent on the degree of volume loss. It is also important to factor in the patient's overall volume status, as prerenal AKI can be present in situations such as heart failure, and cirrhosis.

Other tests that are commonly used include the rate of increase in serum creatinine levels. In ATN, the serum creatinine will rise at a rate of 0.3 to 0.5 mg/dl per day. In prerenal disease, the rate of increase will occur at a much slower pace. Also, the measurement of the BUN to creatinine ratio is essential as well. Typically, this ratio is 10, in ATN, it is about 15:1, and in prerenal disease, it is higher than 20:1. This occurs secondary to the passive reabsorption of urea in the proximal tubules, which follows the proximal tubule reabsorption of sodium and water that occurs in prerenal disease. Urine osmolality can also be used to identify prerenal from ATN.

In prerenal conditions, the body still retains the ability to concentrate the urine so that the urine osmolality will be higher than 500 mosm/kg. However, in ATN, the urine concentration abilities are compromised so that the urine osmolality will be below 450 msom/kg. Lastly, it is important to remember that pre-existing renal disease may skew the usefulness of many of the tests mentioned above. In underlying renal disease, sodium conservation and urine concentration ability are undermined.