The reported deaths from NCDs account for 63% of all causes of mortality worldwide.

As our understanding of the functions that various foods, essential nutrients, and other food components play in health and disease changes, so does the notion of what makes up a healthy diet. Studies indicate that consuming specific nutrients and food groups improves overall health and prevent prevalent non-communicable diseases (NCDs). Among its initiatives aimed at lowering NCDs risk factors, the World Health Organization (WHO) also includes strategies for tackling unhealthy eating habits in its Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases.

A healthy diet comprises a suitable balance of macronutrients such as carbohydrates, proteins, and fats and micronutrients such as vitamins and minerals consumed in reasonable proportions supporting the body's metabolic and physiologic requirements.

The Institute of Medicine (IOM) set a recommended daily allowance (RDA) for carbohydrates for adults and children older than 1-year-old at 130 g/d. Foods high in carbohydrates, such as grains, fruits and vegetables, legumes, nuts, seeds, and dairy products, are recommended for appropriate carbohydrate intake. Proteins are large molecules comprised of a combination of 20 amino acids in various sequences. They are vital for building and repairing cells and tissues throughout the human body. The RDA for protein is 0.8 g per kg of body weight, irrespective of age. Dietary sources of proteins can be found in animals (meat, dairy, fish, and egg) and plants (soy, nuts, grains, seeds, and legumes).

The main structural elements of cellular membranes, fats, also serve as a source of cell energy. The four types of dietary fats are monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, saturated, and trans. Among these, trans and saturated fats are linked to adverse health effects, including an increased mortality risk. The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) recommends that healthy adults (over the age of 19) should have 20 to 35% of their daily calorie intake come from fats, and young children (between the ages of 1 and 3) need up to 40% of their daily calories to come from fat, with trans fats being restricted as much as possible and saturated fats limited to less than 10%.

The human body needs vitamins and minerals for optimum cell growth and development, maintaining metabolic integrity and water regulation. Vitamins can be grouped into two categories; fat-soluble (A, D, E, and K) and water-soluble (B-complex and C). Deficiencies result from insufficient vitamin consumption, as the vitamins required cannot be found in one food source. Because of this, various diets are necessary to satisfy the body's vitamin needs. Asides from inadequate dietary vitamin consumption, other factors such as hereditary conditions, diseases of the intestinal tract, adverse effects of medication, and chronic alcohol use also result in vitamin deficiency.