1. Visualization by hand & wrist plain film radiographs: Standard posteroanterior (PA) view of the hand and wrist; Effective radiation received during each exposure is between 0.0001-0.1 mSV.

Techniques:

A. Greulich and Pyle (GP) atlas

B. Tanner Whitehouse (TW2) Method

C. Gilsanz and Ratibin (GR) Atlas

D. Automated skeletal bone age assessment

- Stage 1: Pre-processing: Image normalized to grayscale, background removed and re-oriented

- Stage 2: Segmentation: Desired parts of image separated from the background

- Stage 3: Analysis: Selected regions of interest analyzed for bone age by TW2 method or GP atlas

Recently developed software computes bone age by both GP and TW2 methods, which has demonstrated validity across different ethnicities.

E. Capito-hamate planimetry [Choi et al. (2018)]

2. Visualization by ultrasound (US)

3. Visualization by Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

4.  Visualization of elbow ossification

5. Visualization of humeral head ossification

- Stage 1 includes an incompletely ossified lateral epiphysis

- Stage 2 demonstrates increased ossification of the lateral epiphysis, with a lateral curved margin

- Stages 3 to 5 demonstrate collinearity between lateral margin of epiphysis and metaphysis; in stage 3, the lateral half of the physis is open without obvious fusion, in stage 4, the lateral half of physis is partly fused, and in stage 5, the lateral half of physis is completely fused

It has been demonstrated that peak height velocity (PHV) correlates between stages 2 and 3.

6. Visualization of the clavicle

7. Visualization of iliac bone

A. By pelvic radiographs: Risser sign - Based on the ossification of iliac crest apophysis. However, not a reliable or commonly used technique.

B. Non-ionizing Imaging: Ultrasonography as a technique to assess bone age using iliac crest apophysis ossification - has also been considered. However, this technique still requires validation.

8. Visualization of the femoral head

9. Modified Oxford Score

10. Calcaneal apophyseal ossification

- Stage 1 - Apophysis covers less than 50% of the metaphysis

- Stage 2 - Apophysis covers more than 50% of the metaphysis

- Stage 3 - Apophysis has extended fully over the plantar surface and continues to extend over the dorsal surface without evidence of fusion

- Stage 4 - Fusion of the apophysis to metaphysis begins

- Stage 5 - Fusion is complete

Calcaneal stages 0 to 2 corresponded to high chances of the contralateral slip in SCFE, and stage 3  corresponds closely to PHV

11. Visualization of cervical maturation

12. Visualization of Dental Maturity: Predominantly studies for forensic purposes. Mineralization of teeth is much less affected by nutritional or endocrine disorders than the skeletal system.

Techniques:

A. Atlas method

B. Scoring method

13. Chondrocyte physiology: The thyroid hormone regulates the growth and maturation of bones by regulating cartilage proliferation, differentiation, and osteogenesis. It facilitates growth hormone action. Cartilage is made up of cells (chondroblasts and chondrocytes) and extracellular matrix (10% aggrecan, 75% water, collagen, and other constituents). Chondroblasts initially secrete the extracellular matrix, inside which they become trapped and mature into chondrocytes. The outermost layer of cartilage is a layer of dense irregular connective tissue called perichondrium, which is constituted by an inner layer of chondroblasts and an outer layer of fibroblasts. In growing cartilage, chondrocytes divide and develop into nests of 2 to 4 cells. These cells are situated in matrix-enclosed compartments called lacunae. The size of its lacuna is a good criterion in deciding whether a chondrocyte is young or old. The larger the lacuna, the older the chondrocyte and vice versa. Active, young chondrocytes are secretory and contain basophilic cytoplasm with the rich, rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). Older chondrocytes contain fat droplets.