**Primary Hyperparathyroidism**

Nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis are the most common renal manifestations of primary hyperparathyroidism.

**Sarcoidosis**

Sarcoidosis is associated with hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria. Nephrocalcinosis is seen in up to 50% of cases with renal involvement.

**Hypervitaminosis D**

Vitamin D acts by increasing the intestinal absorption of calcium and also bone resorption, which results in hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria. Nephrocalcinosis is more likely to occur when activated vitamin D such as calcitriol in conjunction with phosphate supplements. This scenario is common in X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets.

**Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis**

It is the most common cause of nephrocalcinosis due to hypercalciuria without hypercalcemia. It has associations with hypocitraturia, which promotes calcium precipitation in renal tubules. It also results in metabolic acidosis which causes increased buffering of acid by bone buffers with subsequent release of calcium and phosphate. In a study by Brenner et al., evaluating the radiological prevalence of nephrocalcinosis in various renal tubular acidosis, of the 92 patients studied, nephrocalcinosis was seen in up to 29% of patients who were predominantly those with distal renal tubular acidosis.

**Medullary Sponge Kidney**

This condition is a disorder with dilated papillary collecting ducts, and stones are common. It is associated with hypercalciuria and hypocitraturia thereby, resulting in nephrocalcinosis.

**Nephrocalcinosis Due To****Loop Diuretic Abuse**

There is a risk of nephrocalcinosis in patients taking high doses of loop diuretics for a prolonged period. In a study by Kim et al., 18 consecutive adult patients who habitually took furosemide for weight gain and edema were evaluated. The study found nephrocalcinosis in 15 patients that underwent exposure to a mean dose of 538 mg per day. The authors concluded that the risk of nephrocalcinosis correlates with the dose of furosemide taken.

**Hereditary Disorders Associated with Nephrocalcinosis**

Some of these include X-linked hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis, X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, hypomagnesemia-hypercalciuria syndrome, and Bartter syndrome.

X-linked hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis is also termed Dent disease and has associations with some mutations affecting the CLCN5 gene on the X chromosome that leads to inactivation of CLC-5 voltage-gated chloride channels. This results in a clinical syndrome affecting young boys and usually includes hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis, hematuria, low molecular weight proteinuria, glycosuria, aminoaciduria, hypophosphatemia, renal failure, and rickets.