Progress in arthroscopic techniques has improved the surgical care of Bankart lesions. Arthroscopic Bankart repair is less morbid than open repair. Bankart lesions are more troublesome for young athletes involved in overhead activities. Treatment of the Bankart lesion is complicated by associated injuries to the glenoid rim and humeral head. Glenoid bone loss and the humeral head defect will mandate additional procedures to prevent the recurrence after Bankart repair. Strict adherence to structured rehabilitation protocol is crucial for returning to sport. This is where an interprofessional team approach to management is vital.

The comprehensive management of such injuries requires interprofessional coordination between the orthopedic surgeon, musculoskeletal radiologist, nursing staff, and physiotherapist. The surgeon will take the lead on these cases, but all team members must contribute from their specialties to guide the patient outcome. Nursing will assist in patient evaluation, serve as the liaison between specialties, and counsel patients. They will also often assist during surgical repair. Pharmacists can have a minor role in ensuring proper post-operative pain control is appropriate and that there are no drug interactions while counseling the patient on their medications. The physical therapist is undoubtedly a key player in managing these injuries, either through conservative management to avoid surgery or post-operatively to restore function. Everyone on the interprofessional care team must maintain accurate and updated records so all caregivers have accurate information from which to make decisions, and open lines of communication among all team members are crucial to successful patient outcomes. [Level 5]