The initial evaluation of patients with maxillofacial trauma should follow advanced trauma life Support (ATLS) protocols. The primary survey includes airway and cervical spine stabilization, breathing and ventilatory support, attention to circulation and hemorrhage control, disability and neurologic evaluation, and exposure and environment control.

Airway obstruction associated with fractures of the midfacial skeleton can be life-threatening if not recognized promptly and treated appropriately. Orotracheal intubation is required when intranasal damage is a possibility. Airway obstruction in Le Fort injuries mainly occurs due to multiple sources bleeding into the upper airway, as well as midface altered airway anatomy. Beware that the risk of life-threatening hemorrhage in Le Fort II and III injuries is higher than that associated with other facial injuries.

Maxillofacial trauma is an obvious threat to the patient's airway; therefore, a rapid evaluation must be performed to determine the need for a definitive airway. The concept of the definitive airway in cases of maxillofacial trauma is probably much more critical as compared to trauma to other body parts; therefore, an emergency airway may be required.

In a patient with complex maxillofacial trauma, cervical spine fracture should always be considered unless proven otherwise. Therefore, the cervical spine must be protected while providing airway management.

During the secondary survey, the assessment of maxillofacial fractures is performed after initial stabilization and resuscitation of the multisystem trauma patient. An ophthalmologic evaluation is required in Le Fort II and III fractures with orbital involvement. This should be completed before surgery to ensure there is no globe injury.

The mobility of the face should be tested on both sides as well as in the midline. The type of Le Fort fracture is determined by which regions are mobile.

- Le Fort I: Mobility of the maxilla; maxilla is free from the rest of the facial bones (floating palate)

- Le Fort II: Mobility of the maxilla and nose as a combined segment

- Le Fort III: Mobilized segment to include the maxilla, nose, and zygomas

A CT scan of facial bones is required to fully and adequately assess the extent of bone and soft tissue involvement. Plain radiographs are not sufficient for evaluation. Beware that penetrating trauma to the midface may involve injury to the brain and major vascular structures. Therefore, a CT scan of the head and diagnostic angiography should also be considered.