**Surgery**

It is estimated that approximately 80.5% of pituitary carcinomas have been treated at least twice with surgery (including 27.9% of patients who underwent at least four surgeries).

**Radiotherapy**

In one survey, it was estimated that approximately 42.9% of patients with pituitary carcinoma were treated with at least two courses of radiotherapy.

**Chemotherapy**

Temozolomide is an oral alkylating agent which exerts its pharmacologic effect by deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) methylation, resulting in irreversible DNA damage. Temozolomide is the recommended first-line chemotherapy. Temozolomide has been shown to improve progression-free and overall 5-year survival rates in responders.

For tumors that are progressing on or after the first course of temozolomide, there are, unfortunately, no other evidence-based treatments available at this time; therefore, maximizing and prolonging temozolomide efficacy is critical. Despite limited experience, options include long-term treatment with temozolomide as long as it is effective and clinically tolerated.

**Antisecretory Medications**

Controlling pituitary hormone hypersecretion is as mandatory in patients with pituitary cancer as in any patient with a functional pituitary tumor. For patients with lactotroph tumors, dopamine agonists, such as cabergoline, can be given at high doses.

**Future Therapies**

Potential future therapeutic options that are currently being studied include immunotherapy as well as molecularly targeted therapies such as bevacizumab (anti-VEGF antibody), everolimus (mTOR inhibitor), and several tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).