Cancer is an abnormal and uncontrolled proliferation of cells at a certain location that has the potential to spread to a distant site. These malignant cells develop vascularity, which in turn increases its ability to proliferate. About 14.1 million cases of cancers are registered every year, out of which about 8.8 million are eventually fatal, making cancer one of the leading causes of death.

The central nervous system (CNS) has three layers of meninges called the dura mater, the arachnoid, and the pia mater. The dura mater is known as the patchy-meningeal layer. The arachnoid and pia meningeal layers are called the leptomeninges. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lies in the space between the arachnoid and pia mater, known as the subarachnoid space.

The CSF is the main route for the malignant cells to gain access to the leptomeninges. However, to do so, the cancer cells must cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The BBB is an anatomical structure that consists of brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMECs), which form tight intercellular junctions with astrocyte foot processes and regulate transport from blood to CSF. It is hypothesized that tumor cells bind to endothelial cells via receptors and confer changes in the endothelium. This exposes the vascular basement membrane to tumor cells, which then binds to specific components and enters the CSF. Certain genomic functions mediate this whole process of extravasation of cancer cells. This metastatic potential is acquired over time. The Massague’ group suggested that overlapped genes like COX-2, EGFR ligand, ANGPTL4, and LTBP1 are responsible for causing disruption of BBB and tumor proliferation in different parts of the brain.

Refer to figure 1:

**Routes of Spread**

The routes of spread to BBB from primary tumor site includes:

- Hematogenous spread

- Direct invasion from primary tumors in the brain parenchyma and meninges

- Choroid plexus metastasis into CSF

- Epidural, subdural, and vertebral metastasis

- Perineural and endoneurial spread from the brain and spinal cord in a retrograde manner

- Iatrogenic spread via neurosurgical procedures

CSF is known to be rich in high amounts of oxygen and glucose, enough to support the high metabolic demands of the rapidly multiplying malignant cells. Therefore, tumor proliferation in leptomeninges is not dependent upon angiogenesis, a limiting factor for tumors in other locations, including brain parenchymal metastasis.

**Risk Factors**

The major risk factors associated with CM are:

- Incomplete surgical resection of brain metastasis

- The Omission of postoperative radiation therapy

- Presence of parenchymal brain metastasis in young (age <40 years)

- Advanced systemic disease

Neurosurgical resection is the preferred treatment option for solitary brain metastasis. Many studies indicate that the risk of CM is 2.81 times more with piecemeal resection than in en-bloc resection.

Due to the selective permeability of BBB, conventional systemic therapy may not be effective in brain metastasis. Radiotherapy (RT) is a feasible option for radiosensitive tumors, especially if the primary site is unknown. Adjuvant RT is recommended after neurosurgical resection. Whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) reduces the risk of recurrence but is associated with increased adverse effects, and therefore stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) is increasingly becoming the preferred option. Studies have shown that the risk of CM after prior neurosurgical resection is 6.5 times higher than SRS without previous surgery.

Location of brain metastasis and tumor volume has not been found to increase the possibility of occurrence of CM. It is the chance of CSF exposure for the spilling of the tumor cells that is rather significant.