Small bowel obstruction may be diagnosed with a physical examination alone, but often further diagnostics are required for surgical evaluation and management. While traditionally, a physical examination was used to diagnose small bowel obstruction, the invention of computed tomography (CT) has dramatically improved the accuracy and characterization of this disease. Radiographs are often used as a supplementary imaging modality; however, ultrasound is more sensitive and specific than radiographs. Additionally, ultrasound does not result in radiation exposure and has the benefit of rapid and serial examinations.

Plain radiography has poor sensitivity, ranging from 50% to 80%. It may be an initial screening test for obvious air-fluid levels and free intra-abdominal air but cannot be relied upon to rule out small bowel obstruction. Small bowel diameter of greater than 6 centimeters, large bowel greater than 12 centimeters, and cecum greater than 15 centimeters are worrisome for obstruction.

A computed tomography scan of the abdomen is the gold standard imaging modality. Intravenous (IV) contrast should be used if the patient has a normal renal function and does not have a contraindication. If the patient has a subnormal renal function, a non-contrast study may be obtained. A consultation with a radiology provider should be done, which study should be performed. Oral contrast is unnecessary in evaluating small bowel obstruction as it can lead to delayed diagnosis and complications. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be appropriate for young patients who had multiple computed tomography scans performed previously.

**Point-of-Care Ultrasound**

The following steps may be taken while performing a point of care ultrasound:

- With the patient in the supine position, a transducer of the highest frequency possible should be selected to provide adequate depth in the patient. In the pediatric population, this will often be a linear high-frequency transducer of 5 MHz to 10 MHz, and in adult patients, it may be a curvilinear transducer of 3 MHz to 5 MHz.

- Commence from the right lower quadrant of the abdomen in the transverse plane. Apply serial compressions every 3 cm along all 4 abdominal quadrants, ending in the left lower quadrant.

- Then apply the transducer in the longitudinal or sagittal orientation and compress the bowel in all abdominal quadrants ending in the right lower quadrant.

- A dilated small bowel that measures more than 3 cm is suggestive of an obstruction or ileus. An edematous bowel wall that measures more than 3 mm is indicative of an obstruction or other intestinal inflammatory cause. The noncompressibility of bowel and free fluid suggests obstruction. Anterograde-retrograde peristalsis is specific for obstruction. Lastly, the visualization of a transition point is specific for obstruction. A transition point on ultrasound is demonstrated by a dilated, thick, noncompressible bowel adjacent to small, decompressed bowel.

Ultrasound is not a replacement for computed tomography scan and should not delay surgical consultation. It is useful in cases where it can facilitate diagnosis and rule out other causes.

Routine laboratory studies also need to be sent to evaluate for bowel ischemia, inflammation, the degree of dehydration and to rule out concomitant diagnoses. These may include a complete blood count (CBC), lactic acid, complete metabolic profile (CMP), urine studies, and coagulation studies.