Hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola may be unilateral or bilateral. It may affect only the nipple, areola or both. Rarely, hyperkeratotic patches may extend beyond the areolar region. The skin lesions are usually painless with no discharge or associated lymphadenopathy. However, pruritus may be present in some patients. In males under estrogen therapy, a gynecomastia may be observed in association with hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola.

Hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola occurs during puberty or pregnancy. There is usually a diffuse pigmentation and a warty thickening of the nipples and/or areolae. Skin lesions may become darker and thicker during pregnancy and tend to improve after delivery. The skin thickening is variable from a simple hyperkeratosis to a tumoral aspect. In some women, breastfeeding may become impossible because of nipple lesions. No prepubertal onset of hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola has been observed.

The classification initially proposed by Levy-Franckel divides hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola into three types: (1) epidermal nevus, with unilateral involvement of a single breast, usually in a Blaschko linear pattern (observed equally in both genders); (2) hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola associated with ichthyosis, with bilateral involvement of the breasts (observed equally in both genders); and (3) a bilateral type, generally affecting both nipples and areolae and observed mainly in females in the second or third decade of life.

A more recent classification divides hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola into two types: (1) a primary or idiopathic type, and (2) a secondary type, associated with another skin condition such a naevi structure (mainly epidermal nevus but also organoid nevus leiomyomas) or a warty tumor (verruca, seborrheic keratosis), as well as ichthyosis, chronic eczema (including atopic dermatitis), Darier disease, acanthosis nigricans, terra firma dermatitis, reticulate and confluent papillomatosis, and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. This second type of hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola also includes breast lesions developed in pregnant women and males receiving estrogen therapy.

In pregnant women, some physiological changes of the breast (such as pigmentation, and nipple and areola enlargement) should be considered in the differential diagnosis of hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola.

It may be challenging to differentiate the idiopathic type of hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola from secondary type. The diagnosis is all the more difficult as the histological aspects are quite similar, such as in seborrheic keratosis, acanthosis nigricans, and epidermal nevus.

Seborrheic keratosis shares similar histological features with hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola, and the diagnosis of seborrheic keratosis is likely if the papillomatous papules are well delimited. Furthermore, in seborrheic keratosis, a discrete fibrosis of the upper dermis is usually observed on histological examination. Acanthosis nigricans may have a similar histological aspect as hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola; however, it involves mainly flexural areas and is often associated with metabolic disorders. Epidermal nevus is usually unilateral and spread beyond the areolar region, frequently following a Blashcko linear pattern.