In the less severe stages of rosacea, dermatologists can help optimize the treatment of this condition. Upon reaching the point of requiring surgical treatment, the advantages and disadvantages of the necessary procedure(s) require a consult with experienced plastic surgeons, ear, nose, and throat (ENT) surgeons, or dermatologists trained to perform these procedures. Depending on the surgical treatment, anesthesiologists must have adequate sedation and pain control during the operation. Pathologists can be employed to analyze biopsy specimens to rule out malignancy. Nurses are an integral part of the team for post-operational monitoring in the healthcare facility. Lastly, pharmacists play a role in confirming the proper antibiotic coverage to prevent postoperative infection.

The National Rosacea Society Expert Committee updated its guidelines in 2017 on the standard classification and pathophysiology of rosacea. Last updated in 2002, current guidelines were developed after an assessment of articles from peer-reviewed journals and expert advice to guide practitioners on proper investigations, aid in the diagnosis, and provide treatment recommendations.

In summary, rhinophyma requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. All team members must maintain accurate records of their interactions and interventions so that all interprofessional teammates can access updated and accurate information regarding the case. Nurses, pharmacists, and other providers must openly communicate with the treating clinicians and specialists so that any necessary interventions can be implemented promptly. [Level 5]