Er:YAG full-field laser skin resurfacing may be employed for the treatment of facial actinic damage, dyschromia, rhytids, scarring, skin laxity, or even for improvement in coarse skin texture. Full-field treatment is usually limited to Fitzpatrick skin types I-II to reduce the occurrence of adverse effects; however, in some cases, Fitzpatrick skin types III-IV may be treated using more conservative parameters.

The Fitzpatrick skin classification categorizes skin pigmentation by its ability to tan and resistance to burning with sun exposure. Patients with type I skin always burn and never tan; they have very fair skin, often freckled with red or blonde hair and green or blue eyes. Patients with type II skin burn easily and only tan minimally, typically with fair skin, blonde or brown hair, and blue eyes. Patients with type III skin burn moderately but may also tan to a light brown color; they are generally fair-skinned with brown hair and brown eyes. Patients with type I-III skin are of predominantly European descent. Patients with type IV skin may be of Mediterranean or East Asian descent and also have dark hair and eyes; they burn only minimally and tan to a moderate brown color. Patients with type V skin rarely burn and tan darkly; they may be of South Asian descent. Patients with type VI skin never burn and do not typically demonstrate any skin changes with sun exposure. They are generally of sub-Saharan African descent.

Patients undergoing Er:YAG laser resurfacing can experience visible improvement of facial rhytids 3 to 8 weeks following treatment, particularly in the periorbital and perioral areas.