**Structure**

The hyoglossus muscle is one of the extrinsic muscles of the tongue. It is a thin, quadrilateral muscle that consists of two main parts. The anterior quadrilateral part arises from the hyoid body, and the posterior triangular part arises from the greater cornu of the hyoid bone. Both parts ascend towards the tongue external to the genioglossus. They insert into the side of the posterior half of the tongue between the styloglossus laterally and the inferior longitudinal muscle medially, with the posterior part attaching posteroinferiorly to the anterior part.

The anterior part is thicker than the posterior part and can be subdivided into 10 to 15 parallel bundles by the perimysium. Most of these bundles ascend in a posterolateral direction towards their insertion; however, the posterior internal slip of the anterior part diverges and merges into the insertion of the posterior part of the hyoglossus. In contrast to the anterior part, the posterior part is composed of 3 bundles, and instead of being parallel, these fibers converge towards their insertion. The fibers of these bundles all ascend in different directions, with the anterior bundle ascending posteriorly, the middle bundle ascending vertically and the posterior bundle ascending posteriorly.

**Function**

The hyoglossus muscle is one of the four extrinsic muscles of the tongue, and, alongside the styloglossus, it acts as one of the two tongue base retractor muscles. The main action of the hyoglossus is to cause retraction and downward compression of the lower third of the tongue.