Pamidronate correlates with numerous adverse effects, including hypocalcemia and resulting secondary hyperparathyroidism, acute phase response, musculoskeletal pain, various ocular events, and osteonecrosis of the jaw.

IV Bisphosphonates, like pamidronate, are more likely to cause symptomatic hypocalcemia than oral medications, which usually occur days after infusion. Prevention of this complication is achievable by making sure patients receive adequate Vitamin D and calcium supplementation approximately two weeks before bisphosphonate infusion.

An adverse effect similar to the acute phase response can occur following the initial pamidronate infusion, which reaches maximal intensity in 28 to 36 hours and self-resolves in 2 to 3 days. It is rarer following subsequent infusions. Patients with this response complain of fever and symptoms of influenza, such as malaise, fatigue, and generalized body pain.

The most common ocular complication following pamidronate use is nonspecific and self-resolving conjunctivitis. More serious ocular complications include scleritis and uveitis, which both warrant immediate discontinuation of the drug.

Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) is an uncommon but feared side effect of bisphosphonate use. Patients with ONJ may complain of jaw pain, swelling and redness of nearby tissue, loose teeth in the affected region, and the presence of pus.

The IV bisphosphonates pamidronate and zoledronate are also associated with significant nephrotoxicity, which is rare among oral bisphosphonates. The risk of nephrotoxicity increases with larger doses, shorter infusion times, and more frequent dosing intervals.

There are reports of pamidronate causing other adverse effects like urticaria and atypical femoral fractures, but the number of such cases is small.