The mainstay treatment for acute benzodiazepine toxicity is supportive care, which may include endotracheal intubation to provide definitive airway management. Single-dose or multi-dose activated charcoal, hemodialysis, or whole bowel irrigation play no role in managing benzodiazepine toxicity.

While the mainstay treatment of acute benzodiazepine toxicity or overdose is supportive care, there is, however, an “antidote” that may be used in limited situations. Flumazenil is a nonspecific competitive antagonist at the benzodiazepine receptor that can reverse benzodiazepine-induced sedation. However, in most cases, the risks of flumazenil usually outweigh the benefits in acute toxicity, and thus flumazenil is not recommended for routine reversal of this sedative agent. Seizures and cardiac dysrhythmias, particularly PSVT, can occur after flumazenil administration, and many fatalities have been reported. Flumazenil can precipitate acute withdrawal syndromes in those with chronic benzodiazepine dependence, which can be life-threatening. If a patient with a chronic dependence on benzodiazepines is given flumazenil, it can lower their seizure threshold and potentially cause life-threatening seizures. The treatment of seizures, which typically involves benzodiazepines, would be rendered useless, as the flumazenil has blocked the benzodiazepine receptors.

Flumazenil can be safely administered to non-habituated users of benzodiazepines. This situation classically occurs in the pediatric population with accidental ingestion or after procedural sedation. It is recommended that the decision to use flumazenil be based on the balance of risk versus benefit in the assessment and treatment of a patient that is a non-habituated user of benzodiazepines, as most people with a benzodiazepine overdose will do well with supportive care and time alone.