Infectious mononucleosis is a rather common disease that is seen primarily in patients ages 10 to 30 years old.  Its symptoms, which include sore throat, fever, fatigue, and lymphadenopathy overlap with many other common disease processes.  Although the disease is treated with supportive care only, diagnosis is vital to initiate prevention of complications and ineffective or potentially dangerous treatments may be avoided.

The monospot test is a particularly common test for the rapid detection of IM.  Results are obtainable within 5 to 10 minutes, and the cost of the test is relatively inexpensive, thus making it a very common testing modality in clinics and urgent care settings.  However, because of the test’s limited sensitivity, the Center for Disease Control does not endorse this modality of testing for general use or confirmation of EBV.

It is incumbent upon the practitioner to understand the appropriate use of the monospot test and the limitations inherent within the test, particularly with regards to its sensitivity.  In patients between the ages of 10 and 30 years old who have a constellation of symptoms consistent with IM, a positive monospot test may help to help to clarify the diagnosis of IM further, though EBV specific antibody testing should be a strong consideration.

In patients presenting with Infectious mononucleosis-like symptoms who have a negative monospot test, false negative test results should be considered, especially if patient testing occurred within the first 1 to 2 weeks of symptoms.  It is crucial for the health care provider to consider EBV specific antibody testing or close follow up and repeat testing, depending on what resources are available.

As with any diagnostic testing modality, one must understand the limitations of the test and the appropriate population in which to initiate testing.  Although it is a rapid and inexpensive test, there are significant concerns and limitations, particularly with the sensitivity of the test.  It should be utilized as a diagnostic aid in patients older than 4 years of age who present with symptoms that are clinically consistent with IM.  However, EBV-specific antibody testing is the recommendation for actual confirmation of the diagnosis of IM, due to EBV.