**Hyphema**

- The diagnosis is made by slit-lamp examination.

- Open globe injury should be ruled out in traumatic hyphema cases. CT scan should be done in traumatic cases to rule out Orbital fracture and IOFB. USG should be done to rule out vitreous hemorrhage, IOFB, lens dislocation, and retinal detachment.

- Complete blood count, bleeding and coagulation disorders, hypertension, history of any anticoagulant medications should be ruled out in patients with spontaneous hyphema.

**Vitreous Hemorrhage**

- In patients with vitreous hemorrhage, systemic metabolic stability should be evaluated first.

- Most common causes of Vitreous hemorrhage like diabetes mellitus, hypertension, trauma, chest compression, raised intracranial tension, systemic autoimmune vasculitis, history of tuberculosis, bleeding or coagulation disorders, history of anticoagulant drugs intake should be investigated first.

- All routine blood tests like CBC, ESR, Hb, BT, CT, serum homocysteine, PT with INR, peripheral blood smear, Mantoux test, chest X-ray should be investigated.

- If Retina is hazily visible through the bleed, the cause of bleeding should be thoroughly investigated with the help of indirect ophthalmoscopy, 90D or 78D slit lamp guided biomicroscopic examination to look for precise posterior segment involvement.

- If any macular pathology like wet ARMD, IPCV, choroidal rupture at the macula, ruptured microaneurysm, retinal venous occlusion, diabetic macular edema is suspected on indirect ophthalmoscopic examination, optical coherence tomography (OCT) and optical coherence tomography angiography (OCT-A) should be done to find out the respective causes. It is especially useful to differentiate sub-ILM from the sub-hyaloid type of bleed.

- If the fundus is visible, fundus fluorescein angiography(FFA) should be done to determine the cause, extent, location of the retinal ischemic stimulus, and indocyanine green angiography (ICG) is necessary if any choroidal involvement is suspected.

- In cases where visibility of the retina is an issue, B-scan ultrasonography should be done for the diagnosis of Vitreous hemorrhage and to look for associated findings of retinal detachment, posterior vitreous detachment, lens drop, intraocular foreign body, traction at the posterior pole to differentiate sub-hyaloid hemorrhage (SHH) from intragel vitreous hemorrhage.

**Suprachoroidal Hemorrhage**

- It is a spot diagnosis clinically.

- In cases where distorted intraocular architecture does not allow posterior segment evaluation, B- scan ultrasonography helps in the diagnosis of SCH.

- It can also help localize the site and extent of bleed so that we could plan for surgical drainage based on USG guidance.

- It also helps to rule out associated retinal detachment or vitreous hemorrhage.

- It is also useful for post-surgical follow-up of the patients to assess the condition of the eye.

- A-scan shows a typical high reflective spike at the wall of the SCH followed by an area of lower reflective spike indicating clotted blood in the suprachoroidal space.

- CT scan and MRI also helps to demarcate the site and extent of bleed.

- Fundus fluorescein angiography(FFA), Indocyanine green angiography(ICG), Optical coherence angiography (OCT) are helpful to rule out the causes of loss of vision but can only be useful if proper examination of the posterior segment is visible.

**Retinal hemorrhages, Disc hemorrhages, and macular hemorrhages**are spot clinical diagnosis on indirect ophthalmoscopic examination and 78D or 90D slit-lamp biomicroscopic examination. To know the site, extent, and location of the hemorrhages, an OCT 5 line raster scan along the hemorrhage is very helpful. OCT and OCT-A might provide additional information regarding the location of the hemorrhage, associated signs of edema, subretinal fluid, any tractional component, and the integrity of the outer and inner retinal layers. FFA is useful to look for any ischemic areas, differentiate hemorrhages from neovascularization, and plan for FFA guided photocoagulation if required. ICG is useful to get precise information regarding choroidal pathology as choroidal circulation is very nicely differentiated on ICG angiography.