# Introduction

The Bainbridge reflex is a compensatory reflex resulting in an increase in heart rate following an increase in cardiac preload.

# Issues of Concern

Discovery of the Bainbridge reflex arose from a controversial experiment.

While Bainbridge's experiment has been monumental in the field of medicine. It turns out that many researchers have encountered differing results when replicating similar experiments.

# Organ Systems Involved

Primarily the cardiovascular system and central nervous system are involved with the Bainbridge reflex.

# Function

The function of the Bainbridge reflex in conjunction with several other cardiovascular reflexes is to maintain homeostasis of the cardiovascular system. The arterial baroreceptor reflex predominately regulates and maintains arterial blood pressure.

# Mechanism

Stretch receptors present in the atria detect increases in central venous pressure (CVP) resulting from increased volume which increases the heart rate by a signaling mechanism with the brain.

# Clinical Significance

Understanding the mechanism of the Bainbridge reflex will help clinicians understand specific hemodynamic changes seen in their patients during various clinical scenarios. The Bainbridge reflex controls heart rate in response to blood volume. Blood volume can be influenced by multiple physiologic, idiopathic and pathologic changes. As stated above, the respiratory sinus arrhythmia is a direct response of the Bainbridge reflex due to increased venous return during inspiration due to decreased intrathoracic pressures. An idiopathic example of an increase in heart rate would occur with the initiation of normal saline or blood infusions. Pathologic changes in the Bainbridge reflex may be seen in during acute volume overload. Several studies and case reports depict the Bainbridge reflex in a clinical scenario in more detail.

One study described different mechanisms that increase cardiac output (CO) during 0 G (0 gravity). During this study, human subjects were observed in a supine and upright seated position in 0 G and 1G respectively. The inference is that in the 0G upright position, an increase in CO resulted due to redistribution of blood volume from the peripheral to cardiac, circulatory system leading to an increase in stroke volume and secondly, due to an increase in heart rate.

A case report of a 26-year-old who developed respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) after being exposed to cardiac loading stressors such as 45 degrees HDT (head down tilt) and increased tidal volume during CO2 breathing.

Another case report mentions the use of PLR (passive leg raise) in resuscitating of an 84-year-old male admitted to the emergency department for pneumonia.