Teasdale et al., in their original paper on the Glasgow coma scale, suggested that distinguishing between normal and abnormal flexion requires an experienced observer, and thus, simply defining the response as either flexion or extension may be sufficient in the early stages following brain insult.

**Decorticate Posturing**

Decorticate posturing is described as abnormal flexion of the arms with the extension of the legs. Specifically, it involves slow flexion of the elbow, wrist, and fingers with adduction and internal rotation at the shoulder. The lower limbs show extension and internal rotation at the hip, with the extension of the knee and plantar flexion of the feet. Toes are typically abducted and hyperextended.

**Decerebrate Posturing**

Decerebrate posturing is described as adduction and internal rotation of the shoulder, extension at the elbows with pronation of the forearm, and flexion of the fingers. As with decorticate posturing, the lower limbs show extension and internal rotation at the hip, with the extension of the knee and plantar flexion of the feet. Toes are typically abducted and hyperextended.

**Stages of Brain Herniation**

In central herniation, the neurological status of a patient can be seen to progress through a series of stages. Starting with the diencephalic stage, phases proceed through: obeying commands, bilateral Babinski reflexes, paratonia, grasp reflex, decortication. Later as the midbrain and upper pons are involved, the patient becomes decerebrated. As the lower pons and upper medulla are involved, the patient becomes flaccid.