The incision is extensive and is typically made from ASIS to ASIS through the natural suprapubic crease. This positions the final scar low enough on the trunk to be hidden in the bikini line. A flap between the fascia and fat is then created superiorly to the costal margin, following it until the xiphoid process is reached. The umbilicus is circumferentially dissected from the flap, leaving it attached to the abdomen by the umbilical stalk and fat. Special care is needed to leave enough of a fat pad circumferentially around the umbilicus to avoid ischemia and necrosis, as the plexus surrounding the umbilical stalk contains its blood supply. Once the flap is raised, the patient is flexed in the bed to re-drape the flap and determine its final position at the previous incision, and the excess skin is then marked. The fascia of the rectus muscle is then plicated with long-lasting absorbable suture such as polydioxanone (PDS) suture to reinforce the abdominal wall. Some surgeons prefer permanent sutures such as nylon or Prolene, though reports of local reactions and extrusion do exist.

**Special Considerations**

The abdominoplasty can be catered to each patient's body habitus by altering the procedure slightly. The use of liposuction can aid in the removal of excess fat in the lateral flanks and upper thighs to help smooth the contours of the abdominoplasty. A panniculectomy (essentially an abdominoplasty without the rectus muscle plication) can be of significant benefit in patients who have had extreme weight loss. The blood flow to the abdomen is better maintained in this procedure since it is not necessary to extend dissection to the xiphoid process. This ensures sufficient blood flow after significant weight loss and excessively flaccid skin aprons. A "mini-abdominoplasty" (wherein minimal skin and fat are excised but the rectus muscle is plicated and re-enforced) is ideal for patients who are not overweight and present with infra-umbilical abdominal wall laxity and minimal skin and fat excess. These patients are classically women at a healthy weight who have had one or two children but have maintained good skin laxity

Postoperatively, it is important that the patient remains in a flexed (Semi-Fowler) position for 2 weeks. This positioning helps avoid excessive straining on the incision and reduce the risk of hypertrophic scar formation. A belt lipectomy can be considered in patients with significant flank, buttock, and thigh fat. This is a circumferential lipectomy which can add the benefits of a thigh and buttock lift to the abdominoplasty. Closed suction drains and oral antibiotics are used at the discretion of the surgeon but have shown only anecdotal benefits in preventing infection and other complications such as seroma and hematoma formation