Calcium is tightly regulated and rarely varies from physiologic levels within the body.

Calcium levels are managed by the parathyroid hormone (PTH), calcitonin, and calcitriol. The parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an essential regulator of calcium homeostasis, which acts on the renal, skeletal, and gastrointestinal systems to increase serum calcium levels. First, PTH promotes calcium absorption in the gut by stimulating the formation of renally derived calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D), which targets the intestines to increase calcium absorption.

PTH is regulated by serum calcium via negative feedback, preventing excess PTH secretion when calcium is at the physiological level (10 mg/dL).

**Calcium and the Renal System**

The PTH acts on the renal system by activating adenylyl cyclase and 1 alpha-hydroxylase to increase calcium reabsorption and phosphate excretion. Adenylyl cyclase increases calcium reabsorption at the distal convoluted tubules. The enzyme 1alpha-hydroxylase increases the conversion of vitamin D to its active form, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, which results in increased calcium absorption in the intestine.

**Calcium and the Gastrointestinal System**

Humans do not endogenously create calcium, so it must be ingested and absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract. The amount of calcium absorbed in the small intestine is primarily influenced by current calcium levels and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (calcitriol). Still, other factors such as age, gender, race, and comorbidities can affect calcium absorption. Calcitriol is increased in response to low serum calcium and triggers an active process in the duodenum to absorb more calcium.

Since calcium is absorbed in ionic form, dietary intake of compounds that interact with calcium will reduce the amount of calcium available for absorption. These are primarily oxalate, phosphate, sulfate, citrate, fiber, and fats.

**Calcium and the Musculoskeletal System**

Bone tissue stores calcium as hydroxyapatite, which is deposited when serum calcium levels are elevated and released when levels are low. This process is linked with the endocrine system via the thyroid and parathyroid glands. When serum calcium levels are elevated, the thyroid gland releases calcitonin, which inhibits bone resorption by halting osteoclast activity. The PTH effect on bone tissue is dependent on continuous versus intermittent exposure.

Calcium is necessary for muscle contraction to occur. Contraction is initiated when actin and myosin subunits interact with each other and are inhibited by two regulatory subunits: troponin and tropomyosin. Tropomyosin obstructs the actin-myosin binding site, which prevents contraction by blocking actin and myosin interaction.

**Calcium and the Cardiovascular System**

Calcium in the heart muscle cells is responsible for stabilizing the membrane potential.

Prospective cohort studies have shown no relationship between dietary calcium intake and the risk of heart disease, death, or myocardial infarction.

Calcium is a key cofactor in the coagulation cascade and is necessary for appropriate coagulability. During primary hemostasis, von Willebrand Factor (vWF) is released from injured tissue to act as a bridge for the endothelium and platelet GpIb receptors for proper platelet adhesion. After a platelet adhesion to the endothelium, calcium is released to assist with other coagulation factors of the clotting cascade.