# Continuing Education Activity

Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) is a clinical syndrome in which there is an acute, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema associated with hypoxia that occurs during or after a transfusion. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of transfusion-related acute lung injury and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify diagnostic criteria for transfusion-related acute lung injury.
- Describe the pathophysiology of transfusion-related acute lung injury.
- Contrast transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) and transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO).
- Review the importance of improving care coordination amongst interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients with transfusion-related acute lung injury.

# Introduction

Transfusion reactions are adverse events that occur after transfusing blood products such as whole blood, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), platelets, cryoprecipitate, granulocytes, intravenous immune globulin, allogenic and autologous stem cells, and packed red blood cells.

TRALI was first reported in the 1950s but recognized as a distinctive clinical syndrome in 1983.

In the US, TRALI has to be reported to the Blood Banking services.

# Etiology

True TRALI should not have any risk factors for acute lung injury according to diagnostic criteria. TRALI is caused by damage to pulmonary vasculature from neutrophil-mediated in forms of human neutrophil antigen (HNA) or human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies in donor blood which bind to antigens of a recipient. Storage of blood products can accumulate proinflammatory mediators that can cause TRALI as well. A two-hit hypothesis applies in this clinical syndrome. Neutrophil sequestration occurs in the pulmonary vasculature, and neutrophils activate to damage the endothelial layer, causing leakage of protein and fluid into alveolar space.

# Epidemiology

Comorbidities suggest risk factors for having TRALI, mechanical ventilation, sepsis, massive transfusion, coronary artery bypass graft, and end-stage liver disease.

In the US, TRALI has been responsible for at least 30% of transfusion-related deaths. While the mortality rates have dropped over the past decade, continued awareness is key.

# Pathophysiology

Due to the two-hit hypothesis, the first hit takes place by priming of neutrophils from who are already ill from shock, sepsis, having organ damage who also had surgery or experienced a great deal of stress from trauma.

# Histopathology

Histopathology consists of early acute lung distress syndrome (ARDS), revealing interstitial and intra-alveolar edema and the presence of neutrophils in the interstitial and airway. Lung sections have shown numerous neutrophils in pulmonary capillaries and small pulmonary vessels.

# History and Physical

Before a blood transfusion, a complete history and physical exam needs to be done to assess the patient's clinical status. Most likely, the hemoglobin is lower than 7, or they are actively bleeding and need a red blood cell transfusion. Abnormal coagulation studies with consumptive coagulopathy also warrant correction with FFP or cryoprecipitate before any interventions or emergent surgery. Within 6 hours of blood transfusion for acute TRALI or 6 to 72 hours for delayed TRALI, patients can develop body temperature of greater than 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or 37 degrees Celcius or hypotension along with acute dyspnea requiring more oxygen via nasal cannula, nonbreathable mask or even mechanical ventilation depending on severity.

# Evaluation

A chest radiograph will show bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. Clinical characteristics of TRALI include acute dyspnea, hypoxemia, fever, hypotension, tachycardia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and normal pulmonary artery occlusion pressure due to noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.

Nearly 30% of patients will have low levels of BNP and transient leucopenia.

# Treatment / Management

Immediate management of TRALI is to stop the transfusion and notify the blood bank to screen the donor unit for antileukocyte antibodies, anti-HLA or anti-neutrophil-specific antibodies.

Once the transfusion is stopped, gradual recovery may take 2-4 days. The chest x-ray will improve within 2-5 days.

# Differential Diagnosis

When there is a transfusion reaction with acute dyspnea from respiratory distress, acute pulmonary edema with diffuse bilateral infiltrates in the chest x-ray, transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) is in the differential diagnosis. TACO is also a clinical diagnosis with similar clinical pictures as TRALI. However, there are distinct features that separate two syndromes. TACO can present with fever and hypotension. Even though normal fluid balance does not rule out TACO, it can happen to patients who have high fluid intake before the transfusion. Due to volume overload, patients with TACO can have distended neck veins and already reduced ejection fraction (EF) from heart failure with reduced EF. Pulmonary artery occlusion pressures could be 18 mmHg or greater, secondary to cardiogenic pulmonary edema with elevated brain natriuretic peptide. Because of cardiogenic pulmonary edema, TACO has transudate fluids which are low in plasma proteins.

# Prognosis

Despite aggressive support, mortality rates of more than 12% are reported once TRALI is diagnosed. Even those who survive have a slow recovery.

# Pearls and Other Issues

TRALI can develop within 6 hours to 72 hours of blood transfusions that are rich in plasma. Despite suspected various hypothesis, it could certainly be prevented with a careful approach in blood transfusions, especially in those who are more vulnerable for acquiring TRALI. Due to no definitive treatment, prevention is the best key to keep TRALI from occurring by treating underlying diseases first.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of TRALI is not simple and is best done with an interprofessional team that includes a hematologist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, internist, and a specialty trained nurse experienced with the care of these patients. TRALI can develop within 6 hours to 72 hours of blood transfusions that are rich in plasma. Despite suspected various hypotheses, it could certainly be prevented with the careful approach in blood transfusions, especially in those who are more vulnerable to acquire TRALI. Due to no definitive treatment, prevention is the best key to keep TRALI from occurring by treating underlying diseases first.

Nurses who administer blood should be aware of this syndrome as it may present with shortness of breath. At the first sign of symptoms, the blood transfusion should be discontinued, and the patient monitored in the ICU.

The outcome of patients with TRALI depends on age, the number of other organs involved, the need for mechanical ventilation, and response to treatment.