There are many disease processes associated with plasma:

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP): a type of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia that manifests as fever, thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, renal dysfunction, and neurologic dysfunction. All five criteria might not be present in all patients. It is often due to the deficiency or inhibition of ADAMTS13, a metalloproteinase that breaks apart big von Willebrand factor (vWF) multimers. In TTP, these large vWF multimers are not broken down and cause increased platelet adhesion and thrombosis. Labs will often show anemia, thrombocytopenia, schistocytes on peripheral smear, increased LDH, increased creatinine, and increased bleeding time with normal PT and PTT. Treatment most involves plasma exchange with fresh frozen plasma, steroids, and splenectomy. Platelets should not be given since it causes more thrombosis. Plasma exchange allows for a good prognosis in patients with TTP.

- Clotting disorders: Deficiency of specific clotting factors cause hemophilia.****Hemophilia A is due to factor VIII deficiency, while hemophilia B is due to deficiency of factor IX. Symptoms involve hemarthrosis and intramuscular hematomas. Prophylactic transfusion of a factor VIII- or factor IX-concentrate is the main treatment for children with severe hemophilia; however, this leads over time to the formation of antibodies against these factors.

- Von Willebrand disease: It is due to a deficiency or abnormal von Willebrand factor (vWF), which is the most common bleeding disorder and is an autosomal dominant disorder. vWF is needed to protect factor VIII, which is critical for secondary hemostasis. The main role of vWF is to allow for platelet-subendothelium interaction and platelet-to-platelet aggregation. The amount of bleeding seen in patients is directly correlated to the severity of deficiency of vWF and factor VIII. Bleeding from mucocutaneous surfaces (gingiva, menstrual bleeding, easy bruising) are commonly seen. Since factor VIII is only mildly reduced, symptoms such as intramuscular hematomas or hemarthrosis are rare. In terms of lab abnormalities, the platelet count is normal, and bleeding time is increased, prothrombin time (PT) is normal, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) may increase (depending on the deficiency of Factor VIII). The VWF-ristocetin cofactor activity assay is used for diagnosis. The Von Willebrand ristocetin cofactor assay tests the ability of a plasma sample to agglutinate platelets in the presence of the Ristocetin. The rate of ristocetin-induced agglutination is directly proportional to the amount and activity of the von Willebrand factor.

- Immunodeficiency: Antibodies or immunoglobulins play a critical role in the immune system to fight off infections. There are 5 classes of immunoglobulins which are IgM, IgG, IgA, IgD, and IgE. The deficiency of each of them can present with unique symptoms. Failure to produce any immunoglobulins occurs in X-linked agammaglobulinemia (Bruton disease), which is due to the failure of pre-B cells to become mature B cells. IgA deficiency is the major mucosal antibody that causes diarrhea and respiratory infections if it is deficient. Hyper IgM syndrome occurs when the inability of CD40 to interact with B cell causes IgM levels to remain high because of the inability to change into other antibody types.