The Doppler effect refers to the change in observed sound wave frequencies due to motion. In the case of duplex ultrasound, the source of the sound waves and the measurement of the change are contained within the transducer probe. The transducer contains piezoelectric crystals which convert electrical activity to the ultrasound waves and vice versa. The probe measures the frequency shift due to reflections off the underlying tissues. This Doppler shift is calculated as:

Equation 1: f(d) = f(t) - f(r) = f(t) * 2 * [u*cos(theta) / c]

Where f(d) is the Doppler shift, f(t) is the transmitted frequency, f(r) is the returning frequency, c is the speed of the ultrasound wave and u*cos(theta) is the velocity component of the reflection in the direction of the ultrasonic beam with angle theta measured between the line of movement of the reflector and the transducer beam.  This equation explains why Doppler images degrade at an angle greater than 70 degrees as the cos(theta) approaches 0 at 90 degrees. If the exact angle is known, the Doppler output could be translated directly into velocities, but as this is often, unknown outputs remain as Doppler shift

Electronic gating is an important aspect of ultrasonography. All duplex and Doppler ultrasounds are equipped with predetermined gating which governs the depth at which the data is interpreted. This allows for increased and decreased penetration which can be adjusted as needed for anatomic reasons or clarity.

A variety of methods for wave generation exist. These include continuous wave, pulsed wave, high repetition frequency, color, and power. As the name indicates, continuous wave ultrasound is a continuous cyclic generation of waves. As the waves disperse and encounter moving structures, they undergo a shift which returns to the detectors. Objects moving towards the transducer result in a decreased frequency while those moving away from an increased frequency. These are then translated into visual images with red traditionally representing movement towards the transducer and blue representing a movement away. When Doppler shifts become, high reconstruction can be inaccurate and flow directions can become reversed. This phenomenon is known as aliasing artifact, or state of ambiguity, and is governed by the Nyquist limit which states that ambiguity will occur if the Doppler shift is greater than twice the sampling frequency. Pulsed wave ultrasound increased the maximum velocity measurable by minimizing overlap between echo trains. While it employs similar principles to continuous wave ultrasound, the sound waves are generated in a regular interval with pauses. In pulse-wave systems, the maximum velocity measurable by the instrument is determined by the pulse repetition frequency (PRF). Therefore the maximum accurate velocity, V(m), is calculated by:

Equation 2: V(m) = c^2 / [8*R*f(t)]

R is the range or distance from the transducer. This is further increased by the introduction of high pulse repetition frequency which utilizes pulse waves at two to five different ultrasound bursts to increase the sampling frequency. Other Doppler modalities include Color Doppler imaging and Power Doppler imaging. In Color Doppler imaging, the flow rates and direction of flow are depicted as a mean Doppler shift. This method is heavily dependent on the angle of the beam in relation to the vessel and thus open to significant error