**Change in the platysma with age:**

The platysma becomes thinner and less well defined with age. In youth, the muscles fibers often decussate with fibers from the opposite side. With age, the medial fibers separate. There is a weakening of the muscle and sagging, resulting in typical "platysmal bands." Ptosis of the muscle results in further laxity of neck structures.

**Relationship of the superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) to the platysma:**

Traditionally, the depiction of the platysma was as mainly a cervical muscle with most anatomy textbooks showing only a small extension of the platysma over the mandibular border onto the face, with the SMAS as a distinct facial structure. Recent anatomical and surgical findings indicated that the platysma has a significant facial component and actually extends more superiorly onto the face. The SMAS is a fibro-fatty layer in the face with distinct facial components as described by Mitz and Peyronie in 1976.

**The Jowl and the Platysma**

Mendelson et al have shown that platysmal redundancy makes up the overlying laxity seen in a jowl.

**What causes platysmal bands?**

Platysmal bands begin to appear in most people by the age of 55 years with worsening over time. There are several theories for the appearance of platysmal bands with age. These include skin laxity, loss of platysmal tone, and detachment of the platysma from deeper attachments. A more recent theory is that the platysma becomes hyperkinetic, making the platysma more prominent (in the form of bands), which secondarily cause skin laxity instead of the other way around. The current thinking is that the anterior platysma bands are created by contracture of these anterior free platysmal fibers because they are not seen in the presence of facial palsy but worsen on the non-paralysed side with time.

Based upon these studies of patients with unilateral facial paralysis, Trevidic et al. have proposed selective denervation of the platysma for the management of platysmal bands.