The pathophysiology of Dupuytren disease involves abnormal myofibroblastic growth in the hand, predominantly composed of type III collagen. Numerous cytokines are involved including interleukin-1, transforming growth factor beta-1, transforming growth factor beta-2, epidermal growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and connective tissue growth factor. Dupuytren contracture progresses through three phases: (1) proliferative, (2) involution, and (3) residual. The proliferative phase has a characteristically high concentration of immature myofibroblasts and fibroblasts arranged in a whorled pattern. In the involution phase, fibroblasts become aligned in the longitudinal axis of the hand following lines of tension. In the residual phase, relatively acellular collagen-rich chords remain causing contracture deformity.

The disorder is not always progressive and in at least 50-70% of patients, it may stabilize or even regress.

Transformation of the normal fascial bands into pathological cords is what causes unique deformities of the hand. Central cords originate from the pretendinous bands and cause skin pitting and metacarpal phalangeal (MCP) joint contracture. Natatory cords are responsible for webspace contractures. Spiral cords are the most important in the disease process and can cause proximal interphalangeal (PIP) contracture. A spiral cord originates from four main structures: (1) pretendinous band, (2) spiral band, (3) Lateral digital sheath, and (4) Grayson ligament.  Surgeons should be aware that the spiral cord causes displacement of the neurovascular bundle centrally, superficially, and proximally in the digit.

Risk factors for increased severity and recurrence of disease after treatment include male gender, onset before age 50, bilateral disease, sibling/parent involvement, or the presence of Garrod pads, Ledderhose, or Peyronies diseases.

There are also genetic factors involved in Dupuytren disease.  In a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of Dupuytren disease by Dolmans et. al.WNT4, and SRFP4. Research has further progressed and now there are 26 known loci described. Additionally, Wnt7b has been found to be expressed in Dupuytren nodules.