Quality refers to the ability of a product or service to meet its purpose or consumer need.  Quality management (QM) serves as the overarching system used to achieve and manage quality. Subsets of quality management include quality assurance (QA), the process that ensures quality, as well as quality control (QC), the manner of evaluating quality.

The quality movement began with QC, the fundamental unit, or structure within the system of QM.

QA, which started in the 1950s, emphasizes providing confidence that quality requirements will be met.

QM, the overarching umbrella that encompasses both QC and QA, refers to the administration of systems design, policies, and processes that minimize, if not eliminate, harm while optimizing patient care and outcomes.

There is a perception that QA is no longer applicable as it implies that quality is static and that once specifications are met, there is no need to strive for a better product or service, but such is not the case.

Traditionally, this has been done within a hospital by a committee that has identified a concern regarding some aspect of a specific treatment or procedure. After identifying the quality concern, standards for acceptable vs. unacceptable level of performance are set. QC measures will collect data to determine whether the minimum acceptable standard is reached or whether any action is necessary to improve overall performance (QA).

QA has become very important to the continued delivery of quality healthcare. In 1976, the National Association for Healthcare Quality (NAHQ) was founded in the United States to equip healthcare professionals and organizations with the tools to ensure excellent quality of care. NAHQ certifies individuals in the healthcare quality profession (CPHQ) and instructs healthcare professionals in essential competencies in quality assurance; this includes patient safety, patient care coordination, performance and process improvement, risk management, data analytics, population health, and compliance with standards and regulations.

Professionals train for competency in quality assurance at all levels of patient care delivery. Quality measurement efforts have even become intertwined with reimbursement within the United States healthcare system to ensure providers take certain actions. This paradigm represents a shift in payment policy towards ensuring the quality of care rather than the incredibly complex task of assigning value to care. Some examples of quality metrics include surgical wound infection rates, rate of hospital readmission within 30 days, operative mortality rates, maternal-fetal mortality, nosocomial infections, vaccination rates based on population demographic, rate of patients referred to appropriate screening tests as defined by the United States Preventative Services Task Force (USPSTF), number of diabetic patients meeting goal hemoglobin A1c <7%, and proper timing of inpatient medication administration.