Metabolism is a group of processes through which food is converted into energy to help maintain bodily function. The energy generated through biochemical pathways is usually in the form of Adenosine triphosphate (ATP). A continuous supply of ATP to meet the body's energy demands during activity and rest is fundamental to the metabolic processes that sustain life. During the resting stage, the body requires energy to support activities such as breathing, maintaining blood circulation, brain function, cellular growth and repair, basic hormonal and neurological changes, etc.

The calories needs for maintaining basal (resting phase) metabolism is called basal metabolic rate (BMR). BMR increases with a decrease in body weight to about 0.02 kcal/min, corresponding to each 1% decrease in body weight. Healthy body weight is calculated by the measurement of body mass index (BMI). It assesses the bodyweight of an individual relative to their height and hence provides a more distinctive account of body fat content than just the weight. Though BMI does not directly measure body fat, it is a useful and inexpensive screening method for clinical and research purposes. For adults, BMI is categorized into four ranges and indicates varying levels of health risks. For Asians, BMI ranges are different.

- BMI below 18.5 indicates underweight

- BMI range of 18.5-24.9 indicates a normal/ healthy state

- BMI range of 25-29.9 indicates overweight

- BMI equal to or higher than 30 is considered obese

Obesity is, however, sub-classified as class-1 obesity (BMI of 30 to < 35): class-2 obesity (BMI of 35 to < 40) and class-3 obesity (BMI of 40 or higher)

- BMI for an individual is calculated by any of the following equations:

- BMI = [weight (kg)/height (m)]

- BMI = [weight (lb)/height (in)] x 703

BMI corresponding to the normal range is associated with health compared to underweight, overweight, or obese ranges. Too little or too much body fat in underweight and overweight/obese reflects a risk of disease predisposition.

Bodyweight, as estimated by BMI and body fat distribution and composition when assuming a condition of overweight or obesity, impacts metabolic health unfavorably. Notably, some individuals can be metabolically healthy despite being overweight and are categorized as metabolically healthy obese (MHO). MHO indicates the absence of hypertension, dyslipidemia, type2 diabetes, or insulin resistance and does not present health risks.

Weight management or reduction is considered a standard regime to overcome high body mass index and reduce predisposition to metabolic, inflammatory, and infectious diseases. Managing bodyweight impinges on modulating the metabolism through diet and calorie restriction, physical activity, intermitted fasting, sleep cycles, etc. Herein, we will discuss the metabolic regulation and consequences of different weight loss regimes.

**Calorie Restriction and Dietary Modifications for Weight Loss and Metabolic Consequences**

Metabolism constitutes a multitude of biochemical reactions to derive energy from food and drink. The gain of weight usually occurs through metabolic derangement wherein food intake is more than the energy expenditure from metabolic activities, leading to accumulation of excess energy in the form of fat deposition in adipose tissues.

Many dietary regimes have been developed to substantiate weight loss as well as maintenance of lost weight. However, none presents to be universally effective. The manifestation of individual differences can be due to lifestyle choices, eating habits, and metabolic variations. According to the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force guidelines, a hypocaloric diet (calorie restriction) as a lifestyle intervention method has been proposed to induce a negative energy balance.

Besides efficiently inducing sustained and long-term weight loss, calorie restriction supports metabolic health, prevents diseases, and delays aging.**metabolic adaptation**. During the calorie restriction regime, the metabolic adaptation during rest (basal metabolism) and activity correlates with weight loss.

Calorie restriction-induced slowing down of metabolic rate also limits the mitochondrial generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS is disruptive to molecular and cellular structures and functions of the body. Diminished ROS production due to the slowing down of metabolism alleviates homeostasis and functional impairments.

Another challenge faced by overweight and obese individuals is the impairment of **metabolic flexibility**, where the body cannot switch the use of metabolic substrates depending upon the need, nutrient availability, and environmental cues.

Recently, intermittent fasting, also known as time-restricted feeding, has been somewhat effective in weight loss. Intermittent fasting is proposed to affect human circadian rhythms, sleep patterns, lifestyle behaviors, and intestinal microflora.

The alternating fasting and feeding cycles stimulate specific biochemical reprogramming directed to utilize stored energy during the fasting periods termed fasting physiology. It is conjectured that repair mechanisms integral to fasting-refeeding are optimally active during the fasting period. It is thus imperative that periodic and intermittent fasting may trigger factors that help enhance the general health of the individuals. Experimental approaches have demonstrated that combining calorie restriction with intermitted fasting may facilitate fasting physiology to be triggered sooner compared to the regime of consuming high calories.

**Metabolic Effects of Weight Loss Through Physical Activity and Exercise Training**

Moderate to intense physical activities daily effectively maintain body structure and weight after healthy weight has been achieved. Many weight maintenance regimes follow exercise and resistance training as mainstream mechanisms towards controlling unhealthy weight regain. Exercise stimulates a negative energy balance and induces a restructuring of body fat.

Skeletal muscle contraction constitutes most substrate channelizing mechanisms during exercise to generate a continual supply of ATP. Since muscle reserves for ATP are small, maintaining the ATP resynthesis rates to match muscle contraction is necessary. Reducing equivalents to support ATP synthesis are obtained from carbohydrates and fat metabolism. This increases the phosphocreatine and glycogen breakdown, thus activating both aerobic and anaerobic respiratory pathways.

Exercise-mediated weight loss and maintenance is considered a prime mechanism in sports physiology to maintain low body fat and retaining lean mass, facilitating an optimized body composition.

**Pharmacological and Surgical Intervention For Weight Loss and Metabolic Effects**

Although lifestyle changes, dietary modulations, and physical restraint training are the fundamental measures of weight loss, pharmacological and surgical interventions are now becoming common for therapeutic purposes. However, these interventions are limited by their side effects, surgical risks, and efficacy.

Recent advancements in technologies and metabolomics have helped our understanding of the mechanistic pathways and metabolites that are mediators of an increase in BMI and weight gain. However, only five drug therapies have been approved for obesity treatment thus far.

Recently blood metabolic signatures of adiposity associated with lifestyle factors have been identified. Hence, drug design and repurposing of drugs for weight management have taken a faster pace. The drugs used in the weight loss regime, such as selective inhibitors of pancreatic lipase, stimulators of noradrenaline release leading to the suppression of appetite m, combination drugs to enhance satiety by increasing energy expenditure, thus reducing food intake, have shown an overall success in weight management.

**Metabolic Effectors In Weight Management**

Metabolic pathways that play a significant role in weight regain or the maintenance of the lost weight can be divided into intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Extrinsic factors span the lifestyle and psychosocial parameters, while intrinsic factors focus on energy balance and functional resistance to weight loss. Both the processes are interconnected through complex metabolic networks. Accordingly, weight loss in individuals with high baseline fat mass progresses to steady maintenance of the lost weight. High-fat concentrations lead to loss of fat weight without stress to the adipocytes or reduction of fat-free mass. Continued weight loss management requires effective regimes spanning both intrinsic and extrinsic factors, i.e., limited energy intake, exercise, and a fat-free composition of the diet, proper sleep, besides genetic variability. The final goal is to prevent weight regain by maintaining minimum cellular stress and accumulation of fat. The primary weight gain and weight regain are different metabolic processes. Hence, preventing weight recidivism requires controlling a set of metabolic indices different from those targeted during initial weight loss. Sustaining weight loss underlies diverse homeostatic metabolic adaptations through the modulation of energy expenditure that improves metabolic efficiency. However, it leads to an increase in the signals for energy intake.

**Maintaining Energy Balance Through Fat-free Mass and Hormone Regulation**

The percentage of body fat lost during calorie restriction negatively correlates with the rate of weight regain, which depends on the baseline BMR. Thus, higher initial BMR is usually helpful in successful weight maintenance after weight loss.

Other major regulators of weight maintenance after weight loss are metabolic hormones that modulate the feelings of hunger and satiety, such as leptin, insulin, ghrelin, etc.

Similarly, a higher baseline concentration of ghrelin hormone is also associated with improved weight loss. In addition, alteration in plasma ghrelin concentration is related to increased satiety. However, unlike leptin, ghrelin doesn’t seem to have a long-term effect on body weight maintenance. Finally, the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis seems to be the central modulator for weight maintenance through the influence of leptin as well as other regulatory metabolic hormones.

Other metabolic hormones, namely, peptide YY (PYY), gastric inhibitory peptide, GLP1, amylin, pancreatic polypeptide, and cholecystokinin (CCK), are sporadically shown to regulate hunger and satiety signals. The concentrations of hormones PYY and CCK were shown to reflect initial weight loss levels even after 40% weight gain, thus indicating a negative correlation to weight maintenance after weight loss.

**Physiologic and Cellular Regulation of Weight Maintenance**

The plasma concentration of metabolites reflects the physiological activities of tissues and cells. Plasma concentration of some metabolites is observed to vary over time during and after the weight loss and maintenance process, indicating metabolic adaptation response.

The correlation of plasma leptin, baseline BMI, and initial fat mass with a risk for weight regain points to an active role of the adipocytes. After losing fat, adipocytes experience cellular stress. The cells become smaller in size upon fat loss affecting the structure-function axis of adipocytes.

Adipocytes regulated energy requirement also correlates with a drop in leptin concentrations. Subsequently, many studies have supported that fast initial weight loss results in a more significant amount of lost weight but induces cellular stress and higher reversal. However, a gradual initial weight loss substantiates metabolic adaptability of adipocytes and a greater prospect for long-term weight maintenance.