Weight changes, metabolic changes, and sedation are significant concerns with risperidone. Risperidone may produce extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS), including acute dystonia, akathisia, tardive dyskinesia (TD), and parkinsonian features. Acute/early EPS can occur at the beginning of treatment or when the dose is adjusted. Late-onset EPS (tardive dyskinesia) typically results from chronic treatment. Akathisia is a feeling of restlessness and may manifest as the patient pacing. Acute dystonia includes muscle spasms that result in abnormal postures and typically affect the head and neck. Parkinsonian features include skeletal muscle rigidity (often described as "cogwheel rigidity"), tremor, shuffling gait, and bradykinesia. Movements of the limbs, torso, neck, and head (commonly involving the tongue and lips) characterize tardive dyskinesia. This may also appear as facial grimacing or oculogyric crisis. EPS is thought to be due to D2 blockade in the nigrostriatal pathway. Since acute EPS symptoms often are improved with the cessation of the medication, these side effects are a major cause of noncompliance with treatment. Although these side effects are thought to be reversible, the duration of parkinsonian features after discontinuation of the medication can vary. Tardive dyskinesia, however, will likely persist after the medication is discontinued and may be permanent. In addition to discontinuation of the antipsychotic, pharmacologic treatments are available that may help with certain extrapyramidal symptoms.

Antagonism of D2 receptors in the tuberoinfundibular pathway is believed to precipitate a rise in prolactin level. The resulting hyperprolactinemia can precipitate sexual dysfunction, which has a prevalence of 45 to 80 percent among males and 30% to 80% among females taking this medication. Further, the elevated prolactin can contribute to decreased libido, impaired arousal, and difficulty attaining orgasm. Sexual side effects may also be precipitated by risperidone's action at adrenergic (alpha 1, alpha 2) and histamine (H2) receptors. Gynecomastia, galactorrhea, and priapism have been reported in male patients, while galactorrhea and amenorrhea have been reported in female patients. It is important to note that children may be more susceptible to certain susceptible to some side effects and require careful monitoring.

Serious side effects of antipsychotic medications (like risperidone) can include neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). Although the pathogenesis of NMS is not clear, it is a life-threatening condition that can manifest with altered mental status, fever, "lead pipe" rigidity, and autonomic instability, including hypertension, tachypnea, and tachycardia. The use of risperidone has also been linked to a higher probability of cerebrovascular events in elderly patients with dementia, leading to an FDA warning about using this medication in the context of dementia-related psychosis. Studies have even shown an increase in all-cause mortality among the elderly with dementia who are on this medication.