In SBE, it is essential to employ a pool of SPs that demographically represents the population it serves. To achieve cultural competence learning objectives, the critical first step for an SP program is to recruit, develop, and maintain a diverse SP population.

SBE programs must carefully screen applicants within their program with background checks and contracts, for the confidentiality of learners, peer, and individual performance. SP programs are encouraged to consult the respective Human Resource office to aide with effective recruiting methods. Social media platforms, online job posting services, and the development of a program webpage are additional resources that can aide in SP recruitment.

Should an SP training program have the benefit of a designated SP Coordinator, this reduces the faculty and staff workload to manage and train SPs in the respective academic and clinical environments. The relationship between an SP Coordinator and faculty or staff serves to provide additional consistency with simulation curriculum development within and among disciplines to deliver high-quality simulation to all healthcare learners for the dynamic healthcare environment.

Recruitment

An extensive recruitment vetting process is required to ensure that an SP pool is comprised of individuals who will deliver the highest quality learner experience. Such factors include fidelity of performance, dynamic verbal communication skills, the ability to recall case-specific details, and well-timed improvisational skills. After reviewing the application, an initial phone screening should follow to gauge the general level of interest. An initial phone screening provides an opportunity to explain the role of an SP for those who may have little familiarity with the concept. This approach also allows the SP coordinator to learn more about a candidate’s understanding of the role and a quick snapshot of their qualifying skill set. At this time, unusual job requirements may be disclosed, such as audio and video recording, or a willingness for learners to complete a physical examination that may include being partially disrobed. Moreover, there is the opportunity to share information that can be extended to other social or professional circles, even if the phone screening did not result in a qualifying applicant.

Process

Candidates that pass the initial phone screening should then be invited to attend an intensive group information session and participate in a solo or joint audition with other candidates. Developing and hosting such an information session requires an SP coordinator who possesses a sound understanding of many health profession education curriculums and corresponding learning objectives. Potential SPs can be evaluated through portrayal exercises, vignette assignments, and improvisational skills assessment. Employing current, seasoned SPs familiar with program structure to assist with evaluation can be an added advantage, as they provide a unique assessment for the potential fit as an SP. The information session also provides an opportunity to observe an SP’s ability to integrate therapeutic communication skills and accept verbal feedback.