The goals of evaluating a patient with subacute combined degeneration are as follows:

1. Identify hematological abnormalities of cobalamin deficiency:

A complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear help to identify hematological abnormalities due to cobalamin deficiency such as macrocytosis, anemia, and hyper segmented neutrophils. Macrocytosis, which is defined as mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of more than 100 fL, may occur without anemia. However, an MCV greater than 115 fl is considered more specific for B12 deficiency and helps differentiate it from other causes of macrocytosis. Furthermore, a normal MCV does not rule out B12 deficiency.

2. Confirm B12 deficiency:

**A) Serum B12 levels**

Chemiluminescence assay is the most commonly used assay to measure serum B12. It has a sensitivity of 95 % and a specificity of ≤80 % in patients with symptoms of deficiency. Generally, B12 levels >300 pg/mL are considered normal. Levels between 200 and 300 pg/mL are borderline, and <200 pg/ml are low and are considered deficient. However, serum B12 levels should be interpreted cautiously due to several reasons:

There are several assays to measure serum B12 levels. Therefore, reference ranges vary.

- Serum B12 level is not a reliable marker for physiological stores. Most B12 measurement assays only measure the protein-bound form of B12, which is unavailable to tissues. A deficiency is therefore possible with borderline or normal serum B12 levels and requires measurement of metabolite levels. A meta-analysis showed that one-third of patients with subacute combined degeneration have normal or high serum B12 levels.

- The test has low sensitivity in patients with autoimmune gastritis as anti intrinsic factor antibodies interfere with chemiluminescence B12 assays.

- Some patients have falsely low serum B12 levels, although they are not deficient. This can occur due to multiple myeloma, HIV, pregnancy, or due to the use of oral contraceptives.

**B) Metabolite Levels**

Methylmalonic acid (MMA) and homocysteine are intermediates of cobalamin metabolism, and their elevation is used to confirm B12 deficiency. Measuring MMA and homocysteine is indicated when neurological findings of B12 deficiency are present, but serum B12 levels are either normal or borderline. The normal range for methylmalonic acid is from 70 to 270 nmol/L and for homocysteine from 5 to 15 micromol/L. Methylmalonic acid is considered a more accurate marker of deficiency than B12 levels. Methylmalonic acid is also a more specific marker of B12 deficiency compared to homocysteine. While homocysteine can be elevated in folate and B12 deficiency, methylmalonic acid is elevated only in B12 deficiency. Therefore, an elevation of both methylmalonic acid and homocysteine suggests B12 deficiency. Elevation of homocysteine with normal methylmalonic acid indicates folate deficiency. It is important to note that methylmalonic acid may be elevated in other conditions such as renal failure and methylmalonic aciduria.

**C) Folate Levels**

Folate deficiency can mimic the hematological picture of cobalamin deficiency. Therefore, serum folate levels should also be measured, especially in patients with alcohol use, a folate-deficient diet, and abnormal gastrointestinal anatomy or function.

3. Determine the cause of cobalamin deficiency:

Patients who are found to have B12 deficiency without an obvious cause should undergo testing for autoantibodies to detect pernicious anemia. Anti-intrinsic factor antibody measurement has low sensitivity but high specificity and can, therefore, be used to confirm the diagnosis of pernicious anemia.

4. Identify demyelinating lesions:

In the early stages of the disease, demyelination is observed in the spine MRI as bilateral paired regions of T2 hyperintensity in the dorsal columns of the cervical and upper thoracic spinal cord. This finding is often referred to as the “Inverted V” or “Inverted rabbit ears” sign. In later stages, T2 hyperintensity may also be seen in the lateral columns of the spinal cord. A decreased T1-weighted signal and contrast enhancement of the same regions may also be observed. Prompt treatment can improve signal abnormalities seen on the MRI.