# Continuing Education Activity

Bronchopleural fistula (BPF) is a sinus tract between the main stem, lobar, or segmental bronchus and the pleural space. Treatment for BPF ranges from medical management to bronchoscopic procedures for critically ill patients and surgical intervention for those deemed at the highest risk. This activity describes the epidemiology, pathophysiology, causes, evaluation, and management of bronchopleural fistula. It explains the role of an interprofessional team in the evaluation and management of patients with bronchopleural fistula.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the risk factors for bronchopleural fistulas.
- Outline the diagnostic techniques of patients with bronchopleural fistulas.
- Explain the conservative and invasive treatment options for the management of patients with bronchopleural fistulas.
- Review the interplay among the interprofessional team in diagnosing, treating, and rehabilitation of patients with bronchopleural fistula.

# Introduction

Bronchopleural fistula (BPF) is a sinus tract between the main stem, lobar, or segmental bronchus and the pleural space. It can be a potentially catastrophic complication following pneumonectomy or other pulmonary resection. Morbidity ranges between 25% and 71%, and diagnosis and management is often a challenge for physicians.

Treatment for BPF ranges from medical management to bronchoscopic procedures for critically ill patients and surgical intervention for those deemed at the highest risk. There is a lack of consensus regarding optimal management due to varying therapeutic success. Varoli et al. described the time of onset following surgical intervention to classify fistulas as early (1 to 7 days), intermediate (8 to 30 days), or late (more than 30 days).

# Etiology

The most common risk factors associated with bronchopleural fistula (BPF) in the postoperative setting include right-sided pneumonectomy and right lower lobectomy. The fistula is commonly found on the stump beside the residual lobe due to the increased risk of ischemic necrosis or the pooling of secretions leading to bacterial overgrowth and colonization. The increased risk of BPF associated with right pneumonectomy is due to the more extensive resection required.

Other causes include:

- Chemotherapy and radiation therapy

- Lobectomy-right, bi-lobectomy, and lower lobectomy

- Diabetes mellitus

- Heavy smoking and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

- Bullous lung disease

- Spontaneous pneumothorax or other parenchymal abnormalities

- Low nutritional status or poor wound healing

- Previous ipsilateral thoracotomy

- A large diameter bronchial stump (greater than 25 mm)

- Extensive lymph node dissection

- Age older than 60 years

- Fever

- Corticosteroid use

- Leukocytosis

- Tracheostomy

- Bronchoscopy for sputum suctioning/mucous

- Residual tumor in the resection margins

- Tightness of the individual sutures

- Excessive peribronchial and paratracheal dissection

- Prolonged postoperative mechanical ventilation

- Tuberculosis

- Hemophilus influenza

- Streptococcus viridans

- Staphylococcus aureus

- Pseudomonas aeruginosa

- Klebsiella pneumoniae

- Pneumococcus

- Non-hemolytic streptococcus

- Aspergillus

- Histoplasma capsulatum

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease with Barrett esophagus

- Boerhaave syndrome

- Broncholithiasis

- Lung cancer

- Thyroid cancer

- Esophageal cancer

- Lymphomas

- Thoracic trauma with tracheobronchial tree disruption

- Bougie intubation

- Necrotizing lung disease associated with radiation or chemotherapy

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS): Especially in patients requiring ventilation with high airway pressures

- Ventilator-induced barotrauma

- Overzealous manual ventilation

- Central line placement

# Epidemiology

Bronchopleural fistula (BPF) is most commonly encountered after lung resection surgery (pneumonectomy, lobectomy, segmentectomy), with a frequency ranging from 4.5% to 20% after pneumonectomy and 0.5% to 1% after lobectomy.

# Pathophysiology

Postoperative bronchopleural fistula (BPF) may be classified as acute, subacute, and chronic. The acute form is caused by surgical dehiscence and requires prompt surgical intervention. When acute, BPF can be life-threatening due to tension pneumothorax or asphyxiation from pulmonary flooding. Patients present with sudden appearance of dyspnea, hypotension, subcutaneous emphysema, cough with expectoration of purulent fluid, tracheal or mediastinal shift, persistent air leak, and a reduction or disappearance of pleural effusion on the chest radiograph. The subacute and chronic forms are primarily related to infection and are often seen in immunocompromised or debilitated patients with multiple comorbidities. The subacute presentation is more insidious and is characterized by wasting, malaise, and fever. The chronic form is associated with an infectious process and fibrosis of the pleural space.

A BPF can occur any time during the postoperative period but more often occurs within 8 to 12 days after surgery. If seen within the first four postoperative days, the BPF is likely secondary to a mechanical failure of bronchial stump closure and requires reexploration. A BPF may also occur after suppurative pneumonia, massive pulmonary infarction, or spontaneously. Empyema may occur alone or may be associated with a BPF. A BPF can occur without associated empyema, and the fluid in the pleural space in these cases is sterile. Displacement of the mediastinum to the opposite side occurs because of air on the operative side. Clearing of fluid from the pleural space and coughing up of fluid and blood suggest a BPF. The sudden reappearance of air in an obliterated space suggests either a BPF or a gas-forming infectious process. If a fistula appears in nonsurgical cases or in delayed postoperative period, the diagnosis should be suspected when fever, productive cough, and new or increasing air-fluid levels are seen on the chest radiograph in the pleural space. Esophagotracheal fistulas are associated with coughing and dyspnea during eating and drinking.

# History and Physical

Patients with bronchopleural fistula (BPF) can present with symptoms that range from acute symptoms of tension pneumothorax to subacute symptoms of empyema. Most patients present in the first two weeks following lung resection. BPF should be suspected in the postoperative lung resection patient who presents with sudden onset of dyspnea, chest pain, hemodynamic instability, and subcutaneous emphysema. Symptoms may be less abrupt in those in whom the chest tube is still in place, and a large persistent or new air leak through the chest tube drainage system may be the only sign present.

Patients who present in the late postoperative period (more than 14 days), or patients with BPF from other causes including infection or malignancy, present with symptoms and signs of empyema. These include fever, malaise, muscle wasting, cough with purulent sputum, reduced air entry, and dullness to percussion on the affected side. When the BPF is associated with empyema that is not adequately drained, the infection can erode through the chest wall, and a pleurocutaneous opening with drainage of mucopurulent material may be seen; it is known as empyema necessitans.

# Evaluation

Persistent air leak after pulmonary injury may represent either disruption of a bronchus or rupture of an overdistended alveolus. Several methods have been used to diagnose bronchopleural fistulas (BPFs), including the instillation of methylene blue into the pleural space and bronchography.

Radiological features that suggest the presence or the development of a BPF include an increase in the intrapleural airspace, the appearance of a new air-fluid level, changes in an already present air-fluid level, development of tension pneumothorax, and a drop in the air-fluid level exceeding 2 cm.

Using standard and thin section non-contrast CT scans, Westcott and Volpe. could demonstrate a fistula in 10 out of 20 patients.

Several authors have tried to localize a BPF using radiolabeled aerosol inhalation with planar and single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) imaging.

Computed tomography bronchography (CTB) has been utilized in the diagnosis of a difficult BPF. Following bronchoscopy, Sarkar et al. injected 20 to 30 mL of a water-based nonionic low osmolar iodinated contrast medium iohexol at the suspected fistula site either through a catheter or directly through the working channel of the bronchoscope.

# Treatment / Management

First-line therapy should address any immediate, life-threatening conditions, for example, endobronchial contamination, pulmonary flooding, and tension pneumothorax. Since most bronchopleural fistulas (BPFs) occur early in the postoperative period and are not infected, patients can undergo surgical repair with excellent success. Bronchoscopic approaches have variable success rates and are appropriate for those who are not suitable for surgical intervention.

The patient should be placed with the affected side dependent, and adequate pleural drainage is performed. The first intervention for BPF should be drainage of air and fluid from the pleural space by chest tube thoracostomy. Pleural fluid should be sent for complete blood cell count (CBC), pH, total protein, lactate dehydrogenase, glucose, cytology, triglycerides, gram stain, and culture to assess for pleural infection. Although integral for drainage, the chest tube itself can function as a foreign body and predispose to infection at the insertion site and in the pleural space. In patients who are mechanically ventilated, the chest tube can be used to add positive intrapleural pressure during the expiratory phase or occlusion during the inspiratory phase. These interventions aim to decrease the air leak during expiration to maintain positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and to decrease BPF flow during inspiration. The chest tube can also be used to apply sclerosing agents, such as talc and bleomycin, to promote pleurodesis. Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics against gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic microorganisms should be given to all patients until gram stain, cultures, and sensitivities are available. Postural drainage can be initiated after specimens have been obtained, as long as a patient can expectorate, chest cavity, and chest tube drainage is less than 30 mL per day, and there is concomitant pleural irrigation.

Suture reclosure of the bronchial stump with vascularized flap coverage is curative for the fistula presenting acutely, normally less than two weeks after surgery.

The disease course is more complicated for patients with BPF who are mechanically ventilated. Maintaining airway pressures at or below the critical opening pressure of the fistula to promote healing, but yet provide adequate alveolar ventilation for sufficient gas exchange can present a significant challenge. Air-leaks through bronchopleural fistulae may range from less than 1 to 16 L per minute. Adverse effects of BPF in mechanically-ventilated patients include incomplete lung expansion, loss of effective tidal volume, or positive end-expiratory pressure, inability to remove carbon dioxide, and prolonged ventilatory support. The large air leak via BPF can also result in auto-triggering of the ventilator, leading to severe hyperventilation and inappropriately large doses of sedatives and/or neuromuscular blockers administered to reduce spontaneous respiration.

Other techniques described to decrease an air leak include independent lung ventilation with two ventilators, differential lung ventilation, and high-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV).

Methods to limit airflow across BPFs include direct closure, decortication, thoracoplasty, omental or muscle transposition, and completion pneumonectomy.

Patients with BPF from causes other than lung resection, including malignancy and infection, are treated with bronchoscopic methods because the bronchial stump is affected by disease, and stump revision is not feasible. Bronchoscopic management is primarily useful for temporary fistula closure but can be used as a bridge to curative surgery if the underlying cause is reversible. A flexible bronchoscope provides superior and precise access to a greater portion of the bronchial tree than the rigid bronchoscope. Outcomes are variable with rates of successful closure ranging from 30% to 80%.

In patients with BPFs equal to 8 mm, fistula closure with airway stents, coils, or Amplatzer devices is a viable option. The largest case series of 31 patients with BPF reported that the Amplatzer device was effective in 96% of cases, lasting for up to 18 months.

There are several case series and reports of patients with BPF who were treated with occlusive materials, none of which have been compared. Bronchoscopic placement of glutaraldehyde sterilized lead shot, gel foam and tetracycline, autologous blood patch, fibrin glue, gelatin-resorcinol mixture, oxidized regenerated cellulose, albumin-glutaraldehyde tissue adhesive, cryoprecipitate fibrin glue and NN-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate has been attempted at the fistula site.

The 2 component fibrin cryoprecipitate glue (calcium gluconate and cryoprecipitate along with topical thrombin [1000 IU/mL]) is delivered at the fistula site through a double lumen catheter inserted into the operative channel of the bronchoscope, creating a fibrin clot that occludes the fistula. Small BPFs can be occluded using an endobronchial injection of ethanol, polidocanol, and tetracycline followed by autologous blood.

Although not often utilized, argon plasma coagulation and neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser have been described for patients with small BPFs. Transplanted bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and dehydrated amniotic membrane allograft have been reported as successful in BPF closure.

Patients should be monitored after fistula closure for clinical symptoms of recurrence, chest tube output of air, and with imaging of the chest. Patients with a sealed fistula should not have an air leak, and imaging should demonstrate stability or resolution of air in the pleural space. Repeat bronchoscopy is not routine and only performed if fistula recurrence or a complication is suspected. If valves or stents are used, a chest CT scan and bronchoscopy are repeated at six weeks to assess for complications. For patients who fail surgical or bronchoscopic intervention, options include repeat surgery, an alternate bronchoscopic method, or in rare cases, an open window thoracostomy such as Eloesser flap thoracostomy or a Claggett window.

# Differential Diagnosis

In patients who have had a pneumonectomy, acute findings of tension pneumothorax are essentially pathognomonic for bronchopleural fistula (BPF). Although other conditions such as postoperative tension chylothorax or hemorrhage into the pleural space may also cause the findings of tension pneumothorax, the affected hemithorax should fill with fluid rather than air. Tension pneumothorax may also be due to a displaced or obstructed chest tube; ensuring a patent chest tube while imaging is being obtained may distinguish this phenomenon from true BPF. In patients who present with empyema, BPF is likely if the effusion contains air, and there is an air leak after chest tube placement. The culture of the effusion may help distinguish anaerobic infection from BPF. Bronchoscopic findings of a bronchial defect will distinguish BPF from other etiologies.

# Prognosis

A BPF can cause significant morbidity, prolonged hospitalization, and mortality. Mortality rates vary between 18% to 67%.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- BPF is most commonly encountered after pulmonary resection (pneumonectomy, lobectomy, segmentectomy) with a frequency ranging from 4.5% to 20% after pneumonectomy and 0.5% to 1% after lobectomy.

- Patients with BPF can present with symptoms that range from acute symptoms of tension pneumothorax to subacute symptoms of empyema or a new or persistent air leak via a chest tube.

- Clinical, radiographic, and bronchoscopic findings that confirm an air leak from a bronchus to the pleural space are used to diagnose a BPF.

- BPFs do not typically spontaneously undergo closure and almost always require some surgical or bronchoscopic intervention.

- All patients with a BPF should have a chest tube placed to drain air. In cases of an empyema, infected pleural fluid should be drained, and antibiotics should be initiated. In all cases, a patient's comorbidities and nutritional status should be optimized.

- For most postoperative lung resection patients with BPF who are good surgical candidates, surgical repair is a definitive therapy with excellent success if spontaneous closure is unlikely.

- Bronchoscopic fistula closure is appropriate for patients with BPF who are poor surgical candidates, those who need a bridge to surgery, or patients with BPF due to advanced malignancy.

- Bronchoscopic approaches have variable success rates but are typically more successful in those with small fistulas of less than 8 mm.

- Following fistula closure, patients should be monitored for clinical symptoms of recurrence with chest tube output and chest imaging.

- For patients who fail surgical or bronchoscopic intervention, options include repeat surgery, an alternate bronchoscopic method, or an open window thoracostomy such as Eloesser flap thoracostomy or a Claggett window.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

BPF is one of the most severe complications after thoracic surgery, and no effective prophylactic procedure is available. Evidence for buttressing the bronchial stump leading to a reduction in the incidence of a bronchopleural fistula is conflicting. Level 1b evidence exists that an intercostal flap reduces the risk of BPF in people with diabetes. Thoracic surgeons should consider coverage of the bronchial stump by an intercostal muscle pedicle flap in patients at high risk of BPF.

In a prospective randomized controlled trial of pneumonectomy patients with diabetes mellitus, Sfyridis et al. reported that intercostal muscle flap coverage was effective.

Deschamps et al. analyzed 713 pneumonectomy patients.

An interprofessional team of the thoracic surgeon, intensivist, and critical care nurse will improve outcomes. Providers must be vigilant for signs and symptoms described above. Rapid recognition and treatment will decrease mortality and morbidity. Specialty trained nurses monitor patients and report status changes back to the team. [Level 5]