The appropriate treatment for DTC is surgery followed with or without radioactive iodine. The necessity and the amount of radioactive iodine to be administered are determined on an individual basis as per the risk category of the patient and institutional protocol. Assessing the patient risk, the need for radioiodine therapy, determining the dose, administering the dose, maintaining radiation safety protocol, and making sure the patient is compliant with the protocol requires an interprofessional team approach including primary care clinician, endocrinologist, pathologist, Nuclear Medicine physician, radiopharmacy staff, nurses, technologists, and radiation safety officer.

An evidence-based integrated management approach brings superior results. The interprofessional team should educate the patient about the risks and benefits of RAI treatment. The patient should be informed of the importance of following a low iodine diet before therapy.

There should be efficient provider-patient communication, and giving proper radiation safety instructions to the patient is essential. Small children or pregnant partners should not accompany the patient while arriving for treatment. Female patients of reproductive age should have a negative serum pregnancy test to proceed with RAI treatment. The patient should be made aware of the possible short and long-term side effects of RAI treatment.

Having checklists can help explain to the patient all aspects of therapy, thus attaining better clinical outcomes and reducing radiation exposure to the public. For the first few days after RAI therapy, the patient should keep at least 3 feet from others, especially pregnant females and children. Patients should be advised of the need for effective contraception for 6 to 12 months following RAI therapy.

Routine follow-up thyroglobulin and TSH levels and, if required, radioactive iodine diagnostic whole-body scans are to be done in post-treatment thyroid cancer patients. Efficient communication and collaboration between the different interprofessional team members are necessary for a better outcome. [Level 5]