Management of cat scratch disease depends on the clinical presentation of the disease. Patients who present with milder presentations such as lymphadenopathy and fever were usually not placed on an antimicrobial regimen because of the self-limiting nature of the disease.

However, studies have shown that the use of a single antimicrobial regimen will reduce the duration of the symptoms significantly. The antimicrobial agents commonly used are azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and rifampin.

For patients with extensive lymphadenopathy, oral azithromycin at 500 mg on the first day and 250 mg on days 2 to 5.

For retinitis, oral Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 4 to 6 weeks and oral rifampin 300 mg twice daily for 4 to 6 weeks

Trench fever or chronic bacteremia with B. quintana can be treated with oral Doxycycline at 200 mg once daily for 4 weeks and intravenous gentamicin 3 mg/kg for 2 weeks.

Bacillary angiomatosis and Peliosis Hepatis treated with oral erythromycin 500 mg four times daily for 3 to 4 months

Documented Bartonella culture-positive endocarditis should be treated with oral Doxycycline 100 mg for 6 weeks and intravenous gentamicin at 3 mg/kg/day for 14 days.

Recommended treatment for neuroretinitis and for CNS involvement is a combination of oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily and rifampin 300mg twice daily.

The management of Oroya fever includes the use of ciprofloxacin as the primary choice with chloramphenicol, ceftriaxone being alternative choice that are very effective. Verruga peruana is managed with azithromycin primarily with rifampin, ciprofloxacin, and chloramphenicol being the preferred alternatives.