# Continuing Education Activity

Lipoid proteinosis is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by hyaline-like deposits in the skin, mucous membranes, and other parts of the body. It is caused by a mutation in the extracellular matrix 1 (ECM1) gene. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of lipoid proteinosis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the etiology of lipoid proteinosis. 
- Describe the most common physical exam findings in patients with lipoid proteinosis.
- Outline the epidemiology of lipoid proteinosis.
- Review some interprofessional team strategies that the healthcare team can use to improve outcomes in patients with lipoid proteinosis.

# Introduction

Urbach and Wiethe first described lipoid Proteinosis (LP) (hyalinosis cutis et mucosae) in 1929.

# Etiology

LP is caused by a homozygous or compound heterozygous loss-of-function mutation in the extracellular matrix protein 1 (ECM1) gene located on chromosome 1q21.

LP is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Patients often have affected family members, and some are children of consanguineous parents.

# Epidemiology

LP occurs worldwide but is rare, with only about 400 cases reported in the medical literature.

# Pathophysiology

ECM1 is a glycoprotein that plays various extracutaneous roles, including regulation of endochondral bone and cartilage formation, endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis, and dendritic cell differentiation.

In the skin, ECM1 interacts with basement membrane-specific heparan sulfate proteoglycan core protein (HSPG), also known as perlecan, and other proteins important for ECM structure and tissue remodeling like matrix metalloproteinase-9, fibulin-3, and laminin 332.

Mutations within the ECM1 gene lead to compromised protein-protein interactions and disrupted tissue homeostasis.

# Histopathology

Histologically, LP is characterized by hyaline-like periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive, diastase-resistant deposits within the papillary dermis and at the dermal-epidermal junction (DEJ).

Immunolabeling can be a useful diagnostic tool, especially early in the disease course. Reduced ECM1 protein in conjunction with characteristic clinical findings should heighten suspicion for LP.

# History and Physical

In almost all affected individuals, the earliest manifestation is a weak or hoarse cry in early life due to hyaline-like deposits on the vocal cords.

Cutaneous abnormalities also present early in the disease course, usually beginning with vesicles or bullae and hemorrhagic crusts on sites of friction or trauma, most notably the face and around the mouth.

Other notable features of LP reflect the infiltrating hyaline-like material throughout the mouth and upper aerodigestive tract. Cobblestone appearance of the oral mucosa, yellow lip nodules, lip eversion, and vegetative lesions and fissures at the lateral commissures can be seen in patients with extensive disease.

As a result of deposits obstructing Stenson’s duct and secondary xerostomia, patients with LP are prone to frequent upper respiratory tract infections, recurrent parotitis, and dental caries. The submandibular gland can become similarly obstructed and inflamed.

Neurologic manifestations of LP can be severe, including epilepsy, dystonia, progressive neuropsychiatric disorders (memory loss and other cognitive impairment, behavioral changes, hallucination, schizophreniform illness), and spontaneous central nervous system (CNS) hemorrhage.

Bilateral, symmetric comma-shaped calcification of the amygdala is a pathognomonic radiologic finding. Calcification has also been reported in the hippocampus, basal ganglia, parahippocampal gyrus, uncinate gyrus, striatum, pineal gland, and perirhinal and parietal cortices.

One study of 10 patients with LP radiographically identified six with amygdaloid complex calcification and degeneration and three with decreased perfusion to the medial temporal lobe, suspicious for underlying calcification. Though these nine patients did not differ from healthy controls for cognitive tasks (memory, attention, executive function), they differed from recognizing facial expression, emotional processing, and odor-associative learning and recognition.

Focal seizures were the most common subtype, as demonstrated by video electroencephalography. Patients with certain mutations tended to be resistant to anti-epileptic therapy while others attained seizure-control with levetiracetam and clobazam.

Finally, there have been rare reports of hyaline-like deposits throughout the digestive tract, some of which regressed with time.

# Evaluation

Because of its autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, patients with LP should be asked about family members with similar symptoms and consanguinity. Synthesis of family history, clinical exam, and histopathologic findings often raise suspicion for LP, though definitive diagnosis can only be made upon identifying an ECM1 mutation.

An otolaryngologist should evaluate patients to assess airway involvement and identify any degree of obstruction. Similarly, patients with neurologic or neuropsychiatric symptoms merit evaluation and follow-up with a neurologist and psychiatrist. Neuroimaging may become necessary to identify involved brain regions.

Other evaluations will depend on disease manifestations but should include frequent dental, dermatologic, and ophthalmic evaluation.

# Treatment / Management

There are been no randomized trials to establish a standard of care for LP. Treatment plans should be individualized based on manifestations of disease and desire for improved cosmetic outcomes.

Systemic retinoids such as acitretin or etretinate may be effective in treating cutaneous and laryngeal lesions by decreasing the amount of hyaline-like deposits within the dermis.

There is conflicting evidence about the efficacy of long-term oral dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for the treatment of cutaneous lesions and hoarseness.

For patients with vocal cord involvement and impaired phonation, microlaryngoscopy and carbon dioxide (CO) laser procedures can be quite successful.

To minimize the appearance of scars and moniliform blepharosis, cosmetic procedures such as CO laser, dermabrasion, blepharoplasty, and erbium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet ablative laser have been employed.

Management of neurologic and psychiatric manifestations of LP should be tailored to each individual. Certain anti-epileptic medications can minimize seizure frequency and severity. Anti-psychotic medication can help manage behavioral changes and psychosis.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses may differ between patients. Possible differential diagnoses include:

**Cutaneous lesions:**

- Herpes simplex infection

- Impetigo

- Epidermolysis bullosa

- Erythropoietic protoporphyria

- Lichen myxedematosus

- Systemic amyloidosis

- Nodular localized cutaneous amyloidosis

- Colloid milium

- Hyalinosis

- Xanthomas

- Scleromyxedema

- Leprosy

- Hydroa vacciniforme

- Incontinentia pigmenti

**Hoarseness:**

- Laryngitis

- Laryngotracheitis

- Laryngotracheobronchitis

- Vocal cord nodules

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease

- Vocal cord polyps

- Laryngeal hemangiomas

- Laryngeal cysts

- Vocal cord paralysis

- Vocal cord hypertrophy

**Enlarged tongue:**

- Systemic amyloidosis

- Hypothyroidism (congenital)

- Myxedema

- Acromegaly

**Mesial temporal lobe calcification:**

- Fahr’s disease

- Calcified glioma

- Raine syndrome

- Healed herpes encephalitis

- Dystonia

# Prognosis

LP typically runs a benign but progressive course that is compatible with a normal lifespan. Respiratory obstruction and central nervous system involvement, however, can be life-threatening or impart significant morbidity.

# Complications

LP can cause a wide variety of clinical manifestations due to hyaline deposition in the skin, mucosa, and various organs. Of the possible clinical complications, airway obstruction, seizures, spontaneous CNS hemorrhage are the most severe. Hyaline deposition within the small bowel has also been linked to cases of gastrointestinal bleeding.

There can also be complications as a result of surgical intervention on the vocal cords or larynx. These include bleeding, infection, and vocal cord scarring leading to a change in voice quality and a possible need for repeat intervention.

Finally, certain patients may be taking systemic medication to manage their disease, such as anti-psychotic, anti-epileptic, and dopamine-modifying agents. These medications can have a variety of drug-specific side effects.

# Consultations

A multidisciplinary approach is recommended for patients with LP. Counseling may involve a dermatologist, otolaryngologist, neurologist, psychiatrist, dentist, and geneticist depending on manifestations of the disease. Like other autosomal recessive conditions, carrier testing and reproductive counseling should be offered to patients and their family members.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

LP is a rare genetic disease that requires interprofessional collaboration for optimal patient care. Patients with suspected LP should undergo a comprehensive workup with several specialists, including a dermatologist, neurologist, psychiatrist, otolaryngologist, dentist, and geneticist. It is important to assess disease burden and to evaluate for any possibly life-threatening manifestations. Patients’ symptoms and quality of life should be assessed frequently. Additionally, genetic counseling may offer patients a better understanding of their condition and its mode of inheritance.