The key to proper treatment in cervical spine trauma is early diagnosis and management. Unfortunately, in blunt trauma, a physical exam alone is unreliable to diagnose or exclude cervical spine injury.

In the setting of any trauma evaluation, before the patient can undergo clinical and radiologic assessment, the patient must undergo a primary survey as per the Advanced Traumatic Life Support protocols. The first stage is to assess the airway and protect the cervical spine, followed by support of breathing, circulation, assessment of neurological status, and exposure. Once the patient is stabilized, a secondary survey can be performed. A detailed history and physical is needed to understand the mechanism of injury, any medical comorbidities that can predispose the patient to have a higher likelihood of spinal injury, and to determine if there are any other axial injuries of the spinal column or distracting injuries in the extremities.

A thorough neurological exam is vital at the time of presentation to assess and document the patient's baseline. Periodic reexaminations should be performed and compared to the patients' baseline to determine any improvement or deterioration. Assessment using the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) spine exam is classically used to assess a patient's neurological status by examining key motor groups, sensory, digital rectal, and reflex examination. With cervical spine trauma, patients can present with unilateral upper extremity symptoms indicating a nerve root injury or bilateral upper extremity and lower extremity symptoms, indicating a spinal cord injury. To obtain an accurate ASIA exam, you must first determine if the patient is in spinal shock. Spinal shock is defined as a temporary loss of spinal cord function and reflex activity below the level of spinal cord injury. This is done by first assessing if the bulbocavernosus reflex is present; this reflex is characterized by the anal sphincter contraction in response to squeezing the glans penis in a male or clitoris in a female or by tugging on the foley catheter. The absence of this reflex indicates that the patient is in spinal shock, which could last from 24 to 72 hours. Therefore, once the patient is no longer in spinal shock, an accurate neurological exam can be obtained.

Listed below are key exam findings associated with neurologic injury:

- **Occiput/C1:**The occiput is in close proximity to the lower cranial nerves (CN).

- **CN-IX (glossopharyngeal), CN-X (vagus nerve):**Test gag response, uvula deviation away from the affected side.

- **CN- XI (spinal accessory nerve):**Test the ability to shrug shoulders (trapezius innervation) and turn head from side to side (Sternocleidomastoid).

- **CN-XII (hypoglossal nerve)**: Test the ability to stick out tongue and move from side to side, look for fasciculations

- **C4:**Injury to this nerve root can present with deficits in scapular stabilization with scapular winging, as it primarily innervates serratus anterior.

- **C5:**Injury to this nerve root can present with deficits in shoulder abduction and elbow flexion (palm up), as it primarily innervates the deltoid and the biceps muscles. Also, sensory deficits in the lateral arm and below the deltoid, and an abnormal biceps reflex.

- **C6:**Injury to this nerve root can present with deficits in elbow flexion (thumbs up) and wrist extension, as it primarily innervates brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus. Also, sensory deficits in the thumb and radial hand and an abnormal brachioradialis reflex.

- **C7:**Injury to this nerve root can present with deficits in elbow extension and wrist flexion, as it primarily innervates the triceps and flexor carpi radialis. Also, sensory deficits in fingers 2, 3, 4, and an abnormal triceps reflex.

- **C8:**Injury to this nerve root can present with deficits in finger flexion, handgrip, and thumb extension, as it primarily innervates flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor digitorum profundus, and extensor pollicis longus. Also, sensory deficits in the small finger.

- **T1:**Injury to this nerve root can present with deficits in finger abduction, as it primarily innervates the hand interossei muscles. Also, sensory deficits in the medial elbow.