**History**

The maternal history of the following may suggest an increased risk of FGR.

- Previous pregnancy with FGR

- Previous pregnancy with preeclampsia

- History of smoking or substance abuse

- Multiple gestations

- Assisted conception

- Chronic illnesses

- Extremes of maternal age

**Physical Examination**

Maternal Findings

The fundal height that estimates gestational age by measuring the distance between the pubic symphysis and the top of the uterus might be decreased.

Neonatal Findings

The neonate with FGR is less than 10 percentile for weight and typically looks emaciated with decreased muscle mass and subcutaneous fat at birth. The head may look proportionately large or small depending upon the pathogenic factor for intrauterine growth restriction. The facies may appear thin, and the umbilical cord shrunken. Due to the lack of proper bone mineralization and bone formation, the cranial suture may be wide and fontanels large. The Ponderal index [PI=weight (g) x100/height (cm)] is a good indicator of the severity of fetal malnutrition, especially in asymmetric FGR. A PI less than the 10th percentile indicates malnutrition.

Depending upon the cause, specific physical findings may be noted in a growth-restricted infant at birth, such as:

- Hepatomegaly, sensorineural hearing loss, chorioretinitis, blueberry muffin spots in congenital CMV infection.

- Low set ears, cleft palate, clenched fist with overlapping fingers, and rocker bottom feet in trisomy 18.

- Scalp defect, close-set eyes, coloboma, micrognathia, and umbilical hernia in trisomy 13.

Other findings in FGR with known etiology may be referable to the primary cause and manifest according to the specific syndromes involved.