It is a demonstrable fact that there is a permanent loss of contractile function due to death of cardiac myocytes and tissue infarction if there is a stoppage of or severe reduction of coronary blood flow for a period exceeding 20-40 minutes et al. described a phenomenon where a reversible period of ischemia in laboratory dogs induced a prolonged period of regional dysfunction; this was termed myocardial stunning.

In both stunning and hibernation, the basic pathology is a hypoperfused myocardium. It is worth noting that coronary stenosis up to 40% does not affect the maximum coronary flow. Between 40 to 80% reduction, maximum flow reduces but the resting flow remains unaffected. However, stenosis exceeding 80% creates a gross reduction in the resting blood supply which dramatically diminishes the contractile capacity.

Myocardial stunning and hibernation appear to be part of the same clinical spectrum, only varying in degrees. There are a number of studies that hypothesize that repetitive episodes of stunning secondary to episodic ischemia lead to hibernation of the myocardium.

There are a number of defense mechanisms described as auto-regulatory phenomena in response to a reduction in myocardial flow in the hibernating myocardium:

1.) When there is a sudden reduction in the coronary flow, the energy requirement of the hypoperfused myocardium exceeds the supply, creating an imbalance which automatically reduces the contractility of the myocardium and its energy requirements; this is a state of "perfusion-contraction matching."

2.) Changes at the cellular level: In the hibernating myocardial tissue certain cardiac myocytes exhibit nucleolar condensations suggesting apoptosis, thus altering the structure and protein composition of the heart. Hence, structural remodeling is undertaken to ensure functionality.

3.) Coronary vasodilatation: When coronary flow reduces, the drop in pressure is counteracted by coronary vasodilation in the initial phase as a means of autoregulation.

4.) Myocardial ischemic preconditioning: Current understanding is that a small ischemic interval serves to protect the myocardium from the detrimental effects of subsequent prolonged ischemia particularly if it is gradual and not sudden.

5.) Cytostructural changes in the hibernating myocardium: In hibernating myocardial segments, disorganization of contractile and cytoskeletal proteins, reduced mRNA expression, and at a cytochemical level a reduction in myocardial phosphates, decreases the responsiveness of myofibrils to calcium and leads to a transition from oxidative to anaerobic metabolism.

6.) Skewed ratios of alpha and beta-adrenergic receptors: In hibernating myocardial segments, as inotropic reserve diminishes and resting flow reduces, an increase in alpha adrenergic receptors and a corresponding decrease in beta-adrenergic receptors are present.