The following technique is a guide only. This procedure is surgeon dependant, and certain techniques or operating steps may vary depending on surgeon preference or experience.

Once the patient has been anesthetized and positioned on the operating table, the tourniquet is applied (where applicable) and inflated to the desired pressure.

Skin is prepared using antiseptic surgical scrub solution, and sterile drapes are applied in the desired fashion by the operating surgeon.

An approximately 8 cm incision is made longitudinally on the dorsal aspect of the wrist between the third and fourth extensor compartments. Lister's tubercle can be used as a landmark to identify the location of the incision.

Blunt dissection of the soft tissues is performed with care, avoiding damage to the dorsal cutaneous nerve branches of the radial nerve. The extensor policis longus tendon is identified and retracted radially (laterally).

The dorsal radiocarpal and dorsal intercarpal ligaments are split longitudinally, and this will detach the dorsal capsule from the radius at the level of the styloid process.

Denude the articular cartilage from the radiocarpal and intercarpal joint surfaces. Decorticate the dorsal fourth of scaphoid, lunate, capitate, and 3rd carpometacarpal joint. During this stage, bone graft can be harvested from the distal radius or iliac crest and placed into the gaps at the fusion zone. Cancellous allograft can be used instead of autograft. The distal radioulnar joint is usually left undisturbed.

A Kirschner wire (K wire) is then placed through the articular surface of the distal radius, and another wire is placed through the lunate. The wrist is placed in 10 to 15 degrees of dorsiflexion and slight ulnar deviation to optimize handgrip strength. The K wire is then advanced through the radiolunate joint from dorsal to volar. The image intensifier is used to check the position of the lunate and the K wire.

The surgical plate is then applied. A pre-contoured dynamic compression plate or a standard 3.5mm dynamic compression plate can be contoured to be placed on the dorsal aspect of the radius and the third metacarpal bone.

The screws are inserted from the most distal hole situated on the third metacarpus, working towards the most proximal hole located on the distal radius. This step can vary depending on surgeon preference and technique, and some surgeons may choose to insert the first screws into the carpal bones rather than into the metacarpal bones.

Once all screws have been inserted, the wound is washed thoroughly, and the tourniquet is deflated. Sources of bleeding are then coagulated using diathermy.

The wound is then closed, starting with the capsule using absorbable sutures. The extensor retinaculum is repaired, and the extensor pollicis longus tendon is transposed subcutaneously.

The subcutaneous layer is closed with absorbable sutures, and a dressing of preference is applied.

Depending on surgeon preference, a volar brace or a short arm cast can be applied at the end of the surgery, and this is usually removed once the wound has healed.

Postoperatively early finger mobilization is advised, and patients are usually not allowed to weight bear through the affected arm for 8 to 12 weeks following the surgery.