Providers need cervical dilators, curettes, and a manual or electric aspiration instrument.

**Dilators**

The 3 most common types of dilators are steel Pratt dilators, Hank dilators, and Hegar dilators. No trials have compared the safety or efficiency of these different dilator sets.

Pratt dilators have long tapered tips allowing the operator to use the least mechanical force; for this reason, the Pratt dilator is commonly preferred. Pratt dilators are sized from 9 to 79 French. The French unit is the diameter of the dilator in millimeters. Dividing the French unit by 3, a rough estimate of Pi, yields the diameter of the dilator in millimeters.

Hank dilators are structurally similar to Pratt dilators, but they are cuffed. Additionally, the taper from the tip to dilation is sharper than the Pratt dilator. Pratt dilators may increase the risk of uterine perforation; many operators use the cuff to stop the advancement of the dilator at the external cervical os. However, each cervix and uterine cavity is different.

Hegar dilators are short with a blunt end. They are sized in millimeters and increase in size rapidly, necessitating increased mechanical force during dilation. This may increase the risk of uterine perforation. In addition, patients with obesity or a long vaginal lumen may not be ideal candidates for the Hegar dilator, as the dilator may be too short to traverse the entire endocervical canal.

**Curettes**

Curettes may be metal or plastic. The diagnostic D&C is typically performed using a sharp metal curette (Figure 5). Metal currettes have a long malleable handle with an open teardrop shape at the tip. These curettes are available in various sizes and are measured by the largest diameter at the tip. A toothed curette is sometimes used in postmenopausal patients for aggressive tissue sampling of the endometrium.

Plastic curettes or cannulas are more commonly used in pregnant patients. These cannulas can be straight or curved and rigid or flexible. These cannulas are measured in millimeters; in the first-trimester abortion, a cannula between 7 mm and 12 mm is usually sufficient. The rigid plastic cannulas are slightly more challenging to place, so if the provider uses a Pratt dilator, they will dilate just past the chosen cannula size. For example, if using an 8 mm cannula, maximum dilation of the endocervical canal with a 25-26 Pratt dilator should be sufficient for cannula placement.

**Aspirators**

Aspirators are either electric or manual vacuum aspirators. The electric suction aspirator produces a negative pressure to quickly and efficiently empty the uterus and decrease bleeding. However, these machines tend to be loud and can increase anxiety in the patient. The manual vacuum aspirator is a handheld device with a large attached syringe to create negative pressure. These can be very effective when used in the office but tend to prolong procedural times as multiple passes may be required.