Whether in allied health sciences, nursing, medicine, or other health endeavors, telehealth is an important and evolving aspect of healthcare. Approximately 50% of United States hospitals engage in telemedicine. The majority of current telemedicine practice is radiology and stroke care.

Acute remote stroke care, known as TeleStroke, is now a commonly present resource in emergency departments without in-house neurology stroke experts or radiologists. As a class I intervention by the American Heart Association, it has improved access to emergent stroke care to millions of patients.

The clinical potential of telehealth is diverse; programs include TeleTrauma, TeleBurns, TeleDermatology, and TeleICU, to name a few. Their utilization can have significant impacts on populations.

Literature investigating the use of off-hours telehealth in nursing homes has shown a decrease in hospitalizations by 10%. In addition to the clinical benefit for patients, the average Medicare savings was approximately $150,000 per nursing home per year. The Extension for Community Health Care Outcomes (ECHO) program has bettered post-acute care by reducing 30-day hospital readmissions and health care costs. The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) has estimated that their use of telehealth saves the system $6500 per patient per year, or $1 billion in 2012, by reducing readmissions, improving chronic disease care, and providing mental health services. Rural VHA systems saved the most on decreasing travel expenses.

There are also opportunities for medical device innovation for remote monitoring. For example, patients with implantable devices, such as subcutaneous implantable cardiac defibrillators (ICDs), have reduced the number of clinic visits as cardiologists can monitor cardiac events remotely. A pulmonary artery sensor has recently been approved by the FDA, allowing for remote monitoring of intracardiac and pulmonary artery pressures, thus potentially preventing complications and hospitalizations.

Aside from issues surrounding reimbursement, state-specific parity laws, medical malpractice coverage, and organizational hurdles in developing a robust telehealth infrastructure, some fear that telehealth may replace the nurse-patient and physician-patient relationship. Others argue that surveys show that approximately 80% of patients favorably view the telemedicine experience.

Additionally, there are issues are surrounding the quality of care provided. Specifically, increased direct-to-consumer companies may lead to more decentralized and costly care. One study of a large telehealth company revealed that 88% of the 1.25 million annual visits might have been over-utilized care, rather than substituted care for an in-person primary care physician or emergency room visit. Spending for some diseases, such as acute respiratory illness, actually increased $45 per each user in one study, compared to a non-telehealth user.

Standards for transmission of audio and video data have not been universally established, including the transmission of radiological images, which require a set of guidelines set by a Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM). The sensitivity and specificity of TeleDerm diagnoses, for example, may be sub-standard without uniform high-quality image standards. Furthermore, digitalization also poses a risk of security, and breaches in electronic information could be a violation of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Clinical practice guidelines for informed consent, documentation, quality of care, and follow-up and coordination of the patient visit are being established. These will be integral in the implementation of telehealth.

The landscape of telehealth is evolving. The Medicare Telehealth Parity Act was introduced to the House of Representatives in May 2017 to expand Medicare coverage and amend some of the limitations that currently exist. Novel programs, such as “Hospital at Home” programs, are aiming to improve patient care by admitting patients to their homes. Transfer center utilization of telehealth may reduce quaternary hospital transfers for specialist care.

During the COVID-19 national emergency, the HHS Office for Civil Rights (OCR) has relaxed some of the regulations involving the use of an HIPP-Compliant only remote communication technology.  Apps such as Facetime, Facebook Messenger, Google Hangout, Zoom, or Skype was allowed to be used in good faith to care for patients via telehealth during the national emegency.  However, public-facing apps were not allowed.

With the advancing innovation in telehealth, there are tremendous opportunities for allied health workers, social workers, therapists, nurses, and physicians to strive to provide cost-effective and excellent care to others continuously.