Among individuals who have asymptomatic chronic infection, incidental diagnosis of peripheral eosinophilia is the most common presentation. However, at the acute stage, infected individuals may have a pruritic edematous petechial rash at the site of penetration. A more pathognomonic rash is **larva currens** or **migrans** from the migration of the filariform larva under the skin resulting in a hypersensitivity response in the host. It results in a transient linear erythematous serpiginous rash that shifts at a rate of 2-10 cm/hour. The duration of the rash can be hours to days at a time, but it can be a recurrent process during the duration of parasitic autoinfection.

Chronic infection can have nonspecific multiorgan symptoms predominantly of gastrointestinal, dermatological, or respiratory systems. Abdominal bloating, heartburn, constipation or diarrhea, and reduced appetite are the usual gastrointestinal symptoms. They take about 2 weeks to manifest after the initial infection. A chronic dry cough or wheezing that mimics asthma can be the respiratory manifestation, whereas constitutional symptoms of low-grade fever, weight loss, and anemia can also be the sole presenting feature. Larva migrating through pulmonary capillaries can produce alveolar hemorrhage, while their entrance into alveolar spaces causes an eosinophilic inflammatory response resulting in clinical evidence of pneumonitis.

A more ominous presentation is of **hyper infection syndrome,**which is characterized by an explosive increase in the multiplication of infective larvae and, thus, the worm burden within a host. Although it has occasionally been reported in immunocompetent hosts, it is usually seen in immunocompromised individuals, particularly those on high-dose systemic steroids or immunosuppressants after solid organ transplant. The initial low-grade gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms of chronic infection suddenly progress to complications of intestinal obstruction, peritonitis, gastrointestinal bleeding, pneumonitis, alveolar hemorrhage, respiratory failure, or sepsis.**Disseminated strongyloidiasis**, on the other hand, involves dissemination outside locations involved in the parasite’s ordinary life cycle. Translocation can result in bloodborne infection, massive weight loss,  meningitis, encephalitis, or SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate secretion of Antidiuretic hormone). Lab findings surprisingly show a normal eosinophil count along with low serum albumin and anemia. Hyper infection syndrome and disseminated disease have a mortality rate of up to 80 to  90%