No matter which method is used to treat the tendon rupture, participating in an exercise program is vital. One may swim, cycle, jog, or walk to increase muscle strength and range of motion.

**Rehabilitation**

Rehabilitation will vary based on surgical versus non-surgical approach and referring physician’s protocol, highlighting the importance of the therapist working closely with referring physician to optimize care. This is particularly important for brace use and weight-bearing status as these areas are those in which therapy management tends to vary the most with this condition. Depending on operative vs. non-operative, immobilization may range from approximately 3 to 4 weeks in operative and 3 to 9 weeks conservative with orthotic use following both approaches depending on referring orthopedic protocol. Varying degrees of plantarflexion to neutral positioning are utilized during this time, with specifics on the optimal positioning still widely debated.

If conservative methods are used, therapy begins during the immobilization phase of cast wear for weight-bearing mobilization training and exercise to promote the maintenance of strength in the remainder of the affected limb. More recent studies have shown the benefits of initiating functional casts coupled with early weight bearing in conservative treatment, including a faster return to activity and improved ankle dorsiflexion (traditionally operative treatment corresponded with earlier weight-bearing and exercise initiation), but this continues to vary and will be determined by the referring physician.

For surgical patients, rehabilitation exercises typically begin 2 to 4 weeks postop.

Exercise focus is typically low impact for the first six months, with high-impact exercises incorporated after six months, emphasizing a return to sport as appropriate. Data has shown a need for a heavy focus on calf strengthening within the first year of injury as a reduction in strength gain potential has been demonstrated beyond the one-year post-injury date.