**Abscess**

Neonatal brain abscess could occur as a complication of bacterial meningitis in 1.3% to 4.0% neonates.

**Intracranial Hemorrhage**

Variable stages of evolving hematoma may mimic tumors on imaging especially in the subacute and chronic stages which show central clot retraction and peripheral enhancement with/without surrounding edema on CT and MRI. MRI sequences like SWI for blood products, DWI and MRS, could aid in the differentiation as well as follow-up images. If underlying vascular malformation or vascular lesion is suspected, then a dedicated  MRI angiography or CT angiogram can be performed.

**Ischemic Stroke**

Ischemic arterial or venous stroke may mimic tumor on imaging. A diagnostic dilemma arises typically when imaging shows mass effects and/or irregular contrast enhancements, advanced MRI sequences like DWI and perfusion MRI can throw further light. As a general rule, if the edema shows restricted diffusion, then tumoral edema is the culprit. However, clinical history and knowledge of arterial and venous territories are of paramount importance for an accurate diagnosis.

**Neurocutaneous Syndromes**

Neurofibromatosis (NF), tuberous sclerosis(TS), Sturge-Weber syndrome, Von-Hippel Lindau (VHL), and hereditary telangiectasia are well-known syndromes with central nervous system (CNS) manifestations that are non-neoplastic. These syndromes are known to predispose to specific types of brain tumors. For example, NF-1 could be associated with low-grade gliomas. TS may be associated with SEGA (subependymal giant cell astrocytomas), and hemangioblastomas are seen in VHL. Physicians may find it challenging to differentiate between the non-neoplastic NF-related myelin vacuolation spots and low-grade glioma in settings of NF-1. Cortical and subcortical T2 hyperintense tubers in tuberous sclerosis may mimic gliomas.