Issues impacting the NPD leader role are characteristics and skills of a leader, leadership styles, including transformational leadership, and legal and ethical responsibilities. Other considerations are demonstrating the value of NPD practice, working within a system, and using scientific rigor to advance the specialty.

Leaders share a common set of characteristics. Hughes reviewed ten national and international research studies from 2002 to 2015 to identify the characteristics of great nurse leaders.

Other qualities that nurses seek in their leaders include a commitment to excellence, passion for their work, clear vision and strategic focus, trustworthiness, respectfulness, approachability, empathy, caring, and commitment to coaching and developing staff. These qualities are essential to outstanding leadership, and organizations must learn the best ways to identify and develop these traits in existing and emerging leaders.

Skills needed to achieve these characteristics include communication, creating a healthy work environment, collaboration, shared decision-making, coaching and mentoring, and delegation. Effective leaders must have strong verbal and written communication skills and must create a healthy work environment attending to the physical, social, and mental health and well-being of patients and staff. This includes both giving and soliciting feedback. Leaders should be quick to listen, slow to speak, and react cautiously.

With the current healthcare environment and the focus on interprofessional education, the leader must develop good working relationships with members of the other disciplines comprising the healthcare team. Effective leaders implement shared decision-making practices to allow for the active and full participation of stakeholders and continuously support coach, and mentor staff members. In addition to serving as role models, leaders motivate and empower people with the tools and the resources they need to do their job, then get out of their way and let them do it. Leaders seize opportunities to motivate people by recognizing their worth, services, or contributions. However, since the leader cannot achieve strategic goals in a vacuum, delegation skills are an essential tool in the leader’s arsenal.

Many leadership texts outline similar leadership activities. These include but are not limited to strategic planning, managing human and fiscal resources, environmental scanning, delegating, quality improvement, program, and project management, and fostering innovation. The authors also emphasize the importance of being a transformational leader.

Schmidt developed a transformational leadership model from data collected through a standardized interview process with 15 leaders in healthcare and non-healthcare organizations. She noted that transformational leadership could only exist in an environment of integrity, respect, and authenticity. The five attributes of transformational leadership are being visionary, risk-taking, effective communication, motivating others, and persistence. These are similar to the four components: idealized influence, inspirational motivation, intellectual stimulation, and individualized consideration.

Transformational leadership is a leadership style that can inspire positive changes in those who follow. Transformational leaders are energetic, enthusiastic, and passionate. They can inspire others to change expectations, perceptions, and motivations to work towards common goals. They serve as role models, challenge the status quo, encourage creativity, have a clear vision, and offer support and encouragement as needed.

Leaders need to understand the organizational culture in which they work. Knowing how the organization thinks is critical to aligning with its goals and helps individuals deal with the changes that occur in every organization. Departmental goals must be consistent and align with organizational goals, and leaders must be able to articulate their value to senior leadership.

All leaders must adhere to legal and ethical guidelines in performing their duties. In the ever-increasingly complex world of health care, leaders face numerous ethical and legal practice challenges. Legal requirements are specified in local, state, or national laws. Regulatory bodies also have specific requirements – leaders must ensure compliance with these standards, such as requirements for health reporting and adherence to privacy standards related to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Ethical standards provide guidance for the behaviors that are expected of individuals in the practice environment. The NPD standards include a standard of ethics, which states: “the nursing professional development practitioner integrates ethics into all aspects of practice.”  p. 86 Specific ethical competencies are outlined for both the NPD practitioner and NPD specialist.

Special legal/ ethical issues impacting the NPD practitioner can include issues related to copyright, content integrity, maintaining a just culture, protecting the rights and dignities of learners, intellectual property, and maintaining appropriate documentation.

In 2021, Harper et al. replicated a study exploring the correlations between NPD staff and organizational outcomes.

The first report of this study provided background information and descriptive data on organizational characteristics, NPD department structure, and NPD practitioner ratios per employee, per RN, and per hospital bed. The second part of the study looked at relationships between NPD staffing and organizational outcomes. Evidence suggested that higher levels of NPD staffing were associated with positive nursing and patient outcomes.

NPD leaders must show the value of NPD practice. Church and colleagues reported on a review of 13 transition-to-practice (TTP) programs accredited by the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) Practice Transition Accreditation Program.

Six overarching themes were identified: leadership support, stakeholder interest, national/state recognition, credibility, collaboration with other facilities, and funding. As leaders of TTP programs, NPD practitioners can provide value to organizations by increasing the quality of development for transitioning nurses and positively impacting the quality of care to patients and families.

Although many organizations have leadership programs that focus on transitioning nurses into leadership roles, focusing on informal leaders such as the direct care clinical nurse (CN) is not as common. Morse and colleagues described a Rising Star program developed as a CN leadership program.

This twelve-month program has 8 hours of classroom/virtual content monthly, including developing a quality improvement (QI) project. All the QI projects were completed, and 19 have been integrated at the unit, department, or institutional level. Forty-one percent worked on an abstract, and eight have been submitted for a conference. In addition, fifty-nine percent have completed advanced formal education. The response has been very positive to this program. The Rising Star facilitator is an NPD specialist that demonstrates leadership by managing the application process, chairing the selection committee, managing applicant notifications, informing executive leadership of program outcomes, and facilitating the program and classes.

With an increasing number of mergers, NPD leaders frequently are part of a multisite system. Boerger shared her perspective on the challenges in leading systems. Harper and colleagues conducted a study to gain consensus around the competencies that individuals leading multisite systems need.

The quantitative study used a modified electronic Delphi (eDelphi) method to determine the competencies needed by multisite leaders. Twenty-four participants completed at least 50% of the initial survey, 21 completed round 2, and 17 completed the third and final round. Five domains of competencies were identified as necessary for the multisite NPD leader. These were executive nursing leadership, NPD practice, business acumen, organizational alignment, and communication/relationship building. A list of the multisite competencies in each of these five areas can be found on the ANPD website.