Normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism is defined as persistently elevated parathyroid hormone titers despite at least two separate, corrected serum calcium or ionized calcium levels over at least six months. This is needed to differentiate it from classic hyperparathyroidism.

The suggested pathophysiology is an early form or precursor of classical hyperparathyroidism, relative hypercalcemia based on an individual patient's baseline, and response resistance in bone and kidney tissues to parathyroid hormone.

Most patients are asymptomatic, but over a third will progress to symptomatic disease with either significant bone loss or nephrolithiasis.

In nPHPT, the bone turnover markers and the net calcium release, as measured by urinary calcium/creatinine ratio, are lower than their hypercalcemic counterparts with similar PTH values. There is a decreased ability to suppress phosphate and promote calcium reabsorption in the renal tubules. Thus, for similar PTH concentrations, some patients became hypercalcemic while others did not, confirming tissue resistance to PTH in these patients.

Studies from parathyroid glands of nPHPT patients show similarity to normal glands with no change in calcium-sensing receptors, chromogranin A, PTH, or mitotic index (Ki-67). However, decreased vitamin D receptor (VDR) expression and increased cyclin D1 observed in these patients are similar to diseased glands. Therefore, it has been postulated that the discordance between calcium-sensing receptors and either VDR or cyclin D1 or both could result in maintaining normocalcemia in nPHPT.

In some studies, nPHPT patients have higher BMI than their hypercalcemic counterparts. The adequacy of estrogen, even in the postmenopausal period, helps resist the effects of PTH on target tissues in these patients and contributes to maintaining normocalcemia.

Although PTH levels are lower than classical PHPT, the mild chronic elevation in nPHPT is probably sufficient to cause PTH-induced bone resorption.

Patients with nPHPT generally tend to have higher rates of cardiovascular complications, hyperaldosteronism, hypertension, and hyperglycemia due to insulin resistance, muscle tone, and overall quality of life.

Renal calcifications are common in nPHPT. They tend to be associated with high serum PTH, increased 1,25(OH) vitamin D levels, and the degree of hypercalciuria.

The increased rate of nephrolithiasis and bone loss is similar between normocalcemic and hypercalcemic hyperparathyroid patients.

The vast majority of hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis patients do not have normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism. Hypercalciuria is not consistently found in nPHPT, and all patients do not develop renal stones, so other factors must be involved:

Contributors to renal calculi other than hypercalciuria include:

- Aciduria

- High dietary salt

- Hyperoxaluria

- Hyperuricosuria

- Hypocitraturia

- Hypovolemia, dehydration, and oliguria (low urinary volume)