Because vWF is a large, complex, heavily modified glycoprotein with more than one role in the process of hemostasis, disorders involving defective or deficient vWF can present with a spectrum of severity.

The most common genetic bleeding disorder, Von Willebrand disease (vWD), encompasses four subtypes inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

Clinical presentation includes a family history of a bleeding disorder, easy bruising, gum bleeding, heavy menses, prolonged bleeding after minor trauma, excess bleeding after major trauma, and symptoms of anemia such as fatigue.

- **Type 1 von Willebrand disease**is the most common, representing about 80% of cases. Type 1 vWD is due to a decreased quantity of otherwise normal functioning vWF from missense mutations or null alleles. Type 1 vWD is considered the most mild, and the main symptom is mucocutaneous bleeding which is exacerbated by taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

- **Type 2 von Willebrand disease**can be either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive in inheritance pattern. Type 2 vWD is due to a vWF functional defect and is subdivided further into type IIA, IIB, IIM, and IIN.

- 
              
- Type IIA vWD - decreased vWF-platelet binding due to loss of high molecular weight vWF multimers
              
              
- Type IIB vWD - abnormal vWF A1 domain causing increased vWF-platelet affinity
              
              
- Type IIM - decreased vWF-platelet binding activity despite normal amounts of high molecular weight vWF multimers
              
              
- Type IIN - decreased vWF-factor VIII binding due to defective vWF D’ domain

- **Type 3 von Willebrand disease**is the most severe, caused by the complete absence of vWF, and follows an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.

Lab findings include decreased vWF, normal platelet count, increased bleeding time, normal prothrombin time, and normal or decreased factor VIII corresponding with normal or increased partial thromboplastin time depending on which domain is affected.

Treatment options for vWD are primarily replacement therapy such as vWF and factor VIII plasma concentrates and recombinant vWF. Desmopressin may also be used in the case of insufficient vWF quantity by stimulating the release of endothelial vWF from WPBs.