The evaluation and treatment of retinitis pigmentosa require educating the patient and family. While the disorder is primarily managed by the ophthalmologist, an ancillary team consisting of a geneticist and pharmacist may also help. Genetic testing and counseling should be considered for those affected by RP. The long-term prognosis can be better predicted in many cases,  and the possibility of gene transmission to descendants will be an important consideration for some patients.

While no treatment options guarantee to arrest the progression of vision loss, patients should be made aware of the possible benefits of several interventions. Nutritional supplementation, especially with vitamin A,  is still an area of interest, but the pharmacist should warn the patient that no definite benefits have been identified. In addition, Vitamin A intake for the long term has to be monitored because of its potential toxicity to the liver. The ophthalmology nurse should educate the patient on the avoidance of excessively bright light exposure, as it may decrease phototoxic effects on the retina. Good sunglasses are, therefore, a must.

Understanding the type of disease which affects the patient is also very important. Without this understanding, patients cannot fully appreciate and learn to adapt to their disease progression and its implications. An interprofessional approach involving a specialty-trained nurse and clinician assisting in patient management and education will provide the best outcome. [Level 5]