Impaired cognition and performance are common complications of shift work across many industries.

The healthcare setting is complex and full of pitfalls that may lead to workplace accidents. The high prevalence of shift work in healthcare is one factor that may contribute to unintentional accidents. As such, it would behoove healthcare companies to consider the well-being of employees in planning shift schedules.

The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health recommends several interventions to improve the wellness of shift workers.

- Avoid fixed, permanent night shifts

- Limit consecutive night shifts to ≤ 3 in a row

- Rotating shift work with forward rotation is preferred over backward rotation (i.e., days to evenings to nights preferred vs. nights to evenings to days)

- Shifts > 12 hours should be avoided with ≤ 3 consecutive 12-hour shifts

- Schedule ≥ 11 hours off between consecutive shifts to allow workers to rest

- Provide regular weekends off without work to nourish family and social connections

- Inform workers of schedules in advance and allow for adjustments if reasonable

Additional interventions to improve overall shift worker wellness include implementing sleep strategies for shift work, good sleep hygiene, bright light therapy, and potentially the addition of appropriate medication. If appropriate, napping during night shifts has been shown to reduce fatigue levels, increase alertness, and improve job performance. “Prophylactic naps” of 1 to 4 hours before night shifts have also demonstrated decreased sleepiness and improved performance. Exposure to light before and during a night shift suppresses the release of melatonin and helps maintain alertness and performance. Conversely, after completing a night shift, workers may benefit from wearing sunglasses or blue-light-blocking glasses to prevent exposure to light and improve the ability to fall asleep.