There are several variants of the landmark technique used together with neurostimulation to identify the femoral nerve within the psoas by evoking a motor response of the quadriceps muscle. While these techniques differ somewhat in terms of the needle insertion point (lumbar level, distance from midline), we will describe what we believe is the most common practice.

Standard ASA monitoring is applied, and the patient positioned in lateral decubitus on the side opposite the surgery, the side of the block upward. The ipsilateral knee flexed at 90ยบ, and the hip flexed at 30ยบ. The needle insertion point is marked 4 to 5 centimeters lateral to the midline at the level of the iliac crest along the intercristal line. The area of the block is then sterilely prepped and draped with sterile towels. A safety time-out is performed with the participation of the patient, nurse, and physician to confirm the patient identity, the procedure, and the laterality. As the LP block may be uncomfortable for the patient, mild sedation is often given using small doses of intravenous midazolam and/or fentanyl.

- Local anesthesia using lidocaine 1% is injected using the 23 to 25 gauge needle at the marked site of needle introduction along the same trajectory planned for the nerve block needle.

- The 25 gauge spinal needle is introduced at this site, perpendicular to the skin, attempting to locate the transverse process. If the transverse process is not found, the needle is withdrawn to a subcutaneous depth and reinserted with a slightly caudad or cephalad angulation. This fanning exploration repeated until the transverse process is located. Its depth and direction are noted, or it can be left in place with the nerve block needle to be inserted alongside it.

- The neurostimulator is set at a current of 1.5 mA with 0.1 msec pulse width duration at 2 Hz and attached to both the block needle and an EKG pad on the skin. The block needle is inserted alongside or in place of the spinal finder needle, and at the depth determined by the finder needle, the transverse process is contacted.

- The block needle is now withdrawn and redirected either caudally or cephalad and to a depth 2 cm greater from that of contact with the transverse process. This may need to be repeated several times until a twitch response of the quadriceps muscle is elicited.

- Precise positioning of the needle is guided by decreasing the current delivery of the neurostimulator until a motor response is still visible at 0.5 mA.

- Inject the local anesthetic in fractionated aliquots, aspirating between each to be sure the needle is not intravascular.

Although the technique described above seems to be straightforward, occasionally, all does not proceed as planned. Below is provided a number of tips for troubleshooting these situations. (see table 1)

There are some additional considerations when placing a continuous lumbar plexus catheter. While the technique of positioning the needle is the same as with a single shot lumbar plexus block, there is a small risk of catheter misplacement intravascular or neuraxial despite proper needle placement. Therefore, catheters should always be tested for negative aspiration for blood or CSF, and injection of local anesthetic should be fractionated and slow. The final positioning of the catheter should be at a depth at the skin of 4 to 5 centimeters more than the depth of the needle at its final positioning. A continuous infusion of 8 to 10 ml/hr of ropivacaine 0.2% is enough to produce excellent analgesia. If weakness precludes participation with physical therapy, the infusion rate can be reduced. Alternatively, the infusion can be increased in the event of poorly controlled pain. The development of foot drop is not a sign of excessive block and should not be mistaken as being due to the block. It is likely a surgical complication (e.g., hematoma, bone fragment, dislocation), causing sciatic compression and should be addressed urgently. The ultrasound-guided technique is beyond the scope of this review.