Patient evaluation of those presenting with signs and symptoms of PTC includes neuroimaging, lumbar puncture with opening pressures and CSF analysis, ophthalmoscopy, visual acuity testing, perimetry testing, and complete blood count (CBC).

**Neuroimaging**

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with venography (MRV) is the preferred imaging modality and is used to rule out other secondary causes of intracranial hypertension. Imaging reveals normal parenchyma and ventricles.

- Computed tomography (CT) can be performed if there are contraindications to MRI but is less sensitive and specific.

**Lumbar puncture**

- An opening pressure greater than 25cm H2O in adults and greater than 28cm H2O in children aged 1 to 18 years, in the setting of normal CSF studies and negative neuroimaging, is suggestive for PTC.

- CSF analysis should include cell count and differential, glucose, protein, gram stain, and culture.

**Ophthalmologic evaluation**

- Ophthalmoscopy: evaluates for optic disc edema, known as papilledema. Typically, a higher the grade of papilledema corresponds to more severe vision loss.

- Visual acuity testing: assesses for visual sequelae of the disease.

- Perimetry testing: more sensitive regarding the degree of vision loss in comparison to visual acuity testing.

**Complete blood count**

- To rule out anemia or lymphoproliferative causes of papilledema.

Diagnosis involves utilization of the Modified Dandy Criteria

1. Signs and symptoms of increased ICP

2. The absence of localizing findings on neurologic examination

3. The absence of deformity, displacement, or obstruction of the ventricular system with otherwise normal neurodiagnostic studies, except for evidence of increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure (greater than 200 mm water). Abnormal neuroimaging apart from empty sella turcica, optic nerve sheath with filled out CSF spaces, and smooth-walled non-flow-related venous sinus stenosis or collapse should lead to another diagnosis.

4. Awake and alert

5. No other causes of increased intracranial pressure present with CSF opening pressure of 20cm to 25 cm water, required at least one of the following:

- Pulse-synchronous tinnitus (pulsatile tinnitus)

- Cranial nerve VI palsy

- Frisen Grade II papilledema

- Echography for drusen negative and no other disc anomalies mimicking disc edema present

- MRV (Magnetic Resonance Venography) with lateral sinus collapse/stenosis preferably using ATECO technique

- Partially empty sella on coronal or sagittal views and optic nerve sheaths with filled out CSF spaces next to the globe on T2 weighted axial scans