The ffERG measures the light-induced electrical activity of the retina at the corneal surface. Specifically, the ffERG records the global or total retinal electrical response to a full-field (Ganzfield) light stimulus. Isolation of the rod and cone components has important diagnostic value in differentiating between various retinal diseases. Modifying the properties of the light-stimulus (wavelength, strength, and flicker rate) as well as the adaptive state of the retina can separate the rod and cone functions of the ffERG.

**Waveform Components**

a-wave

The a-wave is the initial negative deflection corresponding to the early hyperpolarization of the rod and cone photoreceptors. This wave-component reflects outer retinal function.

b-wave

The b-wave is the positive deflection following the a-wave that originates from the depolarization of inner retinal Muller and bipolar cells. This wave-component reflects phototransduction activity.

Oscillatory potentials

Oscillatory potentials (OPs) are high-frequency rhythmic wavelets seen on the rising slope of the b-wave. OPs are visible at greater signal intensities and reflect the electrical activity of inner retinal feedback synaptic circuits, namely amacrine cells, as well as some vascular function.

Photopic negative response

The photopic negative response (PhNR) is the light-adapted, negative deflection that follows the b-wave. It originates from the retinal ganglion cells in response to a brief flash.

**Waveform Analysis (Figure 1)**

Amplitude

The amplitude is the maximal light-induced electrical response (voltage) generated by the various retinal cells. The a-wave amplitude is measured from the baseline of the ERG to the negative trough of the a-wave, and the b-wave amplitude is measured from the trough of the a-wave to the subsequent b-wave peak. The PhNR amplitude is measured from the baseline of the ERG to the negative trough of the PhNR.

Implicit time

Implicit time (time-to-peak) refers to the time needed for the electrical response to reach maximum amplitude. Implicit time is from the stimulus onset to the peak of the corresponding wave-component and reflects the rate at which an electrical signal is conducted.

Latency

Latency is the time from stimulus onset to response onset, as opposed to the peak of the response (i.e., implicit time).

The b-wave to a-wave ratio

The ratio of the b- to a-wave amplitudes provides an index of inner to outer retinal function.

**Protocols**

ISCEV defines 6 protocols to isolate the rod and cone visual systems. These standards are named according to the dark-(DA) or light-adapted (LA) state of the retina and the stimulus flash strength (cd*s/m2).

**DA 0.01 cd*s/m2 ERG—rod system (scotopic) response (Figure 2)**

a-wave: rods

b-wave: bipolar cells

**DA 3.0 cd*s/m2 ERG—rod and cone System (mesopic) response (Figure 2)**

a-wave: rods and cones

b-wave: bipolar cells

**DA 10 cd*s/m2 ERG—enhanced rod and cone system (mesopic) response**

a-wave: rods and cones

b-wave: bipolar cells

**DA oscillatory potentials—amacrine cell response (Figure 4)**

b-wave: Predominantly inner retinal amacrine cells as well as some vascular function

**LA 3.0 cd*s/m2 ERG—cone system response (Figure 3)**

a-wave: cones

b-wave: bipolar cells

**LA 30 Hz flicker ERG—cone system response (Figure 3)**

a-wave: cones

**Extended Protocol**

PhNR—ganglion cells and inner retinal function (Figure 4)

PhNR's can be evoked using a red LED flash on a steady, blue LED background. The red flash may minimize spectral effects that would otherwise inhibit ganglion cell activity, while the blue background suppresses rods and minimizes light adaptation of cones. Blue stimuli on a yellow background is an alternative approach for similarly minimizing spectral antagonism. Optimal recording conditions for eliciting the PhNR occur at flash intensities of 1.0 to 2.5 cd*s/m2 at a frequency of 1 Hz.