# Introduction

The bladder forms an integral part of the genitourinary system. Urine, created by the kidneys, is drained into the bladder by the bilateral ureters. The bladder then acts as the storage site for this waste product until higher-order centers within the central nervous system initiate the micturition (i.e., urination) process, which permits the expulsion of urine into the urethra, located on the inferior aspect of the bladder. The physiology involved in bladder function and micturition is exceedingly complex, integrating the autonomic nervous system, the central nervous system, the somatic nervous system, and neurohormonal modulation. This complex physiologic interplay is, in turn, a site of action for several pharmaceutical agents that treat common bladder pathologies.

# Cellular Level

The bladder divides into two parts: a body and a base. The body of the bladder is composed of smooth muscle, which is known as detrusor muscle.

The base of the bladder is comprised of the trigone, a triangle-shaped area that encompasses the point at which the ureters open into the bladder (also known as the "vesicoureteric junction") and the beginning of the urethra. The ureters terminate at the ureteral orifices within the lumen of the bladder. The very distal portion of the ureter traverses the detrusor muscle, and when the bladder contracts, the orifices coapt and compresses the opening preventing vesicoureteral reflux.

# Development

The urorectal septum partitions the endodermal cloaca at the end of the hindgut into urogenital sinus and rectum. The urogenital sinus is continuous above with the allantois, which drains the embryonic bladder to the umbilical cord. The allantois will regress and become urachus later in the developmental process. The urogenital sinus divides into an anterior vesicourethral canal, which develops into the urinary bladder and a posterior vesicourethral canal that gives rise to the urethra. The mesonephric ducts and the ureters attached to them get absorbed into the posterior wall of the urinary bladder, which will become the trigone located between the ureteric openings and internal urethral orifice.

# Function

As stated above, the function of the bladder is to store the urine and then aid in its expulsion at a time deemed advantageous by the organism.  The long-held belief has been that upon delivery to the bladder, urine will be excreted essentially unchanged in composition.  However, new research is challenging this traditional view, and now there is evidence that the bladder epithelium can modulate the amount of both water and solutes that are ultimately present upon urination.

Bladder capacity changes throughout one's life.  In children, an approximation of bladder volume can be calculated with the formula: (years of age + 2) x 30 mL.  By adulthood, the average volume that a functional bladder can comfortably hold is between 300 and 400 mL.

# Mechanism

The determining factor that directs whether or not the bladder remains relaxed to store urine or contracts to release it is the autonomic nervous system.  Parasympathetic stimulation encourages micturition, while sympathetic stimulation prevents it.

Conversely, continence is maintained by stimulation provided by sympathetic innervation that initially arose from the thoracolumbar spine.

Somatic innervation also plays a role in the micturition response.  These neurons arise from Onuf's nucleus, located in the anterior horn of the sacral region of the spinal cord, and coalesce to become the pudendal nerve, which utilizes acetylcholine to contract the external urethral sphincter through stimulation of a nicotinic receptor at that site.

The inclusion of the somatic nervous system, and thus a degree of conscious control over urinary retention and release, hints to the role that higher-order centers within the central nervous system play in this process.  The dorsal pontine tegmentum has been known for nearly a century to be the central coordinating center for the micturition process, and stimulation of this center induces bladder contractions and relaxes the urethral sphincter.

# Clinical Significance

The clinical significance of a healthy bladder is difficult to overstate.  An estimation using data from 2008 postulated that >45% of people over the age of 20 had been affected by lower urinary tract symptoms at some point in their lives, with an estimation for 2.8 billion people to be affected by 2018.

Overactive bladder, a common condition, is characterized by a recurrent sensation of a need to urinate occurring both day and night that impairs one quality of life and occasionally causes incontinence.

Bladder outlet obstruction is a condition in which urine is prevented from flowing from the bladder through the urethra and to the outside world.  While there are numerous potential causes of this phenomenon, one of the most common is that of benign prostatic hyperplasia.  The prostate is a male reproductive organ inferior to the bladder, and the urethra runs through the center of the prostate.  Many men experience hyperplasia of their prostate late in life, such that the organ expands and compresses the urethra, thereby making urination difficult or even impossible.