Initial treatment of any head injury should follow the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol.

**Simple Pneumocephalus**

Usually conservative. It involves the following steps:

- Bed rest

- Placing the patient in 30 degrees Fowler position

- Avoiding Valsalva maneuvers like nose-blowing, coughing, and sneezing

- Analgesics and antipyretics

- Osmotic diuretics, if indicated

- High-flow oxygen therapy should be given (5 L per minute for five days at least) via a face tent or 100% non-re-breather mask with absolute avoidance of positive pressure. The air is composed of 78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen. The rate of nitrogen absorption from pneumocephalus depends on the partial pressure of nitrogen in the blood, which is inversely proportional to the FiO2. When clinicians supplement oxygen, the nitrogen concentration in blood and brain tissue is reduced, increasing the nitrogen concentration gradient for absorption between the air collection and surrounding brain tissue. Slowly pneumocephalus will be replaced by oxygen, which has got high solubility within brain tissue and blood, which, in turn, facilitates its absorption leading to the final resorption of pneumocephalus.

- Hyperbaric oxygen therapy

**Surgical**

- Symptomatic pneumocephalus

- TP

- Recurrent pneumocephalus

- Persistent traumatic pneumocephalus lasting more than one week

- Tension pneumoventricle

TP following cranial surgery can be treated by introducing a needle through the bur hole of the previous craniotomy and aspirating the air with a syringe.

**Decompression Options**

- Needle aspiration - either blind or under radiological guidance through an existing bur hole or craniotomy

- Controlled decompression via a subdural drain connected to an underwater seal followed by the closure of the dural defect

- Ventriculostomy for pneumoventricle

- Emergency decompression by the creation of fresh cranial bur holes

- Decompressive craniectomy

- Insertion of saline-primed Camino bolt

- Insertion of the subdural evacuating port system (SEPS)™

Endoscopic endonasal eustachian tube obliteration has also been tried as a treatment for TP following lateral skull base surgery.