Of utmost concern is the potential for intraocular penetration, which may lead to devastating consequences, including endophthalmitis or retinal detachment. If the history is suspicious for a penetrating injury, carefully evaluate the anterior segment for shallowing, pupillary disfigurement, lenticular opacities, hypopyon, or increased cells and flare. Sodium fluorescein applied to the ocular surface definitively identifies the site of the ocular injury. Carefully perform a Seidel test by applying sodium fluorescein superior to the suspected wound. If a dark stream is seen flowing inferiorly, it is leakage of aqueous humor confirming that a full-thickness corneal injury has occurred. Even in the event of a negative Seidel test, intraocular debris may be present. Very small corneal foreign bodies may conceivably create subtle self-sealing lacerations. A dilated fundus examination is mandatory to seek the presence of any penetrating foreign bodies. If an intraocular foreign body is not visualized by strongly suspected, then imaging is appropriate. Computed tomography (CT) of the orbits can localize foreign bodies. Magnetic resonance tomography (MRI) is strictly contraindicated if the intraocular foreign body is of metallic origin.

There should be a concern if the patient does not report that their status is stable or improving. Reevaluate the ocular surface for additional foreign bodies, non-healing defects, or ulceration. Repeat Seidel testing. Reevaluate the anterior chamber for shallowing, pupillary disfigurement, lenticular opacities, hyphema, hypopyon, or increased cells and flare.

Corneal foreign bodies (FB) of organic, vegetative, or metallic origin are particularly concerning. These are more likely to incite an aggressive inflammatory reaction.

If there is any potential of vegetative FB, then consider that there is a significant risk for developing keratitis of fungal etiology.

If the FB is of metallic origin, particularly if a ferrous material, be aware that a corneal rust ring can develop within hours of the initial trauma. Depending on the depth and location, the corneal rust ring is removable by using an appropriate burr or Alger brush.  The Alger brush, when used properly, can safely remove metallic debris and the rust ring. Ideally, the internal clutch mechanism will, with excessive pressure on the Bowman membrane, disengage the burr and prevent penetrating deeper. However, if the Bowman membrane has been compromised, there is not sufficient resistance to halt the device, and additional scarring will occur if too much deeper tissue is compromised. Do not risk pursuing capacious treatment leaving a central corneal scar or extensive thinning.