Treatment of patients with HV deformity revolves around non-surgical and surgical treatments. Usually, non-surgical treatments are attempted first. If there is treatment failure, surgical repair should be considered. Interestingly, there is no definitive evidence that conservative treatment is effective; however, the American College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons still recommends using conservative therapy before considering a surgical solution. It is essential for patients to try wide shoes and orthotics before considering more invasive options.

The goal of conservative treatment is to manage the symptoms without correcting the anatomical deformity. Non-surgical treatments options include:

- Shoe modification: Low-heeled, wide shoes.

- Orthoses: Improves alignment and support.

- Analgesics: Acetaminophen and NSAIDs.

- Ice: Icing the inflamed deformity to reduce inflammation.

- Medial bunion pads: Prevents irritation of HV deformity.

- Stretching: Helps maintain joint mobility in the affected joint.

If non-surgical treatments are unable to control the pain, the treatment is deemed to have failed. At that point, surgical management should be considered. Indication for surgery is primarily based on symptoms (difficulty with ambulation, pain). Interestingly, radiographic appearance does not play a significant role. The presence of arthritis and the severity of the deformity helps guide surgeons in performing the most appropriate procedure. Over 150 surgical procedures have been described for the correction of HV deformity. Although there are many described procedures, they all involve one of the basic approaches outlined below:

- **Osteotomy**- A cut is made in the first metatarsal bone and put into a less adducted position. The cut varies in position and shape depending on the surgical strategy. For example, A Wilson osteotomy utilizes a straight cut, while a chevron osteotomy uses a wedge-shaped cut. The location of the cut may occur near the base of the metatarsal (proximal osteotomy), in the shaft (scarf osteotomy), or the neck (distal osteotomy). The chevron osteotomy has been looked at most closely. A randomized control trial comparing chevron osteotomy to no treatment or orthosis found chevron osteotomy outperformed the other treatment strategies. At 12 months, the hallux abductus angle was normal in the osteotomy group, with an 80% satisfaction rate. However, approximately 61% of the patients in the osteotomy group had moderate footwear problems. The surgery group also required the greatest number of sick days and had higher foot care costs.

- **Arthroplasty**– The mobility of the first MTP joint is maintained while relieving the pain (replacing the joint with an implant or removing the joint). Both hemiarthroplasty and total joint arthroplasty have been developed. Hemiarthroplasty maintains toe length and requires less bone resection. An interpositional arthroplasty is performed in patients with severe hallux rigidus and helps maintain joint range of motion. The most common arthroplasty is the Keller resection. In this procedure, as much as 50% of the proximal phalanx is resected to increase dorsiflexion and decompress the joint. Postoperatively from a Keller’s arthroplasty, 75% of patients were satisfied with the results, and 88% had complete pain relief. However, around 12% of patients experienced increased pain.

- **Arthrodesis-**Fusing the MTP joint into the correct position. This is only performed when the joint is severely degenerated and regaining functionality is unlikely.

- **Soft tissue procedures –**The procedure that primarily involves soft tissue is the McBride procedure. In this procedure, the fibular sesamoid is excised, causing Interphalangeal joint flexion, MTP joint hyperextension, and medial deviation of the hallux. Interestingly, no reports have studied soft tissue procedures for HV deformity correction independently. One study compared the chevron plus adductor tenotomy to the chevron osteotomy alone. They found little difference in mechanical correction and no difference in patient satisfaction.

There are very few randomized trials evaluating the efficacy of these procedures. However, as surgical techniques have improved, patient satisfaction has also improved, ranging from 50 to 90%. Interestingly, surgical outcomes do not appear to correlate with patient satisfaction. This is thought to be related to the unmet postsurgical expectations of the patient.

Postoperative care is primarily determined by the type of procedure performed. However, dressing is typically applied at the time of surgery to supply corrective forces. The dressing also compresses the surgical wound to help minimize postoperative edema. The weight-bearing status is procedure dependent but is commonly limited for the first two weeks. Once the sutures are removed, the patient can begin range of motion exercises and increasing weight-bearing activities. Postsurgical imaging is typically obtained as well when the patient becomes more active.

Long-term monitoring is directed to understanding the exact etiology to ensure HV deformity does not recur. If identified, clinicians should treat the causes. Postsurgical patients may still benefit from orthotic devices, notably in diseases that accelerate joint degeneration, such as rheumatoid arthritis. By better controlling these factors, long-term postsurgical results can be obtained.