The primary aim of treating strabismus is to restore proper ocular alignment. The secondary aims are to treat amblyopia, maintain binocularity, and eliminate diplopia.

Following are the various methods of treating strabismus:

Observation: Strabismus secondary to myasthenia gravis, diabetic mononeuropathy, and post-traumatic restrictive strabismus mostly improve with time and with the treatment of the primary cause. Some healthy neonates show intermittent deviation of the eyes. These are called ‘neonatal ocular misalignments,’ which improve by two months and resolve in four months. They usually reflect a normally developing vergence system.

Correction of Refractive Errors: The first step in the management of any child with strabismus is to evaluate for a refractive error and correct it fully. The full correction of hypermetropia is the treatment of choice for all forms of esotropia. Full correction without subtracting any lens power for cycloplegia is prescribed. In convergence excess esotropia, executive bifocals are prescribed to relieve accommodation and thereby preventive accommodative convergence. A minimal plus “add” required is prescribed with the flat top of the bifocal segment bisecting the upper border of the pupil.

Treat Amblyopia: Amblyopia in strabismus is reduced visual acuity in one or both eyes because of misalignment of eyes in the absence of any demonstrable visual pathway abnormality. Refractive correction alone is successful in improving amblyopia in nearly one-third of the patients.

Orthoptics: Orthoptic exercises are commonly used to treat intermittent exotropia. Fusional exercises like “pencil push-ups” are done with a pencil held at arm’s length and slowly moved towards the nose, thereby inducing accommodation and strengthening convergence, which helps in treating the exotropia.

Prismatic Correction: Ophthalmic prisms move the image closer to the fovea and help in improving the sensory fusion. They are prescribed for deviations of less than 20 PD. Amblyopia, suppression, and anomalous retinal correspondence are contraindications for prism therapy.

Pharmacological Therapy: Miotics act by inducing peripheral accommodation so that the patient uses less of accommodation and thus reducing esotropia. Ecothiopate iodide 0.125 percent once daily is used as a short-term treatment for accommodative esotropia patients. This can be used for kids who are too young or intolerant of glasses.

Botulinum Toxin: Botulinum toxin type A is used as a form of chemodenervation to cause temporary paralysis of the extraocular muscle leading to improvement in the strabismus. It is used as an adjunct to surgical therapy and to assess postoperative diplopia if anticipated following strabismus surgery. This can induce transient ptosis and vertical strabismus.

Extraocular Muscle Surgery: Strabismus surgery should be considered only after conservative treatments have failed to correct the deviation. Esotropias more than 15 PD and exotropia more than 20 PD following full spectacle correction are candidates for surgery. Accommodative esotropias are not ideal candidates for surgery as it induces consecutive esotropia.

The three main types of strabismus surgery are:

- Weakening Procedures: These decrease the effective strength of muscle action. Recession, retro equatorial myopexy or posterior fixation (Faden procedure), marginal myectomy, and myectomy (disinsertion) are some of the weakening procedures.

- Strengthening Procedures: These procedures enhance the pull of the muscle. Resection, advancement, Double-breasting or tenoplication, and cinching are the strengthening procedures.

- Vector Adjustment Procedures. These are transpositioning procedures that alter the direction of muscle action. Hummelscheim, Jensen, O’Connor, Knapp, Callahan, Peter, and Helveston are some of the transpositioning procedures.