**Antiarrhythmic:**Like other Class 1a antiarrhythmic agents, quinidine works by inhibiting the fast inward sodium current, depressing the phase 0 of the action potential hence dampening the excitability of cardiac muscles, which in turn prolongs the action potential and decreases automaticity. Quinidine's effect on fast inward sodium current is known as a 'use-dependent block' - this means at higher heart rates, the block increases, while at lower heart rates, the block decreases.

**Antimalarial**: It works as an antimalarial agent by having activity against the erythrocytic stage of thePlasmodium species. It acts by building up in the parasite's food vacuole; it forms a complex with heme which prevents the crystallization in the parasite's food vacuole. Cytotoxic-free heme accumulates secondary to inhibited heme polymerase activity.

Quinidine also has anticholinergic activity.

**Pharmacodynamics and Pharmacokinetics:**

- **Distribution**: Volume of distribution "Vd" is increased with cirrhosis and decreased with congestive heart failure.

- **Metabolism**: Hepatic metabolism by a series of hydroxylation reactions by cytochrome P450 enzymes (60% to 80%) is converted into active compounds, the most important with antiarrhythmic activity 3-hydroxy-quinidine (3HQ); dose adjustment necessary per hepatic impairment.

- **Excretion**: Less than 20% of the drug gets excreted in the urine in an unchanged form, and dose adjustment may be needed only in severe renal impairment.

- **Half-life elimination**: Increases with age and conditions such as cirrhosis and congestive heart failure.

- **Time to peak**: Oral preparation is approximately 2 hours, and extended-release preparations have around 3 to 4 hours.

- **Bioavailability**: Sustained release quinidine gluconate has shown to have higher serum concentrations than sustained-release quinidine sulfate.