Clinicians should initially assess the patient’s airway, breathing, and circulation and provide as-needed supportive care to stabilize the patient. Once the patient has been stabilized, a careful history should be obtained. This includes a history of symptoms, timing of symptom onset, the dose of baclofen, timing of the last dose, how long the patient has been taking it, recent adjustments of dosing, and urine output. If the patient has an intrathecal baclofen pump, identifying the date of pump implantation, last pump battery change, and most recent drug refill should also be obtained.

Patients with intrathecal baclofen pumps should have their pump insertion site examined for signs of infection or fluid pockets and any pump alarms evaluated. A neurologic physical examination should be performed, including assessing the patient’s mental status, pupillary response, reflexes, muscle tone, and clonus. Physical exam findings suggestive of baclofen toxicity are hypotonia and flaccid paralysis. Hyperreflexia and spasticity are more common with baclofen withdrawal.

Signs and symptoms of baclofen toxicity can be mixed. Baclofen toxicity can present with CNS depression, ranging from lethargy, somnolence, and confusion to delirium coma. Paradoxically, myoclonus and convulsions may also be seen due to disinhibition. Complete loss of brainstem reflexes may be seen mimicking brain death.

Common vital sign abnormalities include hypothermia, hypotension, and bradycardia; however, hypertension and tachycardia may also present.

Severe baclofen withdrawal shares many similarities to ethanol or sedative-hypnotic withdrawal, including delirium, tachycardia, hypertension, hyperreflexia, and seizures.