As with most diseases, a careful history and thorough examination are crucial for making an early diagnosis. A newborn with bilateral non-palpable testes or a unilateral impalpable testis and severe hypospadias should be regarded as having a DSD until proven otherwise, whether or not the genitalia grossly appears ambiguous. The incidence of DSD in individuals born with hypospadias and cryptorchidism ranges between 17% and 50%.

History should include any maternal exposure to androgens (e.g., danazol ) during the current pregnancy and any history of maternal virilization during pregnancy.

A careful and detailed physical evaluation is paramount for an accurate diagnosis. An examination should be focused on inspection and palpation of genitalia. The child should be examined in a warm room, supine and in the frog-leg position, with completely free moving legs. This allows for the testicle(s) that may not have descended to be palpated along their course: the inguinal canal, the superficial inguinal pouch, the upper scrotum, or rarely the perineal, femoral, or contralateral scrotal regions.

Documentation of the size of the penis or clitoris, number on perineal openings, presence of testes in labial or inguinal regions should be considered.

The average stretched penile length in a term male infant is between 2.8 to 4.2 cm.

The normal clitoral length in full-term female infants is 3.3 to 6.5 mm, with clitoromegaly defined as length greater than 9 mm. Other findings include fused labial folds, inguinal masses, and urogenital sinus formation.

A uterus can be palpated on a digital rectal examination as an anterior midline cord-like structure.

Other non-genital abnormalities and dysmorphic features should be documented. For example, patients with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome have ambiguous genitalia and microcephaly, posteriorly rotated low set ears, and fusion of second and third toes.