Before introducing imatinib, most CML cases progressed to the blast phase, and death occurred in under five years. Since tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been the first-line therapy for CML, the 5-year survival has risen from 33% to over 90%. The ten-year survival has risen from 11% to 84%, and complete cytogenetic response occurs in 70% to 90% of patients. Individuals diagnosed with chronic phase CML are expected to reach normal or near-normal life expectancy.

Cytogenetic analysis for additional abnormalities, in addition to the classic translocation, may be important for prognostic information. Previously, any additional chromosomal abnormalities were considered a risk for disease progression, tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance, and worse prognosis. However, studies have shown that single additional chromosomal abnormalities, including trisomy 8, loss of Y, and an extra copy of the Philadelphia chromosome, do not impact survival. The presence of two or more additional chromosomal abnormalities or a single additional chromosomal abnormality involving i(17)(q10), the loss of 7 or deletion of 7q, and 3q26.2 rearrangements are poor prognostic indicators.

The BCR-ABL1 mutational analysis may also impact prognosis. The T315I mutation was the first mutation discovered in association with the development of tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance. Over 100 point mutations in the BCR-ABL1 oncogene have been isolated in imatinib-resistant patients. These mutations may have an influence over treatment planning in first-line tyrosine kinase resistant patients.

The future prognostic evaluation may include sequencing for mutations involving known cancer genes, such as IKZF1, RUNX1, ASXL1, BCORL1, and IDH1. These mutations were found in patients who underwent sequencing during blast-phase CML.