**Screening**

Diabetes can be diagnosed in either of four ways:

- Random hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) ≥6.5%

- Fasting blood sugar ≥126 mg/dl

- A 2-hr postprandial glucose ≥200 mg/dl after a 75 gm standard oral glucose load

- Random blood sugar ≥200 mg/dl in a patient with classic symptoms of diabetes (polyuria, polydipsia, and/or polyphagia) or in the patient presenting with a hyperglycemic crisis

Any of the first three standard tests can be used to screen for type 1 or type 2 diabetes. For gestational diabetes, an oral glucose tolerance test is used with different glucose load and cut-off values than in non-pregnant adults. When HbA1c is being measured, it is noteworthy that some hemoglobin variants can interfere with certain essays of HbA1c and should be taken into account. If the patient was diagnosed with diabetes using lab testing (HbA1c or fasting/postprandial blood sugar) without having clinical symptoms, it is essential to send a second test to confirm the diagnosis.

If diabetes screening tests are negative, the first-degree family members of patients with type 1 diabetes may be offered screening for the risk of developing type 1 diabetes with one of the islet cell autoantibodies.

There is no clinical recommendation for screening for type 1 diabetes in asymptomatic low-risk individuals. For type 2 diabetes and prediabetes, adult screening should begin at age 45. It should be conducted earlier if BMI ≥25 (BMI ≥ 23 for Asian Americans) and at least one risk factor is present: hypertension, cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia (low HDL or high triglycerides), polycystic ovary syndrome, physical inactivity, non-White race, severe obesity (BMI ≥40), first degree relative with type 2 diabetes.

If negative for prediabetes, it should be repeated at least every three years.****Patients with prediabetes are tested yearly. Patients diagnosed with HIV should be tested as soon as possible. Women diagnosed with gestational diabetes mellitus must undergo lifelong screening at least every three years.

Prediabetes is not a clinical entity itself; however, it often serves to identify people at increased risk of developing diabetes and cardiovascular disease.

- Fasting plasma glucose 100 to 126 mg/dl

- A 2-hr postprandial glucose 140 to 199 mg/dl after 75 gm glucose load

- Hemoglobin A1C 5.7 to 6.4%

Some entities describe prediabetes as fasting plasma glucose between 110 to 126 mg/dl.

The diagnosis of hypertension (stage I) requires ambulatory blood pressure reading consistently. Systolic blood pressure (SBP) ≥ 130 mm Hg and/or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) ≥ 80 mm Hg. Patients with SBP 120 to 129 mm Hg and DBP <80 should be categorized as elevated BP and not hypertension. If there is a disparity in categorizing patients due to different values of SBP and DBP, the higher value should be used. For example, someone with BP 117/84 has stage I hypertension. Stage II hypertension is present if SBP ≥ 140 mm Hg and/or DBP ≥ 90 mm Hg. Screening for hypertension should be done at least annually in low-risk populations. For people whose SBP is 120 to 129 mm Hg or have risk factors for hypertension, blood pressure should be measured at least semi-annually.

For people presenting with SBP ≥180 and/or DBP ≥120, hypertension can be diagnosed at the first measurement. Similarly, hypertension can be diagnosed if SBP ≥ 160 and/or DBP ≥ 100 PLUS evidence of end-organ damage (hypertensive retinopathy, ischemic cardiovascular disease, left ventricular hypertrophy).

Hyperlipidemia screening is done using blood tests in either fasting or non-fasting state. Universal pediatric screening at age 9 to 11 and repeated at age 17 to 21 is important for diagnosing familial hypercholesterolemia. For patients with a history of smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and a family history of premature atherosclerotic disease, screening should begin at age 20 if they were not tested between ages 17 and 21 years as per the pediatric universal screening guidelines. For patients without the above risk factors, screening can begin at age 35 for men and 45 for women. For ASCVD risk stratification and intervention, LDL cholesterol values are most relevant. If screening results are normal, the testing can be repeated every five years. It can be repeated sooner (every year) in patients with abnormal values near the intervention threshold.

Screening is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic patients for coronary artery disease and peripheral arterial disease. For heart failure, the newest 2022 ACC/AHA guideline for heart failure recommends screening for asymptomatic patients at high risk for heart failure in those with either of the following risk factors:

- Hypertension

- ASCVD

- Diabetes

- Metabolic syndrome and obesity

- Exposure to cardiotoxic agents

- Genetic variant for cardiomyopathy

- Positive family history of cardiomyopathy

These patients are classified as stage A: At risk for heart failure. The suggested screening uses BNP or NT-proBNP using cutoff values of 35 pg/mL or 125 pg/mL, respectively. If patients screen positive, patients are classified as Stage B: Pre-Heart failure and should be referred to a cardiovascular specialist (Class 2b recommendation). In addition, clinicians should ask patients about the symptoms of these diseases in routine visits.