Under the American Heart Association's advanced cardiovascular life support (ACLS) guidelines, the identification and treatment strategies for all tachycardic rhythms involve three simple, rapid decision points.

Next, the tachycardic rhythm is divided into one of two categories depending on the width of the QRS complex: (1) wide-complex tachycardia (QRS width greater than 0.12 seconds) or (2) narrow-complex tachycardia (QRS width less than 0.12 seconds). All narrow-complex tachycardias are considered to be supraventricular in origin and are referred to as SVTs. Although wide-complex tachycardic rhythms can occur from sites above the ventricles (such as in supraventricular rhythms with a bundle branch block or other aberrant conduction), clinically, especially during emergent situations, wide-complex tachycardia is usually treated as ventricular in origin, as it is the most potentially life-threatening condition.

The treatment of all emergent tachycardic rhythms, whether narrow-complex or wide-complex, depends on the third and final clinical determination: the presence or absence of a pulse. Pulseless rhythms are treated under the ACLS cardiac arrest algorithms: a wide-complex tachycardia would be considered to be pulseless ventricular tachycardia, which is treated the same as VF under the VF algorithm. A narrow-complex tachycardia would be considered to be a pulseless SVT and is treated under the PEA (Pulseless Electrical Activity) algorithm.

In the presence of a pulse, the specific treatment for all tachycardic rhythms depends on one final determination: whether the pulse being generated is allowing the patient to be considered stable or unstable. In stable patients, the treatment for the underlying arrhythmia is usually medication.

Like defibrillation, synchronized cardioversion delivers a shock across the chest, either by placing a pair of manual paddles on the chest or through the application of adhesive “hands-free” pads.

Synchronized cardioversion differs from defibrillation in two aspects: (1) the amount of energy needed to convert the rhythm is usually less than that required for defibrillation, and (2) the shock is delivered in a different part of the cardiac cycle.

When a patient is defibrillated, the energy is released through the paddles or hands-free pads immediately when the defibrillation button/s are pressed. The shock is delivered at whatever point the cardiac cycle happens to be in at that moment. If an electrical shock is provided during the relative refractory period (corresponding to the latter part of the T wave), it is possible to induce VF (the so-called “R-on-T Phenomenon”). This would result in a patient who originally had a pulse being put into cardiac arrest.

To avoid inducing cardiac arrest in a patient with a pulse, synchronized cardioversion is performed instead of defibrillation when a patient is in an SVT with a pulse but is considered unstable according to the definition above. To perform synchronized cardioversion, the defibrillator is placed into the “synchronize” mode by pressing the appropriate button on the machine. This causes the monitor to track the R wave of each QRS complex that goes by. A synchronizing marker will appear above each QRS complex, indicating that the synchronize feature is active.

The appropriate energy level is then selected, and the discharge/shock button is pressed and held. The defibrillator does not release the shock immediately. Instead, it waits for the next R-wave to appear and delivers the shock at the time of the R-wave. This allows the shock to be provided safely away from the T wave, avoiding the R-on-T phenomenon.

The recommended energy levels used to perform synchronized cardioversion vary from 50 to 200 joules. Recalling the specific energy level for a particular sub-type of unstable tachycardia is difficult, especially in an emergent situation. The safest and easiest recommendation is to start at the lowest energy level (50 joules), and if the shock is unsuccessful, double the amount of energy used. In a refractory case, you will be at 200 joules after just three shocks.