Monoclonal antibodies are intended for the treatment of outpatient mild-moderate COVID-19 infections in patients with risk factors for progression to severe disease. Effective use of mAbs requires the coordinated efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, pharmacists, nurses, and medical assistants.

Healthcare providers must be able to recognize patients at risk for progression to severe disease who would benefit from monoclonal antibody infusion and recognize which patients must be hospitalized for severe infection. When administering monoclonal antibodies, the interprofessional team must be prepared for adverse events such as transfusion reactions and anaphylaxis. This requires equipment and medications used for the immediate treatment of allergic reactions. Patients must be observed for at least one hour after receiving a monoclonal antibody infusion to ensure patient safety.

The interprofessional healthcare team is also responsible for educating the patient on infection control measures. After receiving monoclonal antibody therapy, the patient must continue self-isolating and use infection control measures such as social distancing, frequent handwashing, and wearing personal protective equipment.

Healthcare providers should also be aware of the resistance patterns of SARS-CoV-2 variants. They should review the information found in section 15 on the fact sheets issued for each of the monoclonal antibodies. Providers should also review the CDC website, which provides information from state and local health authorities that report viral variants in the region, which will help guide treatment decisions. Up-to-date information regarding the use of authorized medications is essential to optimize clinical outcomes. A well-coordinated interprofessional team can minimize the use of ineffective therapies and optimize clinical outcomes for patients affected by this disease.[Level 5]