The lumbar sympathetic chain receives input from the first, second and the third lumbar sometimes are connected by the white rami communicantes,  which contain the preganglionic neurons from the lateral horn of the spinal cord.

All lumbar spinal nerves close to the beginning of their ventral rami join by grey rami communicantes from the ganglia that contain postganglionic neurons. They supply the skin and vessels in the respective territory. Grey rami may leave the sympathetic trunk between the ganglia to form plexuses around the neighboring arteries to reach the target organs. Sympathetic trunk branches accompany lumbar, aorta, common, internal and external iliac arteries. The adrenal medulla is a unique structure in the body that it receives supply from the preganglionic neurons from T10 to L1 spinal segments.

The non-relayed preganglionic neurons emerge from the medial side of the sympathetic trunk as lumbar splanchnic nerves. Four lumbar splanchnic nerves arise from sympathetic trunk to join the coeliac, inferior mesenteric and superior hypogastric plexuses. First lumbar splanchnic nerve arises from the first ganglion gives branches to coeliac, renal and inferior mesenteric plexuses. The second nerve comes from the second ganglion joins the intermesenteric or inferior mesenteric plexuses. The third nerve emerges from the third or fourth ganglion joins the superior hypogastric plexuses. The fourth nerve is given from the fourth ganglion and joins with the lower part of superior hypogastric plexus.

**Microscopic structure:**Autonomic ganglia contain the ganglionic neurons, satellite glial cells, and small intensely fluorescent cells. Ganglionic neurons form many axodendritic synapses with preganglionic axons. Satellite glial cells are closely associated with neurons; they may influence synaptic transmission. Small intensely fluorescent cells possess several granules that contain noradrenaline, dopamine, and serotonin. Sympathetic ganglia contain multipolar neurons, preganglionic sympathetic axons synapse with many postganglionic neurons which is responsible for the widespread effects of the sympathetic activity.

Preganglionic sympathetic neurons release acetylcholine as the neurotransmitter, whereas noradrenaline is the neurotransmitter in postganglionic neurons. The postganglionic neurons are non-myelinated; they reach the target organs in several ways. They will return to the spinal nerves through grey rami communicantes, then distribute through ventral and dorsal rami to blood vessels, sweat glands, and hairs in their territory. In addition, they also travel via a medial branch to the viscera or innervate blood vessels or form plexuses on them to reach their periphery. The majority of the fibers accompany arteries and ducts to reach the distant effectors.

The postganglionic sympathetic fibers are vasoconstricting to blood vessels, secretomotor to sweat glands, and motor to arrector pili muscle. The fibers which follow the motor nerves to skeletal muscle are a vasodilator. The fibers which reach the viscera are responsible for general vasoconstriction, regulation of glandular secretion, and inhibition of smooth muscle contraction in the gastrointestinal system.

General visceral afferent fibers from the viscera and blood vessels follow their efferent fibers. They are the peripheral processes of pseudo-unipolar neurons situated in the dorsal root ganglion of thoracic and upper two lumbar spinal nerves. Visceral afferent fibers which enter the spinal cord through spinal nerve roots terminate in the gray matter. They form connections with CNS that controls autonomic reflex functions. Visceral pain is felt near the viscera or in a cutaneous area or other tissue whose somatic afferents enter the spinal segments that receiving visceral afferents from viscera, the explanation underlying the referred pain.