The differential diagnosis of coronary arteriovenous fistula includes conditions causing dilatation of coronary arteries and the presence of collateral vessels and continuous murmur.

**Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)**

Patent ductus arteriosus is a condition that occurs due to the failure of the obliteration of the embryonic connection between the aorta and pulmonary artery. It can affect infants, children, and young adults. The symptoms are failure to thrive, poor feeding, shortness of breath, and easy fatiguability. On examination, bounding pulse, continuous murmur in the precordium, and signs of heart failure like pulmonary rales, raised JVD, and pedal edema can be found. The diagnosis is by Doppler echocardiography.

**Rupture of sinus of Valsalva aneurysm (SVA)**

SVA is a rare congenital cardiac anomaly caused by the absence of media in the aortic wall behind the sinus of Valsalva. The aneurysm generally arises from the right coronary sinus. SVA commonly ruptures into the right-sided chambers leading to left to right shunt, rarely into the left atrium, left ventricle, pericardium, and pulmonary artery. Classic symptoms are acute onset of dyspnea and palpitations. Continuous murmur and sinus tachycardia are found on examination. Transthoracic echocardiography is diagnostic.

**Pulmonary arteriovenous fistula (PAVF)**

A pulmonary arteriovenous fistula is an abnormal vascular connection between the pulmonary artery and veins, leading to a right-to-left shunt. The PAVF is also known as pulmonary arteriovenous aneurysms, cavernous angioma of the lung, and pulmonary telangiectasias.

**Aortopulmonary window (APW)**

It is a rare congenital condition leading to a defect between the main pulmonary artery and proximal aorta with normally located semilunar valves. This condition is associated with other anomalies in 50% of the cases, like coarctation of the aorta, interrupted aortic arch, tetralogy of Fallot, and atrial septal defect. Small APW is usually asymptomatic. However, large APW presents with congestive heart failure. Symptoms are present in infancy, and 50% of patients die during the first year of life due to congestive heart failure without surgical correction. Transthoracic echocardiography, followed by cardiac catheterization, is diagnostic.

**Anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA).**

The anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA), also known as Bland- White-Garland syndrome, is one of the coronary artery anomalies. In this entity, the left and right coronary arteries communicate via extensive collaterals, ultimately emptying blood from the right coronary artery into the pulmonary artery.

The right coronary artery becomes dilated, and the collaterals are visible on coronary angiogram and coronary computerized-tomography.

**Prolapse of the right coronary cusp with supracristal ventricular septal defect**

In this condition, the right coronary cusp prolapses into the right ventricular outflow tract via a supracristal ventricular septal defect. This leads to symptoms of congestive heart failure. A pan-systolic murmur from ventricular septal defect, an early diastolic murmur from aortic regurgitation due to the right coronary cusp prolapse, can be present.  Transthoracic echocardiography is diagnostic.

**Internal mammary to pulmonary artery fistula**

It can be congenital, traumatic, or related to coronary artery bypass grafting using the left internal mammary artery. A continuous murmur is present on auscultation.

**Systemic arteriovenous fistula**

Systemic arteriovenous fistula can be either traumatic (e.g., aortocaval fistula caused by a bullet trauma), iatrogenic (hemodialysis access), or congenital ( hepatic hemangioma and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasis). It produces high output cardiac failure and is one of the differential diagnoses of continuous murmur and dilated connection between artery and vein.