# Continuing Education Activity

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy arising from the secretory glands, most commonly seen involving the salivary glands. Although uncommon, it is an important differential to consider for a painless swelling in the head and neck region because of its high tendency to metastasize. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of ACC and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of adenoid cystic carcinoma.
- Review the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of adenoid cystic carcinoma.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for adenoid cystic carcinoma.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to enhance the treatment for patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy arising from the secretory glands, most commonly seen involving the salivary glands. It accounts for approximately 1% of all malignancies of the head and neck region. However, it is the most common tumor of the minor salivary glands and the second most common tumor of the major salivary glands. Overall, it accounts for 10% of all salivary gland tumors.

# Etiology

Owing to the low prevalence of this malignancy, scarce data in the form of a few single-center population-based studies is available regarding its etiology.

# Epidemiology

ACC exhibits a slight predominance in females (60% versus 40% in males) with an overall age-adjusted rate of 4.5 cases per 100,000 individuals.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of ACC is an understudied area because of the rarity of the condition.

# Histopathology

ACC was initially named ''cylindroma'' by Billroth, who initially described it in 1859, owing to the cylindrical arrangement of tumor cells in the hyaline stroma.

Immunohistochemistry greatly aids in the diagnosis of ACC as the tumor cells stain positive for smooth muscle actin, S100, vimentin, as well as for MYB and CD 117 (receptor tyrosine kinase c-KIT) which helps differentiate it from other tumors.

The contribution of the solid component is a factor of the aggressiveness of the tumor. A grading strategy is used to describe the histology. The higher the solid parts, the higher the grade, while grade 1 tumors are mostly tubules or cribriform areas.

# History and Physical

The prolonged asymptomatic clinical course of ACC may cause a delay in seeking medical attention. ACC is commonly locally aggressive, however distant metastasis can also occur. The most common presentation of ACC is a slow-growing, hard painless swelling in the head and the neck region, though pain and paresthesia are not uncommon as the tumor is notorious for perineural infiltration with the highest rates of perineural involvement seen in tumors arising from the parotid gland.

# Evaluation

Radiological investigations like computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the imaging modalities of choice to help delineate the extension of the primary tumor as well as for staging purposes.

# Treatment / Management

Complete resection of the tumor via surgery, if possible, is the mainstay for treatment. For localized ACC of the head and neck, care is taken to avoid accidental severance of nerve tissue in the adjoining area and to ensure clear surgical margins. In patients with the spread of disease to the cervical lymph nodes, a modified radical neck dissection is the preferred route. However, despite good surgical techniques, the 5 to 10-year recurrence rate is roughly 75%.

# Differential Diagnosis

Depending on the location of the tumor, the differential diagnosis includes both malignant and benign tumors of the affected organ. In cases where the primary tumor is located in the head and neck region, particularly the major salivary glands, important differential diagnoses to consider include pleomorphic adenoma, polymorphic adenocarcinoma, basaloid carcinoma, or mucoepidermoid carcinoma.

# Medical Oncology

Because ACCs do not have a fast turnover rate, systemic chemotherapy does not confer benefit generally, and therefore a standard chemotherapy regimen is not a part of treatment for ACCs.

# Prognosis

ACCs generally carry a favorable prognosis with a 5-year survival rate of around 75%, but the 10-year survival rate drops acutely to 20%. Features associated with poor prognosis include the size of >4 cm of the primary tumor and a solid subtype histological pattern. Other features like perineural invasion and bone involvement are also associated with an unfavorable outcome and increased mortality. Unfortunately, as the tumor mainly originates in the head and neck region, often at times a complete resection of the tumor is not without complications because of the surrounding neurovascular bundles, which greatly increase the chances of local recurrence.

# Complications

Depending on the region where the tumor originates, it can cause complications such as facial pain and paralysis, particularly if it involves the facial nerve.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Upon diagnosis, the patient should be counseled regarding the slow-growing and locally aggressive nature of the tumor. The treatment depends on the stage, but largely involves surgical resection followed by radiation therapy in the presence of high-risk features. The patient should, however, be educated about the possibility of recurrence of the malignancy even as late as more than 5 years after the initial surgery, so periodic medical follow-up should be reinforced.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The slow-growing kinetics, along with the rarity of the condition, often hinders in early diagnosis of ACC. While the treatment is mainly surgical, it is important to consult with an interprofessional team that includes a radiologist, radiation oncologist, and a medical oncologist to tailor the best possible treatment for the patient. The radiologist plays a pivotal role in studying the images for staging purposes, which are required to decide the most appropriate surgical technique. The radiation oncologist can weigh in on the benefit of postoperative radiation, which plays a crucial part in the overall management of the patient. Lastly, although there is no defined role of systemic chemotherapy in the treatment of localized ACC, in unresectable, recurrent, and metastatic cases, chemotherapy and targeted agents are the only options. Therefore, a medical oncology consult is also advised. Although there are no strict guidelines for the overall management of the ACC, an interprofessional team approach can improve outcomes and quality of life. [Level 2]