# Continuing Education Activity

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are a separate class from other antidepressants, treating different forms of depression and other nervous system disorders such as panic disorder, social phobia, and depression with atypical features. Even though MAOIs were the first antidepressants introduced, they are not the first choice in treating mental health disorders due to several dietary restrictions, side effects, and safety concerns. MAOIs are only a treatment option when all other medications are unsuccessful. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, pharmacology, monitoring, and relevant interactions of MAOIs, pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in treating patients with conditions where this drug class has a therapeutic purpose.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the mechanisms of actions of the MAOI class of drugs.
- Identify the approved and off-label indications for MAOI therapy.
- Review the adverse event profile of MAOIs.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes and treatment efficacy for patients who might benefit from MAOI therapy.

# Indications

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) were first introduced in the 1950s.

Furthermore, examples of neurological disorders that can benefit from MAOIs are patients with Parkinson disease and those diagnosed with multiple system atrophy.

# Mechanism of Action

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors are responsible for blocking the monoamine oxidase enzyme. The monoamine oxidase enzyme breaks down different types of neurotransmitters from the brain: norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, and tyramine. MAOIs inhibit the breakdown of these neurotransmitters thus, increasing their levels and allowing them to continue to influence the cells that have been affected by depression.

There are two types of monoamine oxidase, A and B. The MAO A is mostly distributed in the placenta, gut, and liver, but MAO B is present in the brain, liver, and platelets. Serotonin and noradrenaline are substrates of MAO A, but phenylethylamine, methylhistamine, and tryptamine are substrates of MAO B. Dopamine and tyramine are metabolized by both MAO A and B. Selegiline and rasagiline are irreversible and selective inhibitors of MAO type B, but safinamide is a reversible and selective MAO B inhibitor.

MAOIs are reversible or irreversible. Moclobemide is an example of a reversible MAOI I (RIMA), tranylcypromine, phenelzine, isocarboxazid, and selegiline irreversibly inhibit MAO. Selegiline in low doses is a selective, irreversible MAO B inhibitor, but it is no longer selective at higher doses.

# Administration

MAOI administration is almost always orally but sometimes comes in the form of a skin patch.

The different types of MAOIs approved by the FDA include isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline, and tranylcypromine.

# Adverse Effects

The most frequently encountered side effects are dry mouth, nausea, diarrhea, constipation, drowsiness, insomnia, dizziness, and/or lightheadedness. Furthermore, if applied via patch, a skin reaction may occur at the patch site.

# Contraindications

MAOIs can potentially cause drug-to-drug interactions, drug-food interaction, and overdoses, of which the patient should be aware.

MAOIs prevent the breakdown of tyramine found in the body and certain foods, drinks, and other medications. Patients that take MAOIs and consume tyramine-containing foods or drinks will exhibit high serum tyramine level.

Eating foods with high tyramine can trigger a reaction that can have serious consequences.

Tramadol, meperidine, dextromethorphan, and methadone are contraindicated in patients on MAOIs as they are at high risk for causing serotonin syndrome.

In general, SSRIs, SNRIs, TCAs, bupropion, mirtazapine, St. John's Wort and, sympathomimetic amines, including stimulants, are contraindicated with MAOIs.

# Monitoring

Even though MAOIs are no longer a first-line treatment option, they are still in use, and it is essential to note the precautions when initiating treatment.

# Toxicity

Patients taking MAOIs can overdose and may show similar side effects, as stated above, except with more severe presentation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Safety and optimal treatment are vital to patient health. Patients with a history of seizures or epilepsy should avoid MAOIs; these medications can increase the occurrence of seizures. Also, people with a history of alcoholism, angina, severe headaches, blood vessel disease, diabetes, kidney or liver disease, history of a recent heart attack or stroke, overactive thyroid, and pheochromocytoma should not receive MAOI therapy; since this may cause a hypertensive crisis.

Ads with other illnesses, depression, and other psychiatric treatment plans pose multiple dilemmas for physicians.