**Growth Hormone**

The effects of HGH on the tissues of the body can generally be described as anabolic. Their primary function is to induce growth in almost all tissues and organs of the body, especially during adolescence. It increases the uptake of amino acids from the blood, enhances cellular proliferation, and reduces apoptosis. HGH also impacts metabolism, primarily by up-regulating the production of insulin-like growth factor-1 and its subsequent effect on peripheral cells.

**Prolactin**

Prolactin is best known for its multiple actions on the mammary gland with its two main functions; stimulation of milk production and development of breast tissues. During pregnancy, it contributes to the development and growth of the breast tissue with estrogen and progesterone and stimulates the enlargement of the alveoli in preparation for lactation. Prolactin stimulates milk production by inducing the enzyme that synthesizes the constituents of milk, such as lactose (the carbohydrate of milk), casein (the protein of milk), and lipids.

**Follicle-stimulating Hormone and Luteinizing Hormone**

The gonadotropins primarily regulate reproductive function and sexual development in both males and females. In the case of females, the onset and cessation of reproductive capacity are also dependent on these hormones.

FSH stimulates the production and maturation of sex cells, sperm in males, and ova in females. It also promotes follicular maturation in females during the ovarian cycle; these follicles then release estrogen in the female ovaries. LH triggers ovulation in women and causes the release of progesterone from the corpus luteum after ovulation. Furthermore, it causes the release of estrogen and progesterone from the ovaries. In males, LH stimulates the release of testosterone from the Leydig cells of the testes.

**Adrenocorticotrophic Hormone**

ACTH primarily functions to regulate cortisol and androgen production. The ACTH released from the anterior pituitary acts on its target organ, the Adrenal gland, and stimulates the production of Glucocorticoids from the Zona Fasiculata and androgens from the Zona Reticularis.

**Thyroid-stimulating Hormone**

TSH triggers the secretion of thyroid hormones thyroxine, or T4, and triiodothyronine, or T3 by stimulating receptors found in the follicular cells of the thyroid gland. Subsequently, the thyroid hormones promote bone and central nervous system maturation, increase basal metabolic rate, and heat production. TSH is also necessary to maintain the size of the thyroid follicles and their continued ability to produce thyroid hormones.

**Vasopressin**

Vasopressin acts as a water-saving hormone and is released into the bloodstream to vasoconstrict and reabsorb water from the kidney's collecting duct; this ensures the equilibrium of intracellular and extracellular contents.

**Oxytocin**

The polypeptide hormone oxytocin is commonly released in females during the process of childbirth. It allows the uterus to contract, which advances the fetus into the vagina for delivery. During lactation, oxytocin also releases milk from the breast tissue into the baby's oral cavity. Finally, oxytocin is also present in males during ejaculation and stimulates contraction of the vas deferens to push the semen and sperm forward.