Cancer cells can bypass these checkpoints and divide indefinitely. They do not stop growing even when all growth factors have been depleted. The abnormal behavior of cells can have harmful effects on the body. It starts with a single cell in a specific tissue transforming from a normal cell to a cancer cell. Normally, the body can identify a cancer cell by the proteins on its surface and destroy it. However, if a cancer cell evades destruction, it can form a mass of cancerous cells called a tumor. If the tumor stays in the same place, it is called a benign tumor and can usually be removed with surgery. However, a malignant tumor is one that can spread to other tissues of the body and impair functions of more than one organ. An individual with a malignant tumor is said to have cancer. The spread of cancer cells from one location to another is called metastasis.

Individuals can have a somatic or inherited mutation in certain tumor suppressor genes that will increase their risk of developing cancers. These "tumor suppressor genes" are very often cell cycle regulators that will act as a stop sign to halt cell division in the case of DNA damage, etc. Some relevant tumor suppressors are mentioned below.

A well-known tumor suppressor, Rb, is associated with development of retinoblastoma. The two most common symptoms being leukocoria and strabismus. Leukocoria means "white pupil" and refers to an abnormal pupillary reflex that can be better seen on photography. Strabismus refers to a misalignment of the eyes.

Another well- known tumor suppressor is p53, which is seen to be mutated in around 50% of human cancers. it normally responds to stresses such as damage, oncogenic activation, and more, leading to cell cycle arrest. When mutated, normaly cellular responses to these stressors are less effective, and the cell can continue to progress through cell division. Le Fraumeni syndrome is a syndrome caused by a germline mutation in the TP53 gene, encoding the p53 protein. It genetically predisposes carriers to osteosarcoma, soft tissue sarcomas, premenopausal breast cancers, adrenal cortical carcinomas, and brain tumors.

Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is a tumor suppressor involved in pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. Germline mutations in APC leads to a classical form of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP). FAP is characterized by hundreds of colonic polyps or adenomas, which have a high tendency to undergo malignant transformation.

It is important to recognize that cancer can develop through mechanisms other than loss of tumor suppressor genes as well, such as mutations in DNA repair genes, proto- oncogenes, and growth factor receptors, and others.

A localized tumor can be treated with high-energy radiation, which damages DNA in cancer cells much more than DNA in normal cells. This is because cancer cells have the lost the ability to repair DNA. In order to treat metastatic tumors, chemotherapy is used. Chemotherapy is when drugs that are toxic to dividing cells are administered through the circulatory system. One example is the drug Taxol, or paclitaxel, which causes microtubule stabilization preventing depolymerization, leading to cell cycle arrest.

Other errors in mitosis that can contribute to disease include aneuploidy, or an improper number of chromosomes within cells.  Aneuploidy is a common characteristic of tumors with chromosomal instability, as well as other diseases. Aneuploidy can be caused by nondisjunction, or the failure of chromosomes to separate, which can lead to somatic mosaicism in cells undergoing mitosis. Mosaicism can be a component of certain diseases, such as Turner syndrome.

Mitosis is a process constantly occurring in the human body. It is important to understand the process at the molecular level because many conditions, such as cancer and others, can arise when mitosis is interfered with in any way.