- The patient should be evaluated preoperatively by a medical professional who may risk-stratify and optimize the patient for general anesthesia if warranted.

- A thorough preoperative exam should be performed with the patient in an upright position with no facial animation.

- Includes the assessment of brow position, gross visual field evaluation, the presence of existing rhytids and/or scars, and facial nerve function.

- Preoperative photographic documentation should be obtained.

- The patient should be appropriately counseled regarding the risks, benefits, and alternatives to the procedure.

- Pertinent to this procedure, it is important to mention improper brow position, incomplete eye closure, eye dryness, a disfiguring facial scar, need for revisions, alopecia, paresthesias, and facial nerve injury. Other common risks associated with surgery include pain, bleeding, infection, scarring, etc. 
- The patient's expectations should be discussed, and realistic goals must be set.

- Patients who require additional simultaneous rejuvenating procedures such a blepharoplasty, fat transfer, and laser resurfacing should be identified and counseled.

- Important landmarks are identified:

- The supraorbital rim, supraorbital/supratrochlear neurovascular bundles, temporal line, sentinel vein, corrugator supercilii, procerus muscles, the expected trajectory of the temporal branch of the facial nerve (Pintanguy's line), the position of the hairline, and the anticipated eyebrow shape.

- General anesthesia is recommended but not necessary.

- Muscle paralytics are usually avoided to allow for intraoperative facial nerve monitoring if desired.

- A single dose of intravenous antibiotics covering skin flora may be given preoperatively.

- The supine surgical position is preferable.

- Skin marking

- Starts with a fusiform beveled incision just within the most superior row of eyebrow hair. The upper incision is marked such that the height of the skin excised replicates the amount of brow repositioning desired. The bulk of the elevation occurs laterally and allows the restoration of the natural brow position.