A thorough medical history, detailed sexual history, and physical examination are required before embarking upon any treatment or further investigations. It is also important to obtain a complete medication list including supplements, particularly if targeting prostate problems as they often contain anti-androgens.

We have found it useful to give the patient a scoring system so they can better communicate the degree of their erectile rigidity with 100% being the best and hardest they ever had, 0% being absolutely flaccid and 50% being just barely hard enough for penetration.  This simple scoring system has made it much easier for patients to clearly indicate how rigid their erections are and track their progress after treatment. Alternately, a questionnaire, such as the International Index of Erectile Function Questionnaire (IIEF), can be given to the patient to fill out in private. The questionnaire has been validated and found useful for monitoring the severity of erectile dysfunction and treatment efficacy.

Typical sexual history questions include:

- How hard or rigid an erection can you now get (with 50% being just barely enough for penetration)?

- What is the best or hardest erection you can get right now?

- How long can that erection last?

- Does the penis feel numb or in any way unusual?

- Does the penis lose rigidity during foreplay?

- Does the penis lose rigidity only when attempting vaginal penetration?

- Does the penis stay erect and rigid until immediately after penetration? (This could be from anxiety or a venous leak.)

- Do you still get morning erections? 

- If so, are the morning erections any better or longer-lasting than the erections you get when having intercourse?
- If not, when was the last time you had a good, morning erection?

- Any overnight erections?  If so, how hard are they?

- Does the hardness of the erection vary much from one day to the next?

- Has there been any time or recent circumstance when the erection worked any better such as with masturbation or an alternate partner?

- How is erectile rigidity with masturbation compared to when attempting intercourse?

- When was the last time your erections worked normally and you had sexual intercourse?

- When did the erection trouble begin?

- Did it start suddenly or gradually?  (sudden, unexplained onset of ED is almost always psychogenic)

- Was there any significant change in your life that happened at about the same time as the erection trouble started? New relationships or medications?

- Is the main problem insufficient rigidity or maintenance?

- Is the problem stable or getting worse?

- Is there any history of a particularly traumatic sexual event in your past?

- What do you use for contraception?

- Have you already tried any treatments?  If so, what?

- Are ejaculation and orgasm normal even if the erections are not?

- How hard does the erection get at ejaculation?

- Do you feel your general interest in sexual activity is roughly normal?

- How often would the patient want to have sexual intercourse if his erectile dysfunction were successfully treated?

- Does your partner agree with that frequency?

- Does your partner know you are here seeking treatment? If so, are they encouraging?

- Would your partner be willing to become involved in treatment?

- How often do you and your partner currently attempt intercourse?

- Which of you usually initiates sexual activity and how?

- What will happen to your relationship if the erection trouble isn't successfully treated?

- Are the erections straight or curved?

- Is there a problem with libido, interest, ejaculation, or orgasm?  If so, when did these other symptoms start?

- Would you be satisfied if we could get the erections up to 65% or 75% and they would last for 10 or 15 minutes? If not, what would you consider a successful treatment?

Other helpful things to elicit in the patient history include vascular risk factors (e.g. hypertension and diabetes); lifestyle factors (such as smoking, activity level, alcohol intake, and the use of any recreational drugs), and general medication history.

A full general and cardiovascular examination should be undertaken, as erectile dysfunction could be the first symptom of underlying vascular disease. Peripheral pulses should be checked and blood pressure measured. The genitalia should be carefully inspected, looking at the testicular size (hypogonadism), signs of infection (such as redness and discharge in acute balanoposthitis), the presence of penile fibrosis or plaques (as in Peyronie disease), and phimosis (the inability to retract the foreskin). Hair distribution, breast size (gynecomastia), and a detailed neurological examination are helpful. The cremasteric reflex should be evaluated. (This is done by gently scratching or stroking the upper, inner thigh while observing the scrotum. A normal reflex would be retraction or elevation of the ipsilateral testicle. This reflex will be normal if the thoracolumbar erection center is intact.)

Erectile dysfunction can be the first symptom of otherwise silent cardiovascular disease, so a full cardiovascular workup should be completed in all patients without an obvious cause of their ED.