An interprofessional care team of nurses, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and clinicians is crucial, given the nature of the injury. All healthcare professionals should cooperate in providing a non-judgemental, professional atmosphere. It is helpful to utilize staff experienced in calming or papoosing pediatric patients.

The manual release of the entrapped skin is far easier when the patient is more relaxed. If necessary, the nurse should help the physician restrain the patient during the procedure. Nurses can also help educate the family and patient regarding the nature of the injury and the mechanisms of treatment being utilized. One of the simplest ways of dealing with an entrapped penis zipper injury is to apply mineral oil for at least 5 to 10 minutes and possibly up to 30 minutes. In many cases, the zipper will gradually slide off with gentle manipulation, either manually or utilizing a cotton-tipped swab. This is one approach that all clinicians, nurses, and other healthcare providers should know, as this is something that patients can do at home.

A general anesthetic in the operating room may be necessary for more complex cases.

All healthcare workers in an Emergency Department should be aware of the initially recommended techniques for zipper injuries and penile ring entrapments. Common to both is the use of mineral oil, minimizing unnecessary manipulation and compression of the edematous area. Using the Coban/string technique to remove penile rings should also be familiar as it is generally the least painful and works most of the time.