Required personnel for this procedure may vary based on individual state guidelines and the level of anesthesia provided during the case. However, a minimum of one dentist or surgeon and one surgically-trained assistant are usually sufficient to complete this procedure under local anesthesia. While the surgeon operates, the surgical assistant provides suction and irrigation. They also may anticipatorily hands instruments to the surgeon as needed. Additional personnel may be required if the patient completes the procedure under sedation or general anesthesia.

Roles and responsibilities of team members may change depending on the mode of anesthesia delivery. For instance, an assistant trained in anesthesia monitoring is responsible for constant assessment and support of intraoperative airway patency. They also make the team aware of notable changes to vital signs or patient status during the procedure.

Outpatient anesthesia in a dental or oral and maxillofacial surgery clinic requires a licensed anesthesia provider who has received extensive training in anesthesia delivery and anesthetic-related patient management. This could be the surgeon or dentist, but it could also be a certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA), an MD/DO anesthesiologist, or a dental anesthesiologist.

Ancillary staff members perform crucial administrative tasks such as confirming informed consent, updating the patient’s medical history and allergies, and all necessary pre-procedural verifications. When operating effectively, all surgical team members help foster a culture of safety and efficiency in the outpatient surgical setting.