Routine laboratory investigations have a limited role. The cases of oligohydramnios warrant an evaluation of the renal profile like serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and electrolytes. In patients with unilateral lung hypoplasia, plain chest radiography will typically demonstrate an opaque hemithorax with rib crowding and ipsilateral mediastinal shift. There is compensatory hyperinflation of the contralateral lung. The chest radiograph shows a pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum in cases of air leaks.

Computed tomography (CT) of the chest can be done for confirmation of pulmonary hypoplasia and to differentiate from other conditions like Swyer James syndrome or atelectasis. Radiological features on CT include absent or rudimentary bronchus and underlying pulmonary vasculature with collapsed lung on the same side. Ventilation-perfusion scanning shows the absence of ventilation and perfusion in the affected area with more significant impairment in perfusion, leading to a mismatched perfusion defect.

ECG is useful to differentiate between dextrocardia and dextroversion in cases of right lung hypoplasia. There is right axis deviation, positive QRS complex in aVR, and inversion of all waves in Lead-I. Two-dimensional echocardiography (2D Echo) can rule out congenital cardiac anomalies.

Biometric indices like lung area, thoracic circumference (TC), thoracic circumference to abdominal circumference (TC: AC) ratio have been used during 2D sonography to assess the fetal risk for pulmonary hypoplasia. Volumetric assessment by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or 3D ultrasonography has shown some promise. However, unreliable positive and negative predictive value precludes their routine use for diagnosis.

Pulmonary function testing done in late childhood or adulthood reveals restrictive or obstructive lung defects with a reduction in the diffusion capacity.

Alternative methods for diagnosing pulmonary hypoplasia include alveolar count per unit volume, airway branching count, and lung DNA content of less than 100 mg/kg body weight. Microscopically, there is a decrease in the number of lung cells, fewer branching of bronchi, immature epithelial cells, reduced and thickened pulmonary vessels, and low surfactant concentration. The providers utilize many of the criteria mentioned above in the diagnosis of pulmonary hypoplasia, but there is not a strict diagnostic criterion established.