The treatment of necrolytic migratory erythema and glucagonoma syndrome can be broadly divided into curative treatment, which is surgical, and palliative treatment which is medical.

Curative treatment of glucagonomas and its accompanying paraneoplastic syndrome is centered around early surgical excision of the tumor, which, as previously mentioned, is located in the tail of the pancreas in the majority of cases. Removal of the tumor in the setting of no distant metastases generally completely cures the dermatosis and the accompanying symptoms, often within a week.

Although surgery can be curative in localized disease, many times, the tumor has spread distantly at presentation, with reports of 50% to 100% of patients exhibiting metastases at the time of diagnosis.

Medical therapy is the cornerstone for those with metastatic disease upon presentation or who are poor candidates for surgery. Patients may be treated palliatively with either long-acting somatostatin analogs (i.e., octreotide, lanreotide) or interferon-alpha.

Treatment with somatostatin analogs helps palliate symptoms and improve survival. However, treatment with somatostatin analogs must continue indefinitely as NME and other symptoms of glucagonoma promptly return when treatment is withdrawn. Chemotherapy with agents such as streptozotocin and 5-fluorouracil can be considered to palliate metastatic disease; however, this is not preferred due to the tumor's poor response to current chemotherapeutic agents.

As necrolytic migratory erythema is considered a deficiency dermatosis, the repletion of various nutrients has been utilized in the literature to target this entity specifically. In particular, supplementation of zinc, essential fatty acids, and amino acids have been shown in some cases to resolve NME.

Lastly, in the case of treating NME outside of glucagonoma (i.e., pseudoglucagonoma syndrome), therapy is mainly aimed at treating the underlying condition. However, as malnutrition seems to be a common theme in pseudoglucagonoma syndrome, one may consider nutritional repletion with zinc, amino acids, and essential fatty acids.