The first test that should be ordered in a patient with suspected hyperkalemia is an ECG since the most lethal complication of hyperkalemia is cardiac condition abnormalities which can lead to dysrhythmias and death.

Elevated potassium causes ECG changes in a dose-dependent manner:

- K = 5.5 to 6.5 mEq/L ECG will show tall, peaked t-waves

- K = 6.5 to 7.5 mEq/L ECG will show loss of p-waves

- K = 7 to 8 ECG mEq/L will show widening of the QRS complex

- K = 8 to 10 mEq/L will produce cardiac arrhythmias, sine wave pattern, and asystole

It should be noted that the rate of rising serum potassium is a more significant factor than the level. Patients with chronic hyperkalemia may have relatively normal EGCs, even at high levels. Significant ECG changes may be present at much lower levels in patients with sudden spikes in serum potassium.

Additional laboratory testing should include serum blood urea nitrogen and creatinine to assess renal function and urinalysis to screen for renal disease. Urine potassium, sodium, and osmolality may also help evaluate the cause. In patients with renal disease, the serum calcium level should also be checked because hypocalcemia may exacerbate the cardiac effects of hyperkalemia. A complete blood count to screen for leukocytosis or thrombocytosis may also be helpful. Serum glucose and blood gas analysis should be ordered in diabetics and patients with suspected acidosis. Lactate dehydrogenase should be ordered in patients with suspected hemolysis. Creatinine phosphokinases and urine myoglobin should be ordered in patients with suspected rhabdomyolysis. Uric acid and phosphorus should be ordered in patients with suspected tumor lysis syndrome. Digoxin toxicity may cause hyperkalemia, so serum levels should be checked in patients on digoxin. If no other cause is found, consider cortisol and aldosterone levels to assess for mineralocorticoid deficiency.

Since pseudohyperkalemia is so common, confirmation should be obtained in asymptomatic patients without typical ECG changes before initiating aggressive therapy.