Patients with primary biliary cholangitis can be asymptomatic or may present with jaundice, pruritus, and fatigue. Asymptomatic patients are incidentally diagnosed when they are found to have abnormal liver chemistry during evaluation for some other cause. Jaundice is secondary to cholestasis. Pruritus occurs in about 20% to 70% of patients, which is thought to be the neurocutaneous effect of retained bile salts. Another recent theory for pruritus is the association of elevated levels of lysophosphatidic acid, which is a product of circulating phospholipase and autotaxin, the levels of which are elevated in the case of cholestasis. Patients typically complain of worsening pruritus at night, in hot and humid weather, and when the skin is dry. Few patients may complain of vague right upper quadrant pain and mild cognitive impairment. Malabsorption and steatorrhea have also been reported in the case of primary biliary cholangitis, which is thought to be related to the deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins.

Patients with primary biliary cholangitis have various clinical findings on physical exam, which usually correlate with the stage of disease at presentation. About 40% of patients have skin complaints such as dry skin, hyperpigmentation, xanthelasma, xanthomas, jaundice, dermatographism, and fungal infection of the feet. Due to dry skin and pruritus, excoriations from scratching are common in primary biliary cholangitis patients. Hepatomegaly can be seen in both asymptomatic patients and at the later stage of the disease. Splenomegaly is common more at the later disease state. Stigmata of chronic liver disease such as spider nevi, ascites, edema, proximal, and temporal muscle wasting are more common as the liver disease progresses and patients are cirrhotic. Patients with primary biliary cholangitis can have other autoimmune conditions such as Hashimoto thyroiditis, CREST syndrome, Sjogren syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, telangiectasias, and celiac disease. Osteoporosis, renal tubular acidosis, various skin conditions (lichen planus, discoid lupus, pemphigoid) are also commonly associated with primary biliary cirrhosis.