**Coronary Angioplasty and Stent Placement**

Acute coronary syndromes: Unstable angina, STEMI, and NSTEMI. In stable coronary artery disease, indications for PCI are: Activity limiting symptoms despite optimal medical therapy, Active patients who prefer PCI for improvement in the quality of life, and single-vessel disease involving right coronary and left circumflex coronary arteries or two-vessel disease involving right coronary and left circumflex arteries. For left main disease or multivessel disease in patients who have diabetes - CABG is preferred over PCI.

**Carotid Angioplasty**

Revascularization is primarily indicated in patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis of >70% to 99%.

**Peripheral Vascular Disease**

Patients with disabling symptoms, despite lifestyle adjustment, supervised exercise programs, and pharmacotherapy, are candidates for revascularization. The choice of revascularization procedure depends on symptomatology, patient risk, location and extent of disease, comorbidities, patient's functional status, and patient preference. Angioplasty with stenting is the preferred procedure except in cases of - Eccentric calcified stenosis, a long segment of stenosis, or multifocal stenosis.

**Renal Artery Stenosis**

Angioplasty with stenting is the preferred treatment for patients with renovascular disease with uncontrolled hypertension despite maximally tolerated medical therapy.

**AV Fistula Stenosis**

Angioplasty is sometimes used to treat venous stenosis associated with hemodialysis access.