Noroviruses are difficult to culture in a lab setting. Because of this, it has been difficult to predict exactly how norovirus infects and replicates in humans. Studies suggest that norovirus infection is multi-faceted, with the involvement of multiple cell types in the human gut. The predominant cell type lining the human gut is a single layer of intestinal epithelial cells called enterocytes. Lying deep to the enterocytes are numerous immune cells. Several studies have confirmed that norovirus infects and replicates in immune cells including macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells. It is postulated that noroviruses have a way of bypassing enterocytes to enter the human hosts. Proposed mechanisms include entering through M cells, a specialized type of cell in the gut that overlies the Peyer patches and lymphoid follicles in the gut. M cells lack microvilli and do not secrete mucus, making it easier for the norovirus to enter the host and invade immune cells. However, although definitive data are lacking, other studies suggest norovirus may directly invade enterocytes lining the gut lumen. Furthermore, the role of the host’s pre-existing gut microflora in norovirus infection is being investigated. It has been proposed that norovirus interacts with bacteria in the gut to enhance infection and replication. The average time period from inoculation with the virus until clinical symptoms develop is 1.2 days, and symptoms of norovirus usually resolve within 1 to 3 days. Although symptoms may resolve, humans can continue to shed the virus in their stool for extended periods of time, up to 60 days in some cases. Immunocompromised patients can continue to shed the virus for months or years.