A conservative approach is observed for asymptomatic CMs, irrespective of location. Serial routine MRIs are carried out to monitor the changes in the lesion. The conservative approach is continued for as long as the lesion appears stable, with no additional symptoms or evidence of hemorrhage.

Most cavernomas are supratentorial, and indications for resection include a progressive neurological deficit, intractable epilepsy, or a single hemorrhage in CMs when located in a noneloquent area. Surgical resection of symptomatic CM lesions is considered in the case of multiple hemorrhages in eloquent areas that are associated with deteriorating neurological deficits. Other indications include severe symptoms, such as cardiac or respiratory instability, and the presence of a CM lesion within 2 mm from the pial surface. Several studies report excellent surgical outcomes (70-97 percent) for cerebral and cerebellar cavernous angiomas. Furthermore, the use of stereotaxy and intraoperative functional MR imaging combined with surgical microdissection has significantly reduced the risk of complications for most supratentorial CM lesions.

Brain stem cavernomas pose particular problems to the surgical approach due to the tightly-packed nuclei and nerve fibers. Therefore, any additional mass or introduction of fluid, such as blood products from a bleed, can compress or crush important nerve fibers that control basic, involuntary functions like respiration or heartbeat. Surgical removal may be considered in any of the below-mentioned cases:

- The lesion abuts the surface of the brain stem.

- Recurrent  hemorrhages result in progressive deficits

- Blood from the hemorrhage is entering brain tissue surrounding the cavernous angioma.

- Cavernous angioma growth is causing visible compression of surrounding tissue.

- Patients are treated with steroids for 1 to 2 preoperatively to limit the edema. In the case of  DVA associated with the CM lesion, its resection is avoided because of the high risk of venous infarction in case DVA resection.

- Complete removal of the lesion including hemosiderin ring is required to avoid further recurring hemorrhagic events and complete seizure control. The procedure is usually followed by postoperative MRI within 72 hrs for any rebleeding event in which case surgical intervention is warranted.

- Another series identified a long preoperative seizure history and poorer preoperative seizure control as unfavorable prognostic indicators.

- Stereotactic radiosurgery is a potential alternative to conservative therapy in patients with such surgically inaccessible lesions. However, studies have reported associated high risk of complications like a recurrence of hemorrhage, permanent neurological deficits, and radiation-induced adverse effects.