PNH is rare, with occurrence estimated as high as 15.9 individuals per million worldwide.

Although the condition is due to an X-linked chromosome mutation, women are affected at a slightly higher rate than men. This is because the acquired defect occurs in somatic, or clone, hematopoietic stem cells, rather than germ cells. The phenotype can be created due to a single somatic mutation. Men only have one X chromosome, and women only express a single X chromosome due to lyonization, or inactivation of the duplicate X chromosome. Therefore, once the mutation occurs, the cell line perpetuates the abnormality until clonal superiority is achieved, and the phenotype is expressed.

The PIGA mutation that is responsible for PNH can also occur in germline cells; however, this generally results in embryonic death. There has been a variant of the mutation, a hypomorphic PIGA mutation that is responsible for a syndrome known as multiple congenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndromes. These children have severe congenital manifestations, including intellectual disability, abnormal facial features, seizures, and death at an early age. The difference in this expression of PIGA mutation is that it affects granulocytes rather than erythrocytes, and hemolysis does not occur.

While the occurrence of PNH has no apparent ethnic or geographic distribution, there is an increased risk of thrombosis in the United States and Europe. For instance, about 30 to 40% of PNH cases are reported in the United States(US) and Europe, whereas less than 10% of PNH cases are reported from Asia. Consequently, the incidence of thromboembolism due to PNH is higher in the US and Europe compared to Japan.

Patients affected by PNH in the US demonstrate differences in complications according to ethnic groups. African-Americans with PNH have a 73% rate of thromboembolism (TE) and Latin Americans, about 50%. White race and Asian Americans have a 36% rate of TE complications. They have also demonstrated bone marrow failure to vary with ethnicity or geography. It is more common in residents of Asia, the Pacific Islands, and Latin America. The reasons for these variations are not clear.