Acetylcholinesterase enzyme is responsible for the hydrolysis of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at the various muscarinic and nicotinic sites in the body and hence does not let it accumulate. This enzyme has a serine site and an anionic site on its molecule. The serine site lies within the enzyme's active site and is attacked by the organophosphate molecule; this leads to the phosphorylation of the serine site and the formation of a strong covalent bond inactivating the active site of the enzyme in the process. Unlike poisoning with carbamates, this interaction is irreversible.

Pralidoxime is an acetylcholinesterase enzyme re-activator. It works by attaching to the anionic site of the enzyme. At this site, the pralidoxime molecule is close to the OP molecule. The pralidoxime molecule has a higher affinity to become phosphorylated by the OP compound than the serine site of the enzyme, leading to the pralidoxime molecule sacrificing itself by getting phosphorylated instead of the enzyme. The OP molecule detaches from the enzyme to do this, leading to two things. First is the formation of an organophosphate-pralidoxime complex, which quickly hydrolyzes. The second is restoring the active site of the acetylcholinesterase enzyme, making it available for action once again.

Pralidoxime's primary action is restoring acetylcholinesterases at nicotinic sites in the body, relieving symptoms like muscle weakness, fasciculations, and paralysis. Although it has some muscarinic action as well, it is not clinically significant as that is well taken care of by the co-administration of atropine.

Pralidoxime (2-PAM) also should be given to affect the nicotinic receptors in organophosphate toxicity since atropine only works on muscarinic receptors. Pralidoxime reactivates the phosphorylated AChE by binding to the organophosphate. However, to work, it must be given within 48 hours of the poisoning. The agent does not cause respiratory depression and can be combined with atropine. Evidence regarding the use of oximes to treat organophosphate poisoning is equivocal, and interpretation is challenging. Until this pharmacology is better elucidated and/or other treatments become available, all organophosphate toxicity patients should be treated with an oxime.

The pressor action of pralidoxime is less clearly understood. Earlier the thought was that the stimulation of alpha-adrenergic receptors mediated this vasopressor effect, based on a study by Stavinoha et al. that demonstrated that alpha-adrenergic blockers like phentolamine effectively blocked the increase in systemic arterial pressure brought about by pralidoxime.This concept, however, was disproved by Carrier et al. when they showed that in an isolated aortic strip preparation, there was no effect of phentolamine on the response of the aorta when exposed to pralidoxime. They suggested that the intracellular alteration of calcium ion storage drives the cardiovascular effects of pralidoxime.