Management aims to control the symptoms, improve quality of life, and slow disease progression. In addition to medical treatment, supportive care includes smoking cessation and correction of hypoxia with adequate O2 supplementation. The management approach outlined here is evidence-based recommendations according to the American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society Clinical Practice Guidelines.

**Bronchodilators**

Bronchodilators are used for symptomatic control and relief of symptoms in patients who show reversibility on PFTs. Usually, beta-agonists and anticholinergics are used in the treatment. Studies have shown the benefit and reversibility of airflow obstruction in patients with LAM treated with albuterol and ipratropium after adjusting for smoking and asthmatic status.

**Respiratory Rehabilitation**

Studies have shown that respiratory rehabilitation in patients with decreased functional capacity and respiratory symptoms benefits from it. It encourages all healthcare professionals to consider patients with LAM to have respiratory rehabilitation to increase endurance and improve their quality of life.

**Medication**

Sirolimus is approved to treat LAM by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the European Medicines Agency, and drug agencies in other countries. Sirolimus is an (mTOR) inhibitor that controls the abnormal proliferation and growth of smooth muscle cells in the lung parenchyma and is effective and safe. The medication has shown in the MILES trial the ability to prevent the worsening of lung function (stabilization of FEV and improvement in FVC) and respiratory symptoms while improving the quality of life and reducing serum VEGF-D levels.

Sirolimus can alleviate the lymphatic manifestations of LAM, such as chylous effusions and lymphangioleiomyomas. Sirolimus is considered the first-line treatment for symptomatic patients with LAM with one of the following criteria (strong recommendation): FEV1  <70% of predicted, chylous complications, and rapidly progressive disease such as FEV1 decline ≥90 mL per year, or problematic chylous accumulations. The safety profile of sirolimus is reasonable and includes nonspecific symptoms such as nausea, diarrhea, mucositis, acne, lower-extremity swelling, and hyperlipidemia.

Everolimus is an alternative for patients who cannot tolerate sirolimus or have allergies, but the FDA has not approved it for this purpose, and its use is still off-label. However, everolimus has approval for treating AMLs, central nervous system tumors, and epilepsy due to TSC and renal angiomyolipomas in LAM patients, particularly when associated with tuberous sclerosis.

Hormonal modulating therapy has been hypothesized to be an option for treatment, given the role of estrogen. Selective estrogen receptor modulators could play a role in treating the disease. However, there have been no clinical trials assessing the efficacy of these medications. One study assesses the safety of letrozole in postmenopausal women with LAM, but the study did not conclude with accurate results, given the approval of the sirolimus when the letrozole study was recruiting patients. The use of anti-estrogen treatments is not recommended outside of the clinical trial or investigation; hence hormonal therapy is not recommended treatment for LAM (conditional recommendation). Another treatment, such as doxycycline, is not recommended due to weak evidence (conditional recommendation).

**Lung Transplantation**

Lung transplantation remains the best option for a patient who progresses with worsening symptoms and lung function despite supportive and refractory treatment with an mTOR inhibitor. However, many anecdotal case reports mentioned recurrence with LAM after lung transplantation, raising a question about the curative role of this surgical treatment modality.

**Pleurodesis**

In refractory cases of pneumothorax related to LAM, chemical pleurodesis using talc is recommended. Due to the potential delay in wound healing associated with sirolimus, it is usually recommended to stop the drug  2 to 4 weeks after the resolution of pneumothorax.