T- and B-cell clonality studies are necessary ancillary tests to support the diagnosis of CTCL and CBCL, respectively, especially when distinguishing hyperplasia from monoclonality. The use of primers against gene targets such as IGH, IGK, IGL, TRG, and TRB is up to 90% sensitive in detecting most types of CL. However, these tests must be used alongside clinical, histologic, morphologic, and immunophenotypic data.

Clinical following may be indicated in certain patients whose clinical and anatomic pathologic findings do not correlate initially with cutaneous lymphoma. Dermatopathologists may ask for new samples from skin biopsies of different lesion sites when uncertain. Linking results of gene rearrangements in skin biopsies with results of peripheral blood samples may increase the reliability of these tests as well.

Although circulating atypical Sézary cells may be found in cases of MF, peripheral blood smear evaluation is necessary for patients with suspected SS (e.g., older-aged, erythrodermic, lymphadenopathy, generalized pruritus).

Alongside establishing definitive atypical, neoplastic T-cell monoclonal populations in the skin and blood, an absolute Sézary cell count of >1000/microliter in the peripheral blood with expanded CD4+ T cell population resulting in a CD4/CD8 ratio ≥ 10, CD4+/CD7- cells ≥ 30%, or CD4+/CD26− cells ≥ 40% is necessary to establish a diagnosis of SS, according to the 2018 WHO-EORTC.

In patients with suspected ATL, peripheral blood smear showing “flower” or “cloverleaf” cells (polylobated T-cells with condensed chromatin) is pathognomonic. HTLV-1 infection should be confirmed by ELISA (highest sensitivity), western blot, or PCR. Recommended cytologic panel evaluation includes CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8, CD25, and CD30.

In patients with CBCL and lymphocytosis, peripheral blood flow cytometry is recommended, as well as bone marrow biopsy for those with disseminated skin disease or lymphadenopathy. In any patient with PCDLBCL-LT, both peripheral blood flow cytometry and bone marrow biopsy are recommended, given this condition’s poor prognosis compared to other CBCL sub-types (5-year survival of about 50%).