The two main types of discriminatory acts or comments are macroaggressions and microaggressions. Macroaggressions are more overt and radical forms of racism rooted in a society or within a system. Examples of macroaggressions are the forced relocation of Japanese-Americans into internment camps during World War II, laws preventing equal suffrage rights for women, and the Tuskegee study in which Black men were intentionally misled and denied standard of care treatment for syphilis.

Laws such as Title VII of the Civil Rights Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act prohibiting unequal treatment based on race, sex, and disability have decreased overt racism in the healthcare setting. In areas where overt racism has declined, awareness of microaggressions has increased. Microaggression can be defined as short, everyday insults or snubs that can be barely perceptible or difficult to define but convey a negative message to a person because of their affiliation with a marginalized group.

Despite the insidious nature of microaggressions, they have clearly perceptible negative impacts upon the oppressed's quality of life.

The killing of George Floyd in conjunction with the disproportionate burden of COVID-19 in communities of color has elevated the national consciousness regarding diversity and discrimination. Americans are becoming more aware that structural racism is causing healthcare disparities.

**An Increasingly Multicultural Society Requires a More Diverse Workforce**

As our country's racial and ethnic diversity continues to increase, there is a greater need to diversify our healthcare workforce. Unfortunately, the physician workforce's diversification is occurring at a slower rate than that of the general population.

**The Progression from Individual Racism to Structural Racism**

Racism is a social construct that emphasizes phenotype. According to the National Museum of African American History & Culture, there is individual racism, interpersonal racism, institutional racism, and structural racism. Individual racism is most directly related to the biases which we hold, and interpersonal racism is an expression of these biases between individuals. Institutional racism is reflected in the policies and procedures of an organization. Structural racism is the cumulative effect of these forces across systems and between institutions or organizations. The promotion of health equity and a decrease in health disparities requires addressing individual and interpersonal racism and dismantling institutional and structural racism.

**Bias, Stereotype Threat and Negative Outcomes**

There is increasing awareness in the United States that implicit bias leads to poorer healthcare outcomes for patients of color.