NK and CTL lymphocytes both scan somatic cells within the body for altered and potentially dangerous cells, yet use different mechanisms by which they recognize dangerous cells that should be eliminated by the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis. CTLs create their antigen receptors through somatic recombination in the thymus. CTL effector lymphocytes that have been stimulated by antigen presentation and clonally expanded migrate throughout the body in search of the foreign or altered peptide, which it can specifically recognize. CD8-positive CTLs only recognize linear peptides presented by MHC class I molecules, using CD8 as a co-receptor.

Cytosolic antigens of all nucleated cells are presented by the MHC class I pathway. This pathway involves cleaving a portion of all cytosolic proteins into small peptides approximately ten amino acids in length by the proteasome. These peptides are then loaded onto MHC class I molecules in the lumen of the rough endoplasmic reticulum, MHC class I molecules that bind tightly to a peptide are then permitted to translocate to the plasma membrane. A human nucleated cell thus expresses MHC class I molecules presenting peptides representing all of the cytosolic proteins the cell is making. If a cell becomes infected by a virus, or transformed and expressing abnormal human proteins, these altered-self peptides will also be presented on the surface of nucleated cells. A CTL effector lymphocyte that recognizes a peptide presented by MHC class I for which it is specific will initiate the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis. Thus CTLs can recognize cells for the destruction that exhibit altered-self properties.

NK cells recognize altered cells to kill by the extrinsic pathway by a different mechanism, and since NK cells are part of the innate immune system, they use germline-encoded receptors, rather than created by somatic recombination. NK cells express a variety of receptors that are either activating, and induce apoptosis, or are inhibitory, and prevent the induction of the extrinsic pathway on a target cell.

In addition to containing many receptors that recognize altered host cells directly, NK cells also express CD16, which is a low-affinity receptor for the Fc portion of the IgG isotypes IgG1 and IgG3. The presence of CD16 (also known as FcγRIII) permits NK cells with an additional mechanism for recognizing and killing altered cells, as IgG antibodies can bind to viral or tumor antigens on the surface of a host cell. Recognition of these bound antigens by CD16 on NK cells triggers NK cells to kill the target cell through the extrinsic pathway, a process known as antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC).

The inhibitory receptors predominantly recognize MHC class I molecules, HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C, which are expressed by nucleated host cells. Absence of MHC class I expression will tip the balance in favor of activating receptors if they have recognized a stress ligand, and therefore NK cells will be more likely to kill a cell that exhibits an absence of self with regards to MHC class I expression. Many virally infected or cancerous cells downregulate MHC class I as a strategy to inhibit the presentation of non-self antigens at the cell surface and therefore avoid being killed by CTLs. Therefore, NK cells complement CTLs very well, as CTLs are designed to kill altered-self cells as recognized by MHC class I. If a virally infected or transformed cell attempts to avoid killing by a CTL by downregulating MHC class I expression, it will be more susceptible to being killed by an NK cell.

Unfortunately, this complementary relationship is not always perfect as viruses and cancer cells have evolved additional mechanisms to avoid being killed by the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis. For example, cytomegalovirus both blocks expression of MHC class I, yet also expresses viral proteins designed to mimic the presence of MHC class I. Several viruses have adapted to reduce expression of the stress ligand NKG2D. Intracellular viruses can also avoid detection from CTLs by establishing a latent phase, in which few viral proteins are produced. Therefore less viral antigens will be presented on MHC class I. Cancer cells or persistent viral infections can also induce T cell exhaustion, in which CTLs lose the ability to kill altered self-cells in response to continual exposure to a foreign antigen.