Anticoagulants derive their effect by acting at different sites of the coagulation cascade. Some act directly by enzyme inhibition, while others indirectly, by binding to antithrombin or by preventing their synthesis from the liver (vitamin K dependent factors).

**Available Anticoagulants**

- **Unfractionated Heparin (UFH):**These include heparin, make complexes with antithrombin 3, and inactivates various clotting factors. Its onset of action is rapid, has a short half-life, and can be monitored using activated partial thromboplastin (aPTT), activated clotting time, and anti-factor 10a activity. The recommended target ratio of aPTT is 1.5 to 2.2 times the patients' aPTT.

- **Low Molecular Weight Heparin (LMWH):**These are enoxaparin, dalteparin, tinzaparin, nadroparin, have a longer length of action, long half-life, and can be monitored using anti-factor 10a activity. However, monitoring is not indicated except in certain conditions like pregnancy and renal failure.

- **Vitamin K Dependent Antagonists (VKA):**Warfarin, one of the most common anticoagulants available. It acts by inhibiting vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR), which is needed for the gamma-carboxylation of vitamin K-dependent factors (factors 2, 7, 9, 10, protein C and S). It has a narrow therapeutic window of dosing, and its effect is profoundly altered by certain factors including diet (leafy green vegetables, fruits like avocado, kiwi), medications, and genetic mutations in the VKOR complex which leads to resistance. It requires frequent monitoring with an international normalized ratio (INR).

- **Direct Thrombin Inhibitors:**Bivalirudin, argatroban, and dabigatran are direct thrombin inhibitors; these inhibit the cleavage of fibrinogen to fibrin by thrombin. All products are renally metabolized.

- **Direct Factor 10a Inhibitors:**These include rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban, and betrixaban. Mechanism of action involves inhibition of the cleavage of prothrombin to thrombin by binding directly to factor 10a. These products are only orally administered.

The terms direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), new oral anticoagulants (NOACs), or target-specific oral anticoagulants (TSOACs) refer to those oral anticoagulants which specifically inhibit factors 2a (thrombin) or 10a. According to the International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis, DOACs is the preferred term. DOACs have been found to have similar effects when compared to other anticoagulants. Some studies have also shown possible decreased bleeding incidence with DOACs.