The Joint Commission has seven foundations of safe and effective transitions of care to home for patients

- Leadership support: Support stakeholders' senior leaders to invest in finding solutions for reducing readmissions.

- Multidisciplinary collaboration: Collaborations among healthcare professionals in an interprofessional approach to achieve optimal outcomes and avoid readmission for cost reduction.

- Early identification of patients/clients at risk: Encourage healthcare providers to identify at-risk patients early and factors that may affect health outcomes such as health literacy and confidence in self-care with discharge education.

- Transitional planning: Coordination and plan of care must be continuous among providers, organizations, and suppliers to ensure patients having the necessary equipment and medications when departing the hospital.

- Medication management: Health literacy assessment and appropriate education on drugs and ensuring patients get the necessary physical medications at the time of discharge. Medications prescribed in prescription may not be necessarily available to patients due to insurance or backorders.

- Patient and family action/engagement: Family engagement is crucial in the patient's health. Recovering from illness necessitates the family's involvement in caring for the patient.

- Transfer of information: It is imperative to have a successful transfer of information to provide healthcare providers with crucial details for properly caring for discharged patients.