Evaluation of an infant with suspected PPHN includes obtaining blood gas, chest X-ray, and echocardiogram. Sepsis should be ruled out with complete blood count with differential (CBC with diff), C- reactive protein (CRP), and blood culture. If ECMO support is anticipated, coagulation studies and a head ultrasound should be done before cannulation.

Arterial blood gas demonstrates low partial pressure of arterial oxygen (paO2). In sepsis, leucocytosis or leucopenia may be seen. CRP may be high in sepsis. Chest radiographs may show signs of underlying lung parenchymal disease.

Oxygenation Index (OI) = Mean airway pressure * FiO2*100/PaO2. OI >15, along with pre-post ductal saturation difference of >10%, are suggestive of high pulmonary vascular resistance.

Echocardiography is the gold standard for confirming the diagnosis. It is also used to follow therapeutic efficacy. The direction of flow across PDA and PFO, interventricular septal deviation or flattening, and regurgitation across the tricuspid valve (TR jet) are used to estimate right ventricular and/or pulmonary vascular pressure.

TR jet may not be accurate in 30% of cases due to poor right ventricular dysfunction. Echocardiography also provides information about right and left ventricular function, which is vital in treating persistent pulmonary hypertension.

Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a hormone produced by stressed right ventricles. BNP levels are elevated in babies with PPHN. BNP level of more than 550pg/ml is predictive of persistent pulmonary hypertension.