The differential diagnosis for CQ/HCQ vortex keratopathy (VK, also called corneal verticillata) includes:

- Sub-epithelial deposition of other medications:  A good medical history should reveal the medication responsible.  Amiodarone most commonly is the cause of vortex keratopathy, followed by CQ, HCQ, indomethacin, and phenothiazines.  The appearance of the verticillata caused by these different medications is similar in appearance.

- Fabry disease: Verticillata from Fabry disease is similar in appearance to those caused by medications. Fabry disease presents with retinal vessel tortuosity and cataracts as well.  Other findings include pain of the extremities and angiokeratomas of the skin.  Cardiovascular, renal and cerebrovascular disease are late manifestations.

- Iron lines: Caused by iron deposition from the tear film into the basal epithelium layer.

- Hudson Stahli line: Tends to be more linear and usually horizontal and at the junction of the lower one third and upper two-third of the cornea.

- Fleisher ring: This is present in moderate to advanced cases of keratoconus.  The inferior portion of the ring may be present in less advanced cases and can be confused with VK.

- Corneal irregularity from refractive procedures such as radial keratotomy:  The deposits are within the irregularities caused by the surgery (for example, within the radial keratotomy incisions).

- Stocker's line: The iron line is found next to the head of a pterygium.

- Ferry's line: The iron line is found next to a glaucoma filtering bleb.

- Gout: Uric acid crystal deposition in Bowman's membrane appears as a dust-like brown type of band keratopathy.  In an early stage, it can be confused with VK.

- Corneal chrysiasis: Caused by deposition of gold in the corneal stroma.  A good medical history should reveal a history of treatment with intramuscular injections of gold salts.  The deposition is more granular in appearance and more diffusely distributed throughout the surface of the cornea.

**The Differential for CQ/HCQ Retinopathy Includes**

Age-related macular degeneration: Geographic atrophy (GA) in the absence of drusen and choroidal neovascularization and CQ/HCQ retinopathy can present similarly.  Both present with thinning of the photoreceptor integrity line and the outer nuclear layer of the retina and atrophy of the choriocapillaris on SD-OCT.

Central areolar choroidal dystrophy (CACD): CACD can appear in a bull's eye pattern.  However, it develops between age 20-40 years old, usually too young of an age to have been on CQ/HCQ for over 20 years and to be at high risk of CQ/HCQ retinopathy.  It progresses through 4 stages, each associated with characteristic retinal and choroidal findings.  A speckled FAF pattern is present in 85% of patients with CACD and can be used to differentiate CACD from GA and CQ/HCQ retinopathy.

Stargardt disease: Presence of irregular, pisciform, yellow flecks, at the RPE level in the macula with a possible extension into the periphery differentiates Stargardt disease from CQ/HCQ maculopathy.  The commonest age of onset is in the 2nd decade of life; the classic "beaten bronze" appearance and positive genetic testing for the ABCA4 mutation are additional ways to differentiate the two conditions.  Finally, the classic "silent choroid" found in patients with Stargardt disease when tested with fluorescein angiography is not present in patients with CQ/HCQ retinopathy.

Cone-rod dystrophy (CRD): CRD can present with bull's eye maculopathy. CRD occurs in childhood and causes loss of central vision and photophobia in the early stage, followed by central scotomas, loss of color vision, and peripheral vision.  Night blindness is a present in the early stage.  Photopic and scotopic ERG testing is precise in differentiating CRD from CQ/HCQ retinopathy.

Benign concentric annular dystrophy (BCAD): This rare disorder is characterized by a bull's eye macular pigmentary change while visual acuity is well-preserved.