Lagophthalmos describes the incomplete or abnormal closure of the eyelids. A full eyelid closure with a normal blink reflex is necessary for the maintenance of a stable tear film and healthy ocular surface. Patients who are unable to blink and completely close their eyes are at risk of corneal exposure, evaporation of the tear film, and subsequent exposure keratopathy. This can progress to corneal ulceration and perforation. Therefore it is essential to recognize the signs of lagophthalmos early and investigate the causes and begin treatment. The primary cause of lagophthalmos is facial nerve paralysis, which leads to paralytic lagophthalmos.

There are many etiologies associated with facial nerve paralysis; hence a detailed history and workup are necessary to determine treatment of the underlying cause. The purpose of treating lagophthalmos is two-fold: to prevent further corneal exposure and to improve eyelid function. Any asymmetry in a person's face will likely have a psychological impact. Therefore the patient needs to regain an appearance acceptable to themselves.

Treatment can be divided into medical and surgical modalities. Medical treatment consists of improving the quantity, quality, and stability of the tear film. Surgical procedures can be dynamic or static and focus on reestablishing eyelid function or eyelid coverage. The choice of treatment and reconstruction method will depend on the location, severity, etiology of lagophthalmos, as well as patient factors of age, health, and their expectations.