Proper history taking is an essential step in the management of any wound. Pertinent data include the cause of the wound if known, nutritional status of the patient, duration of the wound, history of previous trauma or ulceration, prior treatment regimens, and if there is any allergy to certain medications or dressing. Examination of wounds should follow a systematic approach. TIMES framework provides a comprehensive and consistent way of wound assessment. The acronym stands for **T**issue type in the wound,**I**nfection or inflammation presence,**M**oisture balance assessment,**E**pithelialization assessment, and**S**urrounding skin.

Tissue type: The type of tissue in the wound bed will influence the decision-making regarding wound management. Assessment should include assessing the viability of this tissue, specifying its type, which may be necrotic, sloughy, infected, granulating, or epithelializing, presence of a foreign body, and finally highlighting any exposed vital structures such as tendons or bones.

Infection or inflammation: The presence of infection can retard wound healing as it prolongs the inflammatory phase. It is crucial to differentiate between contamination or colonization and infection. Almost all wounds are contaminated or colonized. To diagnose infection, health practitioners should look for symptoms such as fever, increased pain and swelling, erythema, and purulent discharge. A wound swab with more than >10colonies/mm3 is suggestive of infection.

Moisture balance: The provision of adequate moisture is essential for the healing of many vascularized wounds. Nevertheless, excess moisture can provide a medium for bacterial growth. Moisture balance assessment: a holistic assessment of the patient will guide the amount of moisture needed and the dressing choice. It is imperative to document the amount, color, and odor of any exudate. Involvement of vascular team in choice of dressing is crucial in cases of vascular compromise of a limb.

Epithelialization assessment: The absence of epithelial advancement is a sign of a non-healing wound. The cause of this should be investigated and treated accordingly. This may include hyper granulation, excess moisture, and the presence of infection.

Surrounding skin: It is crucial to assess any further inflammation or breakdown in the surrounding skin, indicating the extension of the initial wound.