Patients with common peroneal nerve injury/palsy experience a wide range of prognoses along a spectrum depending on the underlying etiology. For example, in the setting of knee dislocations with presenting foot drop and peroneal nerve palsy, outcomes across the board are poor in general in regards to the return of native function.

To adequately treat patients with common peroneal nerve injuries, specialists including neurologists and orthopedic surgeons must coordinate and work closely with primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and physical therapists to ensure appropriate management and outcomes.

The key to the management of the common peroneal nerve is early recognition and appropriate referral to the specialist. The emergency department physician should be able to recognize common peroneal nerve injuries and consult with the orthopedic surgeon. For those managed with non-surgical methods, the nurse has to educate the patient about foot drop and the potential to cause more injury to the tissues. The physical therapist should educate the patient on ambulation, ankle bracing, and the use of an assistive device. The patient requires monitoring for recovery, which in many cases, may take weeks or months. A wound care nurse should follow patients with open wounds until complete healing has occurred. Post-surgical pain control can benefit from pharmacist involvement, assisting with agent selection as well as minimizing opioid use. Communication between all these disciplines is paramount so that everyone on the interprofessional team has the full clinical picture and can make decisions based on the current status.

Peroneal nerve injuries require an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, physical therapists, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]