# Introduction

The medical profession has an established history of team-based approaches to managing the varying complexities of patients. Effective communication between team members has been recognized as a critical factor in safer healthcare delivery.

# Function

Patients who have developed or are at risk of cardiorespiratory arrest require a multidisciplinary team to approach their care. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has become increasingly common for patients with cardiac failure, respiratory failure, or a combination of both. This development is evidenced by the growing number of centers offering ECMO as a therapy.

# Curriculum Development

When developing a simulation-based curriculum, assessing the staffing that would be present and necessary for the scenario provided is important. In the case of ECMO, one would anticipate that there would be a need for multiple disciplinary teams during each step. At one center, the teams that were recognized as essential in developing an ECPR simulation-based curriculum included 1) the ICU team (nurses, respiratory therapists, intensive care physicians, and support staff), 2) a surgical team (cardiovascular or general surgeon, assistants, and nurses), and 3) ECMO team (that consisted of personnel that had specialized in preparing and maintaining the ECMO circuit).

# Procedural Skills Assessment

Methods utilized to assess the effectiveness of a simulation program for ECMO cannulation include but are not limited to pre-. Post-surveys of participants to evaluate their comfort with their role during the simulation, timing of when to decide to place a patient on ECMO to following successful cannulation, testing and timing ECMO specialists to prepare a circuit, and conducting chart reviews of ECMO cannulation times in patients before and after implementation of an ECMO simulation curriculum.

# Clinical Significance

Medical errors continue to remain a significant cause of death.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Simulation-based training has become an important and necessary field of education within the medical community. The need to use simulation with high-fidelity mannequins has become increasingly crucial in resuscitation training. Complex medical scenarios that require numerous personnel, such as ECMO simulation, can often be perceived as chaotic and loud. Utilizing simulation-based techniques to implement a curriculum can help streamline and assign roles in what may otherwise be a messy and physiologically complex situation. The goal would be to achieve a standardized approach to every step of the ECMO cannulation process - recognition of the proper candidates for ECMO therapy, checklists to ensure adequate equipment, a method to efficiently contact each member necessary, continuing resuscitation measures with minimal interruptions up until the patient is officially cannulated and on ECMO, and approaching mechanical issues to the ECMO circuit.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Simulation-based training is effective in multiple medical environments. With the rise of centers offering ECMO as therapy for patients with cardiac and respiratory failure, it has become increasingly important to standardize our approach to a patient needing this level of support.