Squamous cell carcinoma, the second most common form of skin cancer, is caused by the cumulative exposure of skin to UV light. This condition has precursor lesions called actinic keratosis, exhibits tumor progression and has the potential to metastasize in the body. Surgical excision is the preferred mode of treatment with Mohs micrographic surgery technique used for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck and in other areas of high risk or squamous cell carcinoma with high-risk characteristics. Radiation therapy is used in cases of squamous cell carcinoma in older patients or those who will not tolerate surgery, or when it has not been possible to obtain clear margins surgically. Adjuvant radiotherapy is commonly after surgical treatment in very high tumors. Patients with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma should be examined regularly and remember to use measures to protect from UV damage. This activity outlines the diagnosis and interventions used for squamous cell carcinoma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in refining care for those afflicted with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the pathophysiology of squamous cell cancer of the skin.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient suspected of having squamous cell cancer of the skin.
- Summarize the treatment options for squamous cell cancer of the skin.
- Review the importance of cooperation among the interprofessional team in enhancing the delivery of care for those with squamous cell carcinoma.