The triceps reflex, elicited by sharply striking the triceps tendon, is often used to test the function of the nerves of the arm. This reflex tests spinal nerves C6 and C7, predominately C7. The reflex is tested by abducting the patient's shoulder and elbow to 90 degrees. Then the triceps tendon is tapped using a reflex hammer just proximal to the olecranon.

Triceps tendinitis can occur with an overload of the muscle. It commonly manifests as chronic posterior elbow pain that worsens with active extension. The condition is commonly seen in men aged 30 to 40 years who are throwing athletes. The typical management strategy for this condition is rest and pain control.

Ruptures of the triceps muscle are rare and typically only occur in anabolic steroid users. Distal triceps ruptures are also relatively uncommon. The reason they are not common revolves primarily around the anatomy of the triceps muscle. If a rupture were to occur, it would occur at the tendon-bone junction, resulting from an eccentric contraction of the muscle. The injury typically occurs due to either a fall on an outstretched hand or a direct blow to the triceps tendon. The patient presents after a painful popping sensation with pain and swelling over the posterior elbow with the inability to extend the elbow against resistance. Surgical consideration for a partial rupture is controversial, but it is necessary for a complete rupture. If the rupture is chronic, then along with surgical repair, remodeling is also indicated.