Immunoglobulins or antibodies are essential in protecting against bacteria, viruses, and fungi. When there is a deficiency of these glycoproteins, recurrent infectious diseases occur, as seen in the following antibody deficiency disorders

- X-linked agammaglobulinemia

- Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy

- IgA deficiency

- IgG subclass deficiency

- Immunodeficiency with increased IgM

- Common variable immunodeficiency

The most common immunodeficiency is Selective IgA deficiency, characterized by recurrent infections that affect the respiratory, digestive, and genitourinary systems. Recurrent pneumonia, Giardia lamblia infestation, and urinary sepsis are prevalent. The majority of patients can, however, be asymptomatic. They are at higher risk for autoimmune diseases, atopy, and anaphylaxis to IgA-containing products.

Another common problem is the transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy. During the first 3 to 5 months, the child is healthy but becomes sick because of a physiological deficit of immunoglobulins. This disease is characterized by recurrent bacterial infections, including pneumonia, meningitis, otitis, arthritis, and osteomyelitis. This problem diminishes once the child starts producing immunoglobulins.

X-linked agammaglobulinemia is also called Bruton agammaglobulinemia. It occurs due to a defect in Bruton Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) gene that prevents B-cell maturation. This condition is X-linked recessive and seen mostly in males. They present with recurrent bacterial and enteroviral infections after six months, once the maternal IgG is low. No B cells are seen in peripheral blood, and immunoglobulins of all classes are absent. Patients also have absent or scanty lymph nodes and tonsils. Live vaccines are contraindicated.

In common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), individuals acquire the immunodeficiency in the second or third decade of life or later. Both males and females can develop this problem.

Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM)  lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma is associated with a monoclonal immunoglobulin M (IgM) protein. The presence of the monoclonal IgM protein results in hyperviscosity syndrome(IgM>4000 mg/dL) characterized by headache, the Raynaud phenomenon, and retinal hemorrhages.

**Laboratory Assessment of Immunoglobulins**

The quantification of immunoglobulins and the study of their functions are vital for the immunodiagnosis of immunodeficiencies, autoimmunity, hypersensitivity reactions, and inflammatory disorders. The following examinations are routinely performed for the study of the behavior of antibodies:

**Quantitative Serum Immunoglobulins (classes and subclasses)**

- IgG

- IgM

- IgA

- IgE

This assay is used to test for the presence of immunodeficiency disorders such as those in X-linked agammaglobulinemia. There are insufficient amounts of all classes of immunoglobulins, or they are absent. The presence of low IgA may be associated with recurrent diarrhea and lung and sinus infections. Low IgG is associated with pyogenic infections, and a high IgE may be found in parasitic infections.

**IgG Antibodies (post-immunization)**

- Tetanus toxoid

- Diphtheria toxoid

- Pneumococcal polysaccharide

- Polio

This assay evaluates the quality of the immune response after vaccination. In healthy individuals, there is at least a 1:16 titer of antibody.

**IgG Antibodies (post-exposure)**

- Measles

- Varicella-Zoster

This test evaluates the production of antibodies against antigens after the infectious disease has occurred.

**Detection of Isohemagglutinins (IgM)**

- Anti-type A blood

- Anti-type B blood

Isohemagglutinins are IgM antibodies the immune system produces in response to bacterial antigens in the digestive system. It has been shown that their titers may be below 1:4 in antibody deficiency disorders.

**Other Assays**

- Test for heterophile antibody to measure the presence of antibodies against Epstein-Barr virus

- Serum protein electrophoresis evaluates the level of antibodies qualitatively. For example, multiple myeloma shows a monoclonal peak in the gamma region of the electrophoresis that is consistent with a monoclonal antibody.

- Rheumatoid factor is an IgM antibody against the IgG Fc region and is an important seromarker of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

**Clinical Use of Immunoglobulins**

Immunoglobulins or antibodies can be used as a form of immunotherapy. Like drugs, they are prepared from a pool of blood donated at blood collection centers and processed through fractionation to separate the protein fraction from the cellular component. The purified immunoglobulin can treat many immunological problems, including antibody deficiencies, severe combined immunodeficiency disorders (SCID), multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, Kawasaki disease, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), organ transplantations, and many others.