# Introduction

A glucose tolerance test (GTT) is a procedure that determines whether a patient can use and store glucose normally.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Diabetes mellitus is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or both.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus results from cellular-mediated autoimmune destruction of the insulin-secreting cells of pancreatic beta cells.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus accounts for approximately 90% of all cases of diabetes. Patients have minimal symptoms, are not prone to ketosis, and are not dependent on insulin to prevent ketonuria.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined as any degree of glucose intolerance (i.e., hyperglycemia) with onset or first recognition during pregnancy (i.e., patients who become pregnant after a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus are not included in this category).

Patients with GDM are at significantly greater risk for the subsequent development of type 2 diabetes mellitus, which occurs in 15% to 60%. The risk is exceptionally high in patients with marked hyperglycemia during or soon after pregnancy, patients who are obese, and patients whose GDM is diagnosed before 24 weeks gestation.

# Pathophysiology

Insulin resistance and an insulin secretory deficiency brought on by beta cell dysfunction are two defects that characterize the transition from normal glucose tolerance to type 2 diabetes.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

The choice of specimen used for glucose determination depends on the analytical method to be used. Serum or plasma, free of hemolysis, is the specimen of choice for automated enzymatic methods.

The plasma should be separated from the cells within 60 minutes of collection unless the tube contains a glycolysis inhibitor. Serum samples are appropriate for glucose analysis, provided the serum is not in contact with the cells for longer than 90 minutes.

To preserve blood that cannot be separated rapidly, samples should contain the glycolysis inhibitor sodium fluoride (which inhibits the enolase enzyme) at 2.5 mg fluoride/mL of blood.

# Diagnostic Tests

Plasma glucose can be measured with high precision and accuracy using enzymatic methods such as glucose oxidase and hexokinase. The hexokinase method is considered the fastest and most accurate and is commonly used on automated systems.

# Testing Procedures

Serial measurement of plasma glucose before and after a specific amount of glucose given orally should provide a standard method to evaluate individuals and establish values for healthy and diseased subjects.

The following conditions should be met before an OGTT is performed: discontinue, when possible, medications known to affect glucose tolerance; perform the test in the morning after three days of unrestricted diet (containing at least 150 g of carbohydrate per day) and activity; and perform the test after a 10- to 16-hour fast only in ambulatory outpatients (bed rest impairs glucose tolerance), who should remain seated during the test without smoking cigarettes. Glucose tolerance testing should not be performed on hospitalized, acutely ill, or inactive patients. The test should begin between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Venous plasma glucose should be measured fasting and two hours after an oral glucose load. For nonpregnant adults, the recommended load is 75 g, which may not be a maximum stimulus; for children, 1.75 g/kg, up to a maximum of 75 g, is given.

Human growth hormone (hGH) suppression by a glucose load is a classic screening test for acromegaly.

# Interfering Factors

Several precautions must be taken in preparing for and performing the oral glucose tolerance test. The OGTT should not be performed on patients suffering from an intercurrent infection or the effects of trauma or those recovering from a severe illness.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

Impaired fasting glucose (IFG) is defined as fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels from 100 to 125 mg/dL (from 5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L) and impaired glucose tolerance as two-hour post glucose levels during 75-gram OGTT from 140 to 199 mg/dL (from 7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L).

The results of the OGTT as a screening test for type 2 diabetes can be interpreted as follows:

- The 2-hour plasma glucose level <140 mg/dL is considered normal

- The 2-hour plasma glucose level of 140-199 mg/dL indicates impaired glucose tolerance

- The 2-hour plasma glucose level ≥200 mg/dL indicates diabetes

For a diagnosis to be made, the test must be repeated on another day shortly afterward, yielding similar results. Alternatively, a diagnosis can be confirmed using one of the other screening tests. A single abnormal OGTT is insufficient for diagnosing diabetes or prediabetes.

The American Diabetes Association has recommended using either the one- or two-step approach at 24–28 weeks of gestation in pregnant patients not previously known to have diabetes.

**One-Step Strategy for Screening  and Diagnosis of GDM**

The diagnosis of GDM is made when any of the following plasma glucose values are met or exceeded during one step strategy:

- Fasting plasma glucose: 92 mg/dL (5.1 mmol/L)

- 1-h plasma glucose: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)

- 2-h plasma glucose: 153 mg/dL (8.5 mmol/L)

**Two-Step Strategy for Screening and Diagnosis of GDM**

If the plasma glucose level measured one hour after the 50-gram glucose load, at 24–28 weeks of gestation in individuals not previously diagnosed with diabetes, is more than or equal to 130, 135, or 140 mg/dL (7.2, 7.5, or 7.8 mmol/L, respectively), proceed to a 100-gram OGTT. The 100-gram OGTT should be performed when the patient is fasting.

The diagnosis of GDM is made when at least two of the following four plasma glucose levels (measured fasting and at 1, 2, and 3 hours during OGTT) are met or exceeded:

- Fasting plasma glucose: 95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L)

- 1-h plasma glucose: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)

- 2-h plasma glucose: 155 mg/dL (8.6 mmol/L)

- 3-h plasma glucose: 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L)

**Oral Glucose Tolerance Test in Acromegaly**

The diagnostic criteria for acromegaly are met if the growth hormone level does not suppress below 1 ng/mL. The suppression test is reported to have a false-negative rate as high as 50%.

# Clinical Significance

The GTT only establishes the presence of glucose intolerance. It is used in patients with borderline fasting and postprandial glucose to support or rule out the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Some use it in unexplained hypertriglyceridemia, neuropathy, impotence, diabetes-like renal diseases, and retinopathy.

Reactive or postprandial hypoglycemia causes blood glucose to decrease two to five hours after a diet with high carbohydrate content. Early and late postprandial hypoglycemia occurs 2 to 3 hours and 3 to 5 hours after a meal, respectively.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. Laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently to ensure accurate results.

The laboratory must participate in the external quality control or proficiency testing (PT) program because it is a regulatory requirement published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) regulations.

The criteria for acceptable performance for glucose assay by the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) and College of American Pathologists (CAP) proficiency program is within ± 6mg/dL or ± 10% of the mean value of laboratory peer groups.

All specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials should be considered potentially infectious. Exercise the normal precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines. Wear gloves, a lab coat, and safety glasses when handling human blood specimens.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A glucose tolerance test is typically ordered by a medical doctor, advanced nurse practitioner, or physician assistant. Interprofessional collaboration is required for the correct administration of the test.

The actual glucose tolerance test itself can be administered in several settings. The test may be administered in a clinical office with appropriate equipment and staffing. The glucose tolerance test can also be administered in a laboratory. Although the inpatient side is an atypical site for glucose tolerance tests, a hospital may have an outpatient or clinical research department where staff may have additional time to complete the test.

Nurses, medical assistants, or phlebotomists may perform the test. There must be clear communication on order from the provider on the type of test, the length of time, and the number of samples ordered. The personnel administering the test should be aware of the requirements of the test, including the fasting requirement and the pre-test dietary carbohydrate requirement. It is vital to collaborate with laboratory personnel to ensure the timely processing of the specimens and proper storage and shipping (if necessary).

Laboratory personnel should work closely with providers to provide accurate results quickly.