The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus has serious consequences. It confers a risk of long-term diabetic complications, including blindness, renal failure, and amputations, as well as an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. It also means a lifetime of dietary restrictions and medications and can seriously curtail lifestyle and employment prospects.

A provisional diagnosis of diabetes mellitus must always be confirmed by laboratory measurements on blood specimens. Normal plasma glucose levels are defined as under 100 mg/dL during fasting and less than 140 mg/dL 2 hours postprandial. Additionally, glucose levels in healthy individuals can vary with age.

Diagnosis of diabetes depends on plasma glucose, which is measurable during fasting, the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or the A1c criteria.

Confirmation of the diagnosis requires two abnormal test results from the same or two separate samples.

Patients at the borderline of these criteria for diabetes are considered prediabetic.

Hypoglycemia is generally plasma glucose under 70 mg/dL, but symptoms may not occur until plasma glucose is less than 55 mg/dL. Such low levels of plasma glucose indicate a dangerous, potentially life-threatening situation characterized by seizures and coma.

Reactive hypoglycemia can present in gastric surgery patients and usually occurs 90–150 minutes after a meal, especially if it is high in sugar or other carbohydrates. Because of the reduced stomach size, glucose is rapidly transported into the small intestine, where incretins are released, leading to excessive insulin response and hypoglycemia.

Factitious (or non-physiological) hypoglycemia occurs when insulin or sulphonylurea is taken or administered deliberately. It is difficult to diagnose and is usually associated with psychological problems in the patient or carers involved. If a confirmed hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemic sample has a low c-peptide level, then the insulin is likely to be exogenous.

Symptoms of hypoglycemia vary among individuals, and none is specific. Epinephrine produces the classic signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia: trembling, sweating, nausea, rapid pulse, lightheadedness, hunger, and epigastric discomfort.

CSF glucose concentrations should be approximately 60% of plasma concentrations and must always be compared with concurrently measured plasma glucose for adequate clinical interpretation. Glucose in the CSF of neonates varies much more than in adults, and the CSF-to-serum ratio is generally higher than in adults.