**Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma**

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a malignant epithelial tumor that most commonly originates from the fossa of Rosenmuller. Southern Chinese males (40 to 60 years old) have the highest incidence. Predisposing factors appear to be host genetics (HLA gene on chromosome 6p21), environmental factors (i.e., chemicals or carcinogens), and Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) infection. Due to the association with EBV, antibody titers are useful diagnostic markers. The size of the tumor is the crucial prognostic factor, and radiation therapy is the treatment of choice.

Regarding nodal metastasis, cervical lymphadenopathy is the most common presenting symptom (75% of cases). Typically, the retropharyngeal nodes are the first to be involved; however, in 35% of cases, the retropharyngeal nodes are bypassed, and the internal jugular nodes are the first to be involved. Nodal metastasis exhibits an inferior spread pattern; thus, superior nodes will be larger than inferior nodes. Distant metastasis appears to occur at higher rates in NPC in comparison to other head and neck cancers (5 to 41% vs. 5 to 24%). Bone and lungs are the most common sites of distant metastasis.

A nonspecific symptom of NPC is a headache; however, NPCs can spread to adjacent structures. Therefore, presenting signs and symptoms typically depend on which structures are involved. If the tumor involves the eustachian tube opening, the patient can present with serous otitis media, typically unilateral. Tumors can spread anteriorly through the sphenopalatine foramen and then the pterygopalatine fossa. From there, malignant cells can spread centrally along the CN V3 to enter the cranium. Lateral spread to the parapharyngeal space also puts CN V3 at risk, and denervation atrophy of the mastication muscles are visible on MRI in these scenarios. Trismus, also known as “lockjaw,” is a common presenting symptom if the medial or lateral pterygoid muscles are affected. Posterolateral spread into the carotid space puts CNs IX, X, XI, XII at risk; thus, symptoms associated with these nerves can be present. Posterior spread through the posterior pharyngeal wall and retropharyngeal space can infiltrate the prevertebral muscles. The involvement of the vertebral bodies and spinal cord occurs in late stages. Inferior spread into the oropharynx is most easily observable with MRI. Superior spread can lead to cranial involvement via the foramen lacerum, foramen ovale, or direct skull-base erosion. Spread in every direction can result in cavernous sinus involvement, which may present with CN III, IV, V1, and VI injuries.

**Nasopharyngeal Adenoid Hypertrophy**

The adenoids, also known as the nasopharyngeal tonsils, are located in the roof and posterior wall of the nasopharynx and contribute to Waldeyer’s ring of lymphoid tissue. Normally, the adenoids undergo physiological hypertrophy at 6-10 years of age. Nasopharyngeal adenoid hypertrophy (NAH) refers to non-physiologic enlargement, typically benign, and it is the most common cause of nasal obstruction in children. The etiology of NAH is unknown, but persistent rhinitis may be a risk factor. Patients commonly present with open-mouth breathing, snoring, rhinorrhea, and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Treatment of choice is an adenoidectomy.

NAH is not common in adulthood since the adenoids naturally regress, starting at approximately age 16. Theoretical etiologies of adult NAH may be persistent NAH from childhood, re-proliferation in response to infection, or a response to an infection in an immunocompromised state.

**Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis**

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), formerly called Wegner’s granulomatosis, is an idiopathic small-to-medium-sized vessel vasculitis. Classically, GPA involves the nasopharynx, lungs, and kidneys. In 80% of patients, the initial presenting symptoms involve the nasopharynx, which can include uncomplicated sinusitis, nosebleeds, and damage to the bony walls of the sinus. When a patient is only presenting with nasopharyngeal symptoms, it is referred to as “limited GPA,” and 46 to 70% of these patients are positive for c-ANCA. Mainstay treatment is immunosuppression with cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids, and up to 90% of patients improve with this regiment. Rituximab is also available for refractory cases.

**Nasopharyngeal Cyst**

Nasopharyngeal cysts are rare and usually present asymptomatically; therefore, most are diagnosed incidentally on imaging or routine nasal endoscopy. However, these cysts may present with cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea, purulent rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, headache, and middle ear effusion. CSF rhinorrhea is associated with a congenital defect of the craniopharyngeal canal. Normally, this canal degenerates in the 6th week of gestation after the formation of the anterior pituitary gland from Rathke’s pouch. If the craniopharyngeal canal remains patent (0.42% of the asymptomatic population), ventral nasopharyngeal cysts may form and lead to CSF rhinorrhea. Treatment for symptomatic cysts is surgical resection.

**Juvenile Nasopharyngeal Angiofibroma**

Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma (JNA) is a benign, vascular tumor that typically occurs in young males 9-19 years of age. JNAs are rare, representing 0.05% of all head and neck tumors. Common symptoms include nasal obstruction and epistaxis, and treatment of choice is surgical resection with preoperative embolization. Without treatment, aggressive JNAs can spread to adjacent structures leading to worsening nasal obstruction, severe and recurrent epistaxis, facial pain, and visual changes.

**Nasopharyngeal Swab**

Nasopharyngeal swabs are routinely performed to test for several viral and bacterial pathogens, including adenovirus, coronavirus (multiple strains), human metapneumovirus, influenza (A and B), parainfluenza, rhinovirus, RSV (A and B), Bordetella pertussis, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. More recently, nasopharyngeal swabs have been the collection method of choice to confirm infection with the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).