Potential symptoms of an overdose of bazedoxifene/Conjugated estrogens include severe muscle spasms and classic gastrointestinal symptoms, including abdominal pain, vomiting, and nausea. Current research hasn't found a prescribed antidote or first-line treatment to reverse a potentially toxic dose of this combination drug. Patients are advised to seek services of an emergency room or contact Poison control should they suspect an overdose. It's been clinically demonstrated that as a pharmaceutical agent alone, bazedoxifene has a relatively wide therapeutic index. While it is FDA approved as a 20 mg dose in conjunction with conjugated estrogens, bazedoxifene showed no toxicity effects up to 80 mg.

While bazedoxifene is a relatively safe drug compound with minimal risks of overdose toxicity or long-term adverse effects, conjugated estrogen has elevated risks. While trying to determine the optimal ratio of bazedoxifene to conjugated estrogens, a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical study found that 0.625 mg of conjugated estrogen significantly increases endometrial thickness. It was determined that at least 20 mg of bazedoxifene was necessary to counter the CE-induced hyperplasia effects to minimize the probability of endometrial carcinoma developing in the long run.

In addition, there are significant risks associated with bazedoxifene/conjugated estrogens due to the teratogenic effects on fetal development, and thus is classified as a Pregnancy Category X drug. Should a patient become aware that they are pregnant while currently on bazedoxifene/conjugated estrogen drug therapy, it is recommended to immediately discontinue the drug and consult with her primary care physician or obstetrician.