**Closed-globe Trauma**

**Early-onset**

**Traumatic hyphema**

Management of hyphema starts with medical treatment in the form of topical corticosteroids and cycloplegia. Strict bed rest with a 45 degrees head elevation is advised to allow the blood to settle inferiorly so that the visual axis can be cleared. Globe protection in the form of a rigid plastic eye shield may be useful to prevent further trauma to the eye. In conjunction with the patient’s physician, consider withholding any antiplatelet and anticoagulation agents, as well as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Certain cases deemed to be high-risk may require admission to the hospital for close observation. These include those who may be non-compliant with their treatment regime, children, rebleeding cases, Grade II hyphemas or worse, and those with sickle cell trait or disease. Rebleeds can occur 2 to 5 days after the initial injury, and patients should be closely monitored in the early stages.

If the IOP is raised and a decision is made to treat the IOP, having considered parameters such as the status of the optic disc, the presence of preexisting glaucoma, central corneal thickness, and the likelihood of IOP elevation settling, a stepwise approach should be taken starting with topical ocular antihypertensives. First-line treatment normally comprises a topical beta-blocker, alpha-2 agonist, carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, or a combination of these. There are variations amongst clinicians’ practice patterns, but some avoid using prostaglandin analogs as they are theoretically pro-inflammatory with the potential to further break down the blood-aqueous barrier, exacerbating intraocular inflammation and potentially causing a rise in the IOP.

Some clinics use prostaglandin analogs in these situations as well. If the IOP remains inadequately controlled with topical treatment alone, oral or intravenous acetazolamide may be considered. The use of both topical and systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, as well as osmotic agents such as mannitol, should be avoided in patients with sickle cell trait or disease as it can promote sickling due to acidosis.

Surgery in the form of AC paracentesis and/or AC washout to evacuate the hyphema may be needed in certain cases if medical treatment fails. A patient with high IOP that is resistant to maximum medical therapy should be a candidate for surgery. A general guide, as suggested by Wilson, indicates that those with IOP greater than 50 mmHg for over five days, IOP greater than 45 mmHg for over a week, or IOP greater than 35 mmHg for over two weeks should be considered for surgery. A more cautious approach should be taken in patients with sickle cell trait or disease, i.e., IOP greater than 24 mmHg for over a day.

Other criteria include persistent grade IV hyphema (also called eight-ball hyphema) and early corneal blood staining. Despite an anticipated high failure rate and short duration of drainage function, trabeculectomy has been described in this context to maintain a safe level of IOP while the hyphema clears and aqueous outflow normalizes.

**Traumatic Iritis**

Topical corticosteroids and cycloplegia are the mainstays of treatment. Raised IOP is usually self-limiting in these cases, and topical ocular antihypertensives are generally sufficient to control raised IOP in most cases.

**Trabecular Meshwork Injury**

Topical ocular antihypertensives would be sufficient to counteract the initial IOP rise. The use of lasers such as argon laser trabeculoplasty (ALT) or selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT) to the angle may also be considered. Kelman et al. and Akkin et al. previously reported using ALT directed to the traumatized Schlemm’s canal to treat recurrent hyphema due to laceration to the trabecular meshwork and Schlemm’s canal.

**Suprachoroidal Hemorrhage**

Treatment of raised IOP in a well-established suprachoroidal hemorrhage is initially medical with topical and systemic ocular antihypertensives. Topical corticosteroids reduce intraocular inflammation and improve comfort. Cycloplegic agents rotate the ciliary body posteriorly and may help to maintain AC depth and minimize angle closure. Cycloplegia also reduces ciliary spasms and may help to relieve some of the ocular pain commonly associated with suprachoroidal hemorrhage. Surgical drainage should be considered if a high IOP or severe pain remains persistent. There is still no consensus regarding the decision and best timing of drainage, but in principle, it is preferable to wait 7 to 14 days for clot liquefaction to occur.

**Late-onset**

**Steroid Response**

Patients with previously known steroid response and predisposing risk factors, including those with high myopia, primary open-angle glaucoma or glaucoma suspects, first-degree relatives with primary open-angle glaucoma, type I diabetes, connective tissue disease (especially men with rheumatoid arthritis) and angle recession, should be closely monitored when started on corticosteroids.

If corticosteroids are required in the setting of persistent inflammation, corticosteroids with lower potency and less ocular penetration should be considered. If periocular depot corticosteroids were used, they could be surgically excised.

The management of IOP elevation follows the same stepwise approach as in primary open-angle glaucoma. However, there is evidence that SLT in these patients is relatively more effective in lowering IOP.

**Angle Recession**

In angle recession of more than 180 degrees, it has been suggested that a lifelong annual examination is required to detect glaucoma as it may develop several months to years after the initial traumatic insult.

Argon laser trabeculoplasty, an outdated treatment modality, was found to have a minimal therapeutic effect in angle recession glaucoma.

**Lens Subluxation and Dislocation**

If there is a pupil block, or there is suspicion that it is occurring intermittently, a laser peripheral iridotomy can be performed to relieve or prevent it.

**Phacomorphic Glaucoma******

Initial treatment is with topical and systemic ocular antihypertensives. Laser iridotomy may be considered to treat any component of angle closure suspected to be secondary to relative pupil block. There is evidence showing that immediate argon laser peripheral iridoplasty (ALPI) is a safe and effective first-line treatment of acute phacomorphic angle-closure.

**Phacolytic Glaucoma, Lens Particle Glaucoma, and Phacoantigenic Glaucoma**

The management of phacolytic glaucoma will follow the same stepwise approach as initial medical management, including frequent topical steroids and cycloplegia. Ultimately lens extraction is required, ideally once intraocular inflammation has been controlled or stabilized, although this is not always achievable. Often, these patients develop peripheral anterior synechiae, and lens surgery may be combined with goniosynechialysis. Combined cataract surgery and trabeculectomy have been described, although we would advocate against this due to the high trabeculectomy failure rate. The management of lens particle glaucoma and phacoantigenic glaucoma is very similar.

**Ghost Cell Glaucoma**

Ghost cell glaucoma often responds to medical treatment. However, AC washout and pars plana vitrectomy may be considered in the setting of dense vitreous hemorrhage or recalcitrant high IOP.

**Hemolytic Glaucoma**

Treatment is similar to that in ghost cell glaucoma, starting with conservative medical therapy, followed by AC washout and/or pars plana vitrectomy if needed.

**Hemosiderotic Glaucoma**

The principle in managing hemosiderotic glaucoma is the surgical removal of the iron-containing intraocular foreign body. The literature around hemosiderotic glaucoma is sparse; previous studies have primarily focused on the histological findings from enucleated eyes. There has been a case report where the IOP was normalized following the removal of the foreign body.

**Carotid-cavernous Sinus Fistula**

Direct high-flow carotid-cavernous sinus fistula can be treated via endovascular interventional techniques utilizing embolic material such as detachable balloons, coils, and acrylic glue to occlude the fistulous connection. Indirect low-flow fistula can be managed by observation as it was shown that up to 70% of these fistulae close spontaneously.

**Open-globe Trauma******

**Epithelial Downgrowth**

Different treatment modalities may be considered depending on the type of epithelial downgrowth. In general, epithelial pearls and cysts can be monitored if they are not otherwise causing elevation of the IOP. If they are growing in size and causing complications such as inflammation or IOP elevation, an en-bloc surgical resection can be considered.

Short-term success has been reported for epithelial membranes with surgical resection, which can often be combined with cryotherapy and intraocular 5-fluorouracil injection.

Filtering surgery tends to fail as the ostium will often become obstructed by epithelial cells.

**Fibrous Downgrowth**

Similar to epithelial downgrowth, filtering surgery has high failure rates in fibrous downgrowth. Glaucoma drainage tube implantation in this setting may not work due to blockage of the tube lumen by fibrovascular tissue.