Life-threatening injuries diagnosed during the initial trauma evaluation require prompt intervention. Still, the most common injuries due to thoracic trauma are pneumothorax and hemothorax, which are definitively managed in 80% of cases with tube thoracostomy. The size of the chest tube used is a clinical decision based on the pathology seen on a chest x-ray. If both pneumothorax and hemothorax are present, a size 28-Fr or 32-Fr chest tube is usually considered as this will facilitate the evacuation of both air and blood while minimizing the chance of the tube obstructing due to clot. If no effusion is present, small-bore catheters are appropriate, although many trauma clinicians will still opt for formal chest tubes instead. Occult pneumothorax is a pneumothorax that is seen on CT but not on a chest x-ray. They are incidentally found in 2 to 10% of trauma patients who undergo chest CT. Patients can be observed if the pneumothorax is less than 8 mm.

Chest wall injuries are common in blunt thoracic trauma, and the vast majority are treated non-operatively. Most of these injuries are seen in the setting of MVCs, especially when patients are seat-belted or sustain frontal impact to the steering wheel. Rib fractures are found in up to 10% of all trauma patients and 30% of patients presenting with chest trauma. Sternal fractures and scapula fractures are less common, accounting for 8% and 3.5%, respectively, of blunt thoracic trauma patients

Flail chest occurs when 3 or more contiguous ribs are fractured in at least 2 locations. This leads to the paradoxical movement of the flail segment during respiration. The injury itself is usually not the cause of respiratory compromise. Respiratory failure in these patients typically results from the underlying presence of a pulmonary contusion. Pulmonary contusions themselves usually progress over the first 12 to 24 hours post-injury, in which time worsening hypoventilation and hypoxemia may necessitate intubation. Initial chest x-ray usually underestimates the degree to which the lung parenchyma is damaged, and patients with pulmonary contusions should, therefore, be admitted and serially monitored for signs of impending decompensation.

Tension pneumothorax is the presumed diagnosis when patients present with chest trauma, respiratory distress, and hypotension. A physical exam will also demonstrate specific clinical signs, such as tracheal deviation away from the affected side, decreased or absent breath sounds on the affected side, and subcutaneous emphysema on the affected side. If recognized in the field, immediate decompression using a 14-gauge needle placed in the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line is indicated. It should be noted that recent data suggests that needle decompression through the fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line correlates with a lower chance of failure (16.7%) due to body habitus compared to the midclavicular line placement (42.5%).

Massive hemothorax is defined as greater than 1500 mL of blood in the adult population. Although the volume of blood in the pleural space may be estimated on a chest radiograph, the most reliable means for quantification is by tube thoracostomy. In blunt trauma, it is most commonly due to multiple rib fractures with associated lacerated intercostal arteries. However, bleeding can also be due to lung parenchymal lacerations, in which case there is usually an associated air leak. In the setting of penetrating injury, great vessel or pulmonary hilar vessel injury should be suspected. Regardless of the etiology, massive hemothorax is an indication for operative intervention, but the patient's condition should first be stabilized with tube thoracostomy to facilitate lung re-expansion.

Cardiac tamponade is most common after penetrating injury but can also occur due to blunt myocardial rupture, particularly of the atrial appendage. Acutely, less than 100 mL of blood in the pericardial space can cause tamponade. As the pressure in the pericardium rises to match that of the injured chamber, right atrial pressure is overcome, and this leads to decreased filling and reduced right ventricular preload. The classic Beck's triad of muffled heart sounds, jugular venous distention, and hypotension might not be appreciated in the trauma setting due to the often loud environment and the presence of hypovolemia. Patients presenting with hypotension and chest trauma must, therefore, be approached with a high level of suspicion. In the hemodynamically unstable patient, a pericardial drain is placed in the trauma bay under ultrasound guidance. This procedure is successful in approximately 80% of patients and provides sufficient stabilization for transport to the operating room for sternotomy.

Penetrating trauma causes over 90% of great vessel injury compared to blunt trauma. The incidence of blunt aortic injury (BAI) ranges between 1.5 to 2% of patients involved in high-energy blunt trauma, particularly rapid deceleration MVCs, which account for 80% of blunt aortic injuries.

Thoracotomy in the operating room has several indications in thoracic trauma. Most commonly, patients with massive hemothorax over 1500 mL and those with over 200 mL per hr of chest tube output over 3 consecutive hours require an operation. Additionally, those with cardiac tamponade, great vessel injury, massive air leak after thoracostomy placement, diagnosed tracheobronchial injury, and open pneumothorax need surgical repair. However, minimally invasive techniques using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) have been increasingly utilized in hemodynamically stable patients after both blunt and penetrating thoracic trauma. Several series have demonstrated favorable outcomes using VATS, with improved postoperative pain compared to thoracotomy and a shorter duration of thoracostomy drainage.

The utility of resuscitative emergency department resuscitative thoracotomy has been a topic of controversy for many years. Studies have shown that outcomes are based on the location of major injury and whether signs of life are present on arrival. Overall, the survival rate after resuscitative thoracotomy in penetrating trauma is 8.8% versus just 1.4% in blunt trauma. The most favorable outcomes are seen in patients with penetrating cardiac injury who present with signs of life, with an overall survival rate of 19.4%.

- Witnessed penetrating thoracic trauma with less than 15 minutes of prehospital CPR

- Witnessed blunt thoracic trauma with less than 10 minutes of prehospital CPR

- Witnessed penetrating trauma to the neck or extremities with less than 5 minutes of prehospital CPR

- Persistent, severe post-injury hypotension (systolic blood pressure less than 60 mm Hg) due to cardiac tamponade or massive intrathoracic, intraabdominal, extremity, or cervical hemorrhage.