# Introduction

Pulmonary ventilation, more commonly referred to as breathing, is the movement of air into and out of the lungs. Inhalation is the act of drawing air into the lungs, while exhalation is the expulsion of that air out of the lungs. Breathing involves Boyle’s law, which states that the pressure of a gas decreases as the volume increases if the temperature is held constant.

# Structure and Function

The structures of the thoracic wall protect the heart, lungs, and great vessels as well as some abdominal organs. Additionally, the bony structures provide attachment points for muscles and allow for the mechanical function of ventilation.

Ribs are curved, flat bones that attach posteriorly to vertebrae and anteriorly to the sternum. Ribs originate at each thoracic vertebra. The head of each rib has 1 or 2 facets for articulation with the costal facets on the bodies of thoracic vertebrae. Ribs 1, 10, 11, and 12 have a single facet on their head that only articulates with its respective vertebra. Ribs 2 through 9 all have 2 facets on their heads; the superior facet articulates with the vertebra above the rib, while the inferior facet articulates with the respectively named vertebra. In addition, ribs 1 through 10 have tubercles with facets that articulate with the costal facet of the transverse process of each respective vertebra.

The sternum is composed of 3 parts: the manubrium, body, and xiphoid process.

Ribs 1 through 7 are considered true, or vertebrocostal, ribs and attach directly to the sternum. Ribs 8 through 10 are considered false, or vertebrochondral, ribs in which the cartilage of each rib attaches to the cartilage of the rib above it which terminates where the seventh rib attaches to the sternum. Ribs 11 and 12 are considered floating, vertebral, or free, ribs because they terminate in the posterior abdominal musculature and do not attach to the sternum. The costal cartilage of ribs 1 through 10 facilitates the elastic recoil of the thoracic wall which contributes to passive exhalation.

# Embryology

The thoracic wall forms part of the axial skeleton and is composed of segmental bone, muscle, and connective tissue. These elements are derived from paraxial mesoderm, which forms somites from which the sclerotome, myotome, and dermatome separate. The sclerotome is the origin of the vertebrae and transverse elements which begin elongating into ribs during the fifth week of gestation. Ossification begins during the fetal period but will not be complete until adulthood.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Each intercostal space receives its blood supply from 3 arteries, a posterior intercostal artery and a pair of anterior intercostal arteries. The posterior arteries of the first 2 intercostal spaces are fed from the superior (supreme) intercostal artery which comes off the subclavian artery.

The internal thoracic artery is another branch of the subclavian artery that supplies the anterior intercostal arteries of spaces 1 through 6 before dividing into the superior epigastric and musculophrenic arteries.

The intercostal veins run most superiorly in the costal grooves. There are 11 pairs of posterior intercostal veins and one pair of subcostal veins. Like the posterior arteries, the posterior veins also anastomose with the anterior intercostal veins. Several of the superior posterior intercostal veins typically merge to form the left and right superior intercostal veins at the level of T3 or T4 which can then empty into the brachiocephalic vein or the superior vena cava (SVC).

# Nerves

The respiratory center in the medulla oblongata controls the rate and depth of ventilation. While the dorsal respiratory group controls the motor neurons for all inspiration, the ventral respiratory group only controls forced exhalation since normal exhalation is passive. The phrenic nerve is a branch of the cervical plexus. It originates mostly from C4, with some involvement of C3 and C5. The right and left sides travel through the neck and thorax before innervating the diaphragm.

# Muscles

The musculature of the thoracic wall can be divided into 2 groups: those involved in inhalation and those responsible for forced exhalation. During inhalation, the anterior-posterior, vertical, and transverse dimensions of the thorax are increased. Contraction of the dome-shaped diaphragm causes the central tendon to be pulled inferiorly, flattening the diaphragm and increasing the vertical dimensions of the thorax.

Beyond the diaphragm compressing the abdominal cavity and the external intercostals lifting the ribs, the serratus posterior superior attaches to ribs 2 through 5 and elevates them during inhalation. When the neck is fixed, the scalene helps to elevate the first and second ribs. Likewise, the sternocleidomastoid can assist in raising the sternum.

Numerous muscles aid in forced exhalation. The internal intercostals are located deep to the external intercostals. While the external intercostals run inferomedially from superior rib to the adjacent inferior rib, the internal intercostals lie perpendicularly to the externals. This allows them to depress the ribs. The transversus thoracis spreads across the inner surface of the thoracic cage from the lower posterior sternum to ribs 2 through 6.

# Physiologic Variants

The body of the sternum is usually longer and thicker in males and shorter and thinner in females. This can be used to assist in the determination of biological sex in skeletal remains.

Bifid ribs occur when the anterior portion of a rib splits into 2 before reaching the sternum. The corresponding musculature, blood vessels, and nerves also bifurcate. Bifid ribs are usually unilateral and asymptomatic.

# Surgical Considerations

Some essential surgical considerations regarding the thorax pertain to needle decompression and chest tube placement. As discussed, the blood vessels and nerves of the anterior thorax follow the costal groove on the inferior aspect of each rib.

# Clinical Significance

Accessory muscle use is the activation of muscles to aid in ventilation that are generally not active. While this can be a normal finding during activities such as exercise or singing, it is an important finding in patients who are at rest. The list of accessory muscles includes, but is not limited to, the scalenes, sternocleidomastoids, internal intercostals, transversus thoracis, pectoralis major and minor, serratus anterior, serratus posterior superior and inferior, latissimus dorsi, trapezius, and the muscles of the abdominal wall.

Injury to the brain, spinal cord, or phrenic nerve can paralyze the diaphragm and prevent patients from being able to breathe, thus requiring artificial ventilation.

A pneumothorax occurs when free air makes its way into the pleural cavity between the parietal and visceral pleurae. This may cause atelectasis or deflation of the affected lung. A pneumothorax can be caused by an internal insult such as a ruptured bleb or an external injury such as a broken rib or penetrating wound. Treatment may require the removal of the free air by thoracentesis/needle thoracotomy or the placement of a chest tube.