Type 2 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease are two of the most common chronic health conditions, leading to significant mortality rates and financial burden. The various lifestyle modifications indicate changes that patients can make in their daily lives and allow patients to feel empowered to take control of their medical conditions.

Patients diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus are more at risk for developing microvascular disease, a sequela of this condition. However, weight loss through diet and physical activity has been shown to significantly reduce the incidence of diabetes, reducing the patient’s chance of developing nephropathy, retinopathy, and neuropathy.

In patients diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus, reducing the severity of diabetes and preventing its sequela ultimately increases the patient’s quality of life and long-term health. Overall, these preventative methods aim to reduce the incidence of diabetes mellitus, which would significantly reduce chronic disease and prevent patients from experiencing the hardships associated with diabetes, both in terms of health and finances.

Cardiovascular disease is closely associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus as the pathophysiology behind diabetes mellitus induces changes in vessels that leads to a greater likelihood of developing both of these co-morbid conditions.

Dietary changes, such as certain vegetarian diets, the Mediterranean diet, or incorporating the DASH diet, have been shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events and allow patients to make these changes themselves.

These preventative methods will allow patients to control their medical conditions more than medications, surgical interventions, or procedures. They are changes that can be made in the patient’s home environment that significantly impact the overall progression of their disease process and the sequela surrounding the conditions.