The patient may have a history of inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. History may also include a traumatic injury to the extensor mechanism. It is important to ask about these when taking the patient's history.

On inspection, the digit will have the visible, classic swan neck deformity of hyperextension at the PIP joint and flexion at the DIP joint.

The range of motion should be assessed independently at the MCP, PIP, and DIP joints. It is important to examine both active and passive flexion at the PIP joint among the other joints.

There may still be quite a bit of flexibility (active or passive) of the PIP joint in the early stages. However, if passively correctible, the PIP joint will reassume the deformity position when the full active digital extension is attempted.

To flex the PIP joint, the patient will often use the other hand to passively bring the PIP joint out of the fixed hyperextension. Once the joint is no longer hyperextended, active flexion of the joint is still possible in the earlier stages.

The PIP may be stiff and fixed in the later stages or more chronic deformities and will not be passively correctible. Degenerative arthritis at the PIP joint may lead to further joint pain and loss of motion.

Perform the Finochietto-Bunnell test to determine whether a capsular restriction or intrinsic tightness is to blame. Normally, MCP joint extension should not restrict PIP joint motion. The Finochietto-Bunnell test involves holding the MCP in an extended position and then passively flexing the PIP, noting the available ROM. The test is repeated with the MCP flexed. If no change in motion is detected between the two trials, then capsular restriction at the PIP joint is suggested. If the motion increases when the MCP is flexed, then intrinsic muscle tightness is suggested.