MCV in the use of diagnosing types of anemia can experience some challenges. Patients with anemia can have a range of anemia types to a combination of anemias ranging from chronic alcoholism, causing folate deficiency with macrocytosis and bleeding esophageal varices causes microcytosis. Though the history and physical examination are crucial to determining the underlying cause of anemia, MCV can be the determining factor as to what is most important to treat primarily.

Nurse practitioners and primary care physicians whether it is an internist, family practice physician or pediatrician, are generally the first physicians that discover the disturbance in MCV laboratory values with routine visits or investigation of underlying complaints.

Post-operative period

Some patients with a change in MCV and hemoglobin and hematocrit ratio require surgery. There is also the management of patients in the post-operative period by nurses to make sure that the patients initiate and continue inspiratory spirometry to prevent atelectasis and pneumonia and to obtain and monitor laboratory values that are found abnormal especially in the following week after an operation. Physical therapists are also important to ensure that the patients begin moving and maintain physical activity to avoid decubitus ulcers, deep venous thromboses, urinary tract infections, pulmonary embolisms and other preventable surgical complications due to immobility.

Supplementation

Managing proper supplementation is pertinent for the proper care of a patient with MCV changes. As previously stated, patients can suffer from microcytic anemia, which might require iron supplementation, vitamin B6 supplementation, medication changes or even lead chelation. Patients with megaloblastic anemia may require supplementation. The pharmacists are very important for dosage, and reminding providers of contraindications with certain conditions causing anemia.

Pharmacists must assist the clinical team in monitoring the patients for complications of therapy and report back when issues such as constipation develop. They also need to assist in patient education, making sure that appropriate fluid intake is maintained and encourage the clinicians to order a laxative if constipation develops.

Evidence-based approach

Interprofessional healthcare practices are used to improve communication between providers and overall care of the patients. Many of the patients that suffer from changes in MCV are in the elderly population; this population has been found to benefit more with a stronger interprofessional team and meet with their primary care providers to establish a plan targeting their needs (Level III).

Evaluation of patient status and treatment as a team instead of just the primary care can improve the value of the patient’s outcome. These roles in a team can drastically change the type of care for the patient and possibly improve the quality of life of a patient with MCV changes. MCV is a valuable tool in diagnosis, but optimizing its full value requires full coordination from the interprofessional healthcare team. [Level V]