Contraindications include a history of an allergic reaction to either the penicillin or procaine component or other ester anesthetics. Careful consideration is necessary for patients with a history of carbapenem and/or cephalosporin sensitivity. Caution is also urged in those patients with diarrhea as the administration of penicillin procaine could, as with many broad-spectrum antibiotics, potentially worsen the course of pseudomembranous colitis due to Clostridium difficile.

According to one manufacturer, large doses of penicillin given to patients with renal impairment have correlations with seizures, and clinicians should avoid administration in a patient with a history of both renal impairment and seizures. Caution should still be exercised in patients with a renal impairment alone as well as with those patients with a history of seizure without renal impairment.

Other considerations include drug interactions with other therapies. In particular, procaine penicillin may decrease the efficacy of typhoid vaccine and, when given in the setting of methotrexate therapy, may increase serum concentrations of the latter, leading to potential methotrexate toxicity, including hematologic and gastroenterological manifestations. Concurrent administration of probenecid can result in increased serum concentrations of penicillin G and, therefore, should be approached with caution to avoid toxicity. Tetracycline administration may antagonize the bactericidal effect of penicillin, and thus the manufacturer recommends against the administration of these drugs together.