Patients with Pasteurella multocida infection will most commonly present following an injury due to an animal scratch or bite. The presentation may be immediately after the injury and before signs of infection have had time to develop. Infection may develop from 3 to 48 hours after the initial injury. Typical signs of Pasteurella infection include rapidly progressing swelling, erythema, and tenderness around the injury site. Serosanginous or purulent drainage may be present, as well as local lymphadenopathy.

In addition to soft tissue infection, septic arthritis and osteomyelitis are also possible sequelae of Pasteurella infection. Septic joints are not typically a result of direct inoculation and are located distal to the site of initial skin penetration. Patients that are more likely to suffer from a septic joint are those with comorbidities such as diabetes, alcoholism, or chronic corticosteroid use. A previous history of joint damage due to joint replacement or chronic degenerative disease also puts patients at a higher risk for septic arthritis. The most common joint affected is the knee.

One-third of patients suffering from septic arthritis secondary to Pasteurella multocida infection will not report a history of injury due to a bite or scratch, so it is important to obtain a detailed history of possible animal exposure. Patients that suffer from deep, penetrating wounds (typically cat bites) may also develop osteomyelitis. Wounds that penetrate the periosteum are more likely to lead to osteomyelitis, but direct inoculation is unnecessary. Localized extension of a soft tissue infection may eventually involve the bone itself. There is a particularly high risk of combined osteomyelitis and septic arthritis in patients suffering from cat bites to the hand.

Respiratory or invasive infections (i.e., endocarditis, meningitis) caused by Pasteurella multocida are not characterized by any specific features which might aid in definitive diagnosis. A thorough history that reveals animal exposure in the context of an immunocompromised state or other risk factors may raise suspicion for Pasteurella infection in these patients.