Etomidate contains a carboxylated imidazole ring-containing anesthetic compound (R-1-ethyl-1-[a-methylbenzyl] imidazole-5-carboxylate) and is structurally unrelated to other anesthetic agents. The imidazole ring provides water solubility in acidic solutions and lipid solubility at physiological pH. Therefore, etomidate is dissolved in propylene glycol, which often causes pain on injection but can be reduced by prior intravenous injection of lidocaine.

Etomidate has a chiral carbon atom and exists in the form of 2 enantiomers. Only the R (+) isomer is hypnotically active. The S (-) enantiomer has a 20-fold lower hypnotic effect.

**Pharmacokinetics**

The onset of action: 30 to 60 seconds, Peak effect: 1 minute

Distribution: 2 to 4.5 L/kg. Limited pharmacokinetic data in patients with cirrhosis and esophageal varices suggest that the volume of distribution and elimination half-life of etomidate are approximately double that seen in healthy subjects.

Metabolism:  Metabolism is primarily hepatic by ester hydrolysis to inactive metabolites. Minimal anesthetic plasma levels of unchanged drug are equal to or higher than 0.23 mcg/mL; they decrease rapidly up to 30 minutes following injection and more slowly with a half-life value of about 75 minutes.

Excretion: 75% of the administered dose is excreted in the urine on the first day after injection. The chief metabolite is R-(+)-1-(1-phenylethyl)-1H-imidazole-5-carboxylic acid, resulting from hydrolysis of etomidate, and accounts for about 80% of the urinary excretion. Another route of excretion is bile. Like most intravenous anesthetics, etomidate is highly protein-bound (77%). Thus, it can achieve a higher concentration in the brain in low albumin states since it will be less bound to albumin, and more free-drug would be available in the brain.