Finasteride is available as a 1 mg tablet or a 5 mg tablet for oral use. Each dose has a different indication. As much as six to twelve months of continued treatment may be necessary to assess the benefit of treatment.

**Recommended Dosages**

- Benign prostatic hyperplasia: 5 mg once daily (as a single agent or combined with an alpha-blocker)

- Androgenic alopecia (male pattern baldness): 1 mg once daily.

- Hirsutism (female, idiopathic, and related to polycystic ovary syndrome): 5 mg once daily or 2.5 mg once daily; this is an off-label use.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Hepatic Impairment:**There is no specific dose adjustment guidance provided in the manufacturer label. However, the liver extensively metabolizes the drug, so use caution when administering the medication in those patients.

**Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is needed for the patient with renal impairment. The drug is excreted via urine as well as feces.

**Pregnancy:**It is labeled as a Pregnancy Category X medicine. It is contraindicated for a woman who is or may become pregnant. Because finasteride is able to inhibit the conversion of testosterone to 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), it might cause abnormalities of the external genitalia of a male fetus. If pregnancy occurs for a woman while she is taking finasteride or a pregnant woman has exposure to finasteride, that woman should be counseled of the potential hazard to a male fetus.

**Breastfeeding Patients:**It is unknown whether finasteride is excreted in milk. However, it is not indicated for use while nursing infants or babies.

**Pediatric Patients:**Safety and efficacy are not established for the pediatric patient population by the manufacturer, so it is not indicated to use for pediatric patients.

**Geriatric Patients:**Efficacy is not established for the senior adult patient population by the manufacturer. However, based on the pharmacokinetic parameters of 5 mg tablets, no dose adjustment is needed for geriatric patients.