In the past, treatment had involved the use of diethylcarbamazine, which was effective but also caused very serious systemic and ocular complications, especially in patients with high microfilaridermia.

The clearance of microfilariae from the skin and the anterior chamber has been studied extensively. A previous meta-analysis has shown that skin microfilariae are reduced by half in 24 hours, 94% in one week, and 98% to 99% by 1 to 2 months, following a single dose of ivermectin.

A major limitation of currently available treatment is the absence of good and safe drugs to kill the adult worm, which causes the persistence of infection. Tablet doxycycline is promising in this regard, and may kill the adult worm by killing Wolbachia; however, doxycycline does not kill the microfilaria for which another drug has to be used concurrently.Wolbachia is endosymbiotic, rickettsia-like bacteria, which is important for the survival of adult worm and embryogenesis. The used dose is oral 100mg or 200mg once daily for 6 weeks. Ivermectin should be started at least 1 week before doxycycline for optimal benefits.

Older treatments, including suramin and diethylcarbamazine, are avoided as less toxic and effective alternative treatments are available. Diethylcarbamazine may accelerate the development of blindness.  Patients coinfected with Loa loa can have a life-threatening encephalitic reaction to ivermectin, and the opinion of infectious disease specialists or experts on loiasis is a must before starting therapy. Doxycycline has only been tested in coinfected persons with a Loa microfilariae load of less than 8000/ml.