**Major Contraindications**

- **Allery:**Severe hypersensitivity to rivaroxaban (or any component of the formulation) can occur.

- **Hematologic:**Active pathological bleeding is a contraindication for rivaroxaban use.

**Other Contraindications are Drug-disease Interactions**

- **Antiphospholipid syndrome:**this drug is not recommended in patients with triple-positive antiphospholipid syndrome because its safety and efficacy profile is yet to be established. "Triple positive" lupus anticoagulant patients may have increased rates of recurrent thrombotic events on rivaroxaban compared with vitamin K antagonist therapy.

- **Hepatic impairment:**Avoid rivaroxaban in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh classes B and C) or in patients with coagulopathy related to liver disease.

- **Renal impairment:**Caution is necessary for patients with moderate renal impairment (CrCl 30-50 mL/minute) and those with worsening renal function. For DVT/PE and VTE prophylaxis, avoid use in patients with CrCl <30 mL/minute. Clinicians should discontinue the drug in patients who develop acute renal failure. If the CrCl declines to <50 mL/min, reduce the rivaroxaban dose from 20 mg to 15 mg.

- Rivaroxaban is not recommended for patients with atrial fibrillation with end-stage CKD or on hemodialysis with CrCl <15 mL/min.

- **Valvular disease:**Rivaroxaban is not recommended in patients with prosthetic heart valves or rheumatic heart disease and should be avoided in patients with mechanical valves or moderate to severe mitral stenosis.

- **Patients with increased bleeding risk**: Congenital or acquired bleeding disorders, Uncontrolled severe arterial hypertension, Active ulcerative GI disease, vascular retinopathy, and bronchiectasis or history of pulmonary bleeding

**Drug-drug interactions:**Potentially significant interactions may exist which require dose or frequency adjustment, additional monitoring, and/or consideration of alternative therapy. Consult a drug-interaction database for more detailed information. DOACs like rivaroxaban interact with potent CYP3A inhibitors and P-glycoprotein (P-GP) inhibitors, and breast cancer resistance protein Bcrp (ABCG2) inhibitors (mainly comprising azole-antimycotics, apart from fluconazole and HIV protease inhibitors), which are multi-pathway inhibitors of rivaroxaban clearance and elimination.

**During pregnancy and lactation:**The limited available evidence raises concern regarding embryo-fetal safety, with a high incidence of miscarriages and a 4% rate of anomalies when using rivaroxaban. Not enough data are available to judge the safety and efficacy of using DOACs during pregnancy.

**Elderly patients**tend to have higher rivaroxaban concentrations than younger patients (primarily due to reduced clearance).

- **Beers Criteria:**The Beers Criteria lists rivaroxaban as a potentially inappropriate medication and to be used with caution in treating VTE or atrial fibrillation in patients ≥75 years due to an increased risk of GI bleeding compared to warfarin and reported rates of other direct oral anticoagulants when used for long-term treatment of VTE or atrial fibrillation (Beers Criteria [AGS 2019]). The risk-benefit ratio of DOACs in elderly patients on polypharmacy should always merit careful consideration.