For a complex wound to heal, optimization of both systemic and local factors is needed. Adequate debridement of the wound bed and choice of the appropriate dressing is essential. Moreover, it requires adjusting the patient's general condition, noting any comorbidities, and assessing nutritional status to aid the healing process. In most cases, an interprofessional team approach is best to achieve this goal.

**Special Complex Wounds**

**Pressure Ulcer**

A pressure ulcer is a localized injury of the skin and underlying soft tissue over a bony prominence. 3 to 15% of hospitalized patients can develop pressure ulcers, and it is associated with a high mortality rate in the elderly. Common sites include sacrum, ischium, heel, trochanter, scapula, and occiput. It is usually initiated by pressure, shearing, and friction forces. The poor general condition of these patients renders the healing of the pressure ulcer.

Waterlow score is one of the most common scores used to assess the risk of developing pressure ulcers. It assesses the following skin type and risk areas: BMI, sex and age, appetite and weight loss, mobility, continence, and special risks such as malnutrition.

Surgery goals should achieve adequate excision of the pressure ulcer and underlying bursa before reconstruction using durable skin flaps. Examples of the common flaps are gluteus maximus musculocutaneous flap for sacral pressure sore, posterior thigh advancement flap for ischial pressure sores, and fascia lata flap for trochanteric pressure sores.

**Diabetic Foot**

The cause of diabetic foot is usually multifactorial, including neuropathy, ischemia, and infection. Most cases are combined neuro-ischemia.

**Venous Ulcer**

Venous ulcer is one of the late sequelae of varicose veins and subsequent venous hypertension. It is usually difficult to heal and can significantly affect the quality of life of many patients. Treatment should focus on surgical treatment of venous incompetency, if possible, application of compression dressing, either a multi-layer compression dressing or, if not tolerated, intermittent compression, and regular wound dressing.

**Radiated Wounds**

External beam radiation can significantly damage the DNA of keratinocytes, fibroblast, and endothelial cells, which will impair their ability to regenerate. Most of the radiated tissue will continue to have residual endothelial damage and endarteritis obliterans in the long term. This is the main reason why any injury in any radiated tissue will be difficult to heal. Hyperbaric oxygen can improve the wound environment to stimulate healing. However, in extensive cases, surgical excision of the affected area and coverage by vascularized flap is the most suitable option.

**Malignant Wounds**

Early diagnosis of such cases is mandatory to improve the long-term outcome in terms of morbidity and mortality. A biopsy is essential for diagnosis, and further scans may also be needed to assess the systemic spread of the malignancy. The most common causes are basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma, Marjolin ulcer, or secondary malignancies. Wide local excision of the tumor along with potential lymph node surgery is the treatment of choice. In extensive non-operable cases, electrochemotherapy may be used to limit the extension of the ulcer and to decrease pain and discharge.

**Abdominal Wound Dehiscence**

Causes of abdominal wound dehiscence include resection of abdominal wall tumor, e.g., sarcoma or desmoid tumor, or secondary to laparotomy (e.g., trauma, aortic artery aneurysm, sepsis, or necrotizing pancreatitis).In primary cases, reconstruction should be done immediately by a skin flap. While in secondary cases, management is usually staged.