Since everything the human body consumes by mouth passes through the stomach, it is exposed to a variety of foreign agents and is prone to homeostatic disruption. The prevalence of dyspepsia in the Western world is approximately 25%. Worldwide, gastric carcinoma is the fourth most common malignancy and the second deadliest.H. pylori, which causes multiple gastric disorders, remains a challenging infection to treat, and approximately 20% of H. pylori-infected people will continue to experience dyspepsia and may even develop extra-systemic diseases over their lifetime.

Acid-reducing therapies had been the mainstay in the treatment of stomach related pathologies and symptoms varying from dyspepsia, GERD, gastritis to peptic ulcer diseases. Due to the high acidity or low pH (1.0) of gastric content, the simple antacids are commonly used and available over the counter. They are not effective except for transient relief of some symptoms. The antihistamine (H2 blockers) are more efficacious than acid-reducing therapies, and recently, there is greater, the widespread use of the most efficacious acid-reducing therapies, the proton pump inhibitors (PPI). PPIs are most effective in reducing acid production and help many symptoms related to gastric pathology. As a consequence, long-term use without clear indications is not uncommon. It is generally safe, yet the reduced acid-pepsin digestion of B12 containing food may lead to vitamin B12 deficiency, especially in the elderly and vegans.