Three office-based techniques described for accessing the laryngeal musculature are direct visualization, laryngoscopy guided percutaneous injection, and EMG-guided percutaneous injection.

In the former, after topical anesthesia is applied to the nasal cavity, the provider inserts the flexible video endoscope transnasally and advances past the nasopharynx and pharynx until there is a clear view of the glottis, just above the vocal folds. Lidocaine solution is instilled via the operating channel onto the vocal folds drop by drop, while the patient maintains the /i/ phonation ("eee"). Next, the flexible needle is advanced through the channel and advanced just past the tip of the endoscope while still within its protective plastic sheath. At this point, the assistant will advance the needle while the operating surgeon stabilizes the endoscope's position and the needle trajectory. Under direct visualization, 0.2 ml of botulinum toxin are injected into the area of interest. Intralaryngeal leakage can be avoided by assuring slight swelling and blanching of the mucosa at the site of interest after injection. To minimize the risk of reflux at the injection site, the needle is left in place for 15 seconds before the withdrawal.

In adductor dysphonia, the TA-LCA muscle complex is injected with equal components bilaterally. In abductor SD, the PCA muscle is injected one side at a time and usually spaced out to avoid airway compromise. In vocal process granuloma, the interarytenoid and/or thyroarytenoid muscles are injected.

An EMG-guided percutaneous injection is an indirect way to gain access in the treatment of laryngeal movement disorders without direct visualization. For ADSD, an EMG needle is passed through the cricothyroid membrane transcutaneously, 2-3 mm from the midline of the side to be addressed. The needle is advanced superolaterally and maneuvered until the classic crisp motor unit potentials are read on EMG. If the needle is passed into the airway, a "buzz" on the EMG will notify the operating surgeon, and the needle should be withdrawn slightly. When the needle is positioned within the TA muscle, the patient is asked to phonate to help confirm placement, and the EMG should show brisk recruitment.

For ABSD, the needle is inserted transcutaneously along the lower half of the thyroid cartilage's posterior border. The needle is then advanced and should stop when it reaches the posterior surface of the posterior cricoid lamina. To confirm placement, the patient is asked to sniff. If brisk recruitment occurs, then placement is confirmed, and botulinum toxin is injected into the PCA muscle.

Laryngoscopy guided percutaneous injection is a direct way to visualize the larynx while navigating a needle transcutaneously. Topical anesthesia with 2 ml of 4% lidocaine is applied through the cricothyroid membrane and into the airway, and the nasal cavity is topicalized with lidocaine. Next, a video flexible nasolaryngoscope is passed through the nose and advanced past the nasopharynx and held in a position slightly above the vocal cords by the assistant. A 27-gauge needle attached to a 1 ml syringe filled with botulinum toxin is advanced through the cricothyroid membrane at the midline of the neck. The video endoscope is used to visualize the needle as it enters the airway subglottically directly. For ADSD, the needle is angled posterolaterally, and the posterior one-third of both of the vocal folds are injected.

In cases of laryngeal tremor with or without concurrent SD, treatment consists of unilateral or bilateral TA-LCA botulinum toxin injection using one of the above methods.

In the treatment of vocal process granuloma, patients are first seated upright and nares topicalized with oxymetazoline and lidocaine. A transtracheal injection of lidocaine is also performed to anesthetize the airway. A video flexible laryngoscope is passed through the nasal cavity and positioned above the glottis. A botulinum toxin-filled syringe attached to a 25 gauge, the 1.5-inch needle is passed just above the thyroid notch and should enter the larynx at the petiole of the epiglottis. It is then advanced into the interarytenoid region under direct visualization, and botulinum toxin is injected.

In treating cricopharyngeal muscle dysfunction, doses of 80 to 120 units of botulinum toxin have been described. Multiple methods have been described for injecting the CP muscle. Under general anesthesia, rigid endoscopy can be performed to visualize the CP, and EMG is used to confirm the precise location.  Alternatively, EMG-guided injection under videofluoroscopic control, EMG-guided percutaneous injection, and CT-guided injection have all been described.