History and physical exam often can help pinpoint the correct anatomic region of the snapping. The patient often can point with one finger to the area that is painful upon snapping and may even be able to recreate the snap for you. Symptoms develop and increase over a long period of time, typically months to years.

External snapping hip usually is more obvious on clinical exam, with the patient experiencing a snapping or sensation of subluxation of the hip (i.e., pseudosubluxation). Sometimes one can even visualize or palpate the snapping phenomenon under the patient’s skin. The area over the greater trochanteric region may be painful due to greater trochanter bursitis, abductor tendon pathology, or inflammation of the iliotibial band. Tests to provoke the snap usually include femoral rotation and or flexion. To examine the hip, the patient is placed in a lateral position, and the Ober test is done to test for iliotibial band tightness. While the patient is in this same position, the knee and hip can be cycled through flexion and extension to provoke the snapping.

Internal snapping hip is usually described by the patient as a snapping or locking of the hip with an audible snap. Weakness in the gluteus medius is sometimes found as well. To examine the hip, the patient is placed in the supine position with the affected hip guided by the examiner into an externally rotated and flexed position. Then, from this position, the leg is extended into an anatomically neutral position next to the other resting leg. This test is positive if the snapping is reproduced at the anterior hip.  Remember that almost half of the patients with internal snapping hip also have inter-articular pathology that may confound the physical exam findings.