The clinician needs to be well-versed in the reasons to prescribe chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and dosing recommendations to detect those patients at increased risk.

Chloroquine has a long history in the treatment of malaria caused by Plasmodium vivax, ovale, malariae, and falciparum in regions where P. falciparum has not developed resistance to it (mainly in North Africa).  It also has utility in treating amebiasis, especially the extra-intestinal forms.  For malaria prophylaxis in adults, start 500 mg CQ phosphate once a week from 2 weeks before until 8 weeks after travel to an endemic area.  The adult dose for active infection of malaria is a total dose of 2500 mg divided over 3 days for patients over 60 kg and for those less than 60 kg, 41.7 mg/kilogram of divided over 3 days.  Give patients with amebiasis a 1 gram loading dose for two days followed by 500 mg of CQ phosphate for 2-3 weeks.  Chloroquine is often part of a multi-drug regimen with other anti-parasitic medications.  A cumulative dose of over 460 g or a daily dose of 2.3 mg/kg body weight/day is high risk.

HCQ treats rheumatic conditions as mentioned previously in this article. It also has utility in the treatment or prevention of malaria. For malaria prophylaxis in adults, start 400 mg HCQ once a week from 2 weeks before until 8 weeks after travel to an endemic area.  The adult dose for the treatment of malaria is a total dose of 2000 mg divided over 3 days for patients over 60 kg and for those less than 60 kg, 25 mg/kilogram divided over 3 days.  For rheumatic diseases, the most common dose is 400 mg per day.  In 2016, the previous guideline to keep the daily dose of HCQ under 6.5 mg/kilogram of ideal bodyweight was adjusted to 5 mg/kilogram of the actual body weight to keep the risk of retinopathy within acceptable levels.

Previous guidelines using ideal weight protect short stature, obese patients, while the new guidelines using actual weight appear to protect short stature thin patients from receiving a dose that is too high.

Convincing evidence of toxicity should result in the drug's discontinuation in consultation with the prescribing physician.  Because of the long half-life of both drugs, retinopathy can continue for over 6 months, and studies have shown ongoing changes for up to 20 years after cessation of the drugs.