The clinical impact of nutrition during infancy is best understood by measuring growth accurately. An in-depth understanding of the nuances of breastfeeding, formula supplementation, use of specialized formulas are keys to ensuring adequate growth in infancy. Growth can often be interrupted by certain pathological conditions, like gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, milk protein intolerance or allergy, and lactose intolerance, often requiring dietary modifications.

**Measurement of Growth and Growth Failure**

Infancy is a period of rapid growth. Weight, length, weight for height, and head circumference (HC) are the primarily used markers for measuring growth rates in infants and children. Trends in growth patterns over time provide more valuable information than a single measurement. Growth rates increase during the third trimester of pregnancy, accounting for about 90% fetal brain growth occurring between 20 weeks of gestation and full term. The gray matter undergoes a 4-fold increase from 29-40 weeks of pregnancy while the white matter increases 5-fold, from 35-40 weeks of pregnancy. While HC less than 10% at eight months of age correlates with a cognitive, educational, and psychosocial delay at eight years old, better length growth is associated with higher cognitive scores at 24 months. In an ideal scenario, a weight gain of 15-20 g/day and a length increase of 1 cm per week is considered optimal until about 36 weeks.

An infant within the normal percentile ranges (e.g., 10 to 90 percentile for weight) may be failing to thrive if the growth rate stalls over a while. This might be missed by taking a one-time measurement that falls within the acceptable range. The growth rate is the fastest in the first three months after birth, reaching about 30 grams per day. The growth rate subsequently slows down to about 15 grams/day by 3-6 months and about 10 grams/day from 6-12 months. The length and head circumference also increase rapidly in the first year of life, increasing by about 25 cm and 12 cm, respectively. This period of rapid growth is best captured by using the appropriate growth charts from centers for disease control (CDC) and WHO. The WHO growth charts are the primarily used charts for infants and children 0-24 months, while the CDC growth charts guide for children older than two years of age.

**Breastfeeding**

Breastfeeding is now much more than a medical issue- it transcends social, economic, cultural, and geographic realms. AAP recommends exclusive breastfeeding up to six months of age.

Although the rates of breastfeeding are improving in the USA, there exists a racial and economic disparity. Non-Hispanic Black women have the lowest initiation rate (58%), while 80% of Hispanic/ Latino women initiate breastfeeding. Poor women breastfeed at a significantly lower rate than well-to-do mothers, and young mothers (<20 years old) breastfeed at a substantially lower rate than women over 30 years of age.

The only contraindications to breastfeeding are an infant with galactosemia, a mother with HIV, or a mother with active herpes simplex virus (HSV) lesions on her breast. Hepatitis is not an absolute contraindication to breastfeeding. Mothers who are febrile can continue to breastfeed. Newborns with jaundice can continue to breastfeed as well. Mothers who are using street drugs should not breastfeed, but if a mother is enrolled in a supervised opioid treatment center, then breastfeeding is encouraged.

**Donor Milk**

The roots of donor breastmilk lie in the concept of wet-nurses used as far back as the ancient world until the twentieth century.

Preterm infants, especially extremely low birth weight (ELBW) <1000 g and very low birth weight (VLBW) infants <1500 g, are at the highest need for donor breastmilk given the benefits of breastmilk over formula. While donor breastmilk is a valuable resource in the care of preterm infants, newer studies show the benefits of mother's own milk (MOM) over donor breastmilk. It is theorized that pooled pasteurized donor breastmilk has less immunogenic value due to the loss of immunoglobulins and cells during processing. Nevertheless, donor breastmilk is still regarded as superior to commercial preterm formulas, and an increasing number of neonatal intensive care units are now using donor breastmilk in their preterm infants. A survey of NICUs in the USA showed that about 45% of the NICUs are using donor breastmilk in infants up to 1800 g.

**Formula Supplementation**

Much progress has been made in the field of infant formulas. The nutritional qualities of infant formulas are closer to that of breast milk than ever before and have improved in recent years. However, active biological components (immunoglobulins, active enzymes) continue to provide a significant advantage of breast milk over formula and are actively being pursued as additives for infant formulas. A wide variety of infant formulas exist for various stages of infancy, from preterm to full-term neonates, and special situations. The regular full-term infant formulas are usually 19-20 kcal/oz, similar to breastmilk, which has an average caloric strength of 18-20 kcal/oz.

The differences between various infant formulas are primarily based on the types and amounts of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Proteins in infant formulas are typically cow-milk based with a predominance of casein over whey (whey-casein ratio of 20:80 compared to breastmilk (55:45 in mature milk, 80:20 in colostrum). Hydrolyzed protein formulas contain protein that has been broken down into simpler proteins and is better tolerated in infants with milk protein allergies. The protein content in amino acid-based formulas is completely broken down into amino acids. It is tolerated the best for babies with short gut syndrome, cow's milk protein intolerance, or allergies. However, debate exists on the routine use of hydrolyzed and amino acid-based formulas instead of formulas with intact protein. Partially hydrolyzed formulas have been shown in some studies to decrease the risk of atopic dermatitis.

**Summary/Learning Points**

- Optimal nutrition with the right balance of various nutritional components is essential for optimal growth.

- Growth is best monitored using serial measurements of weight, length, and head circumference on the appropriate growth charts (CDC vs. WHO growth charts, Fenton for preterm infants until corrected to 50 weeks, and special charts for exceptional circumstances).

- The AAP recommends exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life and up to 4-6 months in certain conditions.

- Mother's milk is preferred over donor milk for the best outcomes. However, in the absence of the mother's milk, infants <1500 g definitively benefit from the use of pasteurized donor human milk. The use of donor milk is currently subject to institutional and local policies and procedures.