**Systemic Management**

If a history of trauma is missing, all patients with ectopia lentis should be evaluated by a pediatrician to rule out a syndromic association. In patients with homocystinuria, dietary restrictions should be emphasized. In the case of Marfan's syndrome, repair of aortic aneurysm and mitral valve prolapse by a cardio surgeon can be lifesaving. Musculoskeletal problems also deserve attention with the help of a rheumatologist and orthopedist. Genetic screening and counseling of family members and evaluation of pedigree chart of family members.

**Medical Management**

It involved correction of refractive error by glass prescription or contact lenses. Timely intervention is needed to prevent irreversible amblyopia. Pharmacological dilatation with cycloplegics like 1% atropine or 2% homatropine is necessary in cases of dislocation of the lens in the anterior chamber. This will help in the posterior migration of the lens behind the iris. Antiglaucoma medication in the form of 1% timolol two times per day, acetazolamide 250 mg two times per day, or 0.1% brimonidine two per day to reduce intraocular pressure in cases of secondary glaucoma.

**Refractive Correction**

In ectopia lentis spectacles or contact lenses can be advised if the vision shows improvement well with refractive correction. Contact lens holds the advantage of less image magnification and better best-corrected visual acuity.

**Laser Peripheral Iridotomy**

Pupillary block glaucoma can be a complication of ectopia lentis, and laser peripheral iridotomy is the treatment of choice in such cases. Prophylactic laser iridotomy is also indicated in patients with microspherophakia.

**Surgical Management**

**Indications for Surgery**

- Lens induced glaucoma

- The dislocated lens in the anterior chamber with corneal endothelial touch

- Mature or Morgagnian cataract

- Lens induced uveitis

- Visual acuity not improving with refractive correction

- Retinal detachment

- A subluxated or dislocated lens in the vitreous cavity

**Surgical Techniques for Ectopia Lentis**

- Pars plana vitrectomy with lensectomy

- Cataract extraction with anterior vitrectomy

- Anterior chamber IOL

- Iris claw or iris sutured IOL

- Scleral fixated IOL

- Posterior chamber IOL with capsular tension ring or capsular tension segment

- Femtosecond laser for subluxated lens management

- Optical iridectomy

A detailed management algorithm for the subluxated clear lens, subluxated cataractous lens, and the dislocated lens are described in Figures 2, 3, and 4, respectively.