Adverse events in healthcare are generally the result of complex combinations of human factors and systems failures.

**Leadership**

Effective teams require effective leadership.

**Communication**

Failures in communication are the leading cause of medical errors.

**Anticipation and planning**

In healthcare, sudden unexpected events can have serious negative consequences for patients and their medical teams. By thinking ahead and anticipating what might happen, teams can plan for changes to the patient or environment. Planning can take place long before an emergency (e.g., developing and practicing a hospital-wide disaster plan),

**Resource utilization**

Resources for the effective management of a medical crisis include personnel, equipment, and cognitive aids.

**Workload distribution**

During medical crises, teams must perform a multitude of tasks almost simultaneously. Individual team members can quickly become overwhelmed if asked to perform too many tasks at once or tasks beyond their skill set. Balancing the workload is important for establishing role clarity, maximizing efficiency, and ensuring the safety of patients and staff.

**Situational awareness**

Situational awareness refers to an individual’s ability to perceive relevant data from their surroundings, process the information and determine its impact on current goals, and utilize this understanding to predict future events.

**Triage and prioritization**

Medical crises often demonstrate a mismatch between the number of tasks that require completion and the resources available to address those tasks. Teams should rapidly determine the criticality of each task and prioritize those that are more important for optimizing patient outcomes.

**Management of disruptions**

Healthcare teams often work in dynamic environments where they encounter frequent disruptions. Some interruptions (e.g., an overhead announcement stating that there is a fire in the vicinity) require immediate attention and resources. In contrast, others serve as distractions that can negatively impact a team’s performance. Teams should quickly and accurately assess the urgency of each disruption to determine if attention to the disruption can be delayed.