The trachea is a structure composed of incomplete cartilaginous rings (except for the first ring, which is complete) beginning at the subglottic larynx and terminating at the carina and mainstem bronchi. The posterior wall of the trachea is shared with the anterior wall of the esophagus. The first ring which connects the trachea to the larynx is called the cricoid cartilage, which is a complete ring and also contains the cricothyroid joint of the larynx. The trachea lies deep to the sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles, with the thyroid gland typically overlying the second to fourth tracheal rings in the neck. Immediately lateral to the cervical trachea lie the recurrent laryngeal nerves and some peritracheal lympho-fatty tissue. These structures are surrounded by the middle (or pretracheal) layer of the deep cervical fascia. Lateral to these structures lies the common carotid arteries, which are encased in the carotid sheath, a component of the deep layer of the deep cervical fascia. The thymus and anterior mediastinal contents overlie the thoracic trachea as it courses posterior to the heart. The innominate artery crosses over the trachea as it arises from the aorta.

**Anatomic landmarks for tracheostomy:**

- Thyroid notch - a palpable landmark to identify the superior aspect of the larynx in the midline.

- Cricothyroid membrane - a palpable depression between cricoid and thyroid cartilages. This is the location for an emergent cricothyrotomy.

- Cricoid cartilage - a palpable landmark to identify the junction of the larynx and trachea. The skin incision is typically placed 1-2cm inferior to the cricoid.

- Sternal notch - a palpable landmark to identify the thoracic inlet. It is important to palpate here to the possibility of a high-riding innominate artery that may be encountered during tracheostomy.