Arrhythmias: The most common complication of VSD closure. Patients have a 4.6 to 17‰ risk of arrhythmia following device implantation.****While most arrhythmias occur within one day to one-week post-operation, transient atrioventricular block and complete heart block have been noted intraoperatively with a prevalence of about 1.6%. Common post-operative arrhythmias include: right bundle branch block (RBBB) 6.4%, left bundle branch block (LBBB) 1.6%, sinus tachycardia (ST) 3.2%, second atrioventricular block (AVB) 1.09%.et al.****There is evidence to support various arrhythmia risks depending on the VSD type. For example, complete heart block seems to occur more often in perimembranous VSD compared to muscular VSDs.

Trivial residual shunt: A trivial residual shunt occurs when venous blood enters the bloodstream without passing through functional lung tissue without hemodynamic compromise. Approximately 5 to 6.7% of patients who undergo VSD closure will develop a trivial residual shunt.

Aortic Regurgitation: According to one study, the rate of AR following VSD device closure is approximately 3.4‰.

Tricuspid Regurgitation: TR was noted in several case studies. It is thought that post-VSD closure TR is secondary to direct trauma to the tricuspid valve.

Iatrogenic embolization of VSD occluder: The rate of device embolization occurring approximately 0.82%.

Endocarditis: While rare, occurrence data varies from 0.3% to 0.9%. More extensive studies may be needed to discern a more accurate prevalence.

Pulmonary hypertension: According to Jorveit et al., the approximate rate of development of PH status post VSD closure is about 0.3‰.