Purpura fulminans is the acute onset of often rapidly progressing cutaneous hemorrhage and necrosis caused by dermal vascular thrombosis and disseminated intravascular necrosis.  It occurs in 3 clinical settings:

- Neonatal purpura fulminans is a manifestation of inherited protein C or, less commonly, protein S deficiency.

- Idiopathic or acquired purpura fulminans occurs approximately 7 to 10 days after an infectious disease, usually involving the skin (usually varicella or scarlet fever).

- Acute infectious purpura fulminans occurs during an acute illness, usually sepsis with endotoxin producing gram-negative bacteria.

All types of purpura fulminans involve dysfunction of hemostasis with a shift to a disease state with overwhelming procoagulation.

Neonatal purpura fulminans is associated with a hereditary deficiency of the anticoagulants protein C and S. These proteins are vitamin-K dependent cofactors which are pro-fibrinolytic. Protein C is one of the major inhibitors of the coagulation system which when activated inhibits factor Va and VIIIa which in turn down-regulate thrombin synthesis. Neonates typically present with massive venous and arterial thrombosis of the skin and other organs within 5 days of birth.

Acute infectious purpura fulminans is the most common type and is associated with an acquired deficiency of protein C. The mechanism involves a disruption of the coagulation balance. Bacterial endotoxin triggers consumption of proteins C and S and antithrombin III. This pro-coagulative state leads to thromboses of dermal vessels and is associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation. The skin lesions may present early as petechial rashes. These rapidly progress to larger ecchymotic areas. Later in the course, hemorrhagic bullae may form which contribute to the classic hard eschars characteristic of purpura fulminans.

Idiopathic purpura fulminans, the rarest form of the disease, has been associated with the development of anti-protein S antibodies. These antibodies bind to protein S and get excreted. This causes to a transient protein S deficiency which leads to hypo-activation of the protein C pathway and a hypercoagulable state similar to what was described above.