This section discusses the pharmacology of milrinone.

**Phosphodiesterase Inhibition**

Milrinone is the phosphodiesterase inhibitor drug class. Phosphodiesterase is an enzyme that hydrolyzes the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate(cAMP) and guanosine monophosphate(cGMP), terminating their effects in various tissues. There are several phosphodiesterase enzymes throughout the body. Phosphodiesterase III is present in the cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum, smooth muscle in arteries and veins. Milrinone is selective for phosphodiesterase III at low doses and nonselective at high doses.

**Cardiac Effects of Milrinone**

In the myocardium, PDE III inhibition leads to increased contractility (inotropy) and improved relaxation (lusitropy). This effect leads to improved systolic and diastolic function and optimizes cardiac output. Increased heart rate (chronotropy) also occurs but is less pronounced than the increases in heart rate seen with medications in the catecholamine class. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase III prevents cAMP breakdown, increasing protein kinase A activity, leading to phosphorylation of calcium ion channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum and increasing calcium availability in myocyte sarcomere. The aforementioned increased calcium availability manifests in increased cardiac inotropy and chronotropy. Consequently, PDE III inhibition by milrinone causes increased calcium reuptake into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, resulting in enhanced myocardial relaxation (lusitropy) with improved diastolic function.

**Vasoactive Effects of Milrinone**

In the vasculature, PDE III inhibition prevents cGMP metabolism in the smooth musculature and results in vasodilation in both arteries and veins. The vasodilatory effects of milrinone are more potent than beta-2 agonists, including dobutamine and isoproterenol. Milrinone is available in an inhalational formula for directed vasodilation of the pulmonary vasculature to treat pulmonary hypertension.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Plasma half-life: 2 to 2.5 hours.

- Distribution: The volume of distribution:0.38-0.45 liters/kg,  Plasma protein binding: 70%

- Metabolism:  Milrinone is metabolized by the liver to O-glucuronide metabolite

- Excretion: The route of excretion of urine and mean renal clearance of milrinone is approximately 0.3 liters/min (90% recovered in urine in 8 hours)