Initial labs to evaluate gallstones often include CBC, CMP, PT/PTT, lipase, amylase, Alk Phos, total bilirubin, urine analysis.

Ultrasound remains the first line and best imaging modality to diagnose gallstones. A systematic review estimated that the sensitivity was 84% and specificity was 99%, better than other modalities. Either radiology ultrasound study or point-of-care ultrasound can be used to detect biliary disease. Several studies in the literature have shown that point-of-care ultrasound by clinicians is accurate and reliable in diagnosing or excluding biliary disease. Gallstones on ultrasound have the appearance of hyperechoic structures within the gallbladder with distal acoustic shadowing. Sludge in gallbladder may also be seen, with an appearance of hyperechoic layering within the gallbladder. Sludge, unlike stones, does not cast acoustic shadowing.  If the following additional signs are noted, suspicion should be raised for acute cholecystitis:  thickened anterior gallbladder wall (greater than 3 mm), the presence of pericholecystic fluid or positive sonographic Murphy's sign. Additionally, common bile duct (CBD) measurements can be obtained by ultrasound, and if increased, can suggest choledocholithiasis. The normal range of CBD is four mm in patients up to 40 years of age, with additional 1 mm allowed for every additional decade of life.  Post-Cholecystectomy patients are allowed up to 10 mm diameter since the common duct become the bile reservoir once the gallbladder is removed.

If an ultrasound study is equivocal for ruling out acute cholecystitis, then a nuclear medicine cholescintigraphy scan, also known as a HIDA scan can be performed. In a normal healthy gallbladder, a radioactive tracer injected into a peripheral vein is circulated to the liver where it enters the biliary tree and gets taken up into the gallbladder within 4 hours. A diseased gallbladder with cystic duct obstruction will prevent the tracer from entering the gallbladder. HIDA scan has a sensitivity of up to 97% and specificity of 94% for the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis.

CT imaging of the abdomen does not add to increased sensitivity or specificity for diagnosing gallstones or cholecystitis. It can be helpful in determining if CBD dilatation is present, and can detect pancreatic inflammation or complications (masses, pseudo-cysts, necrotizing features). CT imaging is also useful if RUQ ultrasound excludes biliary disease and other causes of abdominal pain are being sought.

Additionally, tests such as endoscopic or magnetic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP/MRCP) are sometimes useful when working up patients with jaundice and dilated CBD or suspected cholangitis, but are usually obtained after an ultrasound. ERCP is an invasive test, requiring the use of contrast dye but also has the advantage of allowing intervention if pathology is found (e.g., stenting, stone extraction, biopsy).  MRCP, on the other hand, is non-invasive and does not require contrast dye.