Clinical symptoms of Ancylostoma infection can be misleading because the symptoms are also present with other infections and nutritional-deficiency status. Routine blood findings can reveal iron-deficient anemia, peripheral blood eosinophilia, and sometimes, elevated IgE levels. Chest radiography may reveal diffuse alveolar infiltrates during the migration phase, but this is not helpful when the worms have already invaded the gut. These tests should be interpreted carefully since other helminth infections such as strongyloidiasis and ascariasis show the same blood and radiologic profile.

Conventional stool examinations, such as the Kato-Katz and formalin-ether concentration technique, are the gold standard for diagnosing Ancylostoma infection by detecting the presence of the eggs and adult worms. The morbidity of Ancylostoma infection can be determined by measuring the number of eggs per gram (EPG) in the stool. However, in some cases when the number of eggs is very low or after mass drug administration (MDA), stool examination is not helpful. Therefore, several laboratories have developing molecular-based examinations targeting the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and 5.8S of the worms in the last few years. These molecular assays are still being validated to replace conventional methods.

In the case of CLM, stool examination is not very helpful, and diagnosis can be made clinically based on skin presentation since the larvae will be confined to the skin. If eosinophilic enteritis is suspected, the eggs will not be found in the stool because humans are not definitive hosts of A. caninum. Colonoscopy and laparotomies to obtain eosinophilic tissues for histopathology features to assess eosinophilic enteritis can be performed, but they are not recommended for routine testing. Serologic tests for A. caninum are not widely available, but several research laboratories have developed serologic testing for this species.