Abrasive agents are used for polishing to make the teeth lustrous and give smooth and shiny surfaces. Abrasive agents are included in dentifrices and polishing pastes, with the difference that the particles are bigger in the latter.

Polishing pastes contain binders, humectants, flavoring agents, coloring agents, and preservatives to increase patient motivation. They are available in various sizes, coarse, large-sized particles, medium particles, and fine particles that are smooth and small.

Pastes with small particle sizes will increase the smoothness and cleanliness of teeth, making them more resistant to plaque accumulation. A polishing agent should be selected so that its hardness is less than the hardness of the surface to be polished.

**Commonly-Used Pastes**

The most frequently utilized is the flour of pumice and calcium carbonate.****

- Feldspar: Used on tooth and restorations.

- Pumice: Used for polishing of tooth enamel, gold foil, amalgam, acrylic resins are siliceous materials. The disadvantage of pumice is its significant abrasive depth and average polishing capacity compared to other polishing agents.

- Calcium carbonate: Less abrasive than pumice, produces minimum scratches and a highly reflective surface.

- Perlite: A fluoride-containing abrasive agent.

- Aluminum silicate: An excellent stain remover, great taste, easy to rinse-off, excellent polishing capacity, fluoride-releasing.

- Xylitol-containing products: Help in saliva production and reduce dry mouth, thus helping to reduce decay, acid, and biofilm production in the mouth. They can be used in kids and are available in various sizes.

- Novamin containing products: Reduce the sensitivity and help in stain removal.

- Zirconium silicate: Used on discs and strips, prophylactic polishing pastes.

**Polishing Devices**

- Manual: Handheld devices

- Engine-driven: Require handpieces