**Deterrence Can Present in Several Forms**

- Providing eye exams at an early age to detect anisometropia and aniseikonia and implement treatment to avoid amblyopia.

- Prompt referral for medical or surgical treatment for diseases that cause aniseikonia. Conditions that often cause aniseikonia include:

- Cataracts: Timely referral for surgery can avoid a monocular refractive shift that causes anisometropia and aniseikonia.
- Keratoconus: It often occurs in the second decade of life and can be treated effectively with contact lenses or surgery. Corneal crosslinking procedures can stop or slow down the progression but need to be initiated at an early stage.
- Epiretinal membrane: Causes different distortion types of aniseikonia.

- Good planning of ocular surgeries to avoid creating aniseikonia. Common causes of iatrogenic aniseikonia include:

- Monovision refractive or cataract surgery: In these cases, one eye is corrected for near use, the other for distance. If the patient can not adapt, spectacle correction may result in aniseikonia and is not tolerated.
- Second-eye cataract surgery. The second eye is delayed to have cataract surgery in about 30% of patients with cataract surgery of the first eye. Careful planning on the refractive outcome is essential to avoid aniseikonia while the patient is waiting for the second-eye cataract to mature.
- Scleral buckle and insertion of silicone oil procedures for retinal detachment: These procedures may generate enough anisometropia to produce symptoms of aniseikonia. There is evidence that retinal detachment surgery can often be done without using a scleral buckle.

**Patient Education**

- Review and planning of surgical options. In some cases, a fitting with contact lenses can be done to simulate monovision correction to ensure the patient can tolerate the planned refractive change.

- Review and planning of optical options. These include correction with spectacles (full correction, one eye undercorrected, iseikonic lenses), contact lenses, and contact lens-spectacle combinations.

- Review of and planning of medical treatments. This can be the case in patients that have developed retinal aniseikonia but also in patients that require orthokeratology or myopia management in the case of developmental anisometropia.