Visual acuity testing plays a role in both the acute and screening settings. In the acute setting, it is important to document an initial visual acuity score. This is true for both mechanical injury of the eye as well as sudden vision loss, for example, from glaucoma, retinal detachment, or ischemia. This visual acuity can be compared to previous visual acuity testing if available and will serve as a baseline for reevaluation after intervention in the acute and subacute setting. If there is a mechanical injury to the eye, contacts should not be used to correct vision; however, pinhole occluders or glasses are still acceptable. It is important to note that 20/20 vision on initial evaluation does not rule out significant pathology that could result in long term visual impairment.

Visual screening tests, including visual acuity, have numerous benefits to children. Some tests encompassed by a comprehensive visual screening exam can lead to early detection of pathologies such as amblyopia or retinoblastoma. However, visual acuity is best at discovering the refractory error, which is the leading cause of visual impairment and reduced vision in children.

With early intervention, the progression of visual impairment can be limited. Using corrective lenses such as glasses in refractive error can have long-term developmental, educational, and social benefits. In the United States, visual acuity screening will typically begin as early as age 3. There is a critical line that the child should be able to complete on a visual acuity chart by age group. The critical line for children between the ages of three to four is 20/50, four to five is 20/40, and five or older is 20/30. Failure to read this line should prompt referral for a comprehensive examination by an ophthalmologist. The current recommendations in the United States are for children with age-appropriate visual acuity to have repeat visual screening performed every 1 to 2 years.

During the initial development of children, it is important to have more frequent visual examinations. However, it has not been found to be of benefit or be cost-effective to have frequent visual screening exams on all adults. This has led to recommendations for visual screening exams in the United States, including visual acuity testing to be based upon risk factors. In asymptomatic adults without significant risk factors for visual disease, a comprehensive eye exam may be performed every 5 to 10 years when under age 40, 2 to 4 years between age 40 and 54, 1 to 3 years between age 55 and 64, and 1 to 2 years over age 65.

The change in frequency is to better assess for age-related ocular disease. Populations at higher risk for glaucoma should have comprehensive eye examinations performed more frequently, even when asymptomatic. Individuals diagnosed with type 1 diabetes should have an eye exam, including visual acuity, five years after diagnosis followed by yearly exams, while individuals diagnosed with type 2 diabetes should have yearly testing starting at the time of diagnosis. Additionally, women with diabetes should have a comprehensive eye exam, including visual acuity during the first trimester of pregnancy. The goal of these screening exams is to allow for early intervention to prevent long-term morbidity and enhance the quality of life.