**When Should Nocturia Be Treated?**

Traditionally, treatment for nocturia was not deemed necessary unless the patient was sufficiently bothered by the nocturnal voidings to desire it. The general population and many physicians consider nocturia a natural part of aging, and patients are often unaware that it is treatable. Nocturia is generally considered pathological only when it significantly bothers the patient. Most people are not bothered by nocturia until it becomes relatively severe and affects sleep, which is usually when they have 2 or more nocturnal voids per night. However, a recent multicenter study by Park et al. found that nocturia treatment was equally successful regardless of the degree of patient bother. This suggests that treatment should be offered to all patients with significant nocturia, at least on a trial basis, regardless of how little discomfort they initially report. The benefits of successful treatment are not apparent until after therapy as patients often underestimate the bother and damage nocturia does to sleep quality, general health, daily activities, and overall quality of life.

The first step in the management of nocturia is to set reasonable goals for treatment. While eliminating all nocturnal voiding episodes would be ideal, for most patients, a goal of a 50% reduction or no more than 1 to 2 voids per night is a reasonably achievable goal. Complete cessation of nocturia may not be possible.

**Initial Treatment**

Initial treatments involve simple measures:

- Prepare for bed starting 20 to 30 minutes before bedtime by a relaxing protocol such as meditation, listening to soft music, yoga, breathing exercises, reading, taking a warm bath, etc.

- Limiting fluid intake in the late afternoon and evening (especially between dinner and bedtime)

- No fluid intake for 2 hours prior to going to bed

- Total daily fluid intake should be limited to 2 liters per day or reduced by 25% from the initial baseline

- Reducing dietary salt and protein intake, especially late in the day

- Adjusting the timing of short-acting diuretics to the afternoon

- Elevating the lower extremities and/or use of support hose starting just after dinner until bedtime

- Using compression stockings to lower peripheral edema as needed

- Pelvic floor muscle exercise training

- Regular physical activity such as an afternoon walk but not too close to bedtime

- Limiting nocturnal oral fluids, alcohol, and caffeinated beverages

- Use bed only for sleeping or sexual activity

- If unable to sleep, get up and perform a relaxing activity such as reading before returning to bed.

- Establish regular sleep routines such as timing, minimizing electronic usage, and optimizing the bedroom environment (acoustics, light, temperature)

- Avoid long periods of standing still, which promotes dependent edema

- Avoid afternoon naps, especially after 3 PM, and going to bed too early

- Avoid smoking after dinner as nicotine from smoking tends to interfere with sleep

- Avoid exercise late in the day (although daytime exercise is encouraged

- Avoid thoughts of serious life issues, problem-solving, or "rehashing daytime events" when going to bed

Unfortunately, fluid management alone seems to have minimal impact on most cases of nocturia, but it is a reasonable place to start.

Be cautious in overly limiting fluid intake in elderly patients who may otherwise tend to become dehydrated.

The use of a bedside commode or urinal can minimize the bother, if not the frequency, of nocturia and may reduce the risk of falls. Remove any obstacles, loose rugs, or furniture between the bed and the nearest commode to reduce fall risk further. Consider using nightlights to help illuminate the passage to the bathroom.

Use mattress covers as necessary to help protect the bed.

Absorbent briefs, pads, and modified underwear can be used to absorb liquids preventing wetness.

Optimizing treatment of known underlying medical conditions, for example, congestive heart failure and diabetes, is recommended but has not been demonstrated to make much of a difference in reducing nocturnal voiding episodes.

**Behavioral Therapy**

Behavioral therapy, which includes pelvic floor muscle training, urge-suppression techniques, delayed voiding, fluid management, sleep hygiene, Kegel exercises, and peripheral edema management, has been shown to be reasonably efficacious both when used alone or together with pharmacological therapy in controlling nocturia.

Behavioral therapy in men, alone or combined with an alpha-blocker therapy, has consistently shown large and statistically significant reductions in nocturia episodes and favorable effects on sleep and quality of life. Based on these findings, behavioral therapy may provide a meaningful treatment option for men with nocturia.

The standard recommended pelvic muscle training protocol is 3 repetitions of a series of eight to twelve slow pelvic contractions or compressions that are held for a duration of 6 to 8 seconds each. This is typically done 3 or 4 times a week and usually continues for at least 3 months.

Sleep issues can significantly affect nocturia, particularly when the first nocturnal void is within the first 3 to 4 hours after falling asleep since this is typically a period of deep sleep. Following are some simple steps patients can take to improve their sleeping experience, which may also help their nocturia:

- Reduce the time they spend in bed. Excess hours in bed will make sleep shallower, leading to worsening of their nocturia. Also, the longer patients stay in bed, the more likely they are going to need to urinate.

- Make the bedroom as comfortable as possible for sleeping by eliminating as much noise and light as possible. Consider using earplugs or blindfolds if noise or light keeps one awake. Opaque curtains will not only reduce light but tend to keep the room quieter.

- Ask patients to try to go to bed at the same time each day.

- Maintain a comfortable room temperature which for most people is around 69 degrees F.

- Make the bed a little warmer, such as by using a hot water bottle, adding an extra-light bed covering, or turning up the setting on their electric blanket a little.

- Have them avoid watching television, using their smartphone, or operating a computer shortly before bedtime. The light from these devices sends a "wake up" signal to the brain, which makes falling asleep more difficult.

- There is evidence that the use of 1 to 2 mg of melatonin, a natural sleep aid available without a prescription, can help reduce nocturia when taken at bedtime.

Nocturia can be reduced by up to 50% in some patients just by using the simple techniques described above.

Specific sleep disorders may predispose to nocturia, so consider a formal sleep study evaluation if initial treatment strategies for nocturia do not result in adequate improvement. Continuous airway positive airway pressure (CPAP) can be very effective in treating nocturia in patients with obstructive sleep apnea and similar problems. In one study, CPAP reduced nocturia from 2.6 to just 0.7 voids per night, which is quite significant.

**Medications**

Pharmacological therapy is most useful in treating nocturia caused by an overactive bladder, nocturnal polyuria, and prostatic obstruction in men.

Diuretic therapy timing adjustments can significantly help reduce nocturia symptoms in patients taking short-acting agents, such as hydrochlorothiazide or furosemide. While it is customary to give these short-acting diuretics in the morning, switching them to the afternoon provides a noticeable benefit to most nocturia patients. The goal is to adjust the timing so that the diuretic is wearing off when the patient goes to bed. During this period, excess fluid tends to re-accumulate in the original tissue spaces rather than pass through the kidneys, becoming extra urine. Even if patients are given twice-daily dosages, it's helpful to time the afternoon dose so it is wearing off at bedtime to take advantage of this period of relatively low urine production.

Alpha-blockers are the most effective single pharmacological agents to treat male prostatic obstruction, but they offer only relatively modest reductions in nocturia in most men. They tend to work relatively quickly, usually within 30 days. However, they are less successful overall in reducing nocturia than in relieving other symptoms of prostatic hyperplasia. It is thought they may help with the prostatic/urethral angle, but the exact mechanism is unclear. There is also the risk of orthostatic hypotension, especially in the elderly and particularly with older agents such as terazosin and doxazosin, which also require dose titration. A single afternoon dose of hydrochlorothiazide added to alpha-blocker therapy may help improve nocturia, but it should be timed so that the diuretic has worn off by the patient's bedtime. The exact mechanism by which alpha-blockers relieve nocturia is not well understood, but theoretically, they may tend to reduce detrusor instability and overactivity indirectly by lowering urinary outflow resistance.

A significant nocturia benefit in women from alpha-blocker therapy would be unexpected, but this has not been widely studied. However, there is one intriguing study by Kim et al. involving 296 women with nocturia who were treated with low-dose tamsulosin and showed a significant reduction in nocturnal voiding episodes. This suggests that it might be worth trying alpha-blocker therapy in women.

About half of the men reporting clinically-significant, benign, prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) will have nocturia of two or more nocturnal voids a night.  Treatment of BPH can help alleviate lower urinary tract symptoms, but nocturia is affected less than other urinary symptoms. Thirty-eight percent of patients who underwent transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) surgery for their BPH symptoms still reported significant nocturia even 3 years after their prostate surgery.

Bladder relaxing drugs, such as anticholinergics, will increase bladder capacity and generally reduce urinary frequency and urgency. Their effect on nocturia is less certain, and there is a concern about possibly contributing to slightly higher post-void residuals or urinary retention in men. These drugs tend to be more effective in patients with other symptoms of overactive bladder. One reasonably effective strategy is to use a short-acting anticholinergic, such as immediate-release oxybutynin 5 mg, just before bed with the expectation that it will have worn off by morning.

Topical vaginal estrogen has demonstrated a significant benefit in reducing nocturia in post-menopausal women. Overall, about 60% of studies reported some benefit from estrogen therapy in this group of female nocturia patients.

Botox (onabotulinum toxin A) bladder injections have been shown to reduce nocturia episodes in patients with significant overactive bladder without nocturnal polyuria who do not respond to alternative medications or treatments.

Anti-diuretic hormone therapy is the recommended medical treatment for patients with nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria. Importantly, it appears to be most effective in patients with the most severe nocturia.

Desmopressin is very similar to natural vasopressin but contains a change in 2 critical amino acids. This leaves the resulting hormone with substantial anti-diuresis effects but eliminates all vasopressor activity which makes it the preferred form of anti-diuretic medical therapy for nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria. Its use is usually associated with a slight increase in daytime diuresis but may lead to hyponatremia in high-risk groups. The lowest effective dose of the medication should be used, especially in older patients, but men tend to need higher dosages than women. This may be due to the vasopressin V2 receptor gene being located on the X chromosome in an area that is relatively protected from inactivation.) Overall, desmopressin therapy can reduce nocturia episodes by an average of about 50%, as shown in 2 recent studies of 1045 patients. This effect typically takes 7 days to become clinically evident. When effective, the benefits of desmopressin therapy appear to be long-lasting.

Desmopressin can be used together with overactive bladder and benign prostatic hyperplasia medications simultaneously and should be considered when there is a failure of alternative medical therapy to reduce nocturia after 30 days.

Since hyponatremia is likely to develop by the first week of therapy, a serum sodium level should be checked after the first week, then at one month, and periodically (generally every 6 months) after that in patients at risk for hyponatremia.

Due to its tendency to cause hyponatremia, anti-diuretic hormone therapy should not be used in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF), peripheral edema, polydipsia, renal failure (less than 50 mL per minute), uncontrolled hypertension, individuals taking loop diuretics or glucocorticoids, and in patients with low serum sodium levels. It should be used cautiously in patients older than 65 years of age and started at the lowest available therapeutically beneficial dosage, which is 25 micrograms for women and 50 micrograms for men. Older patients with low baseline or chronically low serum sodium levels have a 75% risk of developing some degree of hyponatremia with prolonged desmopressin therapy, and cardiac patients have 10 times the risk. However, when lower doses are used along with a careful serum sodium monitoring plan, only mild, clinically insignificant hyponatremia was observed even in high-risk patients. In younger patients with normal serum sodium levels without congestive heart failure (CHF), antidiuretic hormone is probably the medical treatment of choice for most nocturia patients.

Other reported side effects of desmopressin include dry mouth, headaches, nausea, and edema.

Use of desmopressin together with staggered, afternoon administration of furosemide has been shown to be safe and effective in treating nocturia in the elderly in a randomized, double-blinded trial, but such combinations need to be monitored carefully for hyponatremia and should be used cautiously.

Desmopressin is available as both an oral tablet and a nasal spray. The two formulations are essentially equivalent in efficacy, but the oral tablets contain much larger doses of the medication as gastrointestinal (GI) absorption of desmopressin tablets is only about 5%. The newest therapy is a desmopressin nasal spray, which is specifically FDA-approved for nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria in patients who have at least 2 episodes of nocturia every night. This medication has shown efficacy in reducing nocturnal voidings by 50% or more in about half of all patients in clinical trials. Desmopressin nasal spray has the advantage of more consistent efficacy and increased safety compared with oral desmopressin formulations. The desmopressin in the nasal spray has been modified with cyclopentadecanolide, which increases trans-mucosal absorption. Nasal formulations of desmopressin can cause nasal discomfort or congestion, nasopharyngitis, epistaxis, or bronchitis.

Two trials of the new nasal spray, including 1,333 patients, were recently published, and a pooled analysis was performed. The percentage of patients with a 50% or greater reduction in mean nocturia episodes was compared between identical nocturia groups treated with a placebo and two different nasal spray dosages.  The placebo group had a 30.3% response rate, the 0.83 mcg nasal spray patients had 37.9%, and the 1.66 mcg nasal spray group had 48.7% reporting significant benefits.  (p=<0.0001)  Importantly, the incidence of significant hyponatremia (defined as <130 mmol/l with symptoms or less than 125 mmol/l regardless of symptoms) was 1% or less, and all were in the 1.66 mcg mmol/l  treatment group, indicating a high degree of safety. Overall, the desmopressin nasal spray treatment was effective at all dosages, resulting in a significant reduction in nocturia episodes, with an acceptable safety profile. In particular, the 0.83 dose appeared to be the appropriate starting dose for patients at increased risk for hyponatremia, such as patients 65 years or older.

Other Remedies of Uncertain Value

While there is a significant relationship between nocturia and depression, it is unclear if the treatment of depression with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) helps reduce nocturia.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been proposed as a remedy for nocturia by decreasing the glomerular filtration rate. Results from several studies are conflicting and inconclusive.

Melatonin, a sleep aid, also has shown conflicting results in formal studies but is reasonable to add in selected cases.

There is no surgical option specifically for nocturia. Prostate surgery can relieve most lower urinary tract symptoms in men, but nocturia is the most persistent remaining postoperative urinary symptom suggesting that BPH is not always the etiology of this problem.

In addition to alpha-blockers, 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (finasteride, dutasteride) are also used to treat BPH in men, but studies regarding their effect on nocturia are somewhat conflicting. In the largest pooled study of 4,722 patients done by Oelke et al., greater improvements in nocturia were noted in patients on 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors than in similar groups without the medication. However, this effect generally took at least 1 year to become clinically apparent.

Increased physical activity late in the day appears beneficial but has not been proven by prospective studies.

While not a specific treatment for nocturia, it is recommended that precautions be taken to minimize the risk of falls by clearing obstacles, rugs, and furniture from the passageways between the bed and the nearest bathroom, adding nightlights, and using a bedside commode, bedpan or urinal.

Posterior tibial nerve stimulation (PTNS) uses a small transcutaneous needle to electrically stimulate the end of the tibial nerve near the ankle. A tiny amount of this electrical stimulation passes through to the pudendal and pelvic sympathetic nerves to the bladder, where it improves bladder storage and reduces voidings through neuromodulation. There is also stimulation of the large somatic afferent fibers of the sacral plexus, which causes central inhibition of the micturition reflexes. Studies of posterior tibial nerve stimulation have shown some modest improvement in nocturia (average reduction of 0.8 nocturnal voiding episodes per night), but it remains unclear what the optimal PTNS-treatment protocol for nocturia might be, how often the therapy should be repeated, or how long the benefit will last. Patients with pacemakers, implanted defibrillators, pelvic nerve injuries, and those who have not failed a trial of voluntary behavioral therapies should not try posterior tibial nerve stimulation therapy. While promising as a non-invasive, non-drug-based therapy, too many questions remained to be resolved before PTNS can become part of the recommended standard treatment regimen for nocturia.

Combination Therapy

Some studies have shown the advantage of combination therapy in reducing nocturia episodes. Behavioral therapies, managing sleep issues, adjusting the timing of diuretics, the elevation of the lower extremities after dinner, and judicious use of medications, particularly antidiuretic hormone, have produced the best results.