Baseline evaluation in a patient suspected to have viral hepatitis can be started by checking a hepatic function panel. Patients who have a severe disease can have elevated total bilirubin levels. Typically, levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) remain in the reference range, but if it is elevated significantly, the clinician should consider biliary obstruction or liver abscess. In advanced liver disease, prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) may appear prolonged. Patients may also have leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. Patients who suffer from easy bruising, variceal bleed, or hemorrhoidal bleed due to advanced liver disease may have anemia with low hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine levels are also necessary for patients suspected to have advanced liver disease to look for renal impairment. Patients who present with altered mental status should have serum ammonia levels checked and are usually elevated in the presence of hepatic encephalopathy

Besides these routine laboratory tests, other specific tests are available to evaluate for the type of viral hepatitis.

**Viral Hepatitis**

**Hepatitis A**

The standard test for diagnosing acute infection with hepatitis A virus is the presence of immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody to the hepatitis A virus.  IgM antibody disappears a few months after the acute infection.  In the later stages of infection, immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody to hepatitis A virus is detected. However, the presence of IgG antibody to hepatitis A virus only means that the patient has been infected with hepatitis A virus in the past, from 2 months to several decades ago.  IgG antibody to hepatitis A virus does not mean acute infection and most patients who have IgG antibody to hepatitis A virus have lifelong immunity against hepatitis A virus infection

**Hepatitis B**

Work-up for hepatitis B virus infection divides into work-up for acute infection and chronic infection.

**Acute Infection**

In patients who have an acute hepatitis B virus infection, the first serum marker to appear is the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg).  This antigen means that patients have the hepatitis B virus in the blood, but it does not indicate an acute or chronic infection in the absence of symptoms.  When the patient shows symptoms of acute hepatitis, the presence of HBsAg strongly suggests acute hepatitis B virus infection, but it also does not rule out chronic hepatitis B infection with an acute superinfection by another type of hepatitis virus. HBsAg disappears in about six months after the acute infection in those patients who clear the hepatitis B virus, but if it remains present longer than six months, it indicates chronic infection. Patients who end up clearing HBsAg from the blood, the antibody to HBsAg (anti-Hbs) appear.  This antibody may persist for a lifetime and is believed to offer immunity to the patients from subsequent exposure to the hepatitis B virus.

The first antibody to appear is the immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg).  The presence of IgM anti-HBc also means that patients have an acute hepatitis B virus infection and is required to make the diagnosis.  Once the IgM anti-HBc disappears in a few weeks, IgG anti-HBc is detected, which usually remains present for life.  Total assay for antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) can detect both IgM and IgG antibodies and indicates that patients have a history of infection with hepatitis B virus at some point of time in the past as it remains positive both in patients who clear the virus and those who have a persistent infection.

Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) is also present and indicates that the virus is replicating. After the viral replication slows down, HBeAg disappears in the blood, and antibody to HBeAg (anti-HBe) appears, which can persist in the blood for a long time.

**Chronic Infection**

Patients who have chronic hepatitis B infection can have positive HBsAg for life.  These patients can be inactive carriers of the hepatitis B virus or may have active chronic hepatitis. All patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection have the presence of anti-HBc. If HBeAg may or may not be present, but if it present in patients with active chronic hepatitis, it can indicate viral replication. Similarly, hepatitis B virus DNA may or may not be present, but high levels indicate active chronic hepatitis. Patients with chronic infection of hepatitis B usually have an absence of anti-HBs, but the presence of anti-HBs with positive HBsAg in patients with chronic infection with the hepatitis B virus means that the antibody was unsuccessful in inducing the viral clearance.

Evaluation of hepatitis B virus infection can be complicated, and some uncommon but possible scenarios should be kept in mind while investigating. Patients can test negative for HBsAg and anti-HBs but can have the presence of anti-HBc. This situation is possible when the result is false positive but can also happen in patients who are in the time window where they have cleared HBsAg from the blood, but anti-HBs has not yet appeared. Some patients who have cleared hepatitis B virus infection but have lost the anti-HBs over the years can test negative both for HBsAg and anti-HBs but positive for anti-HBc.  Also, patients infected with the hepatitis B virus many years ago can sometimes develop a core mutant variant of the hepatitis B virus where they can test negative for HBeAg and positive for anti-HBe even though the virus may still be active and is replicating. When lab findings like these are detected, the hepatitis B virus DNA PCR assay to check for viral replication is recommended.

Patients who receive a vaccine for the hepatitis B virus develop protective anti-HBs as a response to recombinant HBsAg in the vaccine.  There are no hepatitis B virus DNA or other hepatitis B virus-associated proteins in the vaccine.  Patients who receive the vaccine are not positive for anti-HBc unless they had a previous infection with the hepatitis B virus.

**Hepatitis C**

Hepatitis C virus infection can be confirmed with antibody to hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV).  These assays can detect antibodies within 4 to 10 weeks of infection and are pretty sensitive and specific.  Anti-HCV can remain negative for a few months after an acute hepatitis C virus infection, but once it appears in the blood, it remains present for life.  However, it is important to remember that anti-HCV is not a protective antibody, unlike anti-HBs, and does not offer protection from subsequent exposure to the hepatitis C virus. After patients have positive hepatitis C serology, hepatitis C virus RNA testing can provide confirmation. It is the most specific test for hepatitis C virus infection and can detect acute infection even before antibodies develop. It is also helpful in confirming false-positive cases, seronegative cases, and cases where perinatal transmission has taken place. It can also provide information on viral load, hepatitis C virus genotype, predict response to interferon treatment, which can help healthcare providers to determine the duration and dose of the interferon as well as assess the likelihood of relapse after the treatment.

Liver biopsy is an important diagnostic test especially in patients with chronic hepatitis C and can help with confirmation of the diagnosis, exclude other diseases, and allow reliable assessment of the severity of the disease, including the severity of hepatic fibrosis.  Knowledge of the degree of hepatic fibrosis can help healthcare providers to make decisions regarding whether to initiate antiviral therapy or not. However, liver biopsy is an invasive procedure and can cause complications like infection and bleeding.  Also, in some patients, the damage to the liver is not uniform, and therefore, sampling error can occur. The liver biopsy also cannot be used to predict the rate of progression in patients with chronic hepatitis C infection. Some newer blood tests can be used to determine the degree of hepatic fibrosis but are no substitute for liver biopsy as of yet due to the lower accuracy.  Vibration-controlled transient elastography, which received approval in 2013 in the United States, can help diagnose cirrhosis in a majority of patients but is less accurate in patients with a lesser degree of fibrosis and therefore is not used as a substitute for the liver biopsy.

Other infrequently used test includes liver function testing that can indicate the presence of liver injury but is not very accurate in predicting the severity of the disease. Liver function testing can be more valuable in monitoring therapeutic response to the hepatitis C treatment with improvement in aminotransferase levels indicating patients responding to the treatment while worsening of aminotransferase levels post hepatitis C treatment may indicate a relapse. However, these days it is not in common use as HCV RNA has become a test of choice for healthcare providers to monitor the response.

**Hepatitis D**

Hepatitis D virus infection is diagnosed by checking for immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G IgG) antibody to the hepatitis D virus (anti-HDV). IgM antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) must be checked to differentiate a coinfection where the patients test positive for IgM anti-HBc and superinfection, where the patients test negative for IgM anti-HBc. Hepatitis D virus RNA test can be done but is not routinely performed.

**Hepatitis E**

Hepatitis E virus infection is diagnosed by checking for immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody to the hepatitis E virus (anti-HEV). Also, hepatitis E virus RNA can be checked in the serum and stool of infected patients.

**Hepatitis G**

Hepatitis G virus is usually identified by checking the hepatitis G RNA PCR.  Most patients develop antibodies, which is detectable after the clearance of the virus. The coexistence of hepatitis G RNA and antibody to hepatitis G is not common.  Following the clearing of the virus is cleared and the antibody appears, patients make a full recovery, but patients who have persistent hepatitis G RNA can also have no biochemical or histological signs of liver disease; however, a small percentage of patients with chronic hepatitis G go on developing liver fibrosis.

**Autoimmune Hepatitis**

Autoimmune hepatitis should always be considered in the differential when evaluating patients with acute hepatitis. Work-up usually starts with getting serologic workup that includes serum antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA), serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), liver-kidney microsomal type 1 antibody (LKM-1), anti-liver cytosol 1 antibody (anti-LC1), antibody to soluble liver antigen (anti-SLA), perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) and quantitative immunoglobulins.  Patients can have significantly elevated aminotransferase levels along with elevated serum immunoglobulin levels, especially Ig G predominant gamma globulin levels. They can be seropositive for any of the antibodies mentioned above. Hypergammaglobulinemia is a frequent finding, and patients who have acute hepatitis without hypergammaglobulinemia are unlikely to have autoimmune hepatitis. Levels of gamma globulin or IgG can help monitor the response to therapy. Aminotransferase levels are not very accurate in predicting disease severity or response to therapy but are useful as an adjunct with other tests.

Other values that require monitoring are serum bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase, which can be mild to moderately elevated in a majority of patients; however, a sharp increase in alkaline phosphatase can indicate the development of primary sclerosing cholangitis or onset of hepatocellular carcinoma especially in those patients who have advanced liver disease. Patients with autoimmune hepatitis may also have an elevated prothrombin time (PT), hypoalbuminemia, leukopenia, normochromic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).

Liver biopsy is the gold standard diagnostic test in patients of autoimmune hepatitis. It can not only help determine the severity of the disease, but histopathologic findings on liver biopsy can also help differentiate it from chronic hepatitis C infection, alcoholic hepatitis, drug-induced liver injury, primary biliary cirrhosis, or primary sclerosing cholangitis.

**Alcoholic Hepatitis**

If patients present with a history of alcohol abuse, typical signs, and symptoms of long-term alcohol abuse, and evidence of liver dysfunction, then usually no further diagnostic workup is required.  If the history is not clear or if patients do not have signs or symptoms of long-term alcohol abuse, then a complete blood count and metabolic panel along with liver function studies can be ordered.  Patients can have moderate anemia with an increase in the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) due to alcohol being a direct bone marrow suppressant.  Patients can also have some degree of leukocytosis with increased neutrophils. The metabolic panel can show hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia due to the effects of malnutrition and vomiting. C-reactive protein can be elevated and has an excellent positive predictive value. Liver enzymes have a characteristic pattern with aspartate aminotransferase (AST) being moderately elevated and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) being either in the reference range or only mildly elevated with the ratio of AST and ALT being greater than 1.  However, the AST/ALT ratio is greater than 1 in patients who have liver cirrhosis of any etiology. Therefore, it is not diagnostic of alcoholic hepatitis in patients with advanced liver disease. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is usually only mildly elevated. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP) is elevated in patients with a history of alcohol use but is not diagnostic of alcoholic hepatitis. Liver biopsy is usually not required but remains a valuable diagnostic option to establish the diagnosis in patients with diagnostic uncertainty and for evaluating the severity of the disease.

Apart from the investigations mentioned above, the clinician should consider uncommon and rare causes of hepatitis while making a diagnosis. If necessary, workup should pursue those causes. For example, iron, ferritin, and transferrin levels should be checked if hereditary hemochromatosis is suspected. Drug and toxin-induced liver disease should also be considered, and a careful and detailed history should be obtained. Imaging studies like ultrasonography, CT scan, and MRI also play an essential role in the work-up of hepatitis.