**Intraoperative Complications**

- Zonulolysis- Can occur in eyes with chronic uveitis. A capsular tension ring (CTR) is often necessary for conditions of significant zonular weakness to prevent IOL decentration.

- Phototoxic retinal damage

- Retained lens or nuclear fragments-Due to the compromised visibility, small nuclear fragments may be left in the eye, which later can cause severe inflammation. Hence, a careful extraction should be done.

- Posterior capsular rent- it can cause significant postoperative inflammation and should be managed carefully. An anterior vitrectomy should be performed. An IOL is implanted depending on the capsular status. If the rent is small, an in-the-bag IOL implantation is preferred. If the tear is large, but the capsular rim is intact, an IOL can be implanted in the ciliary sulcus, or an anterior chamber IOL implantation is performed. However, if there is no significant support for the IOL, a scleral fixated IOL can be implanted, or the patient may be left aphakic.

**Postoperative Complications**

- Excessive postoperative inflammation- the patient should be started on topical steroids, eye drops, and topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory eye drops in the immediate postoperative period. However, if the inflammation is not controlled, then oral steroids should be started.

- Intraocular Pressure (IOP) abnormalities- the intraocular pressure may be high or low. IOP may be raised in the early postoperative period due to compromised trabecular meshwork or angles. It can be managed with anti-glaucoma medications. The intraocular pressure may be low, which may be due to choroidal detachment or phthisis bulbi. Oral steroids should be prescribed.

- Recurrence of uveitis

- Posterior capsular opacification- usually occurs in the late postoperative period, should be treated after 3 months of cataract surgery by YAG laser capsulotomy.

- Endophthalmitis

- Cystoid macular edema- It can occur as a complication preoperatively as well as postoperatively. It is one of the major contributors to blindness in uveitis. It occurs due to the breakdown of the inner or outer blood-retinal barrier induced by the inflammation. The mainstay of treatment of this condition is administering steroids in topical, oral, periocular, or intravitreal.