The AGC category includes dysplasia of the endocervical as well as endometrial cells. The causes, however, for these two conditions are different.

About 80% to 95% of endocervical adenocarcinomas are associated with HPV subtypes. Usual-type adenocarcinoma of the cervix is related to high-risk HPV subtypes like HPV-16 or HPV-18. HPV accounts for 50-58% of endocervical adenocarcinomas. Endocervical adenocarcinoma- mucinous,  gastric type is commonly seen in Japan and is associated with HIK1083 and MUC6 immune profile expression and germline inactivation of LKB1 seen in patients with Peutz-Jegher’s syndrome (also called adenoma malignant). Mucinous carcinoma, intestinal-type, is a rare type that shows 85% positivity to MUC-2 and is found to be associated with HPV.

Endometrial carcinomas are associated with unopposed exposure to estrogen. There is an increased incidence with increased duration and dose of exposure. Obesity is an important contributing factor.

A huge number of other factors are associated with AGC apart from the other two conditions. For example, an intrauterine device (IUD) can cause significant changes in the endocervical cells. In the absence of a history of IUD or if the IUD status of the patient is unknown, these patients are likely placed in the AGC category. Severe inflammation, vigorous sampling, and radiation can induce changes that might mimic dysplasia and are often placed in the AGC category. Getting adequate, relevant clinical history is of extreme importance in these patients.