Laparoscopic tubal ligation is overall safe and effective. Mortality rates in the United States are estimated at 1 to 2 per 100000 procedures, with most deaths attributable to hypoventilation and cardiopulmonary arrest while administering general anesthesia.

Complications following mini-laparotomy are also very low. In one Swiss study, the overall rate of major morbidity after postpartum tubal ligation was 0.39%.

The 10-year risk of failure varies by technique

- **Postpartum partial salpingectomy**= 7.5 per 1000 procedures

- **Bipolar coagulation**= 24.8 per 1,000 procedures (19.5 per 1000 1978 to 1982 and 6.3 per 1000 1985 to 1987)

- **Silicone band**= 17.7 per 1000 procedures

- **Spring clip**= 36.5 per 1000 procedures

Since the original CREST study was published, additional data regarding method efficacy have emerged, and follow-up analyses have taken place on the CREST data. Bipolar coagulation has specifically received attention. During the follow-up period, as techniques evolved, the failure rates fell significantly.

Care should be taken to identify **luteal phase pregnancies**before performing interval tubal ligations. A pregnancy test is necessary, but also a careful history should be taken to identify patients at risk of being pregnant despite a negative pregnancy test. On average, women ovulate on day 14 of their cycle, where day 1 of the cycle is day 1 of the last menstrual period. The fertile period extends from several days before ovulation to shortly after, and many urine pregnancy tests do not have the sensitivity to detect very early pregnancy. Patients who have had unprotected intercourse within the last week could be at risk of luteal phase pregnancy. Patients at risk should be counseled preoperatively regarding the risks of surgery and anesthesia during early pregnancy, and the risks merit strong consideration against the benefits of proceeding with the procedure.

If pregnancy does occur after tubal ligation, there is a risk of ectopic pregnancy that varies by technique as well

- **Postpartum partial salpingectomy**= 1.5 per 1000 procedures

- **Bipolar coagulation**= 17.1 per 1000 procedures

- **Silicone band**= 7.3  per 1000 procedures

- **Spring clip**= 8.5 per 1000 procedures

Post-tubal ligation syndrome is a potential complication that is well-documented in the lay media. Its actual existence, however, controversial. Symptoms may include dyspareunia, low back pain, premenstrual tension syndrome, menstrual abnormalities (missed periods, heavy menstrual bleeding), or menopausal symptoms.