# Continuing Education Activity

Clinicians are beginning to reconsider neuromodulation surgery as a last resort for the treatment of refractory psychiatric disorders. Neurosurgical interventions aimed at treating psychiatric disorders are grouped into two categories: destructive (ablative psychosurgery) or selective stimulation (neuromodulation psychosurgery). Neuromodulation surgery involves implanting a device in the brain that modulates the neural networks within the brain. This activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in providing neuromodulation surgery for patients with psychiatric disorders.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the indications and contraindications for neuromodulation for psychiatric disorders.
- Review neuromodulation surgery in patients with psychiatric disorders.
- Summarize the principle of deep brain stimulation for psychiatric disorders.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members in providing neuromodulation treatment for patients with psychiatric disorders.

# Introduction

Despite the advances in pharmacotherapy for treating some psychiatric disorders like anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, depression, and schizophrenia, many patients become refractory and will not respond to pharmacologic treatments.

The use of surgery for the treatment of psychiatric diseases is not a new concept. Historically, the concept of psychosurgery always raised general skepticism and stigma because of the way that it was used in the past with a high rate of complications and mortalities, but usually with little improvement in patients’ functionality.

In the late 1950s, pharmacotherapy was introduced and changed the approach in treating psychiatric conditions.

# Etiology

With new diagnostic techniques, physicians' knowledge of the brain and function has improved over the past decades, but understanding psychiatric disorders remains a challenge. Physicians believe that the cause of many mental health disorders has multifactorial etiology, with genetics and environmental factors having a significant role to play. For example, while the exact cause of schizophrenia is unknown, about 80% of the cases might be due to genetic influence.

# Epidemiology

Psychiatric disorders are a huge problem in the United States and internationally. According to the American Psychiatric Association, about 25% of United States adults are diagnosed with a mental health disorder each year. Disability caused by psychiatric disorders are overwhelming for patients, and the financial burden on the economy is immense. Based on a 2002 publication, the cost of schizophrenia treatment alone was about $63 billion.

Before introducing pharmacotherapy for psychiatric disorders, approximately 10,000 leucotomies were done in the United States and the United Kingdom.

# Pathophysiology

The arrival of new diagnostic techniques and the ability to integrate information from different diagnostic modalities made it possible for clinicians to understand the brain structure and function and help localize brain pathologies. Some of these diagnostic techniques include functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), positive emission tomography (PET), neurophysiologic data from an electroencephalogram, magnetoencephalography, and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).

Researchers cite that the pathophysiology of OCD stems from abnormal function of the cortical-striatal-thalamic circuits. The genu of the corpus callosum has been strongly implicated in the pathophysiology of depression and schizophrenia. In contrast, the medial cingulate cortex has been involved in the pathophysiology of anxiety disorders.

# History and Physical

While the advent of new diagnostic techniques and the ability to integrate information from different diagnostic modalities has made it possible to understand the brain structure and function and help localize brain pathologies, there are no tests or objective biological markers indicated as criteria for diagnosing a psychiatric disorder according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

A careful history and physical examination are fundamental tools for diagnosing and treating psychiatric disorders. Essential components of a patient's history include present illness, past medical history, psychiatric history, substance abuse, family and social information, and medication use. This history will provide insight into the patient’s current illness, predisposing factors like genetic vulnerabilities and low socioeconomic status, current life stressors, family dynamics, and support systems available to the patient. In some cases, medications that have worked for another family member may suggest that patient will benefit from it.

The physical examination starts by examining the patient's general appearance and begins as the physician sets an eye on the patient. The overall patient well-being and nutritional status may be assessed just through observation. A patient may appear messy or bizarre with clothing that may not be appropriate for the setting. Other important aspects that can be evaluated include the patient's psychomotor activity, the patient's mood and affect, and the patient's thought process and thought content. The clinician can observe whether the patient's movements are slow down or if the patient is fidgeting and agitated. The should evaluate patient speech patterns and determine if their thoughts are goal-directed or disorganized. Finally, assessing the patient's thoughts for any delusions, hallucinations, or suicidal and homicidal thoughts, among others, is essential.

A patient's history can help guide specific organ systems' physical examination to focus their attention first. For example, during an assessment of subconjunctival, a patient's pale and dry appearance may suggest self-neglect and inadequate dietary intake due to depression, schizophrenia, and AN. The skin examination is performed for evidence of cuttings marks associated with a borderline personality disorder, depression, and even eating disorders. Other systems-specific physical exams may be based on the patient's history that gives the physician a prompt for further assessment.

# Evaluation

Different diagnostic methods that help evaluate brain function are among the most critical advances that have made it possible to target neuromodulatory psychiatric treatment. Several diagnostic techniques are good at giving information about the cortical structures and function.

- TMS provides a noninvasive means of probing the neurophysiology of different cortical structures function and dysfunction.

- fMRI and PET help provide information about the subcortical structures.

Laboratory workup is performed to exclude primary organic etiologies that may mimic psychiatric disorders. Neuroimaging studies include brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomographic (CT) scans of specific body areas as needed.

# Treatment / Management

The primary goal of treating psychiatric disorders is to improve the functionality of the patients in the society. While the stigma due to the origins of psychosurgery still looms, the utilization of neuromodulatory surgery to treat the psychiatric disorder is nowadays backed by not only a more profound understanding of brain structure and function, but also the development of new stereotactic microsurgical technique and results about successful management of other neurological disorders through neuromodulation. This fountain of knowledge has led to the development of treatment options that target a particular region of the brain and effects that can be reversible, unlike the earlier process like prefrontal leucotomy that involves the permanent removal of parts of the brain.

Only patients with severe, chronic, disabling, and treatment-refractory psychiatric illness should be considered for surgical intervention. Psychiatric disorders that might benefit from surgical intervention include OCD and major affective disorder (unipolar major depression or bipolar disorder). Schizophrenia diagnosis is not currently considered a clear indication for surgery. Ablative procedures, including cingulotomy, anterior capsulotomy, subcaudate tractotomy, and limbic leucotomy, are psychosurgical procedures still used today in some cases.

The concept of DBS in treating psychiatric disorders can be attributed to its success in treating movement disorders like Parkinson’s disease, essential tremor, and dystonia.

DBS modulation can use several different targets, but current literature does not demonstrate clear superiority among these targets.

For OCD, traditional ablative lesions include anterior cingulotomy, capsulotomy, subcaudate tractotomy, and limbic leucotomy. DBS to anterior limb internal capsule, ventral capsule, dorsal striatum, nucleus accumbens, subthalamic nucleus, inferior thalamic peduncle, or globus pallidus internus produces a positive response in 40-90% of the patients.

Tourette’s syndrome (TS) is a recognized idiopathic neuropsychiatric disorder affecting approximately 1% of the population. Dysfunction in the cortico–basal ganglia–thalamocortical network is thought to be the pathophysiologic basis of impairment. DBS of the thalamus, globus pallidus internus, globus pallidus externus, internal capsule, or nucleus accumbens has been used to treat refractory TS.

Case reports for neuromodulation of the nucleus accumbens, and the anterior limb of the internal capsule has successfully been used for preventing heroin use relapse.

DBS to the subcallosal cingulate or the nucleus accumbens for AN had been used with promising results in mood with a significant increase in body-mass index.

Vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) was initially developed to treat medical treatment-resistant epilepsy.

Other neuromodulation techniques that have been used for the treatment of psychiatric disorders that do not involve the application of a surgical device are TMS and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). ECT has been widely reported in the literature as one of the most effective treatments for chronic major depression and pharmacotherapy-resistant major depression.

Ongoing research in the pathophysiologic understanding of these circuits and targets is critical for the potential neurosurgical treatments of schizophrenia. The possibility of targeting the associative striatum, anterior hippocampus, and ventral striatum for therapeutic neuromodulation with DBS is being considered for schizophrenia.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is crucial to make a correct and definite diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder that can be amenable to neuromodulation. Improper diagnosis can expose patients to incorrect treatment modalities. Differential diagnoses for psychiatric disorders include the following disorders, which can present with some psychiatric traits but can be corrected after treating the primary disease.

- Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder

- Autoimmune disorders (rheumatoid arthritis and lupus)

- Chronic fatigue syndrome

- Hypercortisolism (Cushing disease, Cushing syndrome)

- Diabetes

- Fibromyalgia

- Hypothyroidism

- Lyme disease

- Sleep disorders

# Prognosis

Despite the initial lousy reputation of ablative psychosurgery, modern cingulotomy offers positive outcomes in nearly 70% of patients with OCD and about 75% of patients with major depression on the five-year long-term follow-up. Anterior capsulotomy with radiosurgery in patients with intractable OCD offers more than 70% of response at a 5-year follow-up. For alcohol dependence and intractable AN, bilateral stereotactic radiofrequency ablation of the nucleus accumbens offers remission rates of 64-82%. Bilateral cingulotomy for heroin addiction offers a remission rate of 45%.

For DBS, the response rate varies depending on the psychiatric disorder and the target.

- For OCS, the internal capsule  provides a response in 55% of the patients, the anterior capsule/striatum a response in 62% with remission in 6%, the inferior thalamic peduncle a response in 100%, the nucleus accumbens a response in 38%, and the subthalamic nucleus a response in 50%

- For mayor affective disorder, the anterior capsule/striatum provides a response in 40% with remission in 25% of the patients, the cingulate a response in 58% and remission in 28%, and the nucleus accumbens a response in 48% and remission in 5%

- Only case reports and case series have been published for TS, documenting a wide range of improvements (46% to nearly 100%).

# Complications

Seizures

Intracranial hemorrhage

Hypomania

Mania

Worsening of depression

Increase suicide risk

Battery changes requiring reoperations

Hardware malfunction

Infections

Electrode misplacement

Skin erosion

Hemiparesis

# Consultations

Psychiatrist

Neurologist

Neurosurgeon

Social worker

Ethical committee

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Despite pharmacotherapy advances for treating psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, OCD, and depression, many patients become refractory. Neuromodulation provides an alternative, and many times, an effective treatment in these patients.

The medical and patient community needs to evaluate the new modulatory treatments for these unresponsive psychiatric disorders. Each procedure must be given credit bases on evidence-based information, and not on their tainted history. The use of all these neuromodulatory treatments should be evaluated in blind trials and systematic randomized trials. Still, the optimal patient selection and surgical targeting areas need to be explored.

In many patients, DBS indications are limited to intractable OCD, major affective disorders GTS, TS, and AN. Still, sometimes, it is used to treat drug addiction and certain forms of severe aggression or auto aggression.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team of nurses and physicians should be familiar with and educate patients and their families on the option of neuromodulation surgery as a last resort for the treatment of these patients. In the last 50 years, there has been a progressive replacement of ablative psychosurgery by using DBS in unresponsive psychiatric disorders. There is a significant amount of level II evidence for neuromodulation's safety and efficacy in treating refractory major affective disorders and OCD.