The primary care clinician usually diagnoses obesity during health maintenance visits. The growth chart reveals the onset and severity of obesity and also provides clues about the etiology.

- The BMI trajectory helps identify a gradual increase during sensitive growth periods (infancy, childhood, and adolescence) versus an abrupt acceleration.

- Sudden changes in the BMI may indicate personal and family stress or medical problems related to tumors, trauma, hypothyroidism, or medications.

- Comparing the weight and height trajectories can be very useful. A young child taking in excess calories shows a linear increase in both weight and height. In contrast, a disproportionate increase in weight only may indicate a sedentary lifestyle with low physical activity.

- A deceleration in linear growth over time implies endocrine problems such as hypothyroidism.

Laboratory investigation focuses on the early detection of comorbidities. The risk increases with a child's age and with severe obesity. The prevalence of comorbidities varies by race and ethnicity. Black and Hispanic youth have a higher prevalence of pre-diabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Rates of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are higher in Hispanic children. These statistics are likely related to socioeconomic and environmental, not genetic factors. For children with obesity, evaluation for the presence of lipid abnormalities, pre-diabetes and diabetes, and hepatic dysfunction should begin at age ten. This includes a fasting lipid panel, fasting glucose, alanine transaminase (ALT), and aspartate transaminase (AST) every two years. If the fasting glucose is elevated, hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) or a 2-hour plasma glucose level following an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) can be measured. For children aged 2 to 9 years, evaluation for lipid abnormalities is not required but may be performed, especially if there is a positive family history. In this age group, the risk of pre-diabetes, T2DM, and NAFLD is lower, so testing is not universally recommended. However, screening for glucose abnormalities or liver dysfunction is appropriate when there are physical examination findings such as acanthosis nigricans or a positive family history of diabetes.[American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity 2023]

When PCOS is suspected, testing for levels of luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and testosterone should be performed. A thyroid hormone assessment is indicated for concerns about thyroid function and serum cortisol levels for diagnosis of Cushing syndrome.

The following laboratory and imaging studies can be considered in unique circumstances. [American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity 2023]

- Imaging: radiographs of hip and knee joints (SCFE and Blount disease), ultrasound of abdomen and pelvis (PCOS), CT/MRI of the brain (hypothalamic tumors)

- Polysomnography tests for obstructive sleep apnea and pulmonary function tests for asthma.

- Invasive procedures such as lumbar puncture to obtain CSF opening pressure for diagnosis of pseudotumor cerebri.