# Continuing Education Activity

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome is a rare complication of invasive intraocular surgery (especially cataract extraction with intraocular lens implantation) that may occur in patients with congenital aniridia. It is characterized by a progressive fibrotic membrane within the anterior chamber that occurs after ocular surgery. In this activity, we review the clinical presentation and management of aniridic fibrosis syndrome. We also discuss the pathophysiology, risk factors, and differential diagnosis.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the pathophysiology and histopathology associated with aniridic fibrosis syndrome
- Describe the physical examination findings in a patient with aniridic fibrosis syndrome
- Outline the treatment regimen for patients affected with aniridic fibrosis syndrome
- Identify the differential diagnoses to consider in a patient with apparent aniridic fibrosis syndrome

# Introduction

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome was first described by Tsai et al. in 2005.

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome occurs in the setting of congenital aniridia or the absence of the iris. Aniridia is an intricate congenital syndrome that can arise in an inherited or sporadic manner.PAX6 gene mutations, and the specific mutation can have considerable effects on the observed phenotype and resultant pathologies.PAX6 mutations may also be part of various clinical syndromes (e.g., WAGR, or WAGRO syndromes), but other genetic mutations (e.g., FOXC1, PITX2, PITX3) and sporadic cases have been reported to cause aniridia.

# Etiology

The etiology of aniridic fibrosis syndrome is still unknown. This progressive fibrosis appears to occur only in patients with congenital aniridia that have undergone intraocular surgery, especially with some implanted device. However, a history of such is not entirely necessary.

Risk factors have not been fully identified because of limited reported cases of aniridic fibrosis syndrome. However, of the seventeen cases published in the literature, 88% have been female.

# Epidemiology

Congenital aniridia has been reported to have an incidence between 1:64000 and 1:100000.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology that causes aniridic fibrosis syndrome is unknown. However, observations from published literature can give us clues into the underlying mechanisms. In reported cases, the fibrotic membrane appears to originate from the rudimentary iris and is first noticeable as a growth on the posterior chamber (PC) IOL. The membrane may pull the PCIOL anteriorly, and progressive growth in late-stage disease reportedly causes additional tilting of the PCIOL and eventual contact with the cornea.

# Histopathology

Three surgically extracted samples in Tsai et al.’s study were examined for histopathologic changes. The membrane was composed of hypocellular fibrous tissue with bundles of immature collagen bundles mixed in with mature collagen fibers. Mild vascularity was noted in two of the three, and no other ocular cell type was observed in the fibrosis. Additionally, T-cells and macrophages were scarce in two of three samples, indicating a lack of inflammation that may be associated with other anterior chamber membranes.PAX6 mutations could also predispose patients to fibrotic membranes and could be the root cause.

# History and Physical

Patients with aniridic fibrosis syndrome will likely have decreased baseline best-corrected visual acuity. However, the presenting complaint has been recorded as an additional decrease in their visual ability. On ocular examination, a fibrous membrane may be observed to grow from the remnants of the patient’s iris. As patients are accustomed to poor visual acuity, they may delay making an appointment with their physician. With time, the membrane may grow to affect the IOL, ciliary body, and retina; and may become more evident on examination. In addition, patients with aniridic fibrosis syndrome may present with endothelial decompensation.

# Evaluation

Patients with aniridic fibrosis syndrome will, of necessity, have a preexisting diagnosis of aniridia; and will likely have multiple associated ocular procedures. Although there are continually improving genetic tests to detect patients with various causes of aniridia

Regular evaluation of the anterior segment and IOP are essential for the early detection of associated comorbidities. Slit lamp, gonioscopy, and indirect ophthalmoscopy can all be useful in the evaluation of the extent of fibrosis. Visual acuity often decreases with the progression of the fibrotic membrane.

# Treatment / Management

Initially, aniridia is typically managed medically; however, surgical intervention eventually becomes necessary to preserve or restore the best-corrected baseline visual acuity and achieve desirable cosmetic effects.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for patients with suspected aniridic fibrosis syndrome includes other sequelae of PAX6 mutations, diseases associated with underlying aniridia, and other causes of retrocorneal or intraocular membranes. Peter anomaly, also associated with PAX6 gene mutation, has been observed to have a similar type of fibrosis in patients with intraocular surgery.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for patients with aniridia is often poor, with decreased baseline visual acuity.

# Complications

As previously stated, fibrous growth may recur following membranectomy, though no cases of recurrence have been reported in patients with IOL extraction or Boston KPro type 1 implants.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with aniridia will, almost of necessity, undergo ocular surgical procedures to restore or improve vision. Of these, some may develop postsurgical fibrotic membranes, which can cause intraocular damage and decreased visual acuity. Patients with aniridia should be counseled to maintain frequent and regular follow up with their ophthalmologist.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Aniridic fibrosis syndrome is a fibrotic membranous overgrowth retrocorneally that may occur in patients with congenital aniridia, likely secondary to multiple intraocular procedures and intraocular implants

- Genetic testing can be done to assess for aniridia, but no test or presurgical imaging can assess for the likelihood of postsurgical fibrosis.

- The fibrosis begins at the rudimentary iris and extends over intraocular structures, including an IOL, if in the posterior capsule.

- If left untreated, the membrane may extend anteriorly (pulling the IOL forward into contact with the cornea) and posteriorly (potentially covering the ciliary body and anterior retina).

- Treatment is membranectomy, and consideration for a decrease in intraocular structures should be considered. Surgical intervention is generally successful. Recurrence is rare and associated with IOL replacement as opposed to removal.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with congenital aniridia should be referred to an ophthalmologist promptly. The broad scope of potential ocular complications in aniridia requires a team of ophthalmic subspecialists to provide optimal ocular care, as well as other providers, forming an interprofessional team. It has been recommended that only the best surgeons operate on the eyes of aniridic patients due to the potential complication of aniridic fibrosis syndrome.