Patients with atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia usually present with symptoms of dizziness, syncope, shortness of breath, intermittent palpitations, pain/discomfort in the neck, pain/discomfort in the chest, anxiety, and polyuria secondary atrial natriuretic factor secreted mainly by the heart atria in response to atrial stretch. Patients with AVNRT and a known history of coronary artery disease may present with a myocardial infarction secondary to the stress on the heart. Patients with AVNRT and a known history of heart failure may present with acute exacerbation and possibly reduced ejection fraction secondary to tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.

Although syncope is an uncommon symptom in patients with AVNRT, it is typical in patients who have a heart rate above 170 bpm as less filling of the ventricles leads to the reduction in cardiac output and the decreased perfusion of the brain. Depression of the sinoatrial node secondary to tachycardia also may contribute to syncopal symptoms of patients who present with AVNRT.

Patients with AVNRT usually present with a heart rate within the range of 140 to 280 bpm. If a patient has known heart failure or coronary artery disease, they may complain of chest pain. They also may have symptoms of heart failure such as tachypnea with wheezes or swelling in the lower extremities on physical exam. During a physical exam, a provider might be able to appreciate Cannon A waves as the atrium contracts in conjunction with the ventricular contractions against a closed tricuspid valve. Hypotension secondary to decreased ventricular filling also may be a significant physical exam finding in patients presenting with AVNRT.