The most common side effects associated with ketamine are nausea, vomiting, dizziness, diplopia, drowsiness, dysphoria, and confusion. There are reports of the emergence phenomenon for approximately 6% to 12% of patients. Rarely patients experience hallucinations.

A complete list of side effects follows:

- Allergic: anaphylaxis, breathing difficulties, facial, lip, throat, and tongue swelling, hives

- Cardiovascular: arrhythmias, blood pressure frequently elevated, bradycardia, hypotension, left ventricular dysfunction in patients with heart failure, respiratory and cardiac arrest

- Gastrointestinal: anorexia, nausea, and vomiting

- Muscular: muscle stiffness and spasms/tonic-clonic movements resembling seizures, enhanced skeletal muscle tone

- Neurologic: confusion, seizures

- Ophthalmologic: diplopia, increased intraocular pressure, nystagmus

- Psychiatric: amnesia, anxiety, confusion, depression, disorientation, dysphoria, dissociative state (patients may not be able to speak or respond purposefully to verbal commands), emergence phenomena/delirium (6% to 12% in different studies and can last for up to 3 hours) including hallucinations, flashbacks, unusual thoughts, extreme fear, excitement, and irrational behavior, insomnia, physical and psychological dependence, addiction when used recreationally. (Drug dependence and tolerance may develop after prolonged use. Withdrawal symptoms may occur if stopping ketamine suddenly.)

- Respiratory: apnea, increased laryngeal, and tracheal secretions, laryngospasm, airway obstruction in infants (may not be drug-related), respiratory depression

- Skin: (infrequently) at the site of injection, local pain, erythema, morbilliform rash

Emergence delirium may be reduced by decreasing the recommended dose of ketamine, using it in conjunction with benzodiazepines, and/or reducing verbal and tactile stimulation during the drug administration. If "emergence" occurs, a small hypnotic dose of a short-acting barbiturate or benzodiazepine is recommended to terminate the reaction. Diazepam 2 to 5 mg IV push given over 1 minute (15 mg or less in most cases) can reduce emergence phenomena. "Emergence" is not typical in children younger than 15 years or elderly patients greater than 65 years. In a randomized controlled study of adult emergency department patients, Sener et al. found a significant reduction in the incidence of agitation when coadministering midazolam with ketamine for procedural sedation.