Patients with frontotemporal dementia should be evaluated as follows:

**Laboratory:**Neural and axonal cytoskeletons are mainly composed of neurofilaments, which are further made up of small subunits called neurofilament light chains. Neurofilament light chain, among other biomarkers, can be increasingly seen in blood and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with FTD.

**Radiographic tests:**Magnetic resonance imaging,****computed tomography****scan, or single-photon emission tomography****can be used to demonstrate atrophy and hypoperfusion in the frontal and temporal lobes. However, the findings are not specific. Imaging may aid in the diagnosis or to rule out other etiologies.

**Electroencephalography (EEG):**It is not very helpful for FTD as it is for Alzheimer’s disease; however, in comparison to the healthy group, a typical EEG pattern was observed in several patients with FTD and was marked by the reduction of fast activities (alpha, beta1- beta3), but no difference in slow activities (delta & theta waves).

**Neurocognitive exams:**Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive Assessment, and Functional Cognitive Assessment. For primary care, the Cochrane dementia and cognitive improvement group supports the utilization of two tests; MMSE (the most commonly used test in primary care) and the Informant Questionnaire for Cognitive Disorders in the Elderly. MMSE assesses different domains of dementia, including but not limited to memory, cognition, language, attention/orientation, and executive functions.