The best accepted clinical measures of acute inflammation are CRP and ESR. CRP has the advantage of being more sensitive and easily measured on automated platforms by nephelometry and turbidimetry in the majority of clinical laboratories and is a direct readout of the APR. ESR is an indirect measure of APR proteins, mainly fibrinogen. Both can provide results within hours. However, the quantification of some APPs such as alpha-1antitrypsin (AAT), alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, alpha-2 macroglobulin is not as well validated and standardized as CRP. Fibrinogen rises much later than CRP, and its concentration only increased around two folds.

Assessing intravascular hemolysis with haptoglobin can be inaccurate without tests such as bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and hemoglobin. Haptoglobin levels increase during inflammation and decrease during hemolysis. In patients with hemolysis and inflammation, levels can appear normal.

Procalcitonin is a sensitive marker for sepsis and can be used to guide treatment. Procalcitonin has replaced CRP as a diagnostic parameter in sepsis because PCT has higher sensitivity than CRP in sepsis. CRP is no longer used as a diagnostic parameter in sepsis, but it can be useful in the follow-up.

Ferritin levels are increased in inflammatory conditions, and levels of transferrin, a negative APP that transports iron, decrease. Ferritin sequesters iron. Prolonged inflammation or malignancy can lead to anemia of chronic disease. Ferritin, transferrin, and serum iron are part of the iron panel laboratory studies. Iron deficiency anemia and anemia of chronic disease can both present as microcytic anemia. They can be distinguished by assessing ferritin and transferrin levels. Anemia of chronic disease patients will have elevated ferritin and low transferrin. Iron deficiency anemia patients will have lower ferritin and elevated transferrin. Serum iron will be low in both patients for different reasons. In iron deficiency, low serum iron could be due to malnutrition, increased demand, or hemorrhage. In anemia of chronic disease, low serum iron is from impaired distribution of iron mainly due to hepcidin-mediated reduced absorption from enterocytes and macrophages.