**Prescription Requirements**

To be considered valid, a controlled substance prescription must meet several criteria; it must be issued by a practitioner in the usual course of their practice and be issued for a legitimate medical purpose. If these criteria are not met and the prescription has still been refilled, the person dispensing the medication is subject to penalties for violating the CSA.

The CSA also requires prescribers to include their individual registration number on each controlled substance prescription. A DEA-issued registration number includes nine characters with two letters followed by seven digits. Registration numbers for physicians began with the letters A, B, or C. In contrast, the numbers for physicians’ assistants or nurse practitioners begin with M. The second letter is commonly the first letter of the provider’s last name. As another check for the validity of the registration number, the final seventh digit is equivalent to the last number of the sum of digits 1,3, and 5, followed by digits 2, 4, and 6 multiplied by 2.

If there is incorrect or missing information on a prescription for a controlled substance, and if it is from Schedule III, IV, or V, a pharmacist can change or fill in certain items with authorization from the provider. Pharmacists can change the quantity, strength, form, directions for use, and issue date to meet these requirements. The information that can never be changed is the patient’s name, the controlled substance prescribed, and the prescriber’s signature.

**Scheduling System**

The cornerstone of the CSA is the classification system by which it regulates controlled substances. In this system, there are five schedules of substance, numbered I-V. The CSA stratifies these based on a substance’s accepted medical use, the potential for abuse/addiction, and harmfulness. Schedule I contained the substances with the most potential for abuse, harm and have no recognized medical uses, while Schedule V has the least dangerous substances with known medical uses. Of note, controlled substance as defined in the Controlled Substance Act means “a drug or other substance, or immediate precursor, included in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of part B of this subchapter. The term does not include distilled spirits, wine, absinthe, malt beverages, nicotine, or tobacco, as those terms are defined or used in subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986”. This exemption for alcohol and tobacco is important as they are the most widely used drugs in the United States.

**Schedule I**

Schedule I controlled substances are described as having an unacceptable lack of safety, a high potential for abuse/addiction, and currently have no accepted medical use in treatment in the United States. No prescriptions may be written for Schedule I substances. Drugs listed in this schedule include diacetylmorphine (heroin), psychedelic drugs such as psilocybin, MDMA, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), and marijuana.

**Schedule II**

Schedule II controlled substances are defined as having high potential for abuse and dependence, with significant risk to patient safety, and have medical use in the United States. Schedule II substances require an original prescription, either written or electronically transmitted from a practitioner. No oral prescriptions are allowed except in emergency situations.

Partial filling of a Schedule II controlled substance is permitted if the pharmacist cannot supply the full amount of a written or emergency oral prescription so long as the amount dispensed is properly documented, and the rest can be filled within 72 hours.

For Schedule II substances, pre-dated and post-dated prescriptions pose a significant problem. Per CSA guidelines, the prescription for a controlled substance must be signed and dated on the date issued. This poses significant issues for some patients, for whom obtaining new prescriptions monthly is very difficult. Thus in 2006, an amendment was issued that multiple prescriptions allowing up to a 90-day supply of Schedule II substances may be issued if a practitioner determines there is a legitimate medical purpose, that the earliest date to be filled is written on each subsequent prescription, and that the length or amount of this prescription does not create undue risk of diversion or abuse.

Schedule II controlled substances include amphetamines, many barbiturates, cocaine (used as a local anesthetic or to stop severe epistaxis), many opioids (fentanyl, hydromorphone, morphine, oxycodone, etc.), and phencyclidine, also known as PCP (used as a veterinary anesthetic).

**Schedule III**

Schedule III controlled substances are defined as having moderate potential for abuse (less than Schedules I or II) with abuse leading to moderate physical dependence and have a currently accepted medical use in the United States. Schedule III substances may be filled with a written, electronic, or oral prescription and can be filled/refilled up to six months after the date of issue and may be refilled up to five times before requiring renewal by the practitioner.

The CSA allows for the transfer of prescriptions for Schedule III, IV, and V controlled substances between pharmacies one-time, state-law permitting.

Controlled substances within Schedule III include ketamine (a shorter-acting, safer version of PCP now used for veterinary and pediatric anesthesia), anabolic steroids, and buprenorphine.

**Schedule IV**

Schedule IV substances are defined as having a low potential for abuse, may lead to limited physical/psychological dependence, and has medical uses currently accepted in the United States. Control measures for substances in Schedule IV may be refilled up to five times in a six-month period.

Schedule IV substances include benzodiazepines (alprazolam, diazepam, clonazepam, etc.), zolpidem, and tramadol.

**Schedule V**

The substances with the least relative potential for abuse and physical or psychological dependence and with current medical uses in the United States are in Schedule V. These include cough suppressants containing codeine, pregabalin, and lacosamide.