It remains imperative to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient before performing a facial reconstruction after MMS. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Prior to surgery, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluation by a surgeon experienced in selecting the appropriate patient for facial reconstruction after MMS.

- Evaluation by a primary care physician and/or anesthesiologist to ensure that the patient is fit for anesthesia (if applicable).

An interprofessional team of an experienced surgeon, anesthesiologist, and surgical assistants and operative nurses should be involved during the facial reconstruction after MMS to maximize outcomes. Close follow-up during the initial post-operative period, either by a wound care nurse and/or clinician experienced in the postoperative care of facial reconstruction after MMS, should monitor the patient for possible complications, including bleeding and infection. It is also essential to educate the patient on properly caring for the surgical wounds, strenuous activity, heavy lifting, or bending over during the first several days post-operatively to mitigate complications.

Facial reconstruction after MMS requires expert training to facilitate a seamless relationship between the surgeon, histopathologist, and the perioperative team. Moreover, the team members must understand the social importance and value of facial reconstructive surgery after MMS defects, which has recognition as a high-value intervention by society. [Level 5]