**The sequence of Events for Treating a Pelvic Ring Injury**

On arrival:

- ATLS

- Two large-bore IVs
- Foley catheter

- Contraindicated if blood at the urethral meatus
- Indications for a retrograde cystourethrogram

- Male patients with symphysis disruptions, hematuria, blood at meatus, inability to void, ecchymosis or hematoma of the perineum, high-riding or boggy prostate




- Rectal and vaginal exam
- Hemodynamic instability treated with fluids vs. immediate blood products.

- CXR

- High energy trauma may also have widened mediastinum or pneumothorax.

- AP Pelvis

- Try to decipher between APC and LC/VS/CM injury patterns.

- If the symphysis has significantly widened its likely an APC pattern

- If the symphysis is wide and the patient is hemodynamically unstable, apply a pelvic binder or circumferential sheet.


- If the pelvis is broken/disrupted, but it is not clearly an APC pattern, consider other interventions before a pelvic binder.

- Traction for a VS injury

- CT head, neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis

- Fine cuts (2 mm) of the pelvis
- Look for other injuries, including head/neck/chest/abdominal/pelvic hemorrhage.

- If the patient remains hemodynamically unstable

- Identifiable source of bleeding outside of pelvis:

- Control by other means per general surgery recommendations


- No other source of bleeding identified other than pelvic ring injury: 

- Interventional radiology embolization

- Best next step in most centers


- Emergent pelvic external fixation and pelvic packing

- Controversial

- Once the patient is hemodynamically stable

- Inlet and outlet X-rays of the pelvis

- For surgical planning


- If the patient has polytrauma, it indicates a reason for the delay of definitive surgical intervention.

- Temporary external fixation per damage control orthopedic principles


- If the patient is stable (lactate corrected)

- Definitive fixation