The lac operon ensures the sequential utilization of different carbon sources depending on the bacterial cells' nutritional environment. Glucose is the preferred source of energy, following which lactose and other carbohydrates are metabolized. This occurs due to the positive and negative regulation of the lac operon.

In the absence of lactose, the genetic switch, lac repressor binds to the primary operator O1 and physically blocks RNA polymerase from forming the pre-initiation complex, inhibiting the synthesis of enzymes required for lactose metabolism. This repression is further enhanced by the two auxiliary operators, O2 and O3. The bidentate repressor binds to two operator sites simultaneously and leads to the formation of stable DNA loops. DNA looping enhances the effective concentration of the repressor at the primary regulatory operator, further inhibiting the lac operon. This cooperative binding between O1 and O2 or O1 and O3 can increase the repression intensity by as high as 1300 times. Inhibiting the synthesis of enzymes required for lactose metabolism allows the cell to conserve its metabolic energy and utilize the available carbon sources.

However, in the presence of lactose and the absence of its preferred carbohydrate source, the cells switch their genetic machinery to metabolize lactose as its primary source of energy. Due to the inherent leakiness of the lac operon, basal levels of lac permease and beta-galactosidase are produced even in the absence of lactose. This allows lactose to enter the cell via lac permease and get isomerized to allolactose by beta-galactosidase. Allolactose binds to the lac repressor and produces a conformational change, decreasing its affinity for the operator locus. Thus, the repressor dissociates from the operator, allowing the synthesis of metabolic enzymes. This provides evidence that the lac repressor can exhibit two conformational states, one where it binds to the operator and inhibits the lac operon and the other when it allows induction of the operon by binding to an inducer. The phenomenon by which the lac repressor can exhibit two structural states with different biological properties is also called allostery.

Extracellular glucose can also regulate the lac operon by carbon catabolite repression (CCR), a phenomenon formerly called the "glucose effect." The phosphoenolpyruvate: carbohydrate phosphotransferase system (PTS) couples the transport and phosphorylation of glucose as it moves into the cell and plays a central role in exerting the effects of glucose on the expression of the lac operon. The transfer of a phosphate group from phosphoenolpyruvate to glucose occurs in two-steps, each catalyzed by different proteins. The phosphoryl group is first accepted by enzyme I and HPr, which transfers it to a sugar specific Enzyme II. Enzyme II specific for the transport of glucose is EIIAGlc. As glucose levels increase in the environment, it is transported into the cells and phosphorylated by EIIAGlc. Dephosphorylated EIIAGlc binds to LacY and prevents the formation of lac permease. This blocks the entry of lactose into the cell, decreasing the intracellular concentration of the inducer, a phenomenon called inducer exclusion. This ensures that the cells use glucose, and other carbons sources such as lactose, are not metabolized.

In the absence of glucose, phosphorylated EIIAGlc activates the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which catalyzes the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). cAMP binds to and activates the cAMP receptor protein(CRP), also called the Catabolite Activator Protein (CAP). CAP interacts with the CAP binding site, increases the recruitment of RNA polymerase, and enhances its interaction with the lac promoter, positively regulating the transcription mechanism. Thus, the synthesis of enzymes required for lactose metabolism is increased in the absence of glucose.

Another mechanism regulating the synthesis of enzymes is the presence of a positive feedback loop. Increased production of lac permease and beta-galactosidase increases the uptake of lactose and its conversion into allolactose, which further reduces the concentration of active repressor and induces the operon. As a consequence, more lac permease and beta-galactosidase are produced, and the cycle continues.