Cataract extraction is expected to improve the visual outcome. However, the primary pathology also plays an important role in the final visual prognosis.

- In inflammatory conditions such as uveitis, the visual prognosis varies according to the different forms of uveitis and depends on the preoperative and postoperative control of inflammation. Fuchs’ heterochromic iridocyclitis has a good visual outcome and no significant postoperative inflammation. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis-associated uveitis has a guarded visual prognosis due to the high risk of postoperative inflammation. However, strict control of inflammation can achieve a satisfactory visual outcome. Cataract surgery in Behcet’s disease has a guarded prognosis due to intense inflammation and other complications such as optic atrophy, epiretinal membrane. Besides these autoimmune conditions, the infectious uveitis should be treated properly by appropriate antimicrobial prophylaxis as it has a high risk of recurrence, which will complicate the postoperative outcome.

- In degenerative conditions, where a decrease in vision is mainly caused by visually significant cataracts rather than the pathology, cataract extraction with IOL implantation will improve the visual outcome. However, in the presence of significant macular damage, the visual prognosis is poor.

- In the presence of retinal detachment, glaucoma, and intraocular tumors, the visual prognosis is affected by the extent of intraocular damage by the primary pathology.