Physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and other healthcare professionals must ensure that their patients receive the most appropriate treatment for their condition(s). It is prudent for the interdisciplinary team to have an understanding of FDA approval and FDA recalls when formulating treatment plans and educating their patients. With myriad treatments to choose from, healthcare professionals should know that FDA-approved drugs and medical devices have undergone an independent review for safety and efficacy.

Healthcare professionals should consider that when counseling their patients on treatment options and discussing topics such as complementary and alternative medicine. Improved communication between healthcare professionals is also essential. With many medications currently being prescribed for off-label uses, it would behoove physicians, pharmacists, and other clinicians to educate one another and maintain an open line of communication to improve patient health outcomes.

Another interprofessional team intervention is the voluntary reporting of adverse events and quality issues about drugs and medical devices to the FDA MedWatch surveillance system. Issues with other FDA-regulated products, including infant formula, cosmetics, and medical foods, can also be reported.

Of note, pharmacists are most likely to report adverse medication reactions. However, the FDA encourages all interprofessional healthcare team members to report concerns in the interests of public health. The information from these reports is made available to the medical community and the general public. Aiding with postmarket surveillance, MedWatch can alert the FDA to consider product recalls, withdrawals, and changes to labeling to protect the general public. Reporting can be done online, by phone, mail, or fax.