**Anatomical Limbus**

The anatomical limbus is a transition zone between the conjunctivocorneal and corneoscleral junction.

**Conjunctivocorneal Junction**

- At this junction, the bulbar conjunctiva is densely adherent to the underlying structures.

- The conjunctival substantia propria ends here, but the epithelium is in continuity with the cornea.

- The epithelium at the limbus is several layers thick and is arranged irregularly.

**Sclerocorneal Junction**

At this junction, the corneal lamella is transparent and is continuous with the oblique, circular, and opaque scleral fibers.

**Transitions at the Limbus**

- Corneal epithelium becomes continuous with bulbar conjunctival epithelium

- Bowman's membrane becomes continuous with the lamina propria of the conjunctiva and the tenon's

- Corneal stroma becomes sclera

- Descemet membrane gives rise to Schwalbe's line

- Endothelium lines the trabecular meshwork and becomes continuous with the anterior surface of the epithelium.

**Surgical Limbus**

This is a 2 mm wide transition zone with a clear cornea and the opaque sclera on the other side.

**Anterior Limbal Border**

This overlies the termination of the Bowman's membrane. This is the anterior boundary of the surgical limbus. It appears as a ridge formed by the insertion of the conjunctiva and tenons capsule of the conjunctiva. The blue limbal zone varies in each quadrant. This is 1 mm in the superior quadrant, 0.8 mm in the inferior quadrant, and 0.4 mm in the nasal and temporal quadrant.

**Blue Limbal Zone**

It is a transparent zone between the anterior and limbal posterior borders. Beyond the blue zone, there is a white sclera.

**Mid Limbal Line**

This is at the junction of the blue zone with the white sclera. This zone covers the Descemet membrane Schwalbe's line); it is one of the important landmarks.

**Posterior Limbal Border**

This zone lies 1 mm posterior to the mid-limbal line, overlying the scleral spur**.**This forms the posterior border of the surgical limbus and is seen with sclerotic scatter.

**White Limbal Zone**

This 1 mm wide zone between the mid-limbal line and posterior limbal border overlies the trabecular meshwork. The importance of limbus in cataract incisions.

**Clear Corneal Incision**

This is located in front of the anterior limbal border and is associated with high induced astigmatism. It may result in Descemet stripping.

**Anterior Limbal Incision**

This incision is located in the blue limbal zone, traverses the Descemet membrane, and may cause DM detachment or stripping.

**Mid Limbal Incision**

This is externally located on the mid-limbal line and traverses Schwalbe's line internally, and is the preferred site for incision in the eye.

**Posterior Limbal Incision**

This is located at the white limbal zone. This is the junction of the mid-limbal line and posterior limbal border. The underlying trabecular meshwork may be injured while performing an incision here.

**Scleral Incision**

This is located posterior to the posterior limbal border. It results in hyphema and bleeding.