Accessory Bones:

Os trigonum is a frequently encountered accessory bone (incidence 1 to 25%) that forms due to incomplete ossification at the posterior process secondary ossification center around the tenth week of gestation. The three types of os trigonum are type I (complete separation from the talus), type II (connected to the lateral tubercle through hyaline cartilage), and type III (Stieda process, which is when the lateral tubercle appears elongated as it projects posteriorly). An os trigonum can cause symptoms when there is forceful ankle plantarflexion or from repetitive plantarflexion, which causes trauma to the cartilage connecting the os trigonum to the talus.

The os talotibiale is a poorly studied, very rare accessory bone (incidence 0.05%) that is present on the dorsal aspect of the talar dome, directly anterior to the talocrural joint. It is a potential cause of anterior ankle impingement syndrome. The os supratalare is a very rare accessory bone (incidence 0.02 to 0.04%) that occurs on the dorsal aspect of the talar head or neck. It can be seen as free-standing or connected to the talus via cartilage, and while it typically does not cause pain, it can cause dorsal hindfoot pain. The os tali accessorium is another poorly studied, very rare accessory bone (incidence 0.02%) that presents on the medial aspect of the talus, potentially in the deltoid ligament. The os talus secundarius is a very rare accessory bone (incidence is 0.01%) that forms due to incomplete ossification at the lateral process secondary ossification center. Located on the lateral aspect of the subtalar joint and anterior to the lateral malleolus, it typically connects to the lateral talus via cartilage, and it may cause lateral ankle pain due to edema within the os talus secundarius and surrounding soft-tissue edema.

Tarsal Coalition:

The talus can be involved in two different types of tarsal coalition patterns.  The two patterns include the talocalcaneal and talonavicular coalitions.  In general, these coalitions restrict motion secondary to the osseous or osseo-fibrous connecting constituents. It can occur congenitally when corresponding tarsal bones fail to separate during mesenchymal segmentation, or they can be acquired through trauma, arthritis, surgery, or abnormal growth patterns. A talocalcaneal coalition can cause general hindfoot pain, or it may be asymptomatic in patients, but by reducing subtalar joint mobility, it may lead to adjacent joint degeneration or predispose to traumatic injuries or fractures.