Central to the development of HCM is the development of clinical features resulting from excessive tissue exposure to glucocorticoids (particularly cortisol). When these are presumed to be due to exaggeration of physiologic states known to be associated with hypercortisolemia, pseudo-Cushing syndrome, PCS (physiologic HCM) is diagnosed. This distinction from pathologic HCM is important as PCS is generally not sustained, generally resolves with the resolution of the etiologic factor responsible and typically is not associated with the overt cutaneous and/or muscular effects associated with pathologic HCM.

Among the established etiologies of PCS are pregnancy, morbid obesity, severe psychologic stress, severe major depressive disorder, poorly controlled diabetes mellitus with associated marked hyperglycemia, and chronic alcoholism. Even more confusing is the fact that patients with these clinical states can also have true endogenous pathologic HCM.

Other causes of physiologic hypercortisolism that typically don't present with the clinical phenotype of PCS but can have suggestive biochemical anomalies are significant physical stress including surgical and/or hospitalization related stress, severe malnutrition, anorexia nervosa, wasting-cachexia syndrome, intense chronic exercise (including but not restricted to the hyper exercising female athlete syndrome), hypothalamic amenorrhea, various causes of elevated serum cortisol binding globulin (CBG) and glucocorticoid resistance.

Derangement of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is central to the development of HCM. Such disruption can be due to exogenous or endogenous assaults or in some cases, both.

The HPA axis in the normal physiologic state is primarily for maintenance of baseline continuous cortisol production with provocative secretory responses to various stressful stimuli. CRH is the highest hierarchical control hormone in this axis and is produced from the hypothalamus tonically. It acts on the adenohypophysis (anterior pituitary) upon the basophilic corticotrophs to produce ACTH (aka corticotrophin), and this then gets secreted from the pituitary into the general circulation from which it then acts on the adrenal cortex to produce cortisol as the dominant endogenous glucocorticoid.

Circadian and stress-related inputs modulate CRH production from the parvicellular neurons of the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus. Of note is the fact that many of the same neurons concomitantly produce arginine vasopressin, which has a similar though the less dominant modulatory effect on ACTH production from the adenohypophysis.

ACTH production occurs via post-translational modification of the precursor molecule pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC). ACTH stimulates the production of cortisol from the adrenal cortex in the free form, most of which is then bound by carrier proteins of which CBG is the dominant (roughly 95% of the total in physiologic settings) one. It is a high specificity low capacity binding protein produced mainly from the liver. There is some cortisol binding also to albumin but significantly fewer degrees. At target tissues and organs, cortisol then dissociates from its carrier protein and has its dominant effects mediated by binding to the glucocorticoid (and to a less degree the mineralocorticoid) receptor which then gets transported to the nuclear ribosomal complex of target cells to alter DNA transcription and protein production to mediate its effects. There is also evidence that cortisol has some non-genomic mediated effects. The details and mechanisms by which these get mediated are still the subjects of ongoing study.

Cortisol in both physiologic and pathologic settings has a negative feedback effect on further cortisol, production by inhibiting both pituitary ACTH production and hypothalamic CRH production in addition to other CNS modulatory effects.

The adrenal cortex from which cortisol is produced consists of three distinct anatomic and functional layers: the zona glomerulosa, which predominantly produces aldosterone, the zona fasciculata, which dominantly produces cortisol and the zona reticularis which dominantly produces adrenal androgens. ACTH mediates its stimulatory effects on cortisol production by activating the melanocortin-2 receptor (MC2R) of the zona reticularis cells. It is a typical G protein-coupled receptor with cAMP being the dominant mediatory secondary intracellular messenger.

This intricately orchestrated system has baseline tonic unstressed production that has a well defined circadian rhythm (typical peaks usually soon after early morning waking typically between 6 and 8 AM) with a nadir close to midnight. Superimposed on this circadian baseline rhythm is a pulsatile ultradian rhythm, as well. Various endogenous and exogenous stimuli can perturb this system resulting in either in excess or deficient cortisol production. It is excess of cortisol production and effects at the tissue and organ level of the patient that results in the clinical syndrome of HCM whether or endogenous or exogenous etiology.