Norovirus is responsible for an estimated 21 million cases of gastrointestinal illness in the United States each year. Because patients with mild disease may not seek medical treatment, the number of cases may exceed the estimate. Norovirus is believed to cause approximately 60% of cases of acute gastroenteritis in the United States, and the CDC attributes 400,000 emergency department visits and 71,000 hospitalizations each year to norovirus infection. In a review of reported norovirus outbreaks, a food-related transmission was the most common source of widespread disease. Food-related transmission may be due to the ingestion of food that is contaminated during production or the ingestion of food that was contaminated by food service workers during preparation. High-risk food for norovirus contamination include foods that are served raw, like fruits and vegetables, as well as oysters and fish.

Outbreaks are common in a number of different settings. Norovirus is known to cause outbreaks of gastroenteritis in hospitals and other healthcare facilities. In addition to healthcare settings, outbreaks may occur in schools, military barracks, cruise ships, and resorts. Person-to-person transmission is the most common form of transmission, but contaminated surfaces also contribute to disease propagation. Surfaces may be contaminated with viral particles by splashing of emesis or stool or by aerosolized viral particles. The importance of good hand hygiene and effective surface cleaning should be stressed during norovirus outbreaks. Studies suggest that washing hands with soap and running water for at least 20 seconds is the most effective form of hand hygiene for eliminating norovirus. Studies on the effectiveness of alcohol-based hand rubs are inconclusive. Some studies suggest that high-concentration ethanol-based hand sanitizers decrease viral concentration on the hands, but these types of cleaners should be used as a supplement to hand-washing with soap and water. Surfaces such as sinks, toilets, tables, chairs, and beds should be cleaned with a hypochlorite (bleach) solution, and adequate contact time should be ensured. Furthermore, items that have been contaminated with infected emesis or stool that cannot be properly disinfected should be discarded.

Although people of all age groups are at risk of contracting norovirus, those at the extremes of age and the immunocompromised are at highest risk of poor outcomes. Elderly patients are at increased risk of fatal outcomes, with some studies showing a 30-day mortality rate of 7% for patients with community-acquired norovirus infection. Similarly, neonates have an increased rate of serious complications, such as necrotizing enterocolitis. Of all age groups, young children have the highest incidence of norovirus. Estimates suggest an annual incidence of norovirus to be 21,400 per 100,000 for children under 5 years of age. Norovirus infections are also more prevalent in developing nations. Nguyen et al. estimated that 17% of reported gastroenteritis cases in developing countries are due to norovirus. Also notable is norovirus’s effects on immunocompromised patients. Patients with compromised immune systems have a higher risk of infection of norovirus, higher rates of complications, and increased potential for prolonged asymptomatic viral shedding.