Diagnosing and managing these infections requires an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), infectious disease specialists, nursing staff, and an infectious disease-specialized pharmacist. The aid of a clinical microbiologist should be sought if a GAS infection is suspected or confirmed. Clinicians, particularly infectious disease specialists, will be the primary drivers of managing the case, but consulting with an infectious disease pharmacist will aid in more targeted antimicrobial therapy.  The pharmacist can also counsel the patient on drug therapy, perform medication reconciliation, and educate the patient and team on potential adverse events. Nurses will administer the medication in many instances (particularly in the inpatient setting), monitor antimicrobial therapy, and report any concerns to the team. This interprofessional approach to patient care requires open communication and coordinated therapeutic activity, resulting in optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

One of the most critical ways the interprofessional team can improve outcomes in patients with known or suspected infection with GAS is by recognizing the signs of infection. This is especially important in cases of more invasive/severe GAS infections, such as those found with necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock syndrome. Healthcare professionals must recognize signs of sepsis and shock and pay particular attention to physical exam findings, indicating deep soft tissue infections or systemic signs of infection. In doing this, the clinical outcomes among patients are greatly improved as appropriate antibiotics can be provided promptly with the hope that the spread of the infection and the sequelae of the infection may be more promptly controlled. This requires appropriate coordination of nursing and clinicians to recognize these signs of infections, consultants to aid in achieving a proper diagnosis, and pharmacists to help treat these infections most effectively, considering the clinical presentation and the local antibiotic resistance patterns. [Level 1]