Following are some important indications of doing a cardiac ultrasound:

1. Chest pain

- LV wall motion abnormalities, or failure of certain parts of the LV wall to contract, suggest acute coronary syndrome in the appropriate clinical setting.

- RV dilation (RV as large or larger than the LV) suggests right heart strain. If there is associated RV free wall thickness greater than 5 mm or tricuspid regurgitation with velocities higher than 4 m/s, this supports chronic right heart strain. However, an RV or right atrial thrombus (the echogenic mass that has movement independent of the ventricle/atrium), and or a McConnell sign (RV hypokinesis with apical sparing) in the setting of chest pain and/or shortness of breath suggests a pulmonary embolism.

- Visualization of an intimal flap in the ascending aorta (highly specific) or dilation of the aortic outflow tract greater than 4 cm (leading edge to leading edge) with or without a pericardial effusion suggests a Stanford type A aortic dissection.

2. Shortness of breath

- A pericardial effusion explains undifferentiated dyspnea in up to 13% of cases.

- Depressed LV ejection fraction less than 50% (less than 30% fractional shortening, or an E-point septal separation of greater than 7 mm) supports congestive heart failure or myocarditis.

-  Acute coronary syndrome

-  Pulmonary embolism

-  Endocarditis

-  Valvular heart disease

3. Hypotension

- Massive or submassive pulmonary embolism

- Cardiogenic shock

- Pericardial effusion with tamponade physiology

- Aortic dissection

- Hyperdynamic squeeze may suggest sepsis or hemorrhagic shock

4. Penetrating trauma or significant blunt trauma to the chest

- Pericardial effusion with or without tamponade physiology

- Left ventricular wall motion abnormalities may be appreciated in the setting of a cardiac contusion

5. Cardiac arrest

- Organized cardiac activity seen on ultrasound following PEA arrest is associated with survival compared to disorganized activity.

- Detection of reversible causes such as pericardial effusion or pulmonary embolism can be identified.

- Cardiac ultrasound may offer guidance/feedback to medical providers delivering chest compressions regarding the quality of compressions. For this particular indication, transesophageal echocardiography is preferred as it can better visualize the heart during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) to see if the ventricles are adequately being compressed.