**Ocular**- The Nd: YAG laser, with its ability to be absorbed by the melanin-rich pigment of the retina, can cause retinal hemorrhage, vitreous hemorrhage, retinopathy, preretinal membrane formation, and scarring. Other lasers can damage the lens and the cornea, especially if the beam of the laser is invisible or in the near-visible spectrum. Studies that have published untoward outcomes emphasize the importance of eye shields and safety goggles.

**Unwanted Skin Changes**– Temporary erythema and purpura are normal after many forms of laser treatment, but blistering, scarring, and pigmentary changes should not be expected. All such complications have been reported after laser therapy, as a result of thermal injury. It is critical to test a small area of skin for responsiveness in any patient receiving laser therapy, regardless of skin color, before treating the entire affected area. Additionally, patients should be advised about what skin changes are normal after surgery. For example, when the QSRL is used, patients should be counseled that several color changes will occur. Initially, the lesion may turn white, but this generally fades within minutes. Erythema and edema should be expected, followed by crusting and flaking of the skin within approximately 7 to 10 days.

**Darker Complected Patients**– Given the wide absorption spectrum of melanin (250 nm to 1,200 nm) patients with darker skin, which at a cellular level contains copious melanin, can experience a nonspecific thermal injury. The competitive absorption that melanin deposits in the basal layer predispose patients with deeper skin tones to not only have a higher incidence of untoward effects but also can decrease the overall efficacy of laser treatments targeted towards pigment. Patients with intensely pigmented skin, including patients with Fitzpatrick phototype VI skin, can still receive laser treatments, but special considerations must be taken into account. First, it is essential to understand that the absorption of laser energy by melanin decreases as wavelength increases. Therefore, longer wavelengths can penetrate more deeply into the skin while being less absorbed by endogenous melanin. In light of this, lasers with longer wavelengths should be used whenever possible on patients with darker complexions.