Induction and maintenance of general anesthesia are achieved through various sites of action. The most likely of these sites include inhibition of neurotransmitter-gated ion channels such as GABA, glycine, and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in the central nervous system (CNS).

Other sites of action have organ system-specific effects. With regards to cardiac function, isoflurane has minimal impact on left ventricular function but does cause a dose-dependent decrease in systemic vascular resistance due to mild beta-adrenergic stimulation. This would lead to decreased cardiac preload and, in turn, decreased cardiac output, but a rise in heart rate mitigates the decrease in cardiac output. In addition to decreasing systemic vascular resistance, it also causes coronary dilation. This could theoretically lead to a coronary steal phenomenon leading to diversion of blood away from a fixed stenotic lesion. This has largely been overshadowed by isoflurane's cardioprotective effect, which occurs through ischemic preconditioning.

Isoflurane also affects the respiratory system by causing a large decrease in tidal volumes with a minimal increase in respiratory rate leading to an overall decrease in minute ventilation. The decrease in minute ventilation causes an increased PaCO2.

At concentrations greater than 1 MAC, isoflurane causes an increase in cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure. Although blood flow is increased, the cerebral metabolic rate is decreased, and concentrations of 2 MAC can produce an electrically silent electroencephalogram.

Isoflurane also produces a dose-dependent decrease in renal and hepatic blood flow with no clinical effect on renal or hepatic function.