The diagnostic basis is the patient’s systemic symptoms and greater than 6 cm dilation of the colon seen on radiographic images.

- Radiographic evidence of the dilation of the colon greater than 6 cm **AND**:

- At least **three**of the following:
            
              
- Fever over 38 degrees C
              
              
- Heart rate greater than 120 beats/min
              
              
- Neutrophilic leukocytosis exceeding 10500/micro/L
              
              
- Anemia

- At least **one**of the following:
            
              
- Dehydration 
              
              
- Altered sensorium
              
              
- Electrolyte disturbances
              
              
- Hypotension

**Vital Signs and Laboratory**

Vital signs and laboratory results will show fever, tachycardia, anemia, and leukocytosis with a left shift. Increase inflammatory markers, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein, are also commonly seen. Patients who present with severe diarrhea and volume loss can present with hypokalemia and hypoalbuminemia; this generally indicates poor prognosis.

**Radiography**

Plain abdominal imaging is still the most frequently utilized modality; however, computed tomography (CT) is seeing increasing use, especially because it can provide more reliable information about the severity of the disease. CT is commonly used to assess possible complications of toxic megacolon, which include abscess, perforation, or ascending pylephlebitis.

Key features visible on CT include colonic wall thickening, pericolic stranding, bands of high and low intensity stretching over thickened submucosal folds (accordion sign), and multilayers appearance due to alternating densities of edematous submucosa and hyperemic mucosa (target sign).

An abdominal ultrasound is also an option, but it provides nonspecific findings that might not always help with diagnosis.

**Colonoscopy**

Colonoscopy is not necessary for diagnosis. Therefore, colonoscopy is discouraged due to the high risk of perforation.