Penile radiation therapy (RT) is appropriate for Tis, T1 and T2 lesions that are less than 4 cm in size. This therapy can be administered as external beam radiation therapy or interstitial brachytherapy. Radiation has a higher local recurrence rate than partial or total penectomy. High doses of radiation are required to eradicate penile squamous cell carcinoma and complications are high. The 2 most common late side effects of RT are meatal stenosis and soft-tissue ulceration. Circumcision must be performed prior to radiation therapy to prevent radiation-induced phimosis.

Adjuvant RT to the inguinal or pelvic regions has not been thoroughly evaluated. It is currently not recommended as prophylaxis for high-risk patients and is less effective therapeutically than a LN dissection for clinically involved nodes. It may be useful for palliation in patients with inoperable nodes.

HPV is estimated to be a causative factor in up to eighty percent of penile cancer patients. It is well known that squamous cell cancers of the head and neck that are HPV positive respond very well to radiation therapy but there is only limited and anecdotal evidence that this also applies to penile cancer.  Bandini et al reported a retrospective analysis from a large international database of 507 patients with penile cancers who underwent inguinal lymph node dissections. They then reviewed the effect of radiation therapy on overall survival and found that HPV positive penile cancer patients had a significantly better response to radiation and improved overall survival than their HPV negative counterparts.