A multidisciplinary approach provides optimal care for the infant and the mother. Various disciplines, including occupational and physical therapy, social services, and child life, should be included in patient care in addition to physicians and nursing staff. Appropriate post-discharge planning and follow-up care are as important as services during the hospital stay.

Each unit taking care of drug-withdrawing infants should have a standardized policy for the management of neonatal abstinence syndrome. Adherence to a standardized policy has been shown to reduce the length of hospital stay for these infants.

Management during hospital stays includes supportive care with pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions.

The goal of non-pharmacological interventions is to reduce the need for pharmacotherapy. These interventions should be individualized based on the behavioral patterns of each infant. They include appropriate swaddling, positioning, rocking, reducing auditory and visual stimulation, small but frequent feedings, nutritional support, and management of associated morbidities such as loose stools and perianal excoriation.

Breastfeeding should be encouraged in women who are on stable maintenance regimens such as methadone, suboxone, and similar drugs. Breastfeeding increases mother-infant bonding and encourages maternal participation in infant care. Studies have shown that breastfeeding reduces the need for treatment in opioid-exposed infants

The goal of pharmacotherapy is to provide short-term relief in symptoms of drug withdrawal. Opioid therapy is the preferred therapy based on available studies. The current literature does not establish an optimal opioid agent. However, morphine is the most commonly used medication. Methadone and buprenorphine are also commonly used. Older opioids such as tinctures of opium and paregoric are no longer used.

Some infants with severe withdrawal may need a second medication. Again, data is limited on the ideal choice of a second agent. Clonidine and phenobarbital are the most commonly used additional choices. Phenobarbital is the drug of choice for nonopiate withdrawal.

Different scoring systems, such as the Lipsitz tool, the Finnegan Neonatal Abstinence scoring system, and others, have been used to guide initiation, titration, and weaning of opioid therapy. These scoring systems are based on the presence and severity of clinical signs. All these scoring systems involve monitoring for withdrawal signs starting at birth and assessment every three to four hours during the entire hospitalization. Although the Finnegan scoring system is the most widely used, there is no data to support the use of one system over the other.

Once an infant has been completely weaned off from pharmacotherapy and stable for at least 24 hours, the infant can be discharged from the hospital. Some units discharge infants needing multiple medications after they are weaned off opioid medications. They are then discharged with a prescription of the second line agent they have been on, to be later weaned off by the pediatrician on close follow-up.