**Management Options**

Primary fascial closure remains the gold standard in the closure of the open abdomen, but it is only achieved in some patients. Surgeons prioritize wound coverage with either a Bogota bag or temporary, rapidly absorbable mesh (e.g., Vicryl) with plans for expected hernia formation and delayed complex abdominal wall reconstruction. Alternative strategies all focus on one primary goal that is to provide tension across the fascia so that it does not shrink or retract. This phenomenon is commonly referred to as loss of domain, caused by the forces from the lateral abdominal wall musculature now unopposed. Ideally, a temporary dressing will also protect the abdominal contents, minimize the chance of fistula formation, remove excess fluid, and provide strength to the abdominal wall in between trips to the operating room. Most recent evidence favors the trend toward dynamic therapy that allows for sequential tightening of the abdominal wall in between trips to the operating room.

**Static Therapies**

Sequential primary closure: Incisions made for DCL often extend from the xiphoid to the pubis. During each return to the operating room, consider whether the fascia can be closed, or at least partially closed, from the cranial and/or caudad direction using a slowly absorbable suture.

Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT): A vacuum-assisted dressing consists of a bowel protection layer, a soft spongy material, followed by an adhesive bandage with a small opening for a drain connected to continuous suction in the simplest form. There are many industry versions of this dressing, which has been well described for the last two decades. The technique remains preferable to simple silastic dressings such as the Bogota bag to achieve fascial closure.

Mesh bridging: As mentioned above, using a rapidly absorbable, biologic, or synthetic mesh placed as an interposition graft between the fascial edges has been described in the literature. In the setting of massive loss of domain, it may be the only technique to facilitate coverage of the intestines and facilitate granulation to allow skin grafting and later reconstruction.

**Dynamic Therapies**

Mesh-mediated fascial traction (MMFT): In this technique, the mesh is sewn to the opposing fascial edges and sequentially tightens the anterior abdominal wall.

Dynamic retention sutures or abdominal reapproximation anchor (ABRA): Plastic tubes are inserted through the abdominal wall away from the fascial edge and held in place with an adhesive button. This placement of a temporary retention suture that could sequentially tighten the abdominal wall to minimize loss of domain in the open abdomen was first described more than 20 years ago.

Randomized controlled studies have demonstrated that either dynamic therapy with NPWT is better for fascial closure than just NPWT alone.

**Facilitation of Fascial Closure**

Hypertonic Saline (HTS) resuscitation: A protocol developed using hypertonic saline for resuscitation and NPWT has had improved success in early fascial closure in DCL patients.

Botulinum toxin A (BTA): BTA has been used as a method of chemical paralysis of the strong opposing forces of the lateral abdominal wall musculature used in complex abdominal wall reconstruction. One study by Zielinski et al. described the use of this technique in the open abdomen to facilitate primary fascial closure.