The majority of cases of La Crosse encephalitis are asymptomatic and likely go undiagnosed, with roughly 4% of cases being symptomatic. Symptomatic La Crosse encephalitis can vary from a mild febrile illness lasting a few days to more severe and rare cases of fatal encephalitis. Overall fatality with La Crosse encephalitis is reported to be less than 1%. There is, however, concern for substantial morbidity with the complicated severe forms of encephalitis discussed below.

The mild clinical course which occurs in almost 80% to 90% of the symptomatic cases of La Crosse encephalitis presents with headaches, fevers, and sometimes vomiting that occur over 1 to 3 days, followed by improvement over a week. Lethargy with behavioral changes, along with brief seizures, may occur. Almost 50% of hospitalized cases of pediatric La Crosse encephalitis have associated seizures. Of the seizures seen, 40% to 60% are typically focal and/or generalized seizures, with about 10%-15% advancing to status epilepticus.

In children, the illness may present as meningoencephalitis with encephalopathy and seizures, compared to adult cases of La Crosse encephalitis that present with fevers, headaches, and hyponatremia. Altered mental status is commonly seen in adult cases, but seizures are less frequently seen. In more complicated cases of adult La Crosse encephalitis, associated cerebral edema with respiratory compromise can require intubation in up to 25% of patients.

Common symptoms:

- Fever

- Lethargy

- Headaches

- Confusion

- Vomiting

- Seizures (more common in children)

Less common symptoms:

- Hyponatremia (more common in adults)

- Stiff neck

- Photophobia

- Respiratory distress

- Deep coma