Coagulation is an inherent property of the hematologic system and under healthy conditions, normal blood flow is maintained by the balance between the pro-coagulant and anti-thrombotic factors. A hypercoagulable state and subsequent thromboembolism is a result of overactivity of pro-coagulant factors or a deficiency in anti-coagulants. The interplay of factors is complicated - coagulation activators and inhibitors and their production and degradation (quantitative) and functional properties (qualitative) all influence thrombosis. The triad of hypercoagulability, vascular stasis and vascular trauma as described by Virchow in 1856 still holds and remains the harbinger of vascular thrombosis.

Some Coagulation Disorders include the following:

**Antithrombin III (ATIII)**deficiency. Antithrombin III binds to heparin on endothelial cells and forms a complex with thrombin (thrombin-antithrombin (TAT) complex) thus inhibiting coagulation. The prevalence may be 1 in 500 in the general population. Its deficiency may present as early age thrombosis (less than 50 years old) and carries the highest risk for thrombotic events among the inherited thrombophilias. Antithrombin is synthesized in the liver but is not vitamin K-dependent. ATIII deficiency can occur as a consequence of reduced synthesis (liver damage) or increased loss (nephrotic syndrome, enteropathy, DIC, sepsis, burn, trauma, microangiopathy, and cardiopulmonary bypass surgery).

**Protein C deficiency**can present as thrombosis in teenagers. Protein C and S deficiency may be inherited but is also inducable by liver dysfunction, vitamin k antagonists, renal failure, DIC, and active thrombosis. Protein S enhances the effect of activated protein C. Protein S deficiency can be classified as type I (reduced quantity of protein S), type II (low APC activity), and type III (low free protein S due to increased binding to the complement factor C4b). The interaction of protein S with C4, which is an active phase reactant exemplifies the relation of coagulation, inflammation, and autoimmunity.

Protein C interacts with thrombomodulin to become **activated protein C (APC)**. APC has anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory, and cytoprotective properties and has been proposed for the treatment of sepsis. The signal cascade leading to APC can become distorted through many acquired or inherited mechanisms leading to APC resistance. Activated protein C inactivates coagulation factors V and VIII. The factor V Leiden mutation is a common cause for APC resistance and the most frequent genetic thrombophilia.

Prothrombin is the precursor of thrombin, which is factor II. The **prothrombin G20210A mutation**is the second most common inherited risk factor for thrombosis and leads to increased levels of prothrombin which demonstrates a higher risk for arterial and venous thrombotic events.

**Hyperhomocysteinemia**is associated with premature atherosclerosis and thrombosis and caused by defects of the methionine metabolic pathway. Deficiencies of cofactors of this pathway such as vitamin B6, B12, and folate or defects of enzymes such as cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) or methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) decrease the efficiency of homocysteine metabolism. Furthermore renal failure, hypothyroidism, and drugs such as methotrexate, phenytoin, and carbamazepine increase homocysteine levels. On the other hand, lowering homocysteine levels has not been shown to reduce thrombotic risk.

**Elevated factor VIII (FVIII)**increases the risk of thrombosis. African-Americans appear to have higher levels whereas individuals with blood group O tend to have lower levels of FVIII. High levels of this factor also correlate with acute phase reactions, estrogen usage, pregnancy, and after aerobic exercise.

**Dysfibrinolysis**includes plasminogen deficiency, dysfibrinogenemia, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) deficiency, plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI) increase, and factor XII deficiency, which is involved in plasmin generation. Deficient plasminogen clinically appears similar to protein c deficiency with thrombosis during the teenage years. PAI increase and deficient tPA has an association with diabetes mellitus,

The **sticky platelet syndrome**is an autosomal dominant disease in which platelets coming into contact with epinephrine or adenosine diphosphate (ADP) react to induce hypercoagulability.

The most common acquired thrombophilia is the **antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)**in which antibodies are directed against natural constituents of cell membranes, the phospholipids. These antiphospholipid antibodies (APLA) occur in 3 to 5% of the population and may cause arterial or venous thrombosis and fetal loss. APLAs being tested for include lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein. Lupus anticoagulant leads to prolongation of coagulation (aPTT) in vitro but thrombosis in vivo.

**Malignancy**is the second most common acquired hypercoagulability and leads to a prothrombotic state through the production of procoagulant factors (tissue factor and cancer procoagulant) and the interaction of tumor cells with blood and vascular endothelium. Stasis from tumor compression, paraproteinemia, and cytokine release pose an additional risk.

The extrinsic coagulation pathway trigger is tissue factor (TF) which activates coagulation factor VII. Tissue factor is not expressed under physiologic conditions by endothelial cells but continuously produced by subendothelial (activation of coagulation in case of vessel damage) and malignant cells (association of malignancy and thrombotic events). TF is naturally counteracted by the tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI).

Arterial bypass grafts fail prematurely in smokers. **Smoking**tobacco contains various toxins. Nicotine results in endothelial cell damage. The release of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) get reduced. Carbon monoxide increases the permeability of endothelium to lipids thus leading to atheroma formation.

In general, **exercise**improves the cardiovascular risk profile, but observations of sudden cardiac death in some individuals led investigators to search for causes. Exercise influences coagulation, fibrinolysis, and platelet aggregation.

The onset of arterial thrombosis (myocardial infarction and stroke) follows a **circadian**pattern being most frequent during the early morning hours.

**Endogenous and exogenous hormones**influence coagulation. Oral contraception and hormone replacement therapy are a risk factor for thrombosis and cardiovascular events.

Through the increase of procoagulants (diverse coagulation factors and the number of platelets) and the decrease of anticoagulants (PAI) in addition to stasis caused by compression of the gravid uterus, **pregnancy**presents a time of hypercoagulability extending 2 months into the postpartum period.

Heparin is a commonly used anticoagulant. Under certain circumstances, arterial and venous thrombosis concomitantly with thrombocytopenia paradoxically results from prolonged heparin administration, which is called**heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)**. In type-I HIT platelets show a weak reduction of platelets and have little clinical consequences. This is in contrast to the strong reduction of thrombocytes and serious sequelae of HIT type-II. The conformational change of heparin following heparin binding to platelet factor 4 triggers antibody production to heparin. Subsequently, monocytes become activated and attack the vascular endothelium leading to thrombotic events.

There is an interplay between **inflammation**and the coagulation system. Inflammation triggers a hypercoagulable state.

**Trauma**is another acquired hypercoagulable state. Procoagulant disbalance is more pronounced during the first 24 hours following injury and in women. The onset of respiratory distress syndrome and multiorgan failure following trauma has been associated with elevated tissue factor.

Other conditions associated with a hypercoagulable state include myeloproliferative disorders, multiple myeloma,