In some cases, a careful history and examination may not provide enough information to identify the cause of the antalgic gait accurately, and further testing may be necessary.

Initial tests include basic bedside observations such as temperature and heart rate. Pyrexia may indicate infection, while tachycardia may give insight into the severity of the pain. Initial blood tests would consist of a full blood count with inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and c-reactive protein (CRP). White cell count and inflammatory markers may be raised on the background of an infective or inflammatory process. Depending on the history provided, the inclusion of other specific blood tests such as an international normalized ratio (INR) in a patient on chronic warfarin therapy may also be indicated. More specific rheumatological markers may be helpful in a patient with a history or suspicion of rheumatologic disease. In the context of an acute monoarthritis, blood cultures should also be taken to rule out bacteremia and identify any specific causative organisms.

Initial imaging studies such as X-rays may be ordered to provide additional information on possible sites of injury or fracture. X-rays can also provide information about degenerative changes or the presence of effusion in painful joints. If a vascular source of pain is suspected, lower extremity venous doppler or arterial ultrasound would be the imaging study of choice.

Performing a synovial aspirate may be indicated if there is clear synovitis.