Band shaped keratopathy: The patient might give a history of chronic uveitis, vitreoretinal surgery with silicone oil in-situ, or a history of some systemic disease known to cause band-shaped keratopathy. Patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis may give a history of multiple joint pain. History of trauma or long-standing recurrent uveitis can be elicited in patients with a band-shaped keratopathy associated with phthisis bulbi. The patient usually presents with complaints of decreased visual acuity, foreign body sensation, and poor cosmesis. On clinical examination, there is a band-shaped, greyish white, plaque-like lesion extending from the periphery towards the central cornea in the inter-palpebral region. However, there is a lucent zone separating the BSK from the limbus. There are multiple holes in the BSK through which corneal nerves traverse, giving it swiss-cheese appearance.

PBK and ABK: A history of complicated cataract surgery with or without anterior chamber intraocular lens (ACIOL) is often elicited. The patient gives a history of delayed visual recovery after cataract surgery. Though, an interval with relatively good vision after cataract surgery and before the onset of PBK and ABK can also be elicited. On examination, diffuse corneal stromal edema with the presence of epithelial bullae and Descemet's folds will be evident. In long-standing cases of PBK and ABK, subepithelial scarring develops. The epithelium hypertrophies and vascularization occurs. The thick opaque pannus over the cornea may prevent anterior chamber visualization.

Striate keratopathy: It is characterized by the presence of corneal stromal edema and Descemet's folds. Usually, the radiating Descemet's membrane folds are located close to the incision or more centrally. The corneal clarity decreases significantly and is proportional to the degree of intraoperative insult caused. A history of prolonged surgery or complicated surgery can be elicited.

Whorl keratopathy: Golden brown opacities at the level of basal epithelial cells arranged in a whorl can be seen on slit-lamp examination. The whorls start from the center and branch in the periphery. The lesions are noted bilaterally. A history of the use of causative medications can be elicited.

Exposure keratopathy (EK): In cases with exposure keratopathy secondary to nerve damage, the history of parotid surgery/ tumor can be elicited in some. In some cases, the clinician gets a call from intensive care units (ICU) for patients who are bedridden for an extended period. In cases with EK secondary to lid abnormality, obvious coloboma (congenital or acquired) or ectropion can be seen. Proptosis can also be noted. Corneal epithelial defect and underlying stromal edema involving the lower half of the cornea can be noted. Secondary infection with microbial agents results in the infiltration of inflammatory cells into the cornea.

Infectious crystalline keratopathy: The history of previous penetrating keratoplasty and prolonged use of topical steroids is likely to be present in most of the cases. The patient presents with mild discomfort, years after penetrating keratoplasty. The patient presents with grayish-white needle-like branching corneal stromal lesion with decreased vision and minimal to no inflammation surrounding the opacity.

Neurotrophic keratopathy: Corneal sensations decrease significantly after HZO, resulting in recurrent corneal erosions in the chronic phase. The epitheliopathy may result in persistent epithelial defects and subsequent stromal ulceration. The ulcer is called 'neurotrophic ulcer.'

Metabolic keratopathy: All metabolic keratopathies are bilateral and present since early in life. MPS presents with diffuse corneal haze due to the diffuse deposition of mucopolysaccharides in the cornea. In cystinosis, needle-like crystal deposits are noted in the anterior peripheral stroma. Recurrent corneal erosion is commonly associated with it. Blepharospasm and photophobia are common. It is associated with grossly altered renal functions. In LCAT deficiency, arcus at a younger age is noted. Corneal stromal haze and retinal angioid streaks are also noted.

Filamentary keratopathy: The patient typically presents with foreign body sensation, blurring of vision, excessive tearing, frequent blinking, photophobia, and blepharospasm. On examination, corneal filaments are noted along with redness.

Climatic droplet keratopathy: This is a type of corneal degeneration, where golden yellow spherules of varying sizes get deposited in the anterior stroma, bowman's membrane, and epithelium. The patient usually gives a history of prolonged exposure to sunlight. This causes a foreign body sensation and lacrimation if elevated. If the central cornea is involved then visual acuity also declines.

Lipid keratopathy: The patient gives a history of gradual decline in visual acuity. The patient might give a history of recurrent episodes of redness associated with viral keratitis. On examination, lipoidal infiltration into the cornea can be seen as a whitish lesion often arising in close vicinity of a vessel.

Superficial punctate keratopathy and vernal keratoconjunctivitis related keratopathy: On examination, punctate fluorescein stating is noted. In patients with giant papillae, the SPKs are largely located in the superior half of the cornea; whereas, in patients with keratoconjunctivitis sicca there exists diffuse SPK. Patients might give a history of contact lens wear. The patient presents with pain, photophobia, and redness.

However, in VKC related keratopathy, shield ulcer, pseudogerontoxon, and limbal thickening can also be noted. Horner-Trantas dots are characteristically present over the limbus.

Ultraviolet keratopathy: The disease manifests as superficial punctate keratopathy. A history of either seeing a welding arc or trekking in snowcapped terrain may be elicited.

Keratopathy related to SJS/TEN: On examination, one can notice keratinization of lid margins, tarsal conjunctival scarring, and posterior migration of mucocutaneous junction in late stages. All these changes together are responsible for recurrent microtrauma to the cornea. Total limbal stem cell deficiency manifests as vascularization and conjunctivalization or dermalization of the cornea.

Keratopathy related to aniridia: The epithelium is abnormal and results in the thickening of the epithelium over time. Peripheral pannus develops, which progresses centrally ultimately causing complete conjunctivalization.