The major clinical manifestations of chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) are dilated veins such as telangiectasias, reticular veins, varicose veins, leg edema, pain/achiness/heaviness, and skin alterations. Varicose veins are dilated superficial veins that get increasingly convoluted and larger over time.

The edema originates in the peri malleolar region, progresses up the leg in a dependent manner, is pitting in nature, and spares the forefoot. Deep venous system occlusion may cause venous claudication, which improves with rest. Cutaneous alterations include skin darkening due to hemosiderin deposition and eczematous dermatitis. Lipodermatosclerosis is a fibrotic process involving the dermis and subcutaneous fat.

Venous ulcers most commonly occur along the medial surface above the malleolus. There is an increased risk of cellulitis and superficial thrombophlebitis. An international consensus conference developed the Clinical, Etiology, Anatomic, and Pathophysiology (CEAP) classification to improve consistency in reporting, diagnosis, and treating CVI.

**CEAP Classification and Description**

**Clinical Classification**

- C0-No visible or palpable signs of venous disease

- C1-Telengiectases or reticular veins

- C2-Varicose veins

- C3-Edema

- C4a-Pigmentation and/or eczema

- C4b-Lipodermatosclerosis and/or atrophy

- C5-Healed venous ulcer

- C6-Active venous ulcer

**Etiologic Classification**

- Ec-Congenital

- Ep-Primary

- Es-Secondary

- En-No venous etiology identified

**Anatomic Classification**

- As-superficial veins

- Ap-Perforator veins

- Ad-Deep veins

- An-No venous location identified

**Pathophysiologic Classification**

- Pr-Reflux

- P0-Obstruction

- Pr/o-Reflux and obstruction

- Pn-No venous pathophysiology identifiable