Cylindromas may occur in either a sporadic or familial fashion, and they are not thought to occur as the result of environmental factors. When they occur sporadically, it is usually as a solitary lesion. Sporadically occurring cylindromas, in contrast to familial inherited forms, will often exhibit expression of MYB-NFIB fusion transcripts. MYB is an oncogene that when fused with NFIB, a transcription factor gene, forms an oncoprotein which can encourage a neoplastic process. MYB, when activated or over-expressed, may also act as a driver to encourage dermal cylindromas, taking over the action that is usually performed by the MYB-NFIB fusion oncoprotein.

Familial cylindromatosis syndromes are associated with mutations in the CYLD tumor-suppressor gene, except for extremely rare exceptions. The CYLD gene was discovered in 2000 and implicated as the causal agent in the three inherited cylindromatosis syndromes. Of these syndromes, the Brooke-Spiegler Syndrome (BSS) is probably the most well known. Familial cylindromatosis (FC), and multiple familial trichoepitheliomas (MFT) are the other two inheritable cylindromatosis syndromes and also involve mutations in the CYLD gene. CYLD mutations are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern but conform to the two-hit hypothesis, requiring a second mutation of the gene to occur randomly from DNA damage to effect a neoplastic change. Although the CYLD mutation is autosomal dominant, phenotypic expression of these mutations varies widely. There are over 100 mutations that have been identified in the CYLD gene, with more discovered all the time. The most common mutation is on chromosome 16q. It is not well understood which mutations will effect in specific phenotypic expression. Even within the same family, affected members will often exhibit differing phenotypes.