Common complications include but are not limited to bleeding, infection, and damage to the surrounding structure. Bleeding is a common complication as the liver is a very vascular organ. Experienced surgeons must be knowledgeable about anatomical anomalies of arteries to prevent potential significant blood loss. The most severe complication is an iatrogenic injury of the common bile/hepatic duct. Injury to either of these structures may require a further surgical procedure to divert the flow of bile into the intestines. This procedure usually requires a specially trained hepatobiliary surgeon

Lastly, although not a complication, conversion to an open procedure has become a rare event as the experience of surgeons has increased over the years. Conversion to an open procedure creates a larger abdominal incision, causes significant pain control issues postoperatively, and leads to a cosmetically displeasing scar. Please note that conversion to an open procedure should not be viewed as a complication but as a well-educated decision made by an experienced surgeon to care for the patient[9] safely.

Bile leaks might complicate the procedure and present with vague abdominal pain fever, with or without the characteristic features of direct hyperbilirubinemia. The complicated patients usually present within the first week following the surgery. Management should be initiated with diagnostic ultrasonography and or abdominal CT scan. In the case of retained choledocholithiasis, biliary sphincterotomy is mandatory. High-grade leaks should be managed with sphincterotomy and stenting. A HIDA scan evaluating bile leaks is recommended in equivocal findings on CT or ultrasonography.