Osteoarthritis is characterized by a degenerative cascade of progressive cartilage loss which leads to bone damage. Characteristic findings include subchondral cysts, osteophytes, and subchondral plate thickening. Interleukin-6, monokines, interferon-induced protein-10, and macrophage chemotactic protein induce proteolytic enzymes such as matrix metalloproteinases, serine proteases, and cysteine proteinases and result in the degradation of joint collage.

Symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis are typically more severe than those of osteoarthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis is a systemic and chronic inflammatory state caused by an autoimmune response to an environmental trigger. The degradation of cartilage and, eventually, bone is preceded by endothelial cell activation and synovial cell hyperplasia. The pathology occurs following the aberrant production of inflammatory mediators (such as tumor necrosis alpha, interleukins 1, 6 and 8 and others following exposure to an antigenic pathogen).

The monosodium urate salts of gout precipitate as needle-shaped crystals. This crystallization is more likely to occur in cooler body parts and with acidic conditions. Destabilization of these deposited intraarticular uric acid crystals leads to IL-1 mediated inflammatory response leading to the typical acute gouty arthritis flare. The process is different in pseudogout where the inorganic pyrophosphate from chondrocytes combines with calcium to form calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate. This crystal is deposited in joint spaces that have a predilection to osteoarthritic changes. Pseudogout crystal damage includes the fragmentation of bone and cartilage and the formation of osteophytes and subchondral cysts. Metabolic disorders such as hemochromatosis, hyperparathyroidism, or hypomagnesemia increase the likelihood of calcium pyrophosphate deposition.

Septic arthritis is typically an inflammatory response to a monobacterial infection. Bacterial entry into the synovial fluid triggers a release of cytokines, chemokines, and proteases that degrade cartilage and trigger hyperplasia of the synovial membrane. Toxins produced by bacteria play an additional destructive role within the joint space itself. In adults, Staphylococcus aureus is the most common pathogen (with streptococci strains also being common).