**Radiologic Investigations**

When the facet joint is disrupted, the normally posteriorly located inferior articular process moves anteriorly; this anterior movement is to the point that the inferior articular process is riding on the top of the superior articular process, a situation termed “perched facet.” For a more violent shear force, the inferior articular process moves more forward and becomes anchored anteriorly to the superior articular process. This phenomenon is referred to as a locked facet. The disruption of the facet joint leads to a misalignment of the vertebral bodies, narrowing the spinal canal and its neural content. This injury pattern leads to cauda equina injury and/or spinal cord injury if it affects the thoracolumbar junction.

These disruptive changes to the spinal column architecture are readily observed on CT scan with 3D reconstruction as well as on MRI. For visualization of trauma to the spinal cord or cauda equina, MRI is the imaging modality of choice as it also highlights the para-spinal muscles injuries. The traumatic strain and stretch results in muscle edemas, which is well demonstrated as hyper-intense signal change on STIR images. The key features in imaging assessments are the loss of apposition at facet joints and the increased inter-spinous distance. Nonetheless, disc assessment is mandatory in all cases because severe disc injuries requiring fusion may be found even in the absence of an anterior slip.

A commonly adopted method of grading spondylolisthesis is the Meyerding classification which is based on the percentage of the distance the anteriorly translated vertebral body has moved forward relative to the superior endplate of the body. Grades using this system are as follows:

- Grade I: 0% to 25% (or low grade)

- Grade II: 26% to 50%

- Grade III: 51% to 75%

- Grade IV: 76% to 100%

- Grade V: greater than 100% (also known as spondylosis)