History and physical findings will vary depending upon the type of infection acquired; nonetheless, an accurate history and proper clinical evaluation are required to reach an accurate clinical diagnosis of S. pyogenes infection.

Sore throat is usually a major complaint in the case of streptococcus pharyngitis. The most common clinical findings for Streptococcal pharyngitis include sudden onset of fever, malaise, pharyngeal exudate, tender cervical lymphadenopathy and, enlarged tonsils.

In children, impetigo is one of the most common skin infections. S. pyogenes cause non-bullous impetigo. Typically the itchy reddish rash appears around mouth or nose that becomes fluid-filled blister later on. Blisters rupture easily and are covered with honey-colored crust. The lesions are usually well-localized and affect exposed areas of the body: face and lower extremities. There are typically no systemic manifestations of the impetigo.

Patient with scarlet fever usually presents with high-grade fever, sore throat, strawberry-like tongue, and a blanchable, papular, non-confluent rash. The rash typically lasts for 7 to 10 weeks, follows by desquamation. Desquamation can only be observed on the palms and soles.

Soft tissue invasive infections due to S. pyogenes mostly present with shock and multiorgan failure.

Necrotizing fasciitis due to group A streptococcus (S. pyogenes) is a deep-seated infection of the subcutaneous tissue that causes rapid destruction of fascia and fat. Systemically or locally immunocompromised individuals are at increased risk for developing necrotizing fasciitis. Other risk factors include surgical procedures, burns, blunt trauma, minor laceration, and childbirth. Localized pain, necrosis of the infected skin lesion, swelling, redness, edema, increased heart rate, and fever are the typical manifestations of necrotizing fasciitis. In the advanced stage of the disease, a picture of septic shock can be present.