Psychosocial support should be considered when treating and managing all patients with alopecia.

**Nonscarring alopecias**

Androgenetic alopecia (male and female pattern hair loss) treatment and management is aimed at stopping hair loss, preventing or slowing further hair thinning and loss, and promoting the resumption of hair growth. Topical minoxidil and oral finasteride are the first-line treatments for males, and topical minoxidil is the first-line treatment for females. Numerous alternatives exist, including other pharmacologic treatments, platelet-rich plasma, low-level laser therapy, microneedling adjunctive therapy, and autologous hair transplantation. Treating comorbidities such as hyperandrogenism and nutritional deficiency may help maintain hair growth.

Alopecia areata therapies “aim to immunosuppress or immunomodulate the activity of the disease.”

Telogen effluvium is entirely reversible, with trigger removal and treating the underlying disorder if one is present. An essential aspect of the management is counseling the patient about the condition. Inform them that hair shedding takes 3 to 6 months to cease; therefore, regrowth can be seen 3 to 6 months after removing the trigger, but cosmetically significant regrowth may take 12 to 18 months.

**Scarring alopecias**

Due to their rarity, limited evidence exists on the efficacy of the therapeutic options for primary cicatricial alopecias. The aims of treating FFA and LPP are to stop or delay hair loss and progression in the scarring alopecic area(s) and provide symptom relief. There are no specific treatment guidelines for FFA and LPP treatment and management; however, class III or IV topical corticosteroids with or without intralesional triamcinolone acetonide injections may be considered. Additional pharmacotherapeutic treatment options are suggested, and psychological support and camouflage techniques are recommended.