There are two main goals in the evaluation of adrenal tumors. The first is to differentiate between benign and malignant masses, and the second goal is to assess if the tumors are producing excessive hormones.

CT scan is the imaging of choice for evaluation of adrenal tumors.

Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of adrenal tumors is rarely necessary for select patients with single adrenal lesion who have a history of non-adrenal malignancy without evidence of other metastasis. In these cases, a pheochromocytoma needs to be ruled out first before any invasive procedure takes place.

All patients with adrenal adenoma should be investigated for Cushing syndrome, and pheochromocytoma and patients with hypertension should additionally get investigation for hyperaldosteronism.

The initial test to diagnose Cushing syndrome is a low dose (1 mg) dexamethasone suppression test. A plasma cortisol level of less than 1.8 mcg/dL after the overnight administration of 1mg dexamethasone has the best negative predictive value for Cushing syndrome. An abnormal test is confirmed with 24-hour urine free cortisol collection and a plasma ACTH level. A four-fold elevation of 24-hour urine cortisol level is diagnostic of Cushing syndrome.

Twenty-four-hour urinary fractionated metanephrines, or plasma fractionated metanephrines, are measured to assess for pheochromocytoma.

Plasma aldosterone level and plasma renin activity measurements are indicated in patients with adrenal adenoma who have hypertension. In patients with plasma aldosterone concentration greater than 15ng/dL and aldosterone to plasma renin activity over 20, the diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating a lack of aldosterone suppressibility with sodium loading. In patients over 40 years of age, a selective adrenal vein sampling is indicated for localization purposes before surgery.