The diagnosis of echinococcal infection is made based on imaging and serology.

- Blood tests may reveal leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, mild eosinophilia, and abnormal liver function tests, but these are nonspecific and not diagnostic.

- Imaging: Ultrasonography (USG), CT, and MRI are the modalities that can help to diagnose the echinococcal infection. While the USG is convenient and comparatively inexpensive, CT and MRI have the upside of being more precise in terms of specifying the number and the location of cysts, the presence or absence of daughter cysts, and the ability to rule out any complication, thus help in guiding the clinical management.

Ultrasonography is 90% to 95% sensitive for E.granulosus. Based on ultrasonographic images, echinococcal cysts have been categorized by WHO to help in guiding the correct treatment. This categorization is as follows

- **CE1:**Unilocular anechoic cystic lesion with double line sign (active stage)

- **CE2:**Multiseptated, "rosette-like", "honeycomb" cyst (active stage)

- **CE3a:**Cyst with detached membranes (water-lily sign) (transitional stage)

- **CE3b:**Cyst with daughter cysts in the solid matrix (transitional stage)

- **CE4:**Cyst with heterogenous hypoechoic/hyperechoic contents; no daughter cysts (inactive stage)

- **CE5:**Solid plus calcified wall (inactive stage)

Radiography can detect calcifications in up to 30% of the cases. These calcifications are generally ring-like and can progress throughout all the stages of the disease.

CT is superior to USG in terms of higher sensitivity (95 to 100%), determining the size, site, and location of the cysts (extrahepatic as well), and assessing for complications.

MRI offers no major advantage over CT except in determining intra- and extrahepatic venous changes.

Serology helps in the primary diagnosis of echinococcosis as well as in the follow-up after treatment. There are numerous diagnostic serologic techniques, and among these, ELISA is the most specific and sensitive one. Few limitations to serological testing involve nonviable and calcified cysts. Also, liver cysts tend to be more seropositive than lung cysts, and serology is more specific for E. multilocularis than for E. granulosus.

Percutaneous aspiration or biopsy is preferred when other modes have proven to be inconclusive. However, because of the potential anaphylaxis and secondary spread of infection, aspiration, if required, should always be performed under the guidance of either USG or CT. If the disease involves the biliary tree, then endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) can be used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.