The thymus is functional from birth and is proportionally at its largest during infancy.

The production of T lymphocytes is a highly regulated process because it plays a vital role in central tolerance, thereby diminishing autoimmunity. The thymus is composed of a highly vascular connective tissue capsule that surrounds the organ.

The blood-thymus barrier is made up of several different layers of cells that prevent the transport of macromolecules from the vascular space into the parenchyma of the cortex. The first barrier comprises vascular endothelial cells that are surrounded by pericytes. Superficial to the pericytes and endothelial cells of the microvasculature lies the squamous thymic epithelial cells (TECs) that attach to one another by desmosomes and occluding junctions. TECs are considered to be both epithelial and reticular cells. Macrophages are present throughout the cortical parenchyma and, among other functions, are responsible for phagocytizing any macromolecules that do penetrate the blood-thymus barrier.

The cortex contains three different types of TECs, each of which are involved in antigen presentation using MHC class I or II molecules. These epithelial cells are unique in their ability to present antigen using MHC class II since this function is reserved for macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells throughout the rest of the body. There are cortical TECs (cTEC) that surround the microvasculature, lining the connective tissue of the septa and capsule, and play an important role in antigen presentation during positive selection. There are medullary TECs that play an important role in antigen presentation during negative selection. Lastly, there are stellate TECs, which form a cytoreticulum and also function in antigen presentation to immature thymocytes as well as cytokine secretion.

Barriers between blood and various organs exist throughout the body as a mechanism of preventing the spread of infection or toxins to vital organs. Examples include the blood-brain, blood-testis, blood-placenta, and blood-thymus barriers. The thymus contains an important barrier that separates the intravascular space from the rest of the thymus.

Although the thymic epithelia allow for the exchange of small molecules via their high density of both membrane transporters and intercellular junctions, they do not allow the penetration of macromolecules, including foreign antigens.

T lymphocytes arise from stem cells in the bone marrow before traveling to the thymus to mature into T cells. The thymic cortex contains immature, undifferentiated T cells that will first build a T cell receptor via V(D)J recombination. Successful completion of a T cell receptor (TCR) that can signal from the cell surface via the CD3 signaling complex results in upregulation of both the CD4 and CD8 coreceptor molecules. These cells are referred to as double-positive (DP) thymocytes due to the presence of both CD4 and CD8.

T lymphocytes first undergo positive selection in the cortex, where they get exposed to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTEC). This process ensures that the T lymphocytes contain TCRs capable of recognizing and binding to antigen displayed by MHC class I or MHC class II molecules located on the surface of TECs within the cortex. T lymphocytes that are unable to recognize self-antigen presented by MHC I or MHC II molecules are targeted for apoptosis and phagocytized by macrophages.

T lymphocytes capable of binding MHC class I or II on cTECs then migrate to the thymic medulla where they undergo negative selection. During negative selection, T lymphocytes come into contact with self-antigen presented by macrophages and cytoreticular TECs.

One of the primary mechanisms by which autoimmunity is prevented is through the expression of Aire (autoimmune regulator) genes by medullary epithelial cells. Aire genes are responsible for allowing the production of tissue-specific antigens that get presented to T-lymphocytes. Peptide antigens that result from Aire gene product function represent the self-antigens located throughout the rest of the body. Failure of Aire gene expression leads to autoimmunity.

Positive and negative selection are highly specific processes in the development of T lymphocytes, ultimately leading to the death of approximately 95% of cortical T cells.

The main purpose of the blood thymus barrier is to prevent cortical T lymphocytes from interacting with foreign macromolecules. Without the presence of this barrier, foreign antigens could cross the cortical capillaries and pose as self-antigens within the cortex. Mouse model studies have shown that intrathymic inoculation of foreign antigens leads to immune tolerance since thymocytes cannot distinguish self-antigen from the foreign antigen. Allowing foreign antigens to enter the thymus and influence thymocyte development can allow a developing T cell to become tolerant to the antigen.

The barrier has been shown to exist only in the cortex of the thymus and appears to be absent in the thymic medulla.