The elbow is a complex synovial joint which allows for significant motion and function primarily in the form of extension and flexion, however, the elbow joint also facilitates motion in the hand in the form of supination and pronation of the forearm. The main stability of the elbow joint results from the osseous articulations of the trochlea of the humerus and the ulnar olecranon. The olecranon resembles a scoop or a wrench in which a landmark referred to as the trochlear notch, fits around the trochlea of the humerus and serves as the primary pivot point during flexion and extension of the elbow joint.  The trochlear notch wraps around the humerus almost 180 degrees, while the trochlea of the humerus is wide with a central groove, this allows for a tight conforming of the two structures, adding to the stability.  After the osseous articulations of the humerus and ulna (ulnohumeral articulation), the rest of the major stability components of the elbow joint comes from two strong ligaments in the form of the medial collateral ligament (MCL) and the lateral collateral ligament (LCL).  Both the LCL and the MCL form into the joint capsule to provide further stability.

The Medial collateral ligament is a triangular-shaped ligament made up of three smaller ligaments named the anterior oblique ligament, posterior oblique ligament, and the transverse ligament, also sometimes called Cooper's ligament. The anterior oblique ligament originates from the anterior inferior surface of the medial epicondyle of the humerus and inserts onto the coronoid process of the ulna. The anterior oblique ligament is the strongest and most important medial stabilizer of the elbow joint and protects against excessive valgus forces.   The posterior oblique ligament also originates from the medial epicondyle but as its name suggests, runs posteriorly to insert onto the olecranon of the ulna.  The transverse ligament passes between the previous two, running from the coronoid process and the tip of the olecranon.

The lateral collateral ligament is also composed of three parts; the annular ligament, the lateral radial collateral ligament, and the lateral ulnar collateral ligament.  The three components of the LCL provide stability during varus stresses applied on the elbow and posterolateral rotational stability.  The lateral ulnar collateral ligament is the predominant stabilizer in posterolateral rotational structure as it crosses over the inferior aspect of the radial head, originating from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and inserting at the supinator crest of the ulna.  The annular ligament stabilizes the proximal radioulnar joint and originates and inserts at the sigmoid notch of the ulna as it wraps around the neck of the radius.

The cubital tunnel is a clinically significant space allowing the passage of the ulnar nerve.  The roof of the cubital tunnel is created by the arcuate (Osborne’s) ligament running from the medial epicondyle to the olecranon of the ulna. The floor of the cubital tunnel is made up of the MCL, while the anterior, posterior, and lateral borders are comprised of the medial epicondyle, medial head of the triceps brachii, and the olecranon respectively.

As a synovial joint, the elbow has a synovial membrane as well as a joint capsule which are separated from each other by fat pads.  These fat pads are located superficial to areas of stress.  These areas include the olecranon, coronoid and radial fossas.  During flexion and extension, these fat pads are pulled away by attachments to the brachialis and the triceps brachii to allow space for bony processes. A lubricating bursa, namely the olecranon bursa, facilitates triceps action. This bursa serves as a lubricating component between the olecranon process of the ulna and the triceps tendon of insertion.