The pathogenesis of focal segmental glomerular sclerosis involves a complex interplay of several cell types, including podocytes, endothelial cells, and the basement membrane. Podocytes are terminally differentiated cells that provide structural support to the glomerulus and are essential in maintaining an intact glomerular filtration barrier essential to prevent nephrotic range proteinuria. Injury and loss of podocytes result in podocyte hypertrophy of remaining podocytes to cover the glomerular capillary surface resulting in effacement and protein loss.

The proposed mechanism for podocyte injury includes viral- or toxin-mediated insult and intrarenal hemodynamic alterations, such as high intraglomerular capillary pressure and glomerular hyperperfusion. Many morphologic subsets, such as a collapsing variant (FSGS with mesangial hypercellularity), a cellular variant (endocapillary and extracapillary hypercellularity), and FSGS with tip lesions, are known.

Understanding the pathophysiology of FSGS has improved with the discovery that mutations in several proteins responsible for maintaining podocyte structure, function, or both not only result in FSGS but can predict disease characteristics, such as steroid responsiveness.

Proposed circulating factors linked to the development of FSGS include candidate molecules, such as hemopexin, cardiotrophin-like cytokine 1, and vascular endothelial growth factor. One molecule that has been extensively studied is a form of urokinase receptor (suPAR).