Nicotine works through the dopamine receptor to cause drug reinforcement. The components of the midbrain that play a pivotal role in drug reinforcement, motility, and associative motor learning include the ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra pars compacta.

According to product labeling, varenicline binds with high affinity at α4β2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Therefore, the efficacy of varenicline in smoking cessation is presumed to be the result of varenicline’s activity at the α4β2 sub-type of the nicotinic receptors, where its binding produces partial agonist activity while preventing the binding of nicotine to these receptors. Varenicline binds to α4β2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and stimulates receptors at a lower level than nicotine. Varenicline precludes the ability of nicotine to activate α4β2 receptors and stimulate the CNS mesolimbic dopaminergic system, considered to be the neuronal mechanism underlying reinforcement and reward experienced upon addiction. Varenicline is highly selective, and it binds more potently to α4β2 receptors than other common nicotinic receptors. It decreases the craving and withdrawal syndrome that occurs with cessation attempts. Varenicline substantially lowers the stimulation of the mesolimbic dopamine system associated with nicotine addiction due to its partial agonism.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Maximum plasma concentrations of varenicline typically occur within 3-4 hours after oral administration. Varenicline exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over the recommended dosing range after single or repeated doses.

Distribution: Plasma protein binding of varenicline (less than 20%) is independent of age and renal function of the person.

Metabolism: Varenicline has minimal metabolism, with 92% of the drug excreted unchanged in the urine. The elimination half-life (t1/2) of varenicline is around 24 hours.

Excretion:  varenicline is primarily eliminated via the kidney through glomerular filtration along with active tubular secretion, possibly through the organic cation transporter, OCT2.