**Skin**

**Epidermis**

- Seborrheic keratosis (SK) appears as a greasy, "stuck on" lesion with different degrees of pigmentation. The surface can be rough and wart-like in appearance. More common in UV exposed skin. Hallmarks of these lesions that are observable with the slit lamp are (1) milia-like cysts, (2) comedo-like openings, and (3) fissures and ridges.

- Dermatosis papulosa nigra (DPN).  DPN lesions appear in the 2nd decade of life as small round macules of variable pigmentation localized mainly on the cheeks, forehead, temples, and eyelids. Over time the lesions grow darker and larger (with elevation up to 3 mm and size up to 5 mm) and number. The lesions do not bleed or crust.

- Inverted follicular keratosis. A solitary papillary or nodular lesion that is keratotic and may have pigmentation, usually at the margin of the upper eyelid. It often looks similar to squamous cell carcinoma.

- Verruca vulgaris appears as a discrete elevated papillomatous, hyperkeratotic, and acanthotic lesion often on the eyelid margin, is non-pigmented and may have a digitated surface. Of the many types of warts, the filiform type tends to cause warts on the eyelids and face. This type is caused by human papillomavirus (HPV), and in the case of filiform warts, pronounced elongated papillomatous projections are present.

- Molluscum contagiosum lesions are firm, 1 to 10 mm in size, pearly to flesh-colored, dome-shaped lesions with a central umbilication that often contains a central core containing live viral particles. When lesions are close to the ocular surface, chronic follicular conjunctivitis can result from viral shedding.

- Squamous papilloma (acrochordon or skin tag) - This is a lesion often with a stalk and keratinized surface that appears polypoid and is generally not solitary. It occurs more frequently in areas where skin layers rub against each other (e.g., eyelids, groin, armpits, neck). When the stalk is twisted, the lesion may infarct, which will cause a darkening of the lesion.

- Epidermal inclusion cysts/milia. An elevated, lightly colored, smooth lesion exhibiting slow growth with a central pore. Small cysts that are 1 to 2 mm are called milia.

- Cutaneous dermoid cyst. Usually solitary and on the forehead or, when on the eyelids, usually closer to the eyebrow. The average size is 10 to 40 mm, and the lesion may not move freely as it is often attached to the periosteum.

- Keratoacanthoma originates at the base of the lashes or other hair on the eyelid in the upper portion of the hair follicle (infundibulum). It is a fast-growing nodule with a central keratin plug surrounded by rolled margins. The lesion grows rapidly for 6 to 8 weeks, followed by weeks to months of no growth and stable appearance. The lesion often will involute leaving a scar.

- Cutaneous horn describes a hyperkeratotic well-circumscribed lesion that is at least twice as high as it is wide at the base of the lesion. Current categorization is based on the underlying cause. On the eyelid, possible causes are epidermoid cyst, squamous cell carcinoma, verruca vulgaris, and others. Underlying benign lesions tend to be associated with slower growth, with the final size attained in months to years. Faster growth rate and pain are associated with underlying malignancy.

**Melanocytic**

- Ephelis (freckles) is a small, uniformly pigmented, well-circumscribed macular lesion present on sun-exposed areas, including the eyelids or conjunctiva. Ephelides develop in early childhood and will reversibly increase in size, number, and level of pigmentation based on the degree of sun exposure.

- Lentigo simplex is a small, brown, or black, flat lesion that appears similar to a junctional nevus. It is not affected by exposure to sunlight and is not more prevalent in sun-exposed areas.

- Solar lentigo is a lesion of variable size, light to dark brown, that develops over time in sun-exposed areas of the body. This lesion is also called "sunspots," "liver spots," or "age spots."

- Nevi
- Congenital

- Split nevus (also known as a "kissing nevus") is a compound nevus located on the upper and lower eyelid.
- Oculodermal melanocytosis (ODM, nevus of Ota) is a flat, blue-to-gray, lesion of the eyelid and periorbital skin and a change of the color of the sclera to blue. It is almost always unilateral.
- Giant hairy pigmented nevus is a flat dark nevus, often covered with hair, that appears in childhood. It will keep growing until it is 40 cm or larger. It can be on the face but is usually on the trunk.
- Mongolian spot nevus present at birth or soon after, 2 to 8 cm in size, flat, blue to blue-gray, with irregular, poorly distinguished edges, can be on the face but usually on the trunk.
- Blue nevus is dark blue, smooth, dome-shaped, and round. The common blue nevus is smaller, and the cellular blue nevus is larger than 1 cm.


-   Acquired

- Spitz: pink and dome-shaped, grows rapidly, with onset during the first two decades. More likely on the face, neck, or legs. Lesions can be other colors, including red, blue, tan, or brown.
- Reed: a variant of a Spitz nevus that is black with feathered edges.
- Melanocytic nevus

- Junctional: 1 to 10 mm flat or slightly elevated, round or oval macule with a uniform medium to dark brown pigmentation.
- Intradermal: 5 to 10 mm, elevated (round, dome-shaped, or pedunculated), non-pigmented (skin-colored), may have hair. May grow from an existing nevus.
- Compound: 1 to 10 mm, displaying a symmetrical central raised area surrounded by a flat area, with variable pigmentation that is symmetrically distributed.
- Dysplastic: Often larger than 6 mm, with a darker pigmentation pattern in the center ("fried egg" appearance). Often fits other criteria for concern of malignancy, including irregular borders and asymmetry.

**Adnexal Lesions**

- External hordeolum is a painful lesion at the base of an eyelash associated with inflammation. It presents as a painful, warm, swollen, red eyelid abscess that can have a pus point. When it does, this is called a "pointing" hordeolum.

**Hair Follicles**

- Trichoepithelioma is a lesion that originates from hair follicles in sun-exposed areas on the face and scalp. It presents as multiple (in the inherited form) or single (in the sporadic form) skin-colored lesions 2 to 8 mm in size.

- Trichofolliculoma resembles a sebaceous cyst, often with a central umbilication that contains white hair.

- Trichilemmoma resembles verruca or BCC and consists of smooth and well-defined papules or verrucous growths that may be solitary or multiple.

- Pilomatrixoma presents as a solitary, subcutaneous, pink to a purple, painless, firm nodule that grows over months to years. It is normally 15 to 30 mm in size, but much larger lesions of up to 15 cm have been reported. It is more often found in the upper eyelid or eyebrow and can resemble a chalazion. It often contains a calcified center.

**Sweat Glands**

- Apocrine hidrocystoma (cyst of Moll) is a type of sudoriferous cyst of the sweat gland at the base of an eyelash. It develops most often on the inner canthus as a clear papule or nodule of usually 1 to 3 mm but can be up to 15 mm in size, with the color varying from flesh color to blue or black. This lesion often looks tense and shiny with edges that blend into the skin. The lesion transilluminates. It does not easily rupture or involute. It is not affected by variations in temperature.

- Eccrine hydrocystoma is a type of sudoriferous cyst of the sweat glands of the skin. It is a slow-growing clear cyst that does not disappear and averages 4 to 10 mm in size. It is usually on the nasal or temporal side of the eyelid close to (but not on) the eyelid margin. It is affected by temperature.

- Trichilemmal (pilar) cysts commonly present as flesh-colored nodules that are well-circumscribed, firm, smooth, and mobile, ranging in size from 5 mm to as large as 50 mm.

- Syringomas are yellow to skin-colored papules that are usually 3 mm or smaller in size and are usually limited to the lower lids.

- Pleomorphic adenoma presents as a slow-growing subdermal mass of 2-6 cm in size.

- Eccrine spiradenoma is a flesh-colored, gray, pink, purple, red, or blue nodule about 10 mm in size that is soft and can be tender to palpation.

**Accessory Lacrimal Glands**

- Pleomorphic adenoma presents as a painless, slow-growing deep eyelid lesion that mimics a chalazion.

- Oncocytoma also presents as a painless, slow-growing deep eyelid lesion that mimics a chalazion except when on the caruncle, where it appears as a fleshy growth.

**Sebaceous Glands**

- A chalazion can present as a deep chalazion in the meibomian glands or a superficial one in the gland of Zeis. It is a painless, slow-growing nodule that may persist for months and become chronic. It can break through the tarsal plate and present as a lesion of the anterior portion of the eyelid. A chalazion of the gland of Zeis is usually located at the eyelid margin.

- Internal hordeolum (Meibomian gland) presents as a deeper, painful elevated lesion, usually more visible on the conjunctival side of the eyelid. A pus point may be present.

- Cysts of Zeis develop as a solitary lesion at the base of an eyelash. They are filled with yellow/turbid material and do not transilluminate.

- Sebaceous cysts (steatocystoma) develop as solitary lesions, usually at the nasal canthus. They are filled with yellow/turbid material and do not transilluminate. It is of note that sebaceous cysts, epidermal inclusion cysts, and pilar cysts are often confused. The latter two contain keratin and not sebum.

- Sebaceous gland hyperplasia presents as a yellow, elevated, soft nodule that generally displays umbilication.

- Sebaceous gland adenoma presents similar to sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Histopathology is used to differentiate hyperplasia from adenoma and carcinoma.

**Stromal Lesions**

Xanthelasma: Slightly elevated, usually bilateral, yellowish, lightly colored lesion located at the upper or lower medial canthus.

**Vascular Lesions**

- Pyogenic granuloma appears as a fleshy, pink to red, vascularized, and lobulated lesion found on the tarsal conjunctiva. It tends to form as a sequela to a chalazion after eyelid surgery or in the presence of an irritating foreign body such as a suture. It can grow large enough to be visible past the eyelid margin, or it may only be observed after the eyelid is everted.

- Capillary hemangiomas are usually found within the first year of life and present as a cutaneous, subcutaneous, or orbital lesion. Lesions will grow, become deeper red and become lobulated during the first year of life. Cutaneous lesions appear red, subcutaneous blue or purple, and orbital lesions can cause proptosis, strabismus, and optic nerve compression. Large eyelid lesions may cause irregular astigmatism and obstruct vision and cause amblyopia. A capillary hemangioma may get larger as well as change color with crying. Palpation of superficial lesions may cause blanching, and the lesion will have a spongy consistency. Capillary hemangiomas do not have a pulse or bruit.  Spontaneous regression often occurs after age 3 with residual scarring.

- Angiofibromas, when associated with tuberous sclerosis (TB), present with dome-shaped, skin-colored to red papules with small apical telangiectatic vessels that are densest in the maxillary area, over the bridge of the nose, around the nasolabial folds, and the chin and extending onto the lower eyelid. Early on, the lesions are erythematous and flat and will grow to elevated red to red-brown lesions that may coalesce into plaques.

- Nevus flammeus (port-wine stain) presents at birth as a flat, pink, or red homogenous skin lesion with geographic borders. It is painless, does not ulcerate or bleed, and is not warm to touch. The lesions can be single or multiple, unilateral or bilateral, and often follows the trigeminal nerve distribution. The lesion grows larger and darker, may thicken, and become more nodular with age.

**Neurogenic**

- Plexiform neurofibroma of the eyelid presents with ptosis or a classic "S-shape" of the eyelid margin. The eyelid will have rubbery linear lesions underneath the surface, and upon palpation, it can feel like there is a "bag of worms" within the eyelid. Neurofibromas associated with NF1 are usually present by age 10. Patients may develop ptosis obstructing the visual axis, proptosis, exposure keratopathy, strabismus, amblyopia, and glaucoma, especially when the plexiform neurofibroma extends into the orbit. About 50% of patients with plexiform neurofibroma will develop glaucoma in the ipsilateral eye. Between 15 and 20% of children with NF1 develop an optic nerve glioma. About 5% of plexiform neurofibromas develop into malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Optic nerve compression may affect vision as well.

- Solitary neurofibroma of the eyelid is rare and may present nonspecifically suspicious for a chalazion or with ptosis and fullness of the eyelid without pain. More common in young adults compared to the plexiform neurofibroma.

- An eyelid schwannoma presents with painless, gradual growth over months to years of a deep mass that may cause ptosis.

**Lipomatous**

- Lipomas present as soft slow-growing mass over months to years located in the zone of the eyelid that adjoins the orbital rim.