# Continuing Education Activity

Permethrin is a medication used in the management and treatment of scabies and pediculosis. It is in the synthetic neurotoxic pyrethroid class of medicine. It targets eggs, lice, and mites via working on sodium transport across neuronal membranes in arthropods, causing depolarization. This results in respiratory paralysis of the affected arthropod. This activity describes permethrin's indications, action, and contraindications as a valuable agent in treating scabies and pediculosis. This activity will also highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, monitoring, warnings, and toxicity of permethrin, pertinent to healthcare team members in the treatment of patients with scabies and pediculosis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of permethrin.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of permethrin.
- Review the indications for therapy with permethrin.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interdisciplinary team to improve outcomes for patients receiving permethrin.

# Indications

The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the use of permethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid, to treat scabies and pediculosis capitis.

A patient with classic scabies often presents with generalized pruritus that is exacerbated overnight with inflammatory papules primarily localized to the area between the fingers, flexural sites, genitalia, breasts, and buttocks with or without burrows. The clinical diagnosis of pediculosis capitis relies upon the detection of living lice.

Several studies have assessed the effectiveness and safety of permethrin when compared with other treatments for scabies. A review of clinical trials resulted in low-certainty evidence demonstrating that after two weeks of administration, 5% permethrin cream and 200 micrograms/kilogram of oral ivermectin demonstrated similar efficacy for the treatment of scabies. However, clearance may be inferior after the first week when using oral ivermectin. There was moderate-certainty evidence to conclude that the proportion of patients with one or more drug-related adverse events was similar to those treated with permethrin cream or oral ivermectin.

A recent network meta-analysis evaluating randomized controlled trials found that treatment with combined permethrin and oral ivermectin for scabies was associated with the highest cure rate; however, combination treatment was not significantly better than permethrin alone; only one randomized controlled trial included this combination treatment. This analysis also found that permethrin was less often associated with persistent itching than other included treatments, like crotamiton and lindane, but was outperformed by topical ivermectin in this category. The risk of adverse events was lowest with synergized pyrethrins, but permethrin scored better than several treatments, such as lindane and topical ivermectin. The treatment of choice for a particular patient should be guided by several factors, including efficacy, safety profile, and the ability to administer the medication properly.

Classical scabies can have treatment with 5% permethrin cream, 200 micrograms/kilogram of oral ivermectin, or 10% to 25% benzyl benzoate lotion per European guidelines.

In endemic regions and during a scabies epidemic, the large patient population can more easily receive treatment with 200 micrograms/kilogram of oral ivermectin than with topical medications.

A common first-line treatment option for pediculosis capitis is 1% permethrin lotion, which is available over the counter in many countries.

Concerning pediculosis, pediculicide product labels only address their use to treat pediculosis capitis. Treatment of pediculosis corporis relies upon good personal hygiene and appropriate washing of clothes, but a topical pediculicide could aid in treatment, as well.

# Mechanism of Action

Permethrin is a neurotoxic synthetic pyrethroid. It targets eggs, lice, and mites.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Topical permethrin is associated with limited dermal or systemic absorption.

**Distribution:**Pharmacokinetic distribution property has not been examined despite its widespread use. Hence a study was conducted in 2019 to assess the plasma protein and lipoprotein Binding of Cis- and Trans-Permethrin and Deltamethrin in adult humans and rats. The study revealed that pyrethroid has high plasma protein binding (90%) and lipoprotein plays a major role in binding and transport.

**Metabolism:**Permethrin quickly undergoes esterase hydrolysis and detoxification within the body.

**Excretion:**During the 72 hours after topical application, permethrin's inactive metabolites undergo nearly complete excretion into the urine.

# Administration

**Dosage Formulations:**Permetrin cream (5%), Permethrin lotion (1%), Permethrin rinse (1%)

**Classical Scabies**: 5% permethrin cream is applied topically to cool, dry skin from the patient's head to the patient's toes and under the fingernails.****Scabies rarely infests the scalp of adults, but the hairline, neck, temples, and forehead may be infested in infants and geriatric patients; therefore, the clinician should instruct the caregiver to apply 5% cream to the entire head and neck, including the scalp, temples, and forehead.

**Pediculosis Capitis**: Apply 1% permethrin to dampened hair and wash off after ten minutes with a repeat application one week later.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

- **Hepatic Impairment:**The manufacturer's labeling provides no information regarding the use in patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer's labeling provides no information regarding the use in patients with renal impairment. However, permethrin is primarily metabolized by the liver, so hypothetically it should be safe to use in patients with renal impairment.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Permethrin has not been shown to cause human risk and has been in the former FDA pregnancy category B.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**Topical permethrin is acceptable in nursing mothers as less than 2% is absorbed after topical application, and permethrin is rapidly metabolized. Extensive exposure, such as agricultural use or malaria control, might have long-term health concerns because residues can be found in breastmilk. Clinicain should instruct the patient to use only water-miscible cream, gel, or liquid products on the breast because ointments may expose the infant to increased concentrations of mineral paraffin via licking. In addition, breastmilk samples from 79 women from a study at the University of California Davis had their breastmilk examined for the presence of trans-permethrin on day 42 postpartum. The mean concentration was in the acceptable therapeutic range.

# Adverse Effects

Adverse effects reported during the treatment of scabies with permethrin include increased or new onset of pruritus, burning, or a stinging sensation. These dermatologic adverse events were mild in severity and temporary.

# Contraindications

Permethrin has not been approved by the FDA for use in infants before the age of 2 months, and limited studies have taken place to assess the use of this medication in these patients.

# Monitoring

**Scabies:**As per European guidelines, patients with scabies should return for follow-up two weeks after treatment has ended to assess for resolution.

**Pediculosis:**If symptoms of pediculosis pubis remain, patients should return for follow-up one week later to assess for remaining lice or eggs.

# Toxicity

Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, and Impairment of Fertility: Six carcinogenicity bioassays were evaluated with permethrin. No tumorigenicity has been observed in the rat studies. However, the three mouse studies saw an increase in pulmonary adenomas. In one of these studies, there was a raised incidence of pulmonary alveolar-cell carcinomas and benign liver adenomas in female mice. Permethrin exhibited no mutagenic potential in genetic toxicity studies(in vitro and in vivo). Permethrin did not have any adverse impact on the reproductive function when given orally at a dose of 180 mg/kg/day in a three-generation rat study. (Manufacturer's labeling).

In humans, permethrin's postulated lethal oral dose is 1 to 2 grams/kilogram of human body weight.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The coordination of an interprofessional team of health care providers is critical to ensure optimal health care outcomes for patients who receive therapy with topical permethrin for scabies or pediculosis. Patients with scabies or pediculosis may present to health care providers in various fields, such as primary care, urgent care, emergency medicine, pediatrics, family medicine, internal medicine, or dermatology. School nurses and health professionals may identify a child with pediculosis capitis and facilitate communication with the child's caregivers to start timely treatment.

Treatment outcomes and safety depend on the proper use of topical permethrin.

Other treatment options should be options in areas with local resistance to permethrin.