It is important to recognize that the concept of antimicrobial resistance in clinical practice is a relative phenomenon with high complexity. Engaging patients is crucial for successful antimicrobial stewardship to reduce rates of antibiotic resistance. Educating patients on what they can do to keep themselves safe is part of the discussion on improving antibiotic use. This includes raising awareness about the adverse effects of antibiotics as well as the potential consequences of unnecessary antibiotic use. Also, finding different diagnostic tools to help in guiding the antibiotic treatment is highly beneficial, such as the Overlap2 Method, a new initiative to determine the synergic effect of antibiotics on different antimicrobials. Clinical approach to antimicrobial stewardship might differ from outpatient to inpatient settings; however, all share the goal of improving antibiotic use as a core component of fighting antibiotic resistance.

Measuring the clinical significance of antimicrobial stewardship is complicated and can be assessed by clinical and economic outcomes. A recent study compared the use of continuous antibiotics versus intermittent antibiotics to manage bronchiectasis (by assessing the reduction in the frequency and duration of exacerbations) to the risks of managing antibiotic resistance and minimizing side effects demonstrated a lack of high-evidence studies assessing the impact of stewardship programs. Hence, more prospective clinical trials are needed to evaluate the impact of antimicrobial stewardship on clinical outcomes. Outcome measures to utilize are decreased in the length of stay, lower readmission rates, and shorten the period to place the patient on proper effective therapy. On the other hand, economic outcomes provide stronger results showing the benefits of such stewardship programs. Economic outcomes do not only refer to the antimicrobial expenditure, but also include the costs of the drug, microbiology, length of stay, and infectious disease specialists. More significant savings can result from improved clinical outcomes due to decreased length of stay and reduction in complications related to antibiotic use, such as with Clostridium difficile associated disease.