Transplant Patients

In addition to new infections in endemic areas, reactivations can occur in transplant patients when cell-mediated immunity decreases. Most reactivation disease occurs in the first three months after solid organ transplantation. Transmission by the donor organs results in rapid onset after surgery and results in a severe infection. Acute infections in transplant patients are likely to become disseminated. The most common sites are skin, bones, subcutaneous tissues, and meninges. Fungemia is more common in transplant recipients than in other immunocompromised patients. Diagnosis depends on the culture and identification of the fungus in tissues and body fluids. Serological tests are not helpful in this group of patients. Spherules can be identified in sputum, BAL, body fluids, and tissue biopsies. Spherules may be seen in hematoxylin and eosin stain but should be sought using silver methenamine staining.

Treatment with liposomal amphotericin B, 3 mg/kg to 5 mg/kg daily should be initiated in all transplant recipients. If there is a durable response, then the therapy can be switched to oral azole to be continued for at least 12 months or if the patient remains immunosuppressed. Chronic suppressive therapy may be used in high-risk patients, such as those with African or Filipino ancestry or those in endemic regions. In the presence of meningitis, fluconazole should be used in addition to amphotericin B. Fluconazole of 800 mg daily is recommended in cases of meningitis. Intrathecal amphotericin B may be considered if there is a failure of azole therapy. Several transplant centers in the endemic area routinely evaluate for coccidiosis infection before transplant. If the recipient had a history or evidence of infection in the past one to two years, fluconazole prophylaxis is routinely used in the first year of transplantation. If the organ donor turns out to be positive for antibodies, the recipient will receive lifelong fluconazole prophylaxis (10). Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) patients with a history of coccidiosis infection should get azole prophylaxis until complete recovery of T-cell function.