Pulmonary hypertension is a condition in which the blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs and the right side of the heart becomes elevated. This may be due to blockage, narrowing, or damage to the blood vessels of the lungs, which increases pulmonary blood pressure. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a type of pulmonary hypertension (PH) characterized by increased resistance in the pulmonary circulation, which is caused by progressive pulmonary artery remodeling and constriction of the pulmonary vasculature.

In the current era of PAH management, one-year survival rates have increased to 86% to 90% from 65% in the 1980s, and average long-term survival has increased to 6 years from 2.8 years.

This is due to the advancement of targeted medical therapy for PAH. Research that focused on phenotyping and understanding the pathophysiology of PAH at a cellular and genetic level has led to the use of precision medicine and the development of medications that may prevent or reverse pulmonary vascular remodeling associated with this disease.

Without treatment, pulmonary hypertension can slowly progress and become fatal. Treatment is primarily aimed at the reduction of symptoms and the improvement of quality of life. New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class remains an important predictor of future survival in patients. Disease progression (e.g., decline >15% in the 6-minute walking distance (6MWD) and decline in NYHA functional class) are strong predictors of mortality in PAH.

PAH-related hospitalization is associated with rehospitalization and worse survival.

Care of patients with PAH is multimodal and requires frequent nursing interventions for patient education, monitoring, and clinical assessments. A recent study reported that nurses at a specialized outpatient center treating patients with PH were highly qualified and skilled but still expressed a desire for in-depth and continued training.