**Surgical Resection**

- It is the standard of care for the treatment of GCT. As most GCTs are benign and near a joint in young adults, several authors favor an intra-lesional approach that preserves the anatomy of bone instead of resection.

- Wide resection is correlated with a decreased local recurrence risk when compared with an intra-lesional curettage and could increase the recurrence-free survival rate from about 84% to 100%.

- Resection may be the preferred option even in benign tumors when the bone salvageability by intralesional methods would cause a severe compromise in mechanical characteristics. In the so-called "expendable bones," such as the lower ulnar end, upper fibular end, excision may be the treatment of choice.

- Either in primary or recurrent cases, as the tumor involves the end of a long bone and causes significant dysfunction of the joint surface, reconstruction of the joint surface is necessary. A mega prosthetic joint replacement, a biologic reconstruction with an autograft arthrodesis with internal/external fixation, a microvascular fibula reconstruction, an Ilizarov method of bone regeneration, and an osteoarticular allograft are the options for those cases.

- In the past, GCT was treated with amputations, wide resections, or reconstructions. But having in mind that GCT is a benign yet locally aggressive tumor, a local intralesional surgical approach is appropriate in most cases. Curettage, curettage and bone grafting, curettage and insertion of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), and primary resection are among the recommended treatment options. Radiation therapy and embolization of the feeding vessels are used for pelvic and sacral tumors, which are not amenable to surgery.

- Radiotherapy is also recommended for the spinal, sacral, or aggressive tumors when complete excision or curettage is impractical for any functional or medical reasons. Intralesional curettage and bone grafting are the limb-sparing treatment of choice, which is associated with acceptable functional and oncologic outcomes. However, a simple curettage with or without a bone graft has a recurrence rate between 27 to 55%. Many surgeons choose to replace bone graft packing of the lesion with PMMA packing due to the high recurrence rate.

- Wide en-bloc resection is another option that offers the lowest recurrence rate and can be used in an expendable bone. In the proximal fibula, a wide resection without reconstruction is often performed. GCT of the distal radius is usually resected and reconstructed with an allograft or an autograft.

**Adjuvant treatments**(liquid nitrogen, phenol, or HO and argon beam coagulation) offer an excellent recurrence-free survival, especially when paired with an intralesional curettage. A successful treatment for GCT heavily relies on the aggressiveness of the intralesional curettage than on the specific adjuvant used. The adequacy of tumor removal is influenced by the tumor location, associated fractures, extensions to the soft tissue, and an understanding of the functional consequences of the resection.

**Topical or systemic bisphosphonates**like zoledronate or pamidronate can be used as a novel adjuvant therapy for GCT. Bisphosphonates induce apoptosis and limit the tumor progression by targeting the osteoclast-like giant cells.

**Denosumab**, a monoclonal antibody, is widely used to treat unresectable GCTs of bone in adults and skeletally-matured adolescents, and acts by specifically binding to RANKL.

There is no recognized effective chemotherapeutic agent available for the management of these tumors yet.