Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) that helps improve the work of breathing and oxygenation for individuals with different cardiopulmonary complaints related to primary respiratory or cardiovascular complaints. The concept of positive pressure ventilation started in the 1930s and gained momentum in the 1950s during the polio epidemic. It was not until the 1980s that noninvasive forms of CPAP were adopted to help patients with obstructive sleep apnea and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  Using CPAP in the prehospital setting gained traction in the late 90s as the primary form of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation as an alternative to endotracheal intubation or supraglottic devices. Over the past several years has become the standard of care of patients with acute respiratory distress in the prehospital setting.  Meta-analysis performed by Goodacre et al. shows that there is a reduction in mortality and intubation rates with comparison to standard care.

Initial models of CPAP used a control unit (flow generator) attached to the oxygen source to produce the necessary positive pressure. Newer models of CPAP devices deliver a specific amount of pressure based on either adjustment of a control valve (PEEP valve) or by adjusting the amount of flow that is delivered to produce the necessary positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). These newer models have all the necessary parts built into the device and subsequently, have a significantly reduced cost versus the original devices. The newer devises are smaller, cheaper and more intuitive to use.