**Instability Cascade**

Osseous and soft tissue anatomic variables can influence the inherent stability of the LHBT and soft tissue pulley system. Compromise to the soft tissue pulley system can be found in at least 4 different types of lesions. As early as the 1920s, various investigators and shoulder surgeons have proposed soft tissue injury sequences.

The exact sequence of events leading to LHBT instability varies based on the multitude of variables, including individual patient anatomy, LHBT integrity at the onset of symptoms or injury, and the degree and chronicity of concomitant shoulder pathology. The exact sequence of injury is not as important as understanding how the injured structures factor into bicipital groove complex stability. In 2004, Habermeyer and colleagues identified 4 different subtypes of soft tissue injury groups. These types were similar to those described by Braun and colleagues, noting four different types of soft tissue pulley lesions during shoulder arthroscopy.

- Type I: SGHL lesion, isolated

- Type II: SGHL lesion and partial articular-sided supraspinatus tendon tear

- Type III: SGHL lesion and deep surface tear of the subscapularis tendon

- Type IV: SGHL lesion combined with a partial articular-sided supraspinatus and subscapularis tendon tears

Bennett’s classification system subdivides biceps soft tissue pulley lesions into types I to V.

- Type I: Intra-articular subscapularis injury

- Type II: Medial band of CHL incompetent

- Type III: Subscapularis and the medial band of the CHL are both compromised; LHBT dislocates intra-articularly, medially

- Type IV: A lateral band of CHL along with a leading-edge injury of the subscapularis; Can lead to LHBT dislocation anterior to the subscapularis

- Type V: All soft tissue pulley components are disrupted

Walch classified biceps pulley lesions based on the observed LHBT instability pattern.

- Type I: SGHL/CHL injury; Superior LHBT subluxation at the proximal groove entrance; Subscapularis remains intact, preventing frank LHBT dislocation

- Type II: At least partial subscapularis injury is seen in association with the onset of pathology; Medial LHBT subluxation or dislocation

- Type III: Secondary to proximal humerus fracture; usually a lesser tuberosity fracture that is prone to malunion or nonunion

Walch popularized the term “hidden” rotator interval lesions to describe the presence of LHBT instability in the presence of an intact subscapularis muscle. The inciting injury involves compromise to the articular side of the supraspinatus tendon, with tear propagation leading to subsequent injury and compromise to the SGHL/CHL complex, specifically the medial band of the CHL. In this specific soft tissue injury sequence, the LHBT will be located anterior to the intact subscapularis muscle.

A recent study investigated concomitant bicipital groove soft tissue injuries in patients presenting with an injury to the subscapularis. The authors noted about 10% of patients maintained LHBT stability during arthroscopic examination and direct visualization. Those patients that remained stable demonstrated a maintained pulley system via the SGHL/CHL complex. However, the authors reported varying degrees of macroscopic tendinosis and partial fraying in all patients in their study.  It is reasonable to conclude that in the presence of an injury to the subscapularis, all patients will have a corresponding macroscopic lesion of the LHBT.

In the setting of at least a partial injury to the subscapularis muscle, medial LHBT subluxation can further compromise the soft tissue complex and stability. Pathologic contact can occur between the LHBT and the subscapularis on its articular side. Pathologic stress and shear forces are highest at the vulnerable critical 30-degree turning point as the tendon proximally exits the groove to head toward the labrum. Habermeyer advocated for the SGHL/CHL complex injury as essentially a mandatory pre-requisite in the setting of frank dislocation of the LHBT medially.

This far into the instability cascade, patients will often report “popping” or “locking” sensations in the anterior shoulder with various shoulder movements. In the setting of anterosuperior instability patterns, associated SLAP tear patterns can be seen in association.

**Overhead Throwing**

During an overhead throw, such as pitching in baseball, the thrower’s shoulder is brought into a position of maximum shoulder abduction and external rotation during the late cocking phase. Biceps injuries occur in this position secondary to the peel-back phenomenon. The term “thrower's shoulder” implies a pathologic constellation of anatomical changes during shoulder development, including GIRD and humeral head retroversion compared to the contralateral extremity.  Posterior capsular contractures are often present, altering the point of maximal contact forces during overhead throwing. The articular side of the supraspinatus tendon abuts between the greater tuberosity and the posterosuperior labrum. Significant shear forces cause the soft tissue pulley system to become injured.

**Subcoracoid Impingement**

Subcoracoid impingement, defined as pathologic abutment of the subscapularis tendon between the coracoid process and lesser tuberosity, has also been described as a possible reason for the degeneration of the soft tissue pulley sling and subscapularis tendon insertion. Narrowing of the coracohumeral interval, in other words, the distance between the humeral head and the coracoid tip, is related to LHB and rotator cuff abnormalities.