Once the diagnosis of H. pylori based on a history of presenting illness and physical exam findings is a possibility, studies are necessary to establish a definite diagnosis and underlying etiology further. In simple terms, the diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease in general and, more specifically, duodenal ulcers can be made directly by the visualization of the ulcer on upper endoscopy. The evaluation process will depend on what studies the patient may have had completed for the previous assessment of their symptoms. Patients who may have had radiographic imaging completed, which showed evidence of ulceration, but do not have any alarm symptoms suspicious for ulceration/perforation or obstructive pattern, may be treated without the need of endoscopy for visualization of ulcers.

Computed tomography performed for the evaluation of abdominal pain can identify non-perforated peptic ulcers. However, the majority of patients will need a referral for esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for further evaluation. Duodenal ulcers occur most frequently in the first portion of the duodenum (over 95%), with approximately 90% located within 3 cm of the pylorus and are usually less than or equal to 1 cm in diameter. Barium endoscopy is an option for patients with contraindications to EGD. Once the diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease has been made, it is vital to establish the etiology of the disease as this will help develop a treatment plan for the patient, not only acutely but also a long-term plan to help prevent a recurrence.

Given the high correlation of H. pylori coinfection in the setting of duodenal ulcers, individuals evaluated for H. pylori will need further testing for a formal diagnosis.H. pylori as part of the cause. If the patient has undergone EGD, biopsies can be obtained and further tested with a urease test and histology. Less invasive options include a urea breath test, stool antigen test, and serological tests. Serology is less common, as this can remain positive if the patient has been previously infected and does not necessarily represent active infection. The urea breath test has high specificity. However, false-negative results can occur in the setting of PPI use. Stool antigen testing can be used to establish a diagnosis and prove eradication, as it represents ongoing infection.