Blood tests are usually unremarkable; normal white cell counts, normal PCO2, and slightly elevated ESR.

There have been many case reports where individuals with a history of work-related exposure to bagasse were found to have typical radiographic changes to suggest bagassosis as the underlying cause of their disease. In such case reports, the chest radiograph demonstrated bilateral opacities, and computed tomography revealed patchy bilateral opacification, septal thickening, and ground-glass haziness. In many cases, bronchoalveolar lavage reveals lymphocytosis. In bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of patients with bagassosis, hypercellularity with neutrophilia is common. Moreover, raised levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-8, and IL-6 are also noted in the BALF of patients with bagassosis. or bagassosis and silicosis. Further investigation is required to assess the mechanisms underlying the different cellular and cytokine compositions in bagassosis.

In the acute and subacute stages of the disease, high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan shows centrilobular nodules (central or peripheral) and ground-glass opacification.

Lung biopsy is not usually warranted unless other commonly performed tests are inconclusive. Transbronchial biopsy has a fair diagnostic yield in acute and subacute stages of the disease. Guided by imaging, yield can be maximized by acquiring multiple samples (usually six or more) from the most affected areas of the lungs. Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) or surgical open lung biopsy may provide a higher yield in chronic illness or when HRCT findings are not equivocal.