Electrodiagnostic studies are an integral part of the core investigations in patients with a suspected myopathy. These studies can help establish a diagnosis of myopathy; in some cases, point towards etiology, and guide the selection of muscle when a biopsy is considered.

- Nerve conduction studies are usually normal in myopathies, except for severe distal weakness and muscle atrophy in distal myopathies when CMAP can be reduced. Another unique and specific feature is prolonged CMAP duration in critical illness myopathies.

- Typical myopathic features on needle EMG include short duration, low amplitude, polyphasic motor unit potentials with rapid recruitment. Reduced spike duration is considered the most reliable sign of myopathy.

- These findings are non-specific and can be seen not only in myopathies but also in neuromuscular junction disorders. Therefore, more detailed testing, including repetitive nerve stimulation and single-fiber EMG, must be performed when a neuromuscular junction disorder is suspected.

- Some features of needle EMG can point towards the etiology of myopathy. These features include the presence of spontaneous activity and the topographical distribution of involved muscles.

**Abnormal Spontaneous Activity**

- It has been shown that fibrillation potentials, positive sharp waves, complex repetitive discharges, and myotonic discharges are more typical for myopathies with intramuscular structural changes, including protein accumulation, vacuoles, inflammatory infiltrates, fiber necrosis, and fiber splitting.

- Polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and necrotizing myopathies are typically associated with prominent fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves in affected muscles.

- Fibrillation potentials also can be seen in some muscular dystrophies and other inherited myopathies.

- Myotonic discharges can be seen not only in myotonic disorders with clinical myotonia (myotonic dystrophy type 1 and type 2, myotonia congenita, Schwartz–Jampel syndrome), and with clinical paramyotonia (paramyotonia congenita, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis), but also in disorders where electrical myotonia can be detected without clinical myotonia (acid maltase deficiency).

**Topographical Distribution of Affected Muscles in Different Myopathies**

The most typical pattern for most myopathies is predominantly proximal muscle involvement.  The comprehensive electrodiagnostic evaluation should also include neck extensor muscles, distal muscles, and facial muscles to assess less typical patterns.

- In inclusion, body myositis, proximal muscles of the lower extremities, and distal muscles of the upper extremities usually are preferentially affected, with asymmetric weakness early in the disease course. The flexor group of the forearms (flexors digitorum and flexor carpi radialis) are commonly tested muscles to pick up myopathic changes.

- Distal predominant muscle involvement is seen in myotonic dystrophy type 1, myofibrillar myopathy, distal muscular dystrophies, and toxic neuromyopathies.

- Facial and oropharyngeal involvement is seen in myotonic dystrophy type 1, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, mitochondrial myopathies, and congenital myopathy.

- The scapulo-peroneal pattern of involvement is seen in facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, scapulo-peroneal dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy, and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) 1B and 2A.

- Neck extensor myopathy (head drop) can be seen in isolated neck extensor myopathy, myotonic dystrophy type 2, adult rod body myopathy, and amyloidosis.

In some myopathies, electrodiagnostic testing can be normal. For example, in steroid myopathy cases, the most common drug-induced myopathy, NCS, and EMG are usually normal.

EMG also has a low yield in disorders that alter mechanical but not electrical properties of the muscle, as seen in some metabolic and congenital myopathies.