Patients with traumatic shoulder subluxations should have plain radiographs of anteroposterior, scapular-Y, and axilla views done to evaluate the severity of shoulder subluxation and collateral injuries to the bones and joints. Diagnostic ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can provide the details of soft tissue injuries such as the labral tear. Computerized tomography (CT) scan is mainly indicated for traumatic shoulder dislocation to rule out subtle fractures not visible on radiographs or to assess the severity of associated fractures already noticed on the radiographs.

In atraumatic shoulder subluxations, shoulder radiographs can be arranged to evaluate the translation of the humeral head with respect to the glenoid. It may be helpful to detect some bony factors leading to shoulder instability, such as a hypoplastic/dysplastic glenoid with a flat glenoid fossa. Stress radiographs, arthrography, MRI, or arthroscopy, are not mandatory for diagnosis unless some underlying pathology is suspected.

For hemiplegic shoulder subluxation, the shoulder radiographic can be arranged to follow up on the treatment effectiveness or development of glenohumeral subluxation over time. However, palpation of the subacromial gap for grading the extent of shoulder dislocation seems to be reliable and unnecessary radiographs should be avoided. Also, diagnostic ultrasound can help to investigate the causes of shoulder pain with subluxation, such as bicipital or supraspinatus tendinosis and impingement.