In the United States and most western countries, Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. As Graves disease is autoimmune in etiology, this form of hyperthyroidism tends to manifest itself in younger populations. In the older demographic, toxic multinodular goiter is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism.

Although Graves disease and toxic multinodular goiter are the more common causes of hyperthyroidism, other causes of hyperthyroidism include iodine-induced hyperthyroidism (Jod-Basedow phenomenon), thyroid adenomas, de Quervain thyroiditis (subacute thyroiditis), postpartum thyroiditis, and factitious thyroiditis (thyrotoxicosis factitia).

Factitious thyroiditis is hyperthyroidism associated with inappropriate or excessive use of pharmaceutical thyroid hormone. Due to a well-received side effect of weight loss, thyroxine has the potential for abuse, and any history of a hyperthyroid patient should include a medication list and an assessment of possible misuse (whether intentional or unintentional).

Other sources of hyperthyroidism include ectopic foci of thyroxine-secreting tissue. The more prevalent (although rare) form of this etiology is struma ovarii, consisting of ectopic and functional thyroid tissue (often compromising greater than 50% of total mass) in the ovary.

Amiodarone or other iodine-containing medications can induce iodine-associated hyperthyroidism or thyrotoxicosis. This iodine-induced hyperthyroidism is called the Jod-Basedow phenomenon (Jod is the German word for iodine).