As its name implies, papular acrodermatitis of childhood clinically manifests as an acute, symmetric eruption of flat-topped papules in an acral distribution. These monomorphic papules most commonly occur on the extensor surfaces of the extremities. Arms are more commonly involved than legs. The face, buttocks, palms, and soles may also be affected. The trunk and scalp are relatively spared, as are the popliteal and antecubital fossae. However, the involvement of any of these areas does not preclude the diagnosis of papular acrodermatitis of childhood. The lesions are usually pale pink to flesh-colored and 1 mm to 10 mm in size. The lesions tend to be larger in younger children and smaller in older children and adolescents. Rarely, lesions may be vesicular or hemorrhagic. They are firm and discrete. Rarely, the lesions can become confluent over pressure points like knees and elbows. Koebner phenomena, the accentuation of lesions at sites of trauma, has also been reported. Mild to moderate pruritus may be present. Symptoms frequently last 2 to 4 weeks. In some cases, new lesions may continue to appear for up to 8 to 11 weeks after the onset of illness. Importantly, the appearance of the rash itself may not help to distinguish the variously associated etiologies of papular acrodermatitis of childhood; however, careful assessment of associated or antecedent symptoms is essential for recognizing possible infectious triggers that may require further evaluation or isolation. Usually, the rash resolves without any residual effects or scarring. Occasionally, hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation may persist after the rash resolves.

Fever, lymphadenitis, and other symptoms such as hepatosplenomegaly or pharyngitis may be seen in association with the rash or preceding it. This is consistent with a variety of viral triggers for this entity. There may also be a history of vaccination preceding the onset of the rash.