The etiology of spontaneous coronary artery dissection is unclear and hypothesized to be multifactorial. Since SCAD occurs predominantly in young females, including peripartum, it is hypothesized that female sex hormones, environmental stressors, or underlying arteriopathies like fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) contribute to its occurrence. FMD is a non-atherosclerotic and non-inflammatory vascular disease, common in younger women and can present with an aneurysm, stenosis, and dissection and affect the coronary circulation. A study showed that 10.5% of patients with FMD had an arterial dissection, and 2.5% had SCAD.

The case reports have demonstrated similar histologic and angiographic features of SCAD and FMD, suggesting SCAD could be a coronary manifestation of FMD.

Spontaneous coronary artery dissection is the most common cause of ACS in young women without any conventional cardiovascular risk factors. The disproportionately high incidences of SCAD in young women, including those who are pregnant, postpartum, or on oral contraceptive pills, suggests a possible role of female sex hormones. Estrogen and progesterone may cause structural changes in the vessel wall, as in other connective tissues, and make it prone to rupture or dissection.

Women with pregnancy-related spontaneous coronary artery dissection have a poor prognosis. Studies have shown they have larger infarcts, more tendency to have left main and multivessel disease, reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, cardiogenic shock, STEMI, and ventricular arrhythmias.

Studies have also shown a possible association between extreme physical or emotional stress and SCAD. One study found antecedent extreme physical stressors in 40% and emotional stressors in 24% of SCAD patients.