HIV-associated progressive polyradiculopathy occurs due to various etiologies; however, the clinical picture is similar in most cases. There is a variation in time of onset according to the etiology of the syndrome, where infectious polyradiculopathy is seen in the late stages of HIV infection, but inflammatory polyradiculopathy may be seen in the mid to late stages of HIV infection. The AIDP/GBS variant of the disease is usually seen at seroconversion.

Asymmetric progressive paraparesis, diffuse areflexia, and sphincter disturbance are cardinal features of progressive lumbosacral polyradiculopathy (PP) with or without the involvement of more distal sites of the peripheral nervous system. Progressive radiculopathy in HIV patients often presents as cauda equina syndrome, and cervical involvement is usually absent. The classical presentation of this syndrome includes a gradual progression of lower extremity weakness and numbness and often a prior diagnosis of cytomegalovirus disease.

The initial presentation involves lower back pain with acute or subacute motor weakness. This weakness is frequently accompanied by hyporeflexia or even areflexia, extensor plantar response, and loss of sphincter action. Sometimes sensory symptoms may be seen as shock-like pain in dermatomal spread occurring either spontaneously or elicited by movement. Rarely are sacral dysesthesias seen.

The involvement of the upper limbs or cranial nerves in this syndrome is rare.

A recent case series from South Africa identified a unique presentation of this syndrome which presented as acute or subacute severe lower motor neuron weakness confined to the lower limbs in patients who were ultimately diagnosed with HIV infection.