**Pharmacodynamics/Pharmacokinetics**

Adult

Dofetilide dosing is based on creatinine clearance: (CrCl greater than 60 mL/min) 500 mcg bid (CrCl 40 mL/min to 60 mL/min) 250 mcg bid; (CrCl 20 mL/min to less than 40 mL/min) 125 mcg bid; (CrCl less than 20 mL/min) contraindicated.

Pediatric

Safety and efficacy have not been established in children.

**Route of Administration**

Oral absorption is approximately 100%.

Oral bioavailability is not affected by food or antacid. Steady-state plasma concentrations are attainable within 2 to 3 days. Plasma concentrations are dose-proportional.

**Onset of Action**

Dofetilide takes 2 to 3 hours to reach maximum plasma concentration in the fasted state on a single dose. Therefore, this means it takes 2 to 3 hours for the onset of action for dofetilide.

**Duration of Action**

The half-life of dofetilide was reported to be 4.8 to 13.5 hours. The most-reported half-life in the literature for dofetilide is 10 hours. From a pharmacokinetic principle, it takes 4.5 to 5 half-lives to eliminate approximately 100% of a single dose administration of any drug. Hence, it takes 4.5 to 5 half-lives to eliminate a single dose of dofetilide from the human body, which is 45 to 50 hours. Therefore, the duration of action of a single dose of dofetilide is 45 to 50 hours.

**Distribution**

The volume of distribution: 3.1 L/kg to 4.0 L/kg, indicating that dofetilide does not get sequestered in fatty tissues.

**Protein Binding**

Plasma protein binding of dofetilide is 60% to 70%, is independent of plasma concentration, and is unaffected by renal impairment—the volume of distribution: 3.1 L/kg to 4.0 L/kg.

**Metabolism**

Fifty percent of dofetilide metabolism is in the liver into inactive metabolites**.**Dofetilide is metabolized to a small extent by the CYP3A4 isoenzyme of the cytochrome P450 system. Inhibitors of the CYP3A4 isoenzyme could increase systemic dofetilide exposure. Inhibitors of this isoenzyme (e.g., macrolide antibiotics, azole antifungal agents, protease inhibitors, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, amiodarone, cannabinoids, diltiazem, grapefruit juice, nefazodone, norfloxacin, quinine, zafirlukast) should be cautiously coadministered with Tikosyn as they can potentially increase dofetilide levels. Dofetilide is not an inhibitor of CYP3A4 or other cytochrome P450 isoenzymes and is not expected to increase levels of drugs metabolized by CYP3A4.

**Clearance**

Renal

Excretion of about 80% of a single dose of dofetilide is in urine, with 80% as unchanged drug and the remaining 20% consisting of inactive or minimally active metabolites. Dofetilide gets eliminated in the kidney by cationic secretion. Inhibitors of renal cationic secretion are contraindicated with dofetilide. Also, drugs that get actively secreted via this route (e.g., triamterene, metformin, and amiloride) should be co-administered with care as they might increase dofetilide levels. The elimination half-life is 4.8 to 13.5 hours.