During the cardiac cycle, the diastole of the left ventricle occurs in four phases. Namely, isovolumetric relaxation, early diastolic rapid filling, diastasis, and atrial contraction.

Isovolumetric relaxation occurs after the aortic valve closes and the ventricle begins to relax, which lowers intraventricular pressure. Due to decreasing pressure without a change in volume status, this phase is isovolumetric. When the pressure inside the ventricle drops below that of the left atrium, blood from the left atrium forces open the mitral valve and allows blood flow into the left ventricle; this early rapid filling phase is passive, as the pressure gradient allows for rapid filling of the left ventricle. 70-80% of blood transferred during diastole occurs during this period.

The continued passive flow of blood across the mitral valve causes pressure in the left atrium and left ventricle to equalize, ceasing blood transport. This cessation of flow begins diastasis and concludes when the left atrium contracts. The final phase is the atrial contraction, also known as the atrial kick, when contraction of cardiac muscle in the atrium increases pressure, causing additional blood to flow across the mitral valve. In this last phase, 20% to 30% of the total diastolic volume crosses the mitral valve.

The contribution of the atrial kick is dependent on multiple factors. Heart rate and rhythm significantly influence flow from the atrial kick. Tachycardia shortens diastole with a staunch reduction in passive filling time, which allows the atrial kick to contribute a more substantial portion of the volume transferred. Rhythm is also fundamental, as patients in atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter do not have synchronized contractions, which reduces the quantity of volume flowed.

**Echocardiographic Evaluation of the Function of Atrial Kick**

Flow across the mitral valve can be measured using echocardiography. During ventricular diastole, the flow across the mitral valve is visualized as an "E" and "A" wave utilizing pulse wave doppler (PWD). The E wave is the flow across the MV during the early portion of diastole, and the A wave occurs during the atrial contraction (late diastole). E/A ratio is one method utilized to help evaluate diastolic dysfunction of the LV. Similar measurements can be used with tissue doppler when looking at either the lateral or septal mitral valve annulus.

**Loss of Atrial Kick**

The atrial kick may be absent due to underlying medical conditions affecting atrial systole. In atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter, the cardiac muscle fibers of the atrium contract asynchronously due to multiple or asynchronous pacemakers. These conditions can diminish the atrial contraction in two ways. First, the asynchronous contraction of the atrium inhibits complete contraction, which hinders the full force potential from being realized. Without adequate compression of the atrial blood, flow across the mitral valve is limited. The second mechanism for diminished atrial kick occurs when the atrial arrhythmia causes rapid ventricular repolarization, decreasing ventricular diastole time. This decrease in time for ventricular diastole reduced the time available for passive filling. Through either mechanism, inadequate filling of the left ventricle can cause a reduction in cardiac output, leading to syncope.

Loss of atrial kick is identifiable on an EKG through a loss of regular P waves. If fibrillation waves or the classic saw-tooth pattern of atrial flutter is present, the heart does not benefit from synchronized atrial contraction. In patients with chronic atrial fibrillation and preserved ejection fraction, increased pulse rates may be a compensatory mechanism used to overcome an otherwise reduced cardiac output state.