Methylxanthines are well-documented competitive inhibitors of the enzyme phosphodiesterase (isoenzyme types III and IV), nonselective antagonists of adenosine receptors (subtypes A1, A2, and A3), and activators of histone deacetylase (isoenzyme type II), however, the complete mechanism of action of methylxanthines is not known. Moreover, not all of these effects are achievable within the therapeutic window of the drug. The three known primary mechanisms by which methylxanthines exert their effects appear in more detail below:

Phosphodiesterase inhibition

Through non-competitive inhibition of the phosphodiesterase enzyme (PDE), methylxanthines cause an intracellular increase in levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). This signal results in bronchial smooth muscle relaxation, pulmonary vessel vasodilation, diuresis, CNS stimulation, and cardiac stimulation.

Adenosine receptor antagonist

Adenosine receptors in the basal forebrain are essential in signaling mental fatigue to the brain as adenosine accumulates and increasingly binds receptors the longer one stays awake. Methylxanthines bind these receptors with nearly identical affinity to adenosine, and this antagonism is the drug’s primary means of CNS stimulation. Methylxanthines also increase calcium uptake in diaphragmatic muscles via adenosine-mediated calcium channels, thus increasing their force of contraction.

Histone deacetylase activator

During inflammation, histone deacetylase becomes a key regulator of inflammatory mediators. An enzyme called phosphoinisitide-3-kinase-delta prevents recruitment of histone deacetylase to sites of inflammation, and methylxanthines have more recently shown to inhibit phosphoinisitide-3-kinase-delta. Increased recruitment of histone deacetylase to areas of inflammation prevents the transcription of genes for inflammatory mediators and thus exerts an anti-inflammatory effect.