Unfortunately, many incidents of mild-moderate traumatic brain injuries in our everyday life do not even present to the emergency room or other healthcare settings, especially when they are associated with sports-related or recreation-related settings. Per the Journal of Pediatrics, cases of TBI in children of age 18 and under were believed to be caused mainly by sports and recreation-related concussions. However, the vast majority of service members and veterans experience a TBI in a non-deployed setting (diagnosed in up to 80%) due to the nature of their training or participation in sports and leisure activities.

The American Journal of Psychiatry published a study in 2015 that showed the prevalence of comorbidity of disorders among soldiers classified at T2 (3 months post-deployment) as experiencing a major depressive episode, PTSD, generalized anxiety disorder, or suicidality in the past 30 days went up from 12.9% to 16.8% at T3 (9 months post-deployment).

Apart from the obvious physical complaints, neuropsychiatric symptoms noticeably vary out of proportion with the severity of the correspondent TBI. The patients who experience post-concussion syndrome may have somatic complaints like a headache, dizziness, cognitive impairment, and neuropsychiatric symptoms like anxiety, irritability, depression, and sleep disorders. They may have frontal lobe syndrome with behaviors like labile affect, poor social judgment, and lewd behavior with loss of social graces, aggressiveness, and perseveration. These are common in up to 23% of adult patients with TBI.

Working memory is largely affected among patients with mTBI. They may also abuse drugs and experience PTSD symptoms more than the general population (up to 18% and 22%, respectively).

Psychotic disorder following traumatic brain injury (PDFTBI) occurs in 0.7% to 8.9% of persons who sustain TBI. Psychosis following TBI causes patients to have deficits: brain-injured (primarily executive), and psychotic (executive and semantic). Although infrequent, auditory hallucinations are a debilitating complication of TBI that can manifest itself 4 to 5 years after the occurrence of the TBI. The latency between traumatic brain injury (TBI) and the onset of psychotic symptoms is highly variable but typically characterized by paranoid delusions and auditory hallucinations, with visual hallucinations and negative symptoms being less common. Studies showed that PDFTBI has an additive effect on executive dysfunction among TBI patients. Significant executive dysfunction was evident in patients with PFTBI on all measures.