The long head of the biceps tendon (LHBT) pathologies spans a clinical spectrum, from acute tendinitis to chronic degenerative tendinopathy and spontaneous tendon rupture. In athletic populations, the physician must coordinate and work in tandem with their physical therapists to ensure the athlete's potential co-existing shoulder girdle risk factors are addressed appropriately. In throwers, it is critical to recognize that poor trunk control, scapular dyskinesia, shoulder girdle atrophy, and muscular imbalances all can contribute to the proximal biceps tendinitis. Thus, the comprehensive management of these injuries often involves head coaches and athletic trainers in the athletic populations, physical therapists, specialty trained nurses, general practitioners, geriatricians, sports medicine primary care physicians, and orthopedic surgery sports medicine specialists.

Failed non-operative management is an indication for proceeding with surgical treatment. Other indications for surgery include:

- Acute, primary, or associated LHBT instability and/or frank dislocation causing significant patient-reported pain and disability

- Partial-thickness tears of the LHB tendon (greater than 25 to 50%)

- LHB tendon subluxation/dislocation with associated bicipital groove soft tissue stabilizer injury; also may or may not include injuries to the subscapularis or supraspinatus muscle

The two most common surgical techniques employed include biceps tenodesis and biceps tenotomy procedures. The literature demonstrates equivalent outcomes between each type of procedure, and both techniques yield a high rate of patient satisfaction and clinical outcomes at long-term follow-up with each type of procedure. [Level I]

An interprofessional team should manage bicep tendon pathologies. Besides the orthopedic team, other team members may include a sports medicine physician, physical therapist, pharmacist, and specialty trained nurses in orthopedics and rehabilitation. There are a variety of treatments for these conditions, but physical therapy is the first-line treatment. Pharmacists should evaluate medications prescribed, drug-drug interactions, and patient compliance and communicate with the team. Specialty trained nurses assist with the education of the patient and their family and report issues to the team. [Level 5]