Nocturia is a complicated, multifactorial disorder that is often resistant to initial therapy with overactive bladder or BPH medications. Successful treatment of nocturia will require correct identification of the underlying etiology for optimal effectiveness. This cannot be reliably accomplished without a voiding diary.

**The Voiding Diary**

The key to the evaluation of nocturia is the 24-hour voiding diary. Ideally, the patient accurately records the time and amount of urine they void for a full 24-hour day, and this is continued for three consecutive days. When diagnosing nocturia and counting nocturnal voiding episodes, the last void before going to bed is excluded, but the first-morning urination is counted if the urge to urinate is what wakes the patient. For most patients, nocturia of at least 2 times, but more likely 3 times, per night or more is usually bothersome enough to warrant treatment, but the determination about the degree of bother and the need for treatment is really up to the patient.

The timing, amount, and type of fluid ingested are also helpful and should be recorded as well. Alcoholic drinks tend to act as diuretics, and caffeinated beverages can increase bladder activity. However, this degree of detail may be too complex or cumbersome for some patients. The most critical information on the voiding diary is the time of urination, and the urinary volume voided. This information, together with a post-void residual urine determination, is often sufficient to identify the type of nocturia they have.

For example, high, post-void residuals indicate bladder storage or prostate enlargement disorders. Patients with severe nocturia, who void only small amounts and have minimal post-void residual urine volumes, are likely to have bladder overactivity, especially if associated with daytime urinary urgency. Those who void large volumes are likely to have global or nocturnal polyuria, depending on whether the increased diuresis is only overnight or involves the entire day.

Despite the well-established usefulness of a voiding diary in diagnosing and evaluating nocturia, it's been estimated that only 37% of nocturia patients ever fill one out. For any serious evaluation of a patient with nocturia, a 24-hour voiding diary is critical and required. While a 3-day voiding diary is optimal, even a single 24-hour diary is extremely helpful if properly done with accurate measurements. The need for accuracy in completing the voiding diary should be carefully explained to the patient as it diagnoses the nocturia type, identifies the underlying etiology, and guides therapy. It also serves to demonstrate to patients the benefits of optimal timing of fluid intake in managing their nocturia problem.

Attention should also be given to medications and timing, particularly diuretics. It has become commonplace to see short-acting diuretics like furosemide given in the morning. These medications typically increase urinary excretion for 6 to 8 hours after ingestion. When they wear off, fluid re-accumulates in the tissues from which it originally came. After another 8 hours, these tissue spaces are full, and excess fluid is now removed by the kidneys as urine which corresponds to the overnight period if the patient has taken furosemide in the morning. This will contribute to and exacerbate nocturnal polyuria and nocturia. The optimal time to take furosemide to minimize its effect on nocturia would be 6 to 8 hours before bedtime, so the nocturnal hours would correspond to the period of expected tissue space fluid sequestration and rehydration but not to either the period of increased diuresis.

Cystoscopy and urodynamics are not generally necessary or recommended for most patients with nocturia.