A typical modern North American diet is high in saturated fats, omega-6 fatty acids, high glycemic load carbohydrates, and many artificial additives. This unhealthy diet, combined with little training in nutrition among medical professionals, is considered a significant setback in tackling these diseases. Fortunately, there has been tremendous research done in the last few decades examining the effects of dietary patterns on chronic diseases. This information is easily available to physicians online.

Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet originated in the 1990s. In 1992, the National Institute of Health (NIH) started funding several research projects to see if specific dietary interventions were useful in treating hypertension. Subjects included in the study were advised to follow just the dietary interventions and not include any other lifestyle modifications to avoid confounding factors. They found that only the dietary intervention alone could decrease systolic blood pressure by about 6 to 11 mm Hg. This effect was seen both in hypertensive as well as normotensive people. Based on these results, in some instances, DASH has been advocated as the first-line pharmacologic therapy along with lifestyle modification.

What does this diet include? DASH promotes the consumption of vegetables and fruits, lean meat and dairy products, and the inclusion of micronutrients in the menu. It also advocates the reduction of sodium in the diet to about 1500 mg/day. DASH emphasizes on consumption of minimally processed and fresh food. DASH diet has many similarities to some of the other dietary patterns which are promoted for cardiovascular health. DASH diet is a culmination of the ancient and modern world. Scientists have derived it based on certain ancient dietary principles, and it has been tailored to target some of the leading killers of modern society.

A typical serving guide for a patient following the DASH diet is as follows:

- Vegetables: about five servings per day

- Fruits: about five meals per day

- Carbohydrates: about seven servings per day

- Low-fat dairy products: about two servings per day

- Lean meat products: about two or fewer servings per day

- Nuts and seeds: 2 to 3 times per week

Following is a closer look at these recommendations.

**Carbohydrates**

Carbohydrates in the diet are mainly composed of cellulose and starches. The human body cannot digest cellulose. It is mainly present in plant fiber. Healthy starches or “carbs” have to be included in the diet, not just for the energy supply but also for the protective micronutrients. Low carb diets are not as healthy as that may lead to decreased caloric intake than recommended or consumption of unhealthy fats as a substitute.

Healthy carbohydrates included under DASH include:

- 
Green leafy vegetables: kale, broccoli, spinach, collards, mustards

- 
Whole grains: cracked wheat, millets, oats

- 
Low glycemic index fruits

- 
Legumes and beans

**Fats**

Fats have been a prime suspect for some time now in the development of the chronic disease epidemic. However, research has now shown otherwise. Fats are now classified as good fats and bad fats.

Good fats prevent inflammation, provide essential fatty acids, and promote overall health. When consumed in moderation, these fats have been shown to increase HDL and lower small dense LDL particles. Some of the sources of good fats also included in DASH include:

- 
Olive oil

- 
Avocados

- 
Nuts

- 
Hempseeds

- 
Flax seeds

- 
Fish rich in omega-3 fatty acids

Bad fats, which include margarine, vegetable shortenings, partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, cause an increase in small LDL particles, which promote atherogenesis.

Fats are a highly condensed source of energy and therefore have to be consumed in moderation. The serving sizes are much smaller than those for other nutrients on the DASH recommendations.

**Proteins**

DASH recommends more servings of plant proteins like legumes, soy products, nuts, and seeds.

Animal protein in the diet should mainly compose of lean meats, low-fat dairy, eggs, and fish.

Processed and cured meats are not recommended as they have shown to cause hypertension and also contain carcinogens.

DASH diet also talks about the inclusion of certain foods rich in potassium, calcium, and magnesium as these prevent endothelial dysfunction and promote endothelial, smooth muscle relaxation. Some of the foods rich in potassium include bananas, oranges, and spinach. Calcium is rich in dairy products and green leafy vegetables. Magnesium is present in a variety of whole grains, leafy
vegetables, nuts, and seeds.