The differential diagnosis for a perineal mass in a newborn girl includes periurethral cyst, ectopic ureterocele prolapse, and vaginal botryoid sarcoma. Imperforate hymen is distinguished from a periurethral cyst by identification of the urethral meatus. Ectopic ureteroceles may prolapse from the urethra and have a congested appearance. Vaginal botryoid sarcoma usually has a multilobulated appearance.

Other vaginal anomalies that result from developmental aberrancies of the urogenital sinus and Mullerian ducts must be distinguished from imperforate hymen and can also rarely occur in association with an imperforate hymen. Failure to diagnose these anomalies burdens the patient with further morbidity because the treatments are different. The main abnormalities include a transverse vaginal septum, vaginal atresia, and vaginal agenesis.

Failure of canalization at the point of contact between the urogenital sinus and the Mullerian duct results in a transverse vaginal septum. Transverse vaginal septa can be located at different levels within the vaginal (upper, middle lower). The septa may be associated with small perforations.

Vaginal atresia results from an aberrancy in the urogenital sinus, possibly recanalization, such that there is a septum or stenosis. While patients with vaginal agenesis may not be able to conceive due to hypoplasia or absence of the fallopian tubes and uterus, pregnancy is possible for women with vaginal atresia after surgical correction. On physical exam, a rectal exam can help define the extent of the genital tract in children and whether there are vaginal septa or anomalies.

Imperforate hymen can present as part of a syndrome, such as McKusick-Kaufman syndrome, characterized by polydactyly, congenital heart disease, and hydrometrocolpos in females.