Anal abscesses are the most common pathology and represent the acute phase of an infection that originates from the glands secreting mucus present between the sphincters or between the muscles surrounding and close the anus. Anal fistulas represent the chronic phase of this infection. Abscesses and fistulas are, therefore, two stages of the same disease.

When the glands between the sphincters become inflamed, it forms a collection of pus (anal abscess), making its way to the skin that lines the anus and can escape spontaneously or require a surgical incision for evacuation. The channel through which the pus has passed may persist, and the orifice outside and near the anus remains open (anal fistula). There are different anorectal spaces in which the abscess fluid can flow through from one to another:

- The perianal space is located at the level of the anal orifice. Continuous with the ischioanal space laterally and superiorly, it continues in the space between the external and internal sphincter.

- The ischiorectal space (or ischioanal space) extends from the levator ani muscle to the perineum lateral to the anal canal.

- The intersphincteric space is located between the two sphincters, internal and external; it continues inferiorly into the perianal space and superiorly into the rectum wall.

- The supra levator space (or pelvic-rectal space) is limited superiorly by the peritoneum, laterally by the pelvic wall, medially by the rectal wall, and inferiorly by the levator ani muscle.

- The deep post-anal space is found at the front of the apex of the coccyx; it is limited superiorly by the plate of the levator ani muscle and inferiorly by the anococcygeal raphe: it is the posterior part of the ischioanal fossa, where the two spaces meet.

The clinical examination usually starts by observing and palpating the skin of the perineal region posterior to the apex of the ischial tuberosities: color, swelling, and tenderness are evaluated.

A rectal exam can more directly give access to the ischiorectal space. It may reveal a cord-like thickening under the mucosa, or there may be granulation tissue or a frank abscess. It usually requires anoscopy or proctoscopy to find the location of the primary opening. Fistulography may be needed to delineate the fistulous tract. Both MRI and CT scans are done in complex cases or for recurrent lesions. Surgery is required to drain the abscess and close the fistula.