The treatment of tetanus is based on the severity of the disease. However, all patients must have the following goals of treatment:

- Early wound debridement

- Supportive management

- Antibiotic therapy

- Early intramuscular or intravenous administration of the human tetanus immunoglobulin (HTIG)

- Neuromuscular blockade

- Controlling various manifestations

- Managing complications

First-line treatment includes HTIG, which removes released tetanospasmin toxin; however, it does not affect the toxin that is already bound to the central nervous system. HTIG also shortens the course of illness and may help in reducing the severity. A dose of 500 U, either intramuscular or intravenous, is as effective as larger doses. HTIG is injected intrathecally, especially in cases of cerebral tetanus. In the case of generalized tetanus, therapeutic doses (3000-6000 U) are also recommended. Debridement of the wound will control the source of toxin production.

Although toxins are the main cause of disease, metronidazole has been shown to slow the progression of the disease. Metronidazole has been shown to decrease mortality, as well.

For more severe tetanus, patients are likely hospitalized in the intensive care unit (ICU) with sedation and mechanical ventilation, which can affect mortality and long-term sequelae. Tracheostomy is preferred because endotracheal tubes may be a stimulus for muscle spasms. Tracheostomy is also indicated in cases where intubation is required for more than 10 days.

Benzodiazepines are considered a cornerstone therapy for tetanus manifestations, and diazepam is the most frequently studied and utilized drug in this regard. It not only reduces anxiety but also causes sedation and relaxes muscles, thereby preventing lethal respiratory complications. Intravenous magnesium has been shown to prevent muscle spasms. Diazepam or midazolam, GABA-agonist benzodiazepines, are given as a continuous infusion to prevent respiratory or cardiovascular complications. To prevent spasms that last more than 5-10 seconds, diazepam should be administered IV, 10-40 mg every 1-8 hours. The dose of midazolam is 5-15 mg/hour IV.

Providers must also provide supportive care, especially for patients with autonomic instability (labile blood pressure, hyperpyrexia, hypothermia). Magnesium is often used in combination with benzodiazepines to manage these complications.

Providing high-calorie diets to compensate for increased metabolic use from muscle contractions is also important.

Management of respiratory status, cardiovascular complications, and autonomic dysfunction are essential for survival. Moreover, all patients require full tetanus toxoid immunization at recovery; having the infection does not give future immunity.