When evaluating patients with FFI, it is important to consider other prion diseases due to overlap in symptomology.

- Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) and familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (fCJD) are clinically and pathologically similar, with sCJD being more aggressive (6 months or less) with a later onset. Both primarily present with memory problems coupled with confusion followed by myoclonus and ataxia. Spongiform degeneration and astrogliosis are more profuse and widespread compared to FFI.

- Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome (GSS) presents mainly with cerebellar dysfunction with limited to no problems with sleep. Cognitive dysfunction is minimal at most and can be seen in the later stages of the disease.

- Variably protease-sensitive prionopathy can present with varying degrees of aphasia and behavioral symptoms and is best diagnosed with histopathological examination.

- Lithium toxicity

- Familial myoclonic dementia

- Diffuse Lewy body disease

- Chronic meningitis

- Dementia as a paraneoplastic syndrome

- Dementia in motor neuron disease

- Nonherpes viral encephalitis

- Hashimoto encephalopathy (or steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis [SREAT])

- Limbic encephalitis (and other paraneoplastic syndromes)

Furthermore, ruling out other causes of dementia, which may be reversible, is necessary. Some of which include but are not limited to, herpes encephalitis, paraneoplastic syndromes (including limbic encephalitis), Hashimoto encephalitis, lithium poisoning, chronic meningitis, HIV encephalopathy, and hydrocephalus.

Neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Pick disease, corticobasal degeneration, multiple system atrophy, frontotemporal dementia, and familial myoclonic dementia, irrespective of their slow progression, should be considered during evaluation.