The retroperitoneum represents a potential anatomic space that is immediately posterior to the abdominal cavity. Retroperitoneal injury is often seen in conjunction with other injuries in both blunt and penetrating trauma.

The retroperitoneum is divided into 3 anatomic regions that are utilized to guide therapy and describe the location of the retroperitoneal hematomas.

Zone 1: The central retroperitoneum from the diaphragm superiorly to the bifurcation of the aorta inferiorly. It contains the inferior vena cava, originals of the major renal visceral vessels, duodenum, and pancreas.

Zone 2: Includes both lateral perinephric areas of the upper retroperitoneum from the renal vessels medially to the lateral reflection of the posterior parietal peritoneum of the abdomen (from the diaphragm superiorly to the level of aortic bifurcation inferiorly). Organs contained include adrenal glands, kidneys, renal vessels, ureter, and ascending and descending colon.

Zone 3: Is inferior to the aortic bifurcation and includes the right and left internal and external iliac arteries and veins, distal ureter, and distal sigmoid colon and rectum.

Retroperitoneal injury can be due to blunt or penetrating trauma. Blunt trauma is caused by direct energy transfer. A penetrating injury is an injury that directly violates tissue planes.

Management of retroperitoneal injuries can range from observation to immediate operative exploration, depending on the mechanism, affected zone of injury, and organ injury severity.

**For Penetrating Injury**

- Zone 1 – Explore as this is likely a major vascular injury.

- Zone 2 – Selectively explore the kidney for active hemorrhage or an expanding hematoma. Mobilize the colon to rule out retroperitoneal colon injury and explore the ureters if in proximity to the wound.

- Zone 3 – Explore as this is likely a major vascular injury.

**For Blunt Injury**

- Zone 1 – Explore as this is likely a major vascular injury.

- Zone 2 – Explore for an expanding hematoma or one that has failed alternative methods of hemorrhage control (angioembolization). Do not explore a contained, nonexpanding hematoma.

- Zone 3 – Do not explore and utilize a method for hemorrhage control, such as intraoperative preperitoneal packing or angioembolization.