Patients with appendicitis usually first present to the emergency department with abdominal pain. The triage nurse should be familiar with the signs and symptoms of appendicitis because these patients need urgent admission and treatment to prevent perforation. However, making a diagnosis of appendicitis is not always easy.

Several guidelines exist that can help healthcare workers make a diagnosis of appendicitis. While most physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants rely on the physical exam, others may obtain an ultrasound. For questionable cases, a CT scan of the abdomen may be helpful. The American College of Radiology recommends an ultrasound in pregnant women and an MRI in inconclusive cases in the same patient population.

While the patient is undergoing investigation, the nurse should start an IV, administer fluids as ordered. In women, a pregnancy test must be done to rule out ectopic pregnancy. The surgeon should be notified. Pain medications should typically only be administered after the surgeon has seen the patient. The nurse should monitor the patient for acute changes in pain or vital signs and report to the interprofessional team. Before surgery, the pharmacist should evaluate for potential drug-drug interactions and potential drug allergies, reporting to the team any potential concerns.

Controversy also exists on how to manage an appendiceal mass or phlegmon best and when to undertake surgery. There is no longer any question that laparoscopic appendectomy is associated with minimal pain and faster recovery, but it is costly. Other studies indicate that a single small incision provides comparable results to a laparoscopic appendectomy and is cost-effective. Given these controversies, an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and management of appendicitis needs to be established in each institution to ensure that the patient has no morbidity and the management is cost-effective.

**Outcomes**

Many large series show that simple appendicitis treated either with an open or laparoscopic procedure has excellent outcomes. (Level 3)  However, more severe and complicated appendicitis is known to be associated with worse outcomes and greater utilization of resources. Further, the atypical presentation of appendicitis in pregnancy and the elderly may also make diagnosis difficult and lead to a higher incidence of complications.