- The incidence rate of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is drastically reduced when the regulatory authorities like the FDA, ACR, and the European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR) implemented precautionary guidelines that advise the radiologist to avoid high-risk GBCAs if the patient has severe renal insufficiency.

- The chelate of GBCAs is categorized into two groups; the first is linear and less stable; the other is macrocyclic, which is more stable and provides better protection.

- The lowest possible dose of GBCA to obtain the essential clinical information should be used.

- A second dose of GBCA should be delayed for several days to a week or avoided if possible.

- The diagnostic benefit of GBCAs in the imaging study must be weighed cautiously against the significant risk of developing this debilitating disease.

- There is no prophylactic agent that prevents the development of NSF.

- Patients at risk must be recognized before administering a GBCA to prevent the development of NSF.

- In patients who are in chronic hemodialysis, early hemodialysis is recommended following the GBCA MRI examination.

- High-risk GBCAs (group 1) are contraindicated for patients with acute kidney injury or severe chronic kidney disease.

- The use of GBCAs (group 2 or 3) is not contraindicated for any patient, including those with acute kidney injury or severe chronic kidney disease (eGFR less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m2).

- A systematic review found that no patient with stage 4 or 5 chronic kidney disease developed NSF after receiving a group 2 GBCAs and estimated the risk for developing NSF at less than 0.07%.

- Performing a clinically indicated MRI using a group 2 GBCA in a patient with acute kidney injury or severe chronic kidney disease despite the potentially harmful effect may outweigh the risk of developing NSF.