The pelvis is comprised of the large hip bone, the os coxae, on each side. The os coxae itself is composed of the ilium (the flat superior protuberance), ischium (the curved anterior protuberance), and pubis bones (the curved inferior protuberance). The os coxae attach anteriorly to each other at the pubic symphysis and posteriorly to each side of the sacrum, creating the sacroiliac joint. These three os coxae bones meet each other at the acetabulum, a medial structure that serves as an attachment point for the head of the femur. The pubis and ischium also articulate inferiorly at the ramal epiphyses, with their curving nature leaving an opening between them known as the obturator foramen. This foramen allows the obturator nerve to leave the pelvic cavity. Each of the pelvic bones also has many landmarks (i.e., tuberosities, notches) unique to the specific bone. The superior edge of the ilium is named the crest of the ilium, or, more commonly, the iliac crest, with a tuberosity below it on the ilium’s anterior edge known as the anterior inferior iliac spine. The ilium also has a posterior-inferior landmark known as the greater sciatic notch on it, with a subsequent lesser sciatic not being on the posterior-inferior side of the ischium. On the anterior side of the same edge of the ischium is the tuberosity of the ischium.

The primary function of the pelvic bones is to transfer the load of the upper body onto the lower limbs while standing or walking. This function takes place through the connection of the axial and appendicular skeletons at the sacroiliac joint. When a man stands upright, the center of gravity lies in the center of the body. The pelvis transmits the weight to the femur and both lower extremities. The rigid structure of these bones also protects the organs that lie within their confinements. Such organs include the bladder, rectum, urethra, and uterus in females.