Accurate pharmacy calculations prevent medical errors; underdosing a patient may lead to inadequate treatment, and overdosing a patient may lead to drug toxicity.

Additionally, pharmacy calculations require the knowledge of commonly used units; certain medications are dispensed in metric system units such as mg or mL, whereas others may be dispensed in other measurement systems.  Vitamin D, for instance, is administered in International Units.

Drugs may be administered through various routes of administration, oral, IV, IM, parenteral, etc.; these factors must be accounted for when computing calculations and consistency when converting units across different measurement systems is important in maintaining accuracy in pharmacy calculations. This issue also impacts patient care as patients may use the household and avoirdupois systems when using their medications (teaspoons and tablespoons), although the medication was dispensed in mL.  It is important to know units within each system (such as 1 pound = 16 ounces).  quantity, conversions are required between the US Customary System and the metric unit system.

- 2.2 pounds = 1 kg

- 1 solid ounce = 30 g

- 1 tablespoon = 15 mL

- 1 teaspoon = 5 mL

- 1 liquid oz = 30 mL

Conversion calculations may also occur in other measurements, such as time and temperature.

The following equations can be used to convert degrees Fahrenheit to Celcius and vice versa [7]:

**Degrees C to  degrees F:**Divide by 5, then multiply by 9, then add 32

**Degrees F to degrees C:**Subtract 32, then multiply by 5, then divide by 9

Roman numerals are often used on prescriptions as they are challenging to alter, whereas decimals are also used elsewhere in pharmacy practices. Measurements requiring decimals are usually converted into fractions; thus, familiarity with converting measurements between various systems and a foundation in basic arithmetics in terms of fractions, ratios, proportions, and percent is necessary to perform pharmacy calculations.

The **aliquot**method consists of measuring out a small amount of drug, by diluting a larger amount. Aliquoting plays an essential role as a technique to separate a larger sample into smaller parts; it is also equally as important in temperature sensitivity of drugs.

Lastly, stock solutions exist to dispense medications to patients. However, certain patients require different concentrations of drugs, and the Alliqation method exists to calculate and dispense correction concentrations of active ingredients for patients. (See Figure 2 for a schematic of the Alligation method).