The history and physical examination should look for findings consistent with uncomplicated pharyngitis and exclude other potentially serious and life-threatening illnesses. Clinical manifestations frequently include fever, tonsillar exudates, painful cervical adenopathy, pharyngeal erythema, and ear pain. Uncomplicated infectious pharyngitis, both viral and bacterial, typically is self-limited to 5 to 7 days, is not progressive, is bilateral, does not have trismus, and does not have evidence of airway obstruction (stridor).

If viral in etiology, associated symptoms often include coughing, rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, headache, and a rash. Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis typically has an acute onset, lacks signs of a viral upper respiratory infection such as a cough or rhinorrhea, and is associated with fever, tonsillar exudates, and cervical adenopathy. Pharyngitis due to the Epstein-Barr virus, otherwise known as infectious mononucleosis,  can cause headaches, fever, tonsillar hypertrophy, lymphocytosis, and atypical lymphocytes. Myalgia and fatigue are commonly reported symptoms. Infectious mononucleosis can have both anterior and posterior cervical lymphadenopathy. Patients can have persistent lymphadenopathy and fatigue for up to 3 weeks. It is important to assess for hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. If a morbilliform rash develops after amoxicillin for presumed Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci, infectious mononucleosis should be suspected.

A retropharyngeal abscess is characterized by neck stiffness and pain with neck extension. For epiglottitis, look for stridor as a symptom. F. necrophorum is the bacterium that causes Lemierre's syndrome, or internal jugular vein thrombophlebitis. If there has been orogenital contact by the patient, consider N. gonorrhoeae. An acute retroviral syndrome due to HIV may be associated with fever and non-exudative pharyngitis.