Impaired fasting glucose (IFG) is defined as fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels from 100 to 125 mg/dL (from 5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L) and impaired glucose tolerance as two-hour post glucose levels during 75-gram OGTT from 140 to 199 mg/dL (from 7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L).

The results of the OGTT as a screening test for type 2 diabetes can be interpreted as follows:

- The 2-hour plasma glucose level <140 mg/dL is considered normal

- The 2-hour plasma glucose level of 140-199 mg/dL indicates impaired glucose tolerance

- The 2-hour plasma glucose level ≥200 mg/dL indicates diabetes

For a diagnosis to be made, the test must be repeated on another day shortly afterward, yielding similar results. Alternatively, a diagnosis can be confirmed using one of the other screening tests. A single abnormal OGTT is insufficient for diagnosing diabetes or prediabetes.

The American Diabetes Association has recommended using either the one- or two-step approach at 24–28 weeks of gestation in pregnant patients not previously known to have diabetes.

**One-Step Strategy for Screening  and Diagnosis of GDM**

The diagnosis of GDM is made when any of the following plasma glucose values are met or exceeded during one step strategy:

- Fasting plasma glucose: 92 mg/dL (5.1 mmol/L)

- 1-h plasma glucose: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)

- 2-h plasma glucose: 153 mg/dL (8.5 mmol/L)

**Two-Step Strategy for Screening and Diagnosis of GDM**

If the plasma glucose level measured one hour after the 50-gram glucose load, at 24–28 weeks of gestation in individuals not previously diagnosed with diabetes, is more than or equal to 130, 135, or 140 mg/dL (7.2, 7.5, or 7.8 mmol/L, respectively), proceed to a 100-gram OGTT. The 100-gram OGTT should be performed when the patient is fasting.

The diagnosis of GDM is made when at least two of the following four plasma glucose levels (measured fasting and at 1, 2, and 3 hours during OGTT) are met or exceeded:

- Fasting plasma glucose: 95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L)

- 1-h plasma glucose: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)

- 2-h plasma glucose: 155 mg/dL (8.6 mmol/L)

- 3-h plasma glucose: 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L)

**Oral Glucose Tolerance Test in Acromegaly**

The diagnostic criteria for acromegaly are met if the growth hormone level does not suppress below 1 ng/mL. The suppression test is reported to have a false-negative rate as high as 50%.