**Differential Diagnosis**

White spot is a popular term to name a non-cavitated or initial caries lesion. However, it refers to the lesion's color and has no bearing on its activity. That is why it may be confused with other types of dental white lesions, such as dental fluorosis or molar incisor hypomineralization (MIH).

Dental fluorosis results from increased fluoride ingestion during enamel formation, leading to defects in the enamel seen as white spots or striations. Such defects are most frequently located on the vestibular face of the teeth. The primary etiology of dental fluorosis is consuming increased fluoride levels from the drinking water, a public health problem in some regions of the world. However, inappropriately fluoride supplement consumption may also cause dental fluorosis.

Molar-incisor hypomineralization (MIH) is the hypomineralization of systemic origin of one to four permanent first molars, frequently associated with affected incisors. It is a qualitative defect of the enamel that happens when ameloblasts are impaired in late amelogenesis stages: mineralization or maturation. It presents as white, yellow, or brown demarcated enamel opacities located, mainly on the vestibular face of the teeth (in the middle of the incisal third), with a clear distinction between the affected and sound enamel.

**Prognosis**

Dental caries prognosis depends on the patient's health, maintenance of oral hygiene, and the extent and severity of the lesion. Ideally, full recovery of an initial caries lesion would be achieved with the described non-operative measures and are preferred. Despite this, a minimal intervention therapy can also be used, like pit and fissure sealants using resin-based or glass ionomer agents). Dentists should only consider restoring if the initial lesion progresses.