The diagnosis and management of COP requires an interprofessional team that includes a pulmonologist, infectious disease expert, thoracic surgeon, internist, pathologist and a radiologist. Once the diagnosis is made, the treatment is complex as there are no controlled trials comparing medications or duration of treatment in COP. Treatment regimens are based on consensus guidelines. The initial clinical presentation, severity of disease, and degree of responsiveness should be considered when deciding on an appropriate regimen and duration of therapy.

Spontaneous remissions have been described for patients with mild symptoms and minimal radiographic and PFT abnormalities. The anti-inflammatory effect of macrolides particularly clarithromycin has been exploited in some reports to treat patients with mild symptoms.

The vast majority of patients with progressive symptoms and diffuse radiographic involvement are treated with oral glucocorticoids resulting in marked improvement in symptoms. Close monitoring for adverse effects of glucocorticoids is recommended.  Patients who are unable to taper off glucocorticoids or have significant side effects to glucocorticoids can be started on a steroid-sparing agent, although COP is an unapproved indication for all steroid-sparing medications.

COP is associated with excellent, long-term outcomes when treated. Spontaneous remissions are seen in about 50% of mild cases. Patients demonstrate a rapid symptomatic response to treatment and up to 80% achieve complete cure. Relapses are common but do not seem to affect long-term outcomes in terms of morbidity and mortality.