For muscle energy ribs 1 to 2, the patient is positioned supine, and the provider stands at the head of the table. Provider grasps affected rib angle underneath the patient and places the dorsal aspect of the patient’s ipsilateral wrist onto their forehead while it is turned 40 degrees away from the side of dysfunction. While the patient inhales, apply inferolateral traction to the rib angle. Ask the patient to hold their breath for 3 to 5 seconds while lifting their head up towards the ceiling, as the provider administers equal resistance. Then ask the patient to relax for 5 seconds. Engage the rib barrier and repeat above mentioned steps until a desirable outcome is achieved.

For muscle energy ribs 3 to 5, the patient is positioned supine, and the provider stands contralateral to affected ribs. Provider grasps affected rib angle underneath the patient and abducts the patient’s ipsilateral shoulder. While the patient inhales, apply inferolateral traction to the rib angle. Ask the patient to hold their breath for 3 to 5 seconds while bringing their elbow upwards as the provider administers equal resistance. Then ask the patient to relax for 5 seconds. Engage the rib barrier and repeat above mentioned steps until a desirable outcome is achieved.

For muscle energy ribs 6 to 9, the patient is positioned supine, and the provider stands contralateral to the affected ribs. Provider grasps affected rib angle underneath the patient and abducts the patient’s ipsilateral shoulder and elbow to 90 degrees with their wrist facing upwards. While the patient inhales, apply inferolateral traction to the rib angle. Ask the patient to hold their breath for 3 to 5 seconds while pushing their arm anteriorly as the provider administers equal resistance. Then ask the patient to relax for 5 seconds. Engage the rib barrier and repeat above mentioned steps until a desirable outcome is achieved.

For muscle energy ribs 10 to 12, the patient is positioned supine, and the provider stands contralateral to affected ribs. Provider grasps affected rib angle underneath the patient and abducts the patient’s ipsilateral shoulder to 180 degrees. While the patient inhales, apply inferolateral traction to the rib angle. Ask the patient to hold their breath for 3 to 5 seconds while adducting their elbow as the provider administers equal resistance. Then ask the patient to relax for 5 seconds. Engage the rib barrier and repeat above mentioned steps until a desirable outcome is achieved.