The relationship between SIS and rotator cuff syndrome (RCS) remains controversial.

**Terminology**

In order to best understand the clinical association of these conditions, one must first appreciate the constellation of symptoms implied by each clinical diagnosis and its associated terminology.

- **Rotator cuff (RC) tendonitis/tendinosis**: acute or chronic tendinopathic conditions that result from a vulnerable environment for the rotator cuff secondary to repetitive eccentric forces and predisposing anatomical/mechanical risk factors.

- 
              
- Acute injuries and chronic overuse can result in focally weakened cuff regions. These vulnerable areas evolve into PTTs or FTTs, depending on the type of eccentric forces experienced by the rotator cuff.

- **Shoulder impingement**: a clinical term often used nonspecifically to describe patients experiencing pain/symptoms with overhead activity.

- 
              
- **Internal impingement:**
              
              
- 
                  
- The term, "thrower's shoulder" refers to a common set of anatomic adaptive changes that occur over time in this subset of athletes.
                  
                  
- These adaptive changes include but are not limited to increased humeral retroversion and posterior capsular tightness. 
                  
                  
- Glenohumeral internal rotation deficit (GIRD) is a condition resulting from these anatomic adaptations, and GIRD is known to predispose the thrower's shoulder to internal impingement.
                  
                

              
              
- **External impingement**: a term used synonymously with subacromial impingement syndrome. External impingement (EI) encompasses etiologies of external compressive sources (i.e. the acromion) leading to subacromial bursitis and bursal-sided injuries to the RC.

One must also appreciate the historical and evolving theories behind the etiology and pathophysiology of the RCS clinical spectrum:

**Extrinsic Compressive Theories**

Historically, the popular theory for the etiology of RCS cited extrinsic compression factors as the primary source for the onset of the pathophysiologic cycle. Extrinsic factors consist of anatomic entities that cause direct injury to the cuff.

After Neer's proposal regarding the prevalence of extrinsic compressive sources as the primary driving force causing injury to the RC, a decade later he coined promote his theories linking RC injury, extrinsic compression, and subacromial impingement syndrome (SIS).

**Intrinsic Degenerative Theories**

Intrinsic degenerative RC theories advocate for another set of etiological factors as the primary source of pathology leading to the clinical presentation of patient-reported symptoms.  Although the opposing theories existed as early as the 1930s, with Codman and Akerson proposing intrinsic tendon degeneration of the RC,

In general, the intrinsic degenerative theories cite that cuff degeneration eventually compromises the overall stability of the glenohumeral joint. With the dynamic stability compromised, the humeral head migrates superiorly, and the subacromial space decreases in size. Thus, the cuff becomes susceptible to secondary extrinsic compressive forces which ultimately leads to cuff degeneration and tearing:

**Vascular Changes**

Several studies have identified regions of hypovascularity in the RC tendons that may lead to attritional degeneration of the cuff. Lohr et al. initially demonstrated a distal area of the SS tendon on the articular side that lacks blood vessel supply in a cadaveric study.

**Age, Sex, and Genetics**

Histologically, age-related RC changes include collagen fiber disorientation and myxoid degeneration.

**Tensile Forces**

A study by Budoff et al. proposed that the primary mode of failure of the cuff occurs as a result of eccentric tension repeatedly imposed on the RC.

RCS also can be seen in association with glenohumeral instability, PTTs and RC fatigue over time (especially with overhead overuse), and posterior capsular contractures.

**Environmental Factors**

**Sports and Occupation**

Various social and environmental factors predispose patients to develop RCS over time. Occupational mechanical risk factors include manual laborer positions requiring significant heavy lifting, constant overhead working requirements,

**Smoking**

Multiple studies in the literature have supported a dose- and a time-dependent association between smoking and RC tears. A 2010 study investigated 586 subjects with unilateral shoulder pain, noting almost two-thirds of the RC tear subgroup having a documented current or history of smoking.

**Medical Comorbidities**

Multiple medical conditions play a potential role in the development and exacerbation of RCS. Metabolic syndrome and its associated diagnoses (i.e., dyslipidemia, hypertension, hyperglycemia, and abdominal obesity) have known associations with RC pathology.

**Contemporary Etiologies for RC Pathology**

We now appreciate that most RC tears occur in the anterior half of the supraspinatus tendon, typically initiating about 1cm from its insertional footprint on the greater tuberosity.  This area has been termed the "anterior critical zone"