Proper repositioning is essential in maintaining skin integrity and is needed in patients who are unable to do this for themselves. Pressure, friction, and shear forces should be avoided during positioning. The most effective way of repositioning is to move the patient every 2 hours so that the ischemic areas can recover. This can be done with the use of pillows or wedges to keep the patient on their side and placing pillows between their legs and under their calves helps take pressure off their back, buttocks, medial aspect of the knees, and heels. Hygiene and moisture reduction are very important, especially for patients who are incontinent; excess moisture is known to cause the skin to break down, and the patient must always be kept dry. This job falls on the nursing assistants who are responsible for making sure the patient is clean at all times. If patients develop skin breakdown due to moisture, the nurse is at fault for not properly delegating and overseeing the nursing assistants.

An air mattress is a pressure-relief device that is constantly being inflated with air to prevent skin breakdown and used to prevent ulcers in patients at high risk or in patients with existing ulcers. If the patient has a Braden score of 12 or less, they should be placed on an air mattress, and a proper skin assessment should be done at least once a day or every shift. For at-risk patients, the nurse must always make sure the patient is clean and dry. Soaps, alcohol-based lotions, and hot water should be avoided when bathing a patient because these can cause the skin to become dry and leave an alkaline residue which discourages the growth of normal skin bacteria. Initiating weekly rounds is a great way to assess the wound and skin integrity. Working as a team, the wound care doctor, nurse, and nursing assistant should fully assess all patients admitted to the floor. Bedsores are evaluated and proper care determined according to need. To prevent and treat pressure ulcers, it is important to know what they are and how to assess and treat them with help from the entire wound team. Debridement of necrotic tissues will accelerate healing by preventing the growth of pathogenic organisms.

Several reports on the therapeutic efficacy of laser sessions, ultrasound, recombinant platelet-derived growth factors, and hyperbaric oxygen have shown some improvement in the healing of pressure injuries, especially stage III and above; however, more clinical trials are needed.