Initial screening tests usually include bone age, measurement of LH, FSH Testosterone, Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), 17 OH progesterone levels, and thyroid function tests.

Bone age is an initial screening test. If the bone age is advanced (greater than two standard deviations) than the chronologic age, further testing should follow.  Hormonal testing differentiates peripheral and central causes.  A baseline prepubertal LH level of greater than 0.3 IU/L is suggestive of CPP.  Levels under 0.3 are indicative of peripheral causes or benign variants. If there is a high suspicion for central causes, a GnRH stimulation test, which is considered to be the gold standard, should be done. This test is not available in the United States so that the GnRH agonist is an alternative.  FSH levels are of limited utility.  Very high levels of estradiol in females or testosterone in males associated with suppressed LH and FSH are indicative of peripheral precocity. Measurement of adrenal androgens such as dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA S) differentiates between testicular and adrenal sources of androgens.

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels should be a consideration in boys. Some germ cell tumors secrete hCG, which activates the LH receptors and increases testosterone production.

In cases of PPP, pelvic ultrasonography detects ovarian tumors or cysts in females while testicular ultrasonography in males reveals nonpalpable Leydig cell tumors.

Magnetic resonance imaging is to be performed in all cases of CPP, especially in males, to rule out a hypothalamic lesion. It is also to be considered in females who present with early pubertal changes (less than 6 years of age).