Once consent is obtained and all team members agree with the planned procedure, the patient is locally anesthetized, and the anesthetic is allowed time to take effect before initiating surgery. There is much data to support atraumatic teeth extraction whenever feasible. With the advent of new materials and technology, today’s surgeon is responsible for knowing how to extract teeth in a way that facilitates optimum preservation of bone and soft tissue. However, it is essential to note that no extraction is entirely devoid of trauma, and all forms of tooth loss result in some alveolar bone resorption.

Closed Surgical Technique: This technique involves elevating, luxating, and delivering the root segment from the coronal aspect of the socket without creating a mucoperiosteal flap. Once appropriate surgical visualization of the root segment is achieved, dental elevators can be used in succession using one of three fundamental physics concepts: (1) a wheel, (2) a lever, and (3) a wedge. When using an elevator as a wheel, a rotational arc between the elevator tip and the body of the root develops to lift the root out coronally. Cryer elevators perform well when used in this manner. When using an elevator as a class 1 lever, a fulcrum point is created between the alveolar crest and the root. This concept requires a reliable purchase point so that force can be applied without instrument slippage or misdirection.

Additionally, sectioning the root may allow for segmental delivery. A hole can be drilled in the root to allow for a crane pick or similar instrument to lever the root coronally.

Depending on the physical characteristics of the root fragment to be removed, a surgeon may attempt all three of these principles - often simultaneously - until the root mobilizes. With time, the surgeon can predictably retrieve the root with forceps. A periotome is a handy instrument to use when desiring to preserve gingival and alveolar architecture. Manual and powered versions are available. The periotome uses a thin blade-like working end wedged within the periodontal ligament space, severing the ligamentous attachment encircling the root. The periotome avoids the need for excessive cortical bone removal.

Another modern advancement in atraumatic tooth extraction is Piezosurgery. This cutting system creates osteotomies through ultrasonic vibrations, which promotes cleaner surgical cuts compared to oscillating saws or surgical burs. Piezosurgery permits the surgeon to remove only the necessary bone to facilitate root extraction. It also does not cause harm to soft tissues or neurovascular structures, unlike surgical burs or oscillating saws that obliterate hard and soft tissue indiscriminately.

Open Surgical Technique: Removal of root segments using an open surgical technique involves the reflection of a tissue flap to improve visualization and gain surgical access to the root. Removal of cortical bone is often necessary following mucosal flap reflection. Removing roots may warrant a full-thickness flap, meaning the mucosal flap of soft tissue carries an adherent periosteal layer. Although alveolar bone loss does not develop from mucosal flap reflection alone, much of the blood supply to the alveolus originates from the periosteum. It, therefore, impacts the amount of alveolar bone remaining post-extraction.

With the invention of the rotary surgical drill, the transition from simple to surgical exodontia has never been easier. Some say surgical drills are one of the greatest innovations in modern exodontia.

Endodontic File Technique: Using endodontic files to retrieve retained root segments involves the insertion of an endodontic file through the visible root canal orifice from the coronal aspect and advancing it apically until friction develops within the canal.

The type and size of endodontic file best suited for extraction in root tips have yet to be well-studied, but it has been shown that a #25 Hedstrom file generates a tremendous pullout force in all roots, regardless of the length of the root. Factors such as root length and PDL attachment significantly impact the use of this technique. Shorter root segments and tips offer the greatest likelihood of technique success. Barbed broaches, size #40 or #50 endodontic reamers, and even file sizes up to #80 were all identified as potential adjuncts.

Local Anesthetic Needle Technique: Following adequate luxation of the root segment, it may be possible to advance a traditional 25-gauge local anesthetic syringe needle through the visible root canal orifice in an apical direction.

Vertical Extraction Technique: This minimally invasive procedure involves attaching a pin within the body of the retained root (usually within the pulp chamber), followed by applying the extraction system and stabilizing it against the dental arch.

Stabilization often involves the use of putty or impression material (commonly silicone-based). The pin is attached to the extraction system using a cable or wire. With the apparatus firmly held against the arch, increasing traction forces sever the periodontal ligament attachment entirely and lift the root from the socket. This technique is best used on single-rooted teeth and individual root segments but showed reduced effectiveness in multi-rooted teeth without a previous history of root canal therapy.

The Benex device (Benex, Lucerne, Switzerland) is the most frequently cited vertical extraction system on the market today. However, some notable disadvantages of the Benex system are that the technique is time-consuming, and its mechanism is achievable only by counterbalancing against the dental arch, placing adjacent teeth and alveolar bone at risk for accidental fracture.

Regardless of the technique employed to extract the retained tooth root, the surgeon should finish the procedure with copious irrigation of the socket with sterile saline to flush away surgical debris, as they can contribute to the development of infection post-operatively. Wound edges should be re-approximated when reflecting mucoperiosteal flaps.