A detailed history and examination will often identify the source of the antalgic gait in an adult.

**History**

It is essential to ask about the site and character of the pain, as well as any exacerbating or relieving factors to narrow down your differential diagnoses. Establishing the time frame of onset will also provide important clues. A more acute onset may support a differential of trauma or an infective process, such as septic arthritis or a fracture, while a more chronic history may suggest a neoplastic, vascular, or inflammatory process, such as a sarcoma or rheumatological disease. Gaining an understanding of the patient's overall well-being may provide clues that support an infective, inflammatory, or neoplastic cause of their antalgic gait, such as reports of elevated temperature, feeling generally well, or feeling lethargic. In adults, it is important to ask about past medical history that may pose as a risk factor for an infectious etiology, such as diabetes or rheumatological disease.

In addition, certain medications may predispose patients to fractures, infections, or hemarthroses, such as chronic corticosteroid use, immunosuppressive medications, and anticoagulative medications, respectively.

**Physical Examination**

A full physical examination should be carried out, including a detailed lower limb, hip, and spine examination. Attention should be paid to any tenderness over the spinous processes, which may signal a fracture, epidural abscess, or discitis.

A complete neurovascular exam is important to assess for possible vascular causes of pain, such as claudication, as well as to identify the presence of neuropathy.