The use of radiation should be performed with caution as it can cause detrimental effects when used for an extended period. The International Committee on Radiological Protection or ICRP has proposed three recommendations before usage of ionizing radiation. The principle of justification states that the use of radiation should always do more good than harm. The principle of optimization of protection highlights the importance of using the lowest possible dose of radiation for any case. The principle of application of dose limits indicates that the dose given should never exceed the recommended dose for an individual. The environmental protection agency or EPA and the CDC have also recommended ways to protect against excessive exposure to radiation through the principle of ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable). The ALARA principle proposes three concepts that can be useful to best protect against radiation exposure. It recommends minimizing the amount of time exposed to radiation, increasing the distance from the radiation source, and shielding against radiation any time you are at risk of exposure. It emphasizes the importance of barriers such as standing behind walls during appropriate times and using personal protective equipment around radioactive sources.

When planning radiation therapy for a patient, a great deal of communication and teamwork is part of the treatment plan. Due to the danger of using high-energy radiation beams for treatment, careful planning needs to occur to minimize radiation exposure to healthy areas in the body. A radiation oncologist works with dosimetrists and medical physicists to calculate and propose the best dose and treatment plan for the patient. It can take several days to create a treatment regimen, and the result is a personalized treatment for that specific disease or tumor. Dosimetrists contribution to the treatment process involves generating the dose calculations and dose distribution of the radiation beam. Once the radiation oncologist prescribes a dose to the defined tumor volume, the dosimetrists will design and determine the treatment field, technique, and patient set up to accurately deliver the prescribed dose while avoiding vital structures.