Diagnosis of echogenic bowel in the second-trimester warrants thorough antenatal and postnatal follow-up due to the increased risk of fetal abnormalities.

**Prenatal Management**

A detailed sonographic assessment should be performed to assess for additional markers of aneuploidies. Even in the absence of additional markers, it is reasonable to offer cfDNA or quad screen.

Assessment of amniotic fluid is also helpful in detecting maternal-fetal hemorrhage as a cause of the echogenic bowel. Screening for conditions such as cystic fibrosis using parental career screening and serological testing for TORCH infections should be considered.

Serial sonographic screening throughout the pregnancy is recommended for reassessment and to monitor associated conditions such as IUGR, bowel dilatation, and polyhydramnios which are shown to be associated with adverse outcomes.

**Postnatal Management**

The Association of gastrointestinal abnormalities and other comorbidities in infants with a diagnosis of fetal echogenic bowel highlights the need for these deliveries to be referred to a center with a higher neonatal intensive care unit with pediatric subspecialty services. Postnatally, a thorough clinical examination of the infant must be performed. Abdominal X-ray, UGI series, barium, or gastrograffin enema may be required to evaluate for intestinal obstruction.

Passage of meconium and normal feeding pattern should be ensured. In certain cases, testing for congenital infection, CF screening, and karyotyping may be warranted.