Treatment of hemarthrosis includes interventions that are helpful for any patient who develops acute hemarthrosis for any reason along with specific treatments that target the underlying cause of the hemarthrosis. Initial treatment of any acute hemarthrosis includes immobilization, ice, and compression. Analgesia for pain control may be required in the acute period, especially to obtain a radiographic evaluation. Arthrocentesis with aspiration from a joint can be both diagnostic and therapeutic by reducing pressure from the effusion.

In patients receiving therapeutic anticoagulation, clinically significant hemarthrosis is rare. These patients typically tolerate arthrocentesis. In the rare event, these patients develop persistent or recurrent hemarthrosis, repletion of clotting factors with fresh frozen plasma or reversal of anticoagulation with the appropriate pharmacologic agent could be considered. In patients with recurrent postoperative hemarthrosis, revision angioplasty may be necessary. For the cases of ruptured aneurysms, vascular surgery intervention or arterial embolization may be warranted. For benign tumors, arthroscopic or surgical synovectomy is the treatment of choice to prevent recurrent episodes of hemarthrosis.

Special treatment considerations should be given for hemophiliacs presenting with acute hemarthrosis. Coagulation factor specific to hemophilia should be infused promptly at the first sign of joint bleeding (including the prodromal stiffness or tingling phase prior to pain and swelling) ideally within 2 hours of bleed identification. For bleeding into the hip, a target joint, or bleeding associated with trauma, higher factor activity levels of 80% to 100% are targeted; for hemophilia A give 50 units/kg of factor VIII and for hemophilia B given 100 to 120 units/kg of factor IX. For hemarthrosis in peripheral joints such as knees, elbows, or ankles, the factor activity level should be raised to at least 40% to 50%; for hemophilia A give 25 units/kg of factor VIII and for hemophilia B give 50 to 60 units/kg of factor IX. Medications with anti-platelet activity such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) should be avoided. Arthrocentesis is not necessary to diagnose joint bleeding in patients with known hemophilia; however, if arthrocentesis is deemed necessary to rule out a septic joint or reduce pressure from accumulated blood, it should only be performed after the factor has been infused to raise the specific factor levels. In hemophiliacs with target joints who undergo repeated hemorrhage, a short course of glucocorticoids has been found beneficial to reduce pain and swelling associated with synovial inflammation, as long as no signs of septic arthritis exist. Joint surgery for chronic synovitis or arthropathy may be indicated including synovectomy for recurrent bleeding or joint replacement for extensive joint damage.