Patients with complicated cataracts usually present with the primary underlying disease. Therefore, meticulous and timely management of the primary intraocular condition is the most important task for an ophthalmologist. If the primary disease is managed properly, the chance of developing a complicated cataract is reduced. Hence, an interprofessional team approach is required, including the primary health care providers (physicians), specialists (ophthalmologists, rheumatologists, internal medicine specialists), and nursing staff.

The patient presenting with inflammatory intraocular diseases should be started on immediate treatment to control the inflammation. The systemic condition of the patient should also be monitored. The patient should be referred to a rheumatologist for appropriate immunosuppressives in case of uncontrolled inflammation, an Internal Medicine specialist for management of the patient, and the treatment's side effects. Similarly, patients with retinal conditions as a primary intraocular disease should be referred to a Retina specialist for management. Likewise, consultation with a glaucoma specialist is required in patients with glaucomatous damage.

Nursing staff and other professionals should educate the patient about the condition any complications. They should also motivate the patient to seek treatment. The ophthalmologists, along with their team, should provide comprehensive treatment to the patient. The patient should be referred to the appropriate specialist as and when required. If the patient develops a complicated cataract, timely cataract extraction with intraocular lens implantation should be done by an ophthalmic surgeon. Hence, an interprofessional team approach is important to diagnose the primary intraocular disease and provide timely treatment. However, if the patient develops a cataract, timely surgery should be done with appropriate precautions to ensure the best visual outcome for the patient. Also, postoperatively, the patient should be kept in follow-up to tackle the primary intraocular disease, monitor complications, and treat them when required. [Level 5]