The diagnosis of Q fever is mainly based on the epidemiological circumstances, with exposure to a parturient or newly born animal being a major risk factor. The incubation period varies from 2-6 weeks.

The spectrum of severity of Q fever can vary from being asymptomatic to having severe clinical features. The clinical manifestation varies with the route of infection and the size of the inoculum. Pneumonia and hepatitis have been associated with respiratory and intraperitoneal routes, respectively, while myocarditis has been associated with high inocula.

The usual spectrum of Q fever:

- Febrile illness: Fever, usually accompanied by a headache that plateaus in 2 to 4 days and returns to normal in 5 to 14 days, is the most common outcome of the infection. The fever lasts longer in untreated patients (up to 57 days) and in elderly patients.

- Atypical pneumonia: It is characterized by nonproductive cough, fever, and minimal auscultatory findings with nonspecific findings on a chest X-ray.

- Hepatitis: It may present in three ways, including hepatitis without clinical manifestations, hepatitis with hepatomegaly, and hepatitis with granulomas on liver biopsy presenting as prolonged fever of unknown origin. These patients develop fever, abdominal pain (mostly in the right upper quadrant), nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and anorexia.

- Cardiac involvement: Myocarditis and pericarditis are seen in some of the patients with Q fever. Myocarditis is one of the major causes of death in these patients.

- Exanthema associated with fever: Though uncommon, a pink macular or papular rash, may be seen on the trunk in 5% to 21% of patients.

- Neurological involvement: Q fever may cause encephalitis/meningoencephalitis, lymphocytic meningitis, and peripheral neuropathy.