In treating chemical ocular burns, the first step is immediate and thorough decontamination of the ocular surface and adnexa. If necessary, simultaneous decontamination of the rest of the body should occur with particular attention to the oropharynx to avoid inhalational injury. Removing and discarding affected clothing may be necessary. Care must be taken to prevent contaminating care providers during the initial decontamination process. If a commercially prepared sterile irrigating or amphoteric solution is available, these can be utilized for initial ocular lavage. In most cases, tap water will be the only available option in the prehospital setting. Tap water should be used despite the risk of worsening corneal edema due to its hypotonicity relative to the cornea. Tap water meets the basic requirements of an emergency irrigating solution.

However, it must be stressed that the choice of irrigating solution is less important than the timing of treatment. Initiation of decontamination should never be delayed.

Management during the acute phase (days 0 to 7) and early reparative phase (days 8 to 21) is directed at suppressing inflammation and promoting ocular surface re-epithelialization. The severity of the injury will dictate how frequently the patient will need to be evaluated. A topical antibiotic ointment and preservative-free artificial tears may be sufficient for mild injuries. More severe injuries require frequent monitoring for complications like ocular surface exposure from adnexal scarring, corneal or stromal thinning, and elevated intraocular pressure. Topical steroids are used to decrease inflammation. Topical cycloplegic agents can be valuable to manage pain. Systemic pain medication may be needed in addition to topical therapy during the acute phase. Preservative-free artificial tears are used through all stages of healing. Systemic tetracyclines (doxycycline 20 to 50 mg PO twice daily) and vitamin C (1,000 mg PO daily) are prescribed to promote wound healing. Preservative-free topical antibiotics for infection prophylaxis may be started. Avoid aminoglycosides like topical gentamicin and tobramycin as these are particularly toxic to the corneal epithelium. Erythromycin ophthalmic ointment is well-tolerated, readily available, and a good choice for initial infection prophylaxis. Medications to decrease intraocular pressure may be needed throughout the continuum of care. Elevated intraocular pressure can impair corneal healing in the acute and early reparative phases and must be treated aggressively. Chronically elevated intraocular pressure can damage the optic nerve resulting in glaucomatous vision loss.

More severe burns will require more specialized therapies such as topical biologics, including autologous serum and platelet-rich plasma drops. Bandage contact lenses are helpful for corneal epithelial defects and are very useful to modulate pain from exposed corneal nerves. When wounds are covered with a bandage contact lens, it is imperative to include antibiotic prophylaxis against Pseudomonas. More severe burns require consideration of early amniotic membrane transplant, preferably during the first week.

During the late reparative phase (>21 days), management involves controlling inflammation and rehabilitation and reconstructing the ocular surface.