# Continuing Education Activity

Disk batteries (or button batteries) are found in many consumer electronics. The last few decades have seen an increase in demand for compact electronic products with a broadened use of larger and more powerful batteries. With the rise in the use of button batteries, the incidence of battery ingestion has also increased. Disk batteries can cause serious injury when aspirated or swallowed. Most ingestions occur in small children. This review presents the pathophysiology of disk battery ingestion, the epidemiology, presentation, and management by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of disk battery ingestion.
- Outline the presentation of a patient with disk battery ingestion.
- Review the treatment and management options available for disk battery ingestion.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care and outcomes in patients with disk battery ingestion.

# Introduction

Disk batteries (or button batteries) are found in many consumer electronics.  The last few decades have seen an increase in demand for compact electronic products with a broadened use of both more substantial and more powerful batteries.

# Etiology

Injury may occur when batteries are swallowed or aspirated. Most batteries pass through the GI tract without incident. Damage occurs when disk batteries become lodged in the nasopharynx, oropharynx, trachea, esophagus, or GI tract and lead to local injury, ulceration, perforation, or fistula formation. Damage may be acute but is often delayed, and long-term sequelae may occur days to weeks after injury and initial treatment.

# Epidemiology

56,535 button battery ingestions were reported to the National Poison Data System from 1985–2009. 68.1% occurred in children who were younger than six years and 20.3% in children who were aged 6 through 19 years.

Most cases of ingestion are seen in children under the age of six, with the peak frequency occurring in children between the ages of one and three years. The majority of ingestions are unwitnessed. More than half of ingestions occur within one-half hour after removal from the device.

There has been a nearly seven-fold increase in the incidence of severe morbidity and fatalities over the last decade.  This increase is not due to a rise in the number of ingestions overall and may reflect the increased use of larger and more powerful batteries.

# Pathophysiology

Several mechanisms of injury have been theorized and include local pressure necrosis, corrosive damage from leakage of battery contents, heavy metal toxicity, and direct electrical discharge. Electrical injuries appear to be the most likely mechanism.

Disk batteries may cause serious problems if they become lodged in the nose, ears, or GI tract. The most common location resulting in serious sequelae is the esophagus. Batteries that traverse the esophagus often pass the GI tract successfully.

# History and Physical

The clinical presentation of disc battery ingestion can vary based on the timing of ingestion, type of battery, and its location in the body.  The vast majority of patients presenting with known or suspected button battery ingestion are asymptomatic. The most common acute symptoms are nonspecific and include nausea, vomiting, dysphagia, irritability, and abdominal pain but are only present in 10% to 20% of patients.

No physical examination findings are specific for acute disk battery ingestion. Batteries in the nasal cavity may be visualized directly, but findings in patients who have batteries in the esophagus or distal structures are typically unremarkable.  With a delay in presentation, examination findings may vary greatly and depend on the location of the injury.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of suspected button battery ingestion should include plain radiographs with both anteroposterior and lateral views of the head, neck, chest, and abdomen. Button batteries have a distinctive appearance with a step-off seen in the lateral view and a "double-density" or halo sign noted on the A-P view.

# Treatment / Management

Initial management of button battery ingestion should include an assessment of the patient's age, type, and size of the battery when ingestion occurred, and where it is currently located. Low-risk, asymptomatic patients with batteries that have passed through the esophagus have a low risk of significant morbidity or mortality.  The current national guidelines (NBIH and Button Battery Taskforce) support observation and serial radiographs in 10-14 days. For higher-risk patients (less than age six or with button batteries 15 mm or greater), repeat films should be obtained in 4 days, with endoscopic removal for batteries that have not passed through the stomach.

# Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis is usually straightforward; however, disc batteries may be mistaken for a coin or an EKG lead on plain films.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Disk battery ingestion is a relatively common problem seen in the emergency department. The vast majority of disk battery ingestion is in children who merely are exploring their home environment. However, disk battery ingestion can lead to serious complications. The ingestion is best managed by an interprofessional team that can provide aggressive care that may include surgical removal. The triage nurse must be fully aware of the consequences of disk battery ingestion and quickly get the patient admitted and seen by the emergency department physician. The prognosis for those who undergo prompt removal of the foreign body is excellent. Gastroenterologists and GI nurses are needed for endoscopy. However, delayed removal may lead to perforation or necrosis of the esophagus. The key to managing disk battery ingestion is the education of the parent who should keep these items locked up safely in an unreachable area.