Quinolones are a commonly prescribed class of antibiotics because of their broad spectrum of activity and high oral bioavailability. As such, they are prone to overuse, leading to the further development of antimicrobial resistance and undesirable side effects for patients. While empiric use of quinolones is often sufficient to treat patients on an outpatient basis, physicians must follow up with patients to confirm the effectiveness of the treatment and ensure the full completion of their antibiotic course. In cases where culture and sensitivity are available, patients should be placed on more targeted antibiotics to allow for the discontinuation of quinolones.

Before prescribing a quinolone, the clinician, pharmacist, or nurse should perform a thorough, detailed history. Renal dysfunction, history of arrhythmias, and underlying medical conditions that may predispose to more adverse events with quinolone use should especially merit consideration. If a patient is at high risk for severe adverse events, clinicians should consider utilizing another antibiotic if possible. A pharmaceutical consult may be helpful to discuss alternative antibiotics, verify dosing, and identify potential drug-drug interactions. Both the physician and the pharmacist should educate the patient and their care providers on the signs and symptoms of severe side effects that can occur with quinolone use. This way, the interprofessional healthcare team can be alerted more quickly regarding severe adverse events, and the drug can be promptly discontinued and supportive care given. [Level 5]