As always, detailed history with particular emphasis on evaluating headaches is essential. Equally important is the detailed medication history and history of substance abuse. To be considered for a diagnosis of MOH, a patient must have a headache for 15 or more days monthly in a patient with an established diagnosis of a headache disorder such as migraine or tension-type. Additionally, they must be utilizing one or more symptomatic medications regularly (10 to 15 days per month, depending on the type of drug consumed) for over three months. The headache characteristics are usually typical for their primary headache types, such as migraine or tension, although they are often more intense and frequent. Evolution towards MOH is substance-specific, occurring faster in those that overuse triptans, opiates, and combination analgesics than those that overuse simple analgesics.

The most common headache diagnoses before the evolution of MOH are migraines (65%), tension-type headaches (27%), and mixed/other headaches (8%).

The central sensitization caused by MOH can lead to skin hypersensitivity and the expansion of their headache. Autonomic and gastrointestinal symptoms such as a runny nose, tearing, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea can accompany their headache. Physical examination is typically nonfocal with no neurologic deficits. A false-positive diagnosis must be excluded by obtaining a detailed history and physical examination, including headache type, frequency, and drug use, to rule out any secondary headache syndromes that may require different management.