The signs and symptoms of acoustic neuroma are attributed to the involvement of the cranial nerve VIII, compressing surrounding cranial nerves, cerebellum, brainstem, as well as raised intracranial pressure (ICP). The majority of acoustic neuromas present with unilateral hearing loss due to cochlear nerve interruption or impairment of blood supply to the nerve. Other clinical features include tinnitus, decreased word understanding, vertigo, headaches, and facial numbness. With enough growth, the mass at the CPA will eventually compress the brainstem and cause gait abnormalities. The following is a summary of the detailed clinical features.

**Due to the involvement of Cranial Nerve VIII**

- Auditory

- Hearing impairment: the most common and the earliest symptom, slowly progressive, high frequency retro-cochlear sensorineural type. May pass unnoticed due to its insidious onset. It may be examined in the physical through speech discrimination, using tuning forks of wide-range frequencies, Weber test as well as Rinne test.

- Tinnitus: also a common symptom, can be intermittent

- Vestibular: Instability while moving the head and nystagmus

**Due to compression of other Cranial Nerves**

- Facial nerve: usually minimal with late presentation except for very large tumors. Depending on the degree of engagement of the nerve, the symptoms may include twitching, increased lacrimation and facial weakness

- Trigeminal Nerve: paraesthesia in the trigeminal distribution, tingling of the tongue, impairment of the corneal reflex, and less commonly pain which may mimic typical trigeminal neuralgia

- The glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves: palatal paresis, hoarseness of voice and dysphagia

**Due to Cerebellar Compression**

- Occurs in large tumors

- Symptoms include gait ataxia and incoordination of the upper limb, and rarely dysarthria

**Due to Brainstem Compression/Torsion**

- Symptoms include pyramidal weakness, contralateral cranial nerves involvement, and nystagmus

**Due to Raised ICP**

These include, but are not limited to, headache, nausea, vomiting, increased blood pressure, decreased mental abilities, confusion, disturbance of level of consciousness, and papilledema.