The five antibody classes (as classified by heavy chain sequence) are IgM, IgD, IgG, IgE, and IgA.

Complementary-determining regions (CDRs) contained within each antigen-binding fragment (Fab) of each respective antibody play an essential role in determining the specificity and affinity with which antibodies bind their target antigens. These highly specific regions are why mAbs can be applied to target precise targets whilst limiting the effects on alternate systems. The Fc region is another region of the antibody that contains constant domains and acts to activate the immune system against the target of mAbs. These functions are mediated by the binding and activation of other Fc receptors expressed on endogenous cells and the complement system, leading to the activation of effector function.

The initial mAbs were limited not only in their utility (secondary to intolerance, as discussed above) and also in their targets. Early options focused on targeting soluble molecules (namely, cytokines), whilst novel agents have expanded to include a broader range of targets, including membrane-bound structures. For example, direct tumor elimination in oncology applications of mAbs can be accomplished through the inhibition of essential functions, such as dimerization, kinase activation, and signal cascade propagation. The dysfunction of these mechanisms can lead to reduced growth and eventual apoptosis of malignant cells. Additionally, mAb binding of enzymes can lead to elimination, and antibody-drug conjugates can be used to effectively deliver therapeutic agents directly to malignant cells.

Immune-mediated cell destruction is another mechanism by which mAbs have been applied in oncology. This strategy utilized the immune system to target malignant cells and induce destruction through a variety of mechanisms. Examples of such mechanisms include complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC), antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis (ADCP), and antibody-dependent cellular toxicity (ADCC). These mechanisms are triggered when Fc receptors expressed on endogenous cells (natural killer cells, macrophages, etc.) are activated through binding with Fc receptors on mAbs. Finally, vascular disruption is also a potential target for mAbs in oncological applications. Several mechanisms are possible, including toxin administration to vasculature or stromal cells, stromal cell inhibition, and vascular receptor antagonism. One example of an anti-vascular agent is bevacizumab, a humanized mAb that binds directly to vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and thereby defers vascular growth in tumors.

In addition to the oncological application of mAbs, another major area of application is seen in autoimmune conditions including, but not limited to, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and spondyloarthropathies. These diseases create an inflammatory environment in the body whereby CD4+ T-cells are exposed to antigens (via antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and B-cells) and activated in an autoimmune fashion.

Following activation, the T-cells attack the body's tissue to fight the antigens (in this case, autologous antigens) that were inadvertently presented to the immune system, creating an excess of pro-inflammatory molecules. mAbs have come to play an important role in the therapeutics of autoimmune diseases due to their ability to specifically target small molecules or cell surface molecules, as described above. In the native immune system, there are many complex interplays between a variety of cells and molecules in the innate and adaptive immune systems (i.e., T-cells, B-cells, APCs, cytokines) that provide ample opportunity for intervention. A common example of one such agent is Adalimumab, a human mAb that inhibits TNF-alpha (TNF-a). TNF-a is a cytokine produced by macrophages that leads to the production of multiple cytokines (i.e., interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-8, GM-CSF) and increased inflammation.

Inflamed joints in RA patients have demonstrated elevated TNF-a content within the synovium, which effectively correlates with disease activity. Adalimumab has demonstrated a reduction in inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)) and acute-phase reactants (i.e., erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP)), providing effective treatment for patients with RA who meet criteria to receive mAb therapy