The pathophysiology of most Ehlers Danlos syndrome subtypes involves heritable mutations in collagen synthesis and/or processing. The inheritance pattern of these mutations is variable, including autosomal dominant and recessive inheritance involving different mutations; however, it is worth noting that there are reports of spontaneous mutations causing identical genotypes and phenotypes. The collagen affected by these mutations is integral to every body system, from the skin to the integrity of the vasculature, and as such, the symptoms of the disease can be variable and widespread, as discussed throughout this manuscript.

The collagen defect is identified in at least six of the variants of EDS. The vascular type, sometimes referred to as type IV, is secondary to a decreased amount of type III collagen. It is caused by genetic mutations in the COL3A1 gene resulting in excessive connective tissue fragility causing arterial, uterine, and intestinal ruptures and premature death.

In Ehlers-Danlos syndrome types I and II, causative mutations may include the COL5A1, COL5A2, and tenascin-X genes and are suggested to be in the COL1A2 gene. Nevertheless, in most families with autosomal dominant EDS, the disease seems to be associated with loci that bear the COL5A1 or COL5A2 genes. A significant number of the mutations cause low levels of mRNA due to the mutant allele as a result of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.

Wenstrup et al. observed haploinsufficiency of the COL5A1 that encodes type V collagen in the classic type of EDS. 8 of 28 probands with classic EDS had complete or almost complete loss of expression of 1 COL5A1 allele. One-third of patients with classic EDS were observed to have mutations of COL5A1, resulting in haploinsufficiency. These findings indicate that the normal synthesis of the heterotypic collagen fibrils containing types I, III, and V collagen needs the expression of both COL5A1 alleles.

Autosomal recessive–type VI EDS, also referred to as the kyphoscoliotic type, manifests as neonatal kyphoscoliosis, widespread joint laxity, severe muscle hypotonia, and skin fragility at birth. Biochemically, the deficiency of lysyl hydroxylase (LH) is responsible for this type. More than 20 mutations have been identified in the LH1 gene causing LH deficiency and clinical EDS type VI.