Preoperative assessment of patients before cardiac surgery requires an appraisal of the patient and procedural risks, including a thorough history, focused physical examination, and review of diagnostic studies and pertinent consultant preoperative evaluations. Significant cardiovascular risk factors include myocardial ischemia, ventricular dysfunction with heart failure, and atherosclerotic disease of the carotid arteries or proximal aorta. The etiology of ventricular dysfunction is essential to establish optimal perioperative hemodynamic parameters. Patients can be stratified into low, intermediate, or high risk depending on their presentation. Low-risk patients are those with angina without evidence of preoperative MI scheduled for elective surgery. Intermediate risk patients are those with an acute MI who are hemodynamically stable but are usually hospitalized and might be receiving heparin and antiplatelet medications. High-risk patients are those with the highest risk of morbidity and mortality, presenting as hemodynamically unstable following an acute MI.

Perioperative stroke is common in patients with severe atherosclerosis of the proximal aorta or the carotid arteries. Other comorbidities that require investigation include diabetes, hypertension, previous cerebrovascular event, peripheral vascular disease, and history of smoking-related pulmonary pathology. Perioperative stroke risk is reducible by ensuring that the patient is appropriately taking aspirin, beta-blockers, and statins. Patients with a very high stroke risk should have an evaluation by a peripheral vascular surgeon before surgery. During cardiac surgery, thrombi or atheromatous debris can dislodge from aortic plaques during clamping and unclamping of the aorta, or by turbulent high-velocity blood flow via cannulae.

Noncardiac risk factors that cannot be modified include female gender, advanced age, NYHA IV functional status, preexisting renal insufficiency, prior transient ischemic attack (TIA), anemia, and tobacco use. Preexisting renal insufficiency can lead to acute kidney injury (AKI) in about 1 to 2% of patients, which significantly increases mortality.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) should be at their optimal baseline level of pulmonary function before the intervention. Smokers should receive counsel about preoperative cessation.