The spinal cord is composed of gray and white matter, appearing in a cross-section as H-shaped gray matter surrounded by white matter. The gray matter consists of the cell bodies of motor and sensory neurons, interneurons, and neuropils (neuroglia cells and mostly unmyelinated axons). In contrast, the white matter is composed of interconnecting fiber tracts, which are primarily myelinated sensory and motor axons. The supports of the gray matter’s “H” make up the right dorsal, right ventral, left dorsal, and left ventral horns.

Of note, the thoracic spinal cord is the only region in which lateral horns are found, which are outpouchings of gray matter containing cell bodies of sympathetic nerves. Running longitudinally through the center of the spinal cord is the central canal, which is continuous with the brain’s ventricles and filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

The white matter is organized into tracts. Ascending tracts carry information from the sensory receptors to higher levels of the CNS, while descending tracts carry information from the CNS to the periphery. The major tracts and their most defining features are as follows:

**Ascending Tracts**

- Dorsal column: contains the gracile fasciculus and cuneate fasciculus, which together form the dorsal funiculus. The dorsal column is responsible for pressure and vibration sensation, two-point discrimination, movement sense, and conscious proprioception. The dorsal column decussates at the superior portion of the medulla oblongata and forms the medial lemniscus.

- Lateral spinothalamic: carries pain and temperature information. The lateral spinothalamic tract decussates at the anterior commissure, two segments above the entry to the spinal cord.

- Anterior spinothalamic: carries crude touch and pressure information. Its decussation is similar to the lateral spinothalamic tract.

- Dorsal and ventral spinocerebellar: transmit unconscious proprioception sensory information to the cerebellum. The ventral spinocerebellar tract does not decussate, while the dorsal spinocerebellar tract decussates twice, making both tracts ipsilateral.

**Descending Tracts**

- Lateral and anterior corticospinal: involved in conscious control of the skeletal muscle. Most lateral corticospinal tract fibers decussate at the inferior portion of the medulla oblongata. In contrast, the anterior corticospinal tract descends ipsilaterally in the spinal cord and decussates at the segmental level. The lateral corticospinal tract also called the pyramidal tract, innervates the contralateral muscles of the limbs, while the anterior corticospinal tract innervates the proximal muscles of the trunk.

- Vestibulospinal: carries information from the inner ear to control head positioning and modifies muscle tone to maintain posture and balance. The vestibulospinal tract does not decussate.

- Rubrospinal: involved in the movement of the flexor and extensor muscles. The rubrospinal tract originates from the red nuclei in the midbrain and decussates at the start of its pathway.

- Reticulospinal: originates from the reticular formation housed in the brainstem, and it facilitates, influences, and supplements the corticospinal tract.

There is a laminar distribution of neurons in the gray matter, characterized by density and topography:

- Lamina I is located at the tip of the dorsal horn and is composed of loosely packed neuropils and neurons of low neuronal density.

- Lamina II is composed mainly of islet cells with rostrocaudal axes and stalked cells with dorsoventral dendritic trees. Islet cells contain gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and are thought to be inhibitory.

- Lamina III has intermediate size cells, including antenna-like and radial neurons.

- Lamina IV contains antenna-like and transverse cells, with dendrites that mainly go to Laminas II and III and whose axons are thought primarily to enter the spinothalamic tract. Lateral from lamina IV is the lateral spinal nucleus, which sends signals to lamina IV from the midbrain and brainstem.

- Lamina V and VI are composed of medium-sized multipolar neurons that can be fusiform or triangular. These neurons communicate with the reticular formation of the brainstem.

- Lamina VII is composed of homogenous medium-sized multipolar neurons and contains, in individual segments, well-defined nuclei, including the intermediolateral nucleus (T1-L1), which has autonomic functions, and the dorsal nucleus of Clarke (T1-L2), which make up the dorsal spinocerebellar tract.

- Lamina VIII consists of neurons with dorsoventrally polarized dendritic trees.

- Lamina IX has the cell bodies of motor neurons, with dendrites extending dorsally into laminas as far as lamina VI. Lamina IX also contains inhibitory interneurons called Renshaw cells, placed at the medial border of motor nuclei.

- Lamina X is the substantia grisea centralis, the gray matter surrounding the central canal. In the distal portion, lamina X consists of bipolar cells with fan-shaped dendritic trees. In the ventral portion, lamina X consists of bipolar cells with poorly ramified longitudinal dendrites.

**Key Points**

- Anterior horn: contains motor nerves

- Posterior horn: contains sensory nerves, particularly those for pain and temperature

- Lateral horn: contains autonomic nerves

- Spinothalamic tract: contains sensory nerves, particularly those for pain, temperature, and light touch

- Medial lemniscus (in the brainstem): contains nerves for vibration and proprioception

- Posterior column (in the spinal cord): contains nerves for vibration and proprioception

- Corticospinal tract: contains motor nerves