Induced hypothermia is associated with several physiologic derangements, and frequent monitoring is essential for the early detection and management of complications.

- Shivering: The Bedside Shivering Assessment Scale (BSAS) is a grading system that enables repeated quantification of shivering. It uses a four-point scale and can be easily performed at the bedside and used to guide therapy. Non-pharmacological interventions should be used as a first-line treatment since many pharmacologic agents may cause toxicity due to unpredictable pharmacokinetics, excessive sedation, and other complications. These interventions aim to suppress central thermoregulatory responses and decrease the shivering threshold and include counter-warming with air circulating blankets, hand warming, face warming, and head covering.

Drugs can suppress shivering through several different mechanisms involving various receptor types that result in the lowering of the shivering threshold, peripheral vasodilation, and/or neuromuscular blockade. The most commonly used medications are opioids, short-acting benzodiazepines, and paralytics. However, there have been studies on multiple different drug classes showing different degrees of efficacy. Many protocols advocate for the routine use of sedatives, analgesics, and paralytics. However, one study found that a combination of non-pharmacological measures and non-sedating medications were sufficient to manage to shiver in 18% of patients, without the need for oversedation and paralysis.

An optimal approach to the suppression of shivering has not been established. There is likely no approach that will be ideal for all patients, as the threshold and severity of shivering, response to different therapies, and the variations in pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of these drugs vary between patients. These variations are due to differences in age, gender, body surface area, baseline neurological injury, and other factors. This outlines the need for an algorithm that treats shivering based on severity and includes routine assessments and treatment modification. An example of this is the Columbia Anti-Shivering Protocol; this is an algorithm that uses a stepwise approach to the treatment of shivering based on hourly BSAS scores, starting with baseline, noninvasive measures for a score of 0, to neuromuscular blockade for a score of 4.

- Analgesia and sedation: The patient should have adequate analgesia and sedation throughout all phases of the therapeutic hypothermia protocol. There is currently no evidence favoring a particular sedative/analgesic during TTM. It should be noted that hypothermia alters the pharmacokinetic properties of these drugs, and dose reduction may be necessary due to reduced clearance.

- Blood pressure: Hypotension is associated with reduced cerebral blood flow and subsequent ischemia. Adequate blood pressure control is essential during therapeutic hypothermia and may require the use of vasopressors. Current evidence suggests maintaining a systolic blood pressure > 80 mm Hg or a mean arterial pressure >65 mm Hg.

- Glucose control: Hyperglycemia may be associated with poor neurologic outcomes and increased mortality.

- Oxygenation: Optimization of oxygenation and ventilation is associated with improved outcomes. Oxygen saturation should be maintained above 94% and PaCO2 between 35 to 45 mm Hg. Hyperoxia has been shown to correlate with increased mortality when compared to both normoxia and hypoxia.

- Electrolyte abnormalities: While therapeutic hypothermia is associated with multiple electrolyte abnormalities, special attention should be paid to potassium. During the induction and maintenance phases, hyperkalemia can occur due to sequestration within the cells. Potassium should be repleted as necessary during these phases. As the body temperature increases during rewarming, the potassium shift is reversed, and hyperkalemia may develop. It is recommended that potassium repletion be discontinued during the rewarming phase.