Some several diagnostic tests and investigations can be performed to diagnose spinal dysraphism. They are particularly important in diagnosing the occult type because it mostly presents with a skin lesion, and early diagnosis is important to limit permanent disabilities.

Amniocentesis is a prenatal study in which the amniotic fluid is analyzed. An elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in the amniotic fluid may suggest a neural-tube defect. This is usually performed at 16 to 18 weeks of gestation and is a screening test that is routinely performed in many countries. An elevated AFP level may prompt further investigations.

Computed tomography scan of the brain and spine is used to evaluate for associated hydrocephalus that can be present in some patients of spinal dysraphism.

Children with isolated coccygeal or intergluteal dimples or pits do not require imaging because the associated risk of having occult spinal dysraphism is 0.34%, whereas those with lumbosacral dimples or pits have a 3.8% risk. Children with lumbosacral dimples located at a distance greater than 25 mm from the anus or with lesions that are greater than 5 mm in size should undergo imaging due to their higher probability of occult spinal dysraphism than children with isolated coccygeal dimples.

Psychometric tests are used for the assessments of intelligence and cognitive function. They are indicated for patients with hydrocephalus and for patients who display deficits in speech and language functions and/or cognitive or academic skills.