Endovascular stenting has minimized the invasiveness in the repair of coarctation of the aorta but does carry documented complications. The most feared and serious complication is the rupture of the aorta. Based on a large multicenter trial, it was calculated to occur in 1.6% of cases. Noted risk factors for aortic rupture include pre-dilatation balloon angioplasty, abdominal aortic location of the coarctation, and age over forty years of age. The creation of aneurysms has been reported post stent intervention with an estimated incidence of around 5 to 9%. Etiologies of aneurysmal formation are attributed to overstretching with balloon dilatation of the vessel wall and diminished quantity of elastin fibers with an increased collagen component.

Complications can involve the stent itself. Embolization and migration of the stent can occur. There is a tendency for migration in situations where an oversized balloon or an undersized balloon catheter has been used. The stent may become lodged into the aorta or femoral artery, requiring the utilization of a lasso device, which can assist in its retrieval back into the sheath.

Restenosis has been documented to occur in 13 to 31% of cases with balloon angioplasty. This occurrence was found to be reduced to around 2.7% in one study with the employment of stenting. One of the etiologies of this process is a neo-intimal proliferation in the stent. Additional complications arise from femoral access, including limb ischemia and hematoma. These complications have been reduced by the utilization of vascular closure devices.