The evaluation of a bicuspid valve routinely includes an electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. If there is severe stenosis, the electrocardiogram can show left ventricular hypertrophy with increased voltages in the lateral precordial lead and potentially T-wave inversion, consistent with a strain pattern. The echocardiogram is the most common way to understand the features and function of a bicuspid aortic valve. 2D echocardiography will demonstrate where the fusion of the valve leaflets occur, systolic doming (can not visualize when extensive calcification present), an eccentric valve closure in the parasternal long-axis views, the demonstration of a single commissural line in diastole with the characteristic two cusps and two commissures, leaflet redundancy, presence of a raphe, eccentric valve closure in the parasternal short-axis views and can fairly reliable measurements of the ascending aorta.

Doppler echocardiography can provide information on the degree of stenosis with a peak and mean gradient with the mean gradient correlating with invasive catheter measurements. Furthermore, Doppler measurements can be made to demonstrate the degree of insufficiency of the valve.  Rarely invasive cardiac catheter measurements are made for diagnostic purposes only but are usually reserved when an intervention is planned. CT scan and MRI imaging can be obtained to help make a more accurate measurement of the ascending aorta.

2D echocardiography has a sensitivity of 78%, a specificity of 96%, and a predictive accuracy of 93%.