Despite other more rigorous models to represent gases, the Ideal Gas Law is versatile in representing other phases and mixtures. Christensen et al. performed a study to create calibration mixtures of oxygen, isoflurane, enflurane, and halothane. These gases are commonly used in anesthetics, which require accurate measurements to ensure the patient's safety. In this study, Christensen et al. compared the use of ideal gas assumption to more rigorous models to identify the partial pressures of each of the gases. The ideal gas assumptions had a 0.03% error for the calibration experiment. This study concluded that the error from the ideal gas assumption could be used to tune the calibration of the anesthetics, but the deviation itself was not appreciable to prevent use on patients.

In addition to gaseous mixtures, the ideal gas law can model the behavior of certain plasmas. In a study by Oxtoby et al., the researchers found that dusty plasma particles could be modeled by ideal gas behaviors. The study suggests the reason for this similarity stems from low compression ratios of dusty plasma afforded the ideal gas behavior. While more complex models will need to be created, the plasma phases were accurately models were accurately represented by the Ideal Gas Law.

Ideal gases also have contributed to the study of surface tension in water. Sega et al. proved the ideal gas contribution to surface tension in water was not trivial but a rather finite amount. Sega et al. created a new expression that better represented the ideal gas contribution to the surface tension. This can allow for a more accurate representation of gas-liquid interfaces in the future.

The Ideal Gas Law and its behavior primarily serve as an initial step to obtaining information about a system. More complex models are available to describe a system accurately; however, should accuracy not be the main consideration, the Ideal Gas Law affords ease of calculation while providing physical insights into the system.