Complications in patients with SLE may occur either due to organ damage by the disease or due to the adverse effects of the medications.

Disease process-related complications include but are not limited to accelerated atherosclerosis with a several-fold higher risk of coronary artery disease even in the younger population, end-stage renal disease, and neurological deficits, including blindness secondary to neuropsychiatric manifestations. Patients with severe cutaneous lupus, especially discoid lupus, can suffer permanent skin damage and alopecia. Anxiety and depression are more common in patients with SLE. Several pregnancy-related complications are well known, including fetal loss, pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, congenital heart block, and neonatal lupus.

Medication-induced complications are common and require close monitoring. Long-term corticosteroid use in SLE patients frequently leads to under-diagnosed and under-treated osteoporosis, leading to osteoporotic fractures. Other complications of long-term use of corticosteroid therapy include avascular necrosis, glaucoma, cataract, weight gain, and poor control of Diabetes mellitus. High-dose corticosteroid use can also be associated with opportunistic infections and acute psychosis. Long-term use of hydroxychloroquine may rarely result in maculopathy and retinopathy that is irreversible, and close ophthalmology examinations are recommended. Cyclophosphamide use is associated with a significantly high risk of interstitial cystitis and bladder cancer even after drug discontinuation. SLE patients are immunocompromised and at a significantly high risk of infections which is one of the significant causes of morbidity and mortality in SLE.