Venlafaxine can interact with many other medications, vitamins, or herbs.

- Patients should not take venlafaxine with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), linezolid, and methylene blue.

- Caution is necessary when using venlafaxine with other drugs that can increase serotonin levels, including SSRIs, SNRIs, and tramadol, as they can lead to life-threatening serotonin syndrome. Other drugs that can raise serotonin include triptans, such as sumatriptan, rizatriptan, and zolmitriptan.

- Venlafaxine should not be combined with drugs for weight loss, such as phentermine. Using venlafaxine with drugs like phentermine may result in excessive weight loss, serotonin syndrome, and heart problems such as tachycardia and hypertension.

- Venlafaxine with cimetidine raises the risk of high blood pressure or liver disease.

- Venlafaxine with haloperidol raises the risk of QT prolongation.

- Venlafaxine taken with warfarin and anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen (NSAIDs) increase the risk of bleeding.

- Ritonavir, clarithromycin, or ketoconazole can inhibit the breakdown of venlafaxine leading to venlafaxine accumulation in the body.

- Venlafaxine, taken with zolpidem, lorazepam, and diphenhydramine, can lead to increased sedation.

- Metoprolol may be less effective when taken with venlafaxine.

- Venlafaxine can cause false positives when testing the patient’s urine for phencyclidine (PCP) and amphetamine. This effect may remain for several days after stopping venlafaxine.