**Biochemical Evaluation**

Plasma chromogranin A measurement, blood count, electrolytes, liver, and kidney function are tests indicated in the diagnostic process and follow-up of carcinoids

Specific tests are performed when symptoms suggesting hormonal secretion are present. They include

- Urinary dU-5-hydroxy indol-acetic acid in patients with carcinoid syndrome

- Serum cortisol, 24-hour urine free cortisol

- ACTH level determination in patients with Cushing’s disease

- Plasma GHRH and insulin growth factor (IGF)-I are indicated in patients with signs of acromegaly

**Bronchoscopy**

Since lung carcinoids are usually centrally located and visible at endoscopic evaluation, bronchoscopy plays a significant role in their diagnosis.

**Radiological Assessment**

Carcinoids can are detectable on a standard chest x-ray in 40% of the cases. However, the gold standard for radiological detection of lung carcinoids is a CT scan. On both, chest x-ray and CT scans, the mass is usually well-defined, round, and sometimes slightly lobulated. Calcification can occur in central carcinoid tumors. When bronchial involvement is present, secondary distal effects include atelectasis, bronchiectasis, and, hyperlucency on CT scan.

Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) may distinguish carcinoid tumors from atypical carcinoids; this technique may be most helpful in discerning carcinoids from high-grade neuroendocrine tumors such as small cell or large cell neuroendocrine tumors.

Octreotide single-photon emission CT and other novel imaging techniques such as gallium-labeled somatostatin analogs may be more sensitive at the detection of lung carcinoids.