The major role of the healthcare team in fire safety is promoting prevention strategies. Patients who work in high-risk jobs or have children at home may benefit from fire safety education. A large amount of literature supports the use of education on fire safety to improve patient competency of how to react in the event of a fire and ultimately lead to better outcomes.

Addressing scenarios that predispose people to injury due to fire should also be addressed. Burnout has been determined to be a significant risk factor for fire-related injury in workers of high-risk professions.

When a patient presents with injuries from fire, interprofessional collaboration is crucial to optimize patient outcomes. The EMS team will need to quickly evaluate, perform any necessary life-saving resuscitation, and transport the patient to the hospital. Upon arrival, the emergency department team must assess the patient and triage the complications with establishing an airway and improving blood oxygenation taking precedent. The trauma and surgical teams should be consulted depending on the nature and extent of the injuries. The pharmacist should be involved in administering appropriate pharmacology to stabilize the patient.

The burn team may need to be consulted in the event of a skin burn. The nursing staff will be involved throughout the process, especially with patient monitoring and medication administration. After stabilizing the patient, the pulmonologist and dermatology teams may need to consult depending on compromised tissues. Depending on the severity, the patient may need to be transported to the ICU, where the critical care team will take over care.

Other professionals will begin to be involved in the care throughout the recovery phase, such as physical therapy and occupational therapy to rehabilitate the patient. Social work should also be involved to determine the cause of injury and how to prevent another similar scenario. They may also need to support the patient with housing should the fire have taken place at home.