Proper formation and axial positioning of the components of the ear occur through complex reciprocal interactions between the epithelium and mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches and hindbrain. These complex interactions involve a wide variety of essential genes, morphogens, and transcription factors that ultimately determine the fate of cells in the internal ear. Members of the Wnt, Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), and fibroblast-growth-factor (FGF) families, combined with retinoic acid signals, regulate transcription factor genes within the primordial internal ear to regionalize neurogenic activity and establish the axial identity of the ear.

Otic placode induction is dependent on Wnts and FGFs provided by the hindbrain and surrounding head mesenchyme. After induction, the otic placode continues to be influenced by signaling information from surrounding tissues that determine its positional identity along the dorsal-ventral, anterior-posterior, and medial-lateral axes. The anterior-posterior axis is the first axis to be specified. It requires retinoic acid, a key morphogen, to confer proper anterior and posterior identities of the internal ear. Somites express high levels of Raldh2, a retinoic acid synthesizing enzyme that serves as the primary source of retinoic acid for patterning the internal ear. Retinoic acid signaling results in proper anterior-posterior patterning of the internal ear and establishes the neural-sensory-competent domain (NSD) in the anterior otic cup.

The neural-sensory-competent domain gives rise to neurons of the cochleovestibular ganglion, as well as prosensory cells of the internal ear that differentiate into supporting cells or sensory hair cells. Neurogenin1 is a proneural gene that encodes a basic helix-loop-helix region (bHCH) transcription factor and is one of the earliest molecular markers determining the neurogenic fate of cells in the internal ear. The anterior portion of the NSD contains Ngn1-positive cells that ultimately leave the otic epithelium and coalesce to become neurons of the cochleovestibular ganglion. The remaining sensory epithelium of the NSD develops into supporting cells, sensory hair cells, and some nonsensory cells.

Proper patterning of the internal ear dorsal-ventral axis involves the secretion of Wnts transcription factors from the dorsal hindbrain and the release of Sonic Hedgehog from the notochord and ventral floor plate. The patterning of the medial-lateral axis of the internal ear has not been well studied. It is thought to involve hindbrain signaling mediated by the transcription factor Gbx2 from the otic epithelium.

Sonic Hedgehog is not only imperative in determining the dorsal-ventral axis of the internal ear, but it is also responsible for regulating and determining auditory cell fates within the internal ear. Sonic Hedgehog is released from the notochord and ventral hindbrain and allows for proper cochlear duct and semicircular canal development. The mesenchyme encasing the developing internal ear is also essential for shaping the semicircular canals and cochlear duct into their final form through both structural and molecular means.

Although the mechanisms and molecules involved in the process of semicircular canal formation are largely unexplored, studies have implicated a variety of mesenchymal genes in canal formation, such as Prx and Pou3f4. Proper extension and outgrowth of the cochlear duct are dependent on Sonic Hedgehog secretion from the notochord and the release of transcription factors called Tbx1 and Pou3f4 from the otic mesenchyme. Studies have shown that an absence of Pou3f4 or Tbx1 in the otic mesenchyme results in abnormal shortening or coiling of the cochlear duct.