**Preconceptional surveillance**of high-risk populations can reduce the incidence of fetal malformations. Tight glycemic control and the use of supplementary diets before conception is the best way of prevention and management.

High-risk populations with high hemoglobin A1c levels should be counseled before conception with the goal to achieve normal glucose homeostasis before pregnancy. This could potentially prevent structural birth defects because organogenesis starts early in pregnancy, often even prior to women knowing that she is pregnant.

**Nutritional**interventions and monitoring of normal blood glucose levels should be the primary therapeutic goal. Change of lifestyle, dietary interventions, and daily light exercise is recommended. Exercise can have an overall positive impact on health by reducing both fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia and overcoming insulin resistance by reducing the number of adipocytes. Reducing carbohydrate use and maintaining normal sugar levels are helpful in the prevention of ketosis and hyperglycemia. Quantity of calorie intake is a challenging part. Many studies recommended that 30 kilocalories (kcal) per kilogram (kg) body weight for women of normal body mass index, 24 kcal/kg body weight for overweight women, and only 12-15 kcal/kg for obese women should be considered. Food distributions should be done according to carbohydrate content. Some carbohydrate-containing foods based upon the ability to increase the blood sugar level should be monitored because some foods with the same carbohydrate content have disparate effects on blood sugar levels. Diets having a low glycemic index also reduces the chance of macrosomia. Low-glycemic and high fiber diets decrease the need for insulin.

**Inositols:**It has been clear that hyperglycemia has negative effects on inositol regulation and functioning. Dietary supplementation of inositol-rich nutrients such as cereals, maize, legumes, and meat has shown some improvement in fetal organogenesis and growth.

**Fish oil:**Fish oil is rich in omega-3, which is a source of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid that upregulates the peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor-gamma gene expression and enhances the adiponectin gene expression.

**Drug therapy:**Insulin is administered to gestational diabetic women only after failure of primary nutritional intervention because drugs should be avoided as much as possible to preclude adverse effects on fetuses. Some studies have revealed that a mother treated with insulin has fewer chances of anomalies than those without insulin therapy even after having the same glucose level. The use of oral metformin is acceptable given oral formulation and is considered safe for the treatment of gestational diabetes.

Surveillance of the fetus during the first trimester can be done with ultrasound, and further imaging, including MRI and fetal echocardiogram, can be done to better delineate anomalies if present. Specific knowledge of the plan for delivery, expected complications, and psychological support for the mother should be considered during follow-up visits.