Mesna (sodium 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate) is a detoxifying agent used to prevent hemorrhagic cystitis in patients receiving chemotherapy with either high-dose cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide. Mesna initially becomes inactivated to dimesna (mensa disulfide) in the bloodstream; however, once it is filtered through the kidneys and excreted into the bladder, it is reactivated. As reactivated mesna concentrates in the bladder, mesna detoxifies acrolein, a urotoxic breakdown product of ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide that accumulates in the bladder. Acrolein stimulates the release of inflammatory mediators interleukin-1 beta, TNF-alpha, and endogenous nitric oxide inducing vascular dilatation, mucosal edema, and capillary fragility resulting in hemorrhagic cystitis.

There is some evidence to suggest that this might also occur through the inhibition of lactoperoxidase (LPO). Lactoperoxidase utilizes hydrogen peroxide (HO) and thiocyanate (SCN) to produce hypothiocyanous acid (HOSCN). Mesna's sulfhydryl group binds stably to LPO within the SCN binding site and thus inhibits function resulting in the reduction and regulation of local inflammatory effects.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**After oral administration, peak plasma concentrations are attained within 1.5 to 4 hours for free mesna and 3 to 7 hours for total mesna (mesna plus dimesna and mixed disulfides). Food does not alter the bioavailability of orally administered mesna.

**Distribution:**Mean apparent volume of distribution (aVd) for mesna is 0.65 ± 0.24 L/kg following IV administration, suggesting distribution to total body water. A fraction of mesna is bound to albumin in plasma.

**Metabolism:**Mesna is rapidly oxidized to its major metabolite, mesna disulfide (dimesna), and mixed disulfides. Mixed disulfides have been postulated to play an important role in nephroprotection through inhibiting enzymes γ-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) and aminopeptidase N (APN).

**Excretion:**After IV administration of mesna 800 mg, approximately 32% and 33% of the administered dose are excreted in the urine as mesna and dimesna, respectively.