Several other genetic conditions have a constellation of symptoms overlapping with features of MPS. These clinical conditions include:

**Turner syndrome:**This is a genetic syndrome that occurs when there is complete or partial monosomy of the X chromosome in affected girls. The clinical features of Turner syndrome include being delivered small for gestational age with a webbed neck and redundant nuchal skin, widespread nipples, protruding ears, lymphedema of hands and feet, short stature, gonadal dysgenesis, musculoskeletal defects (cubitus valgus, scoliosis, hip dislocation), learning disabilities, endocrine anomalies (hypothyroidism and type 2 diabetes mellitus), renal anomalies (horse-shoe kidneys), gastrointestinal manifestations (inflammatory bowel disease and celiac disease), ear/nose/throat (ENT) problems (strabismus, cataracts, recurrent otitis media, sensorineural hearing loss), and congenital heart defects (bicuspid aortic valve and coarctation of the aorta). In addition, features of MPS usually overlap with parts of Turner syndrome, but patients with Turner syndrome lack multiple body pterygia and contractures.

**Noonan syndrome:**It is an inherited genetic condition with heterogeneous clinical manifestations and characteristic features of craniofacial abnormalities, skeletal abnormalities, blood clotting problems, and cardiac anomalies, but not contractures or conductive hearing loss.

**Klippel-Fiel syndrome:**It is a complex bone formation disorder characterized by abnormal cervical bone fusion (C2 and C3) leading to characteristic features of a short neck, limited neck movements, chronic headaches, and back muscle pains.

**Prune belly syndrome:**It is also known as Eagle-Barrett syndrome, a congenital anatomical-radiological condition with a triad of absent abdominal wall musculature, undescended testes (cryptorchidism), and genitourinary abnormalities (unusually large ureters, vesicoureteral reflux, oligohydramnios).

Patients also have other associated features, including recurrent urinary tract infections, ventricular septal defect, malrotation of the gut, and clubfoot. The abnormal abdominal musculature in prune belly syndrome closely resembles the contractures in multiple pterygium syndrome, and both have cryptorchidism as a feature. Still, absent abdominal musculature in MPS has not been reported.

**Van der Woude syndrome:**This is a rare congenital condition primarily affecting the mouth and palate. Patients present with pitted cleft lips and palates, and the condition lacks multiple pterygia or contractures. Patients typically have problems with feeding, speech articulation, and recurrent ear infections if not treated early.

**Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita:**It is a general term used for patients that develop nonprogressive contractures in multiple areas of the body in-utero. Multiple joints are affected, mainly the extremities. It has been known to occur in isolation or with numerous clinical conditions and syndromes, including multiple pterygium syndrome. Mutations in various genes have been associated with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita. If arthrogryposis multiplex congenita occurs in isolation without multiple pterygia, skeletal deformities, or other features of MPS, MPS can be ruled out by genetic testing.