Multigated acquisition (MUGA) scans rely on R wave progression to assess when to start collecting data; this is referred to as ECG gating. There are certain ECG parameters to ensure before collecting image data: <10% premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and regular R-R intervals. To ensure these parameters, an ECG is obtained before initiating the study. Assessment of systolic function varies less with heart rate changes than the diastolic function, but heart rate variability should be taken into account when selecting an R-R interval as a gate.

The patient’s blood is drawn via an IV line and is mixed with the radioactive isotope tracer and is then reintroduced to the patient via the same IV line. The tracer is given approximately 15 to 20 minutes to reach equilibrium in the circulation. This is adjusted in first-pass MUGA scanning, where a bolus of a radioisotope is given over a longer initial intravenous push, and the patient is imaged immediately. In non-first pass MUGA scanning, after the tracer reaches equilibrium, the ECG rhythm is evaluated for acceptable R-R progression, and once confirmed, the gamma camera is used to capture images. Typically, at least 16 images per R-R interval are obtained when assessing wall motion and left ventricle EF, while 32 to 64 images per R-R interval are obtained when assessing diastolic function. These images are taken in the left anterior oblique, anterior, and lateral views. The camera generally images the patient over 10 minutes in each of these views, for a total exam duration of approximately 30 minutes. Data is then processed to create left ventricle time-activity curves (LVTACs), and the first derivative curves and quantitative data are presented to the provider and patient.