First, conditions that are more common like hyperglycemia and hypercalcemia, which can cause polyuria, have to be ruled out. The differential diagnosis of primary polydipsia (PP) includes mainly diabetes insipidus, either central or nephrogenic. The other condition to differentiate is beer potomania, the differentiating feature being the total amount of urine produced falls below the definition for polyuria. Primary polydipsia is a diagnosis of exclusion. Polydipsic behavior in primary polydipsia is usually not seen at night.

After polyuria (>40-50 ml/kg/24hrs) is confirmed, and urine osmolality is <800 mOsm/kg, serum sodium level has to be checked. If the serum sodium level is <135 meq, it is diagnostic of PP. If the serum sodium levels are >147, it is diagnostic of diabetes insipidus. If the serum sodium is between 135 and 147, the next step would be the water deprivation test. The traditional test that has been utilized by providers for a long time is the indirect water deprivation test that indirectly measures the activity of AVP. This test is started once hypotonic polyuria is confirmed, and serum sodium is between 135 and 147. Polyuria in primary polydipsia decreases with water deprivation (typically >8hrs), and urine osmolality increases (>800 mOsm/kg typically), this is diagnostic of PP. In diabetes insipidus, polyuria does not get better with water deprivation. If the urine osmolality remains <300 mOsm/kg after water deprivation, it is diagnostic of DI.

The administration of desmopressin differentiates between central and nephrogenic insipidus. If, after the administration of desmopressin, there is an increase of >50% in the urine osmolality, it is diagnostic of central DI. If there is an increase of <50% in the urine osmolality, it is diagnostic of nephrogenic DI. If the urine osmolality is between 300 mOsm/kg and 800 mOsm/kg after the water deprivation test, this could either be partial central DI or PP. To differentiate partial central DI from PP, desmopressin is administered. If the urine osmolality increases by > 9%, it is diagnostic of PP. If the Urine osmolality increases by <9%, it is diagnostic of partial central diabetes insipidus.

However, there have been queries regarding the specificity and sensitivity of the water deprivation test.

A study done by Penelope et al. to evaluate the diagnostic value of the water deprivation test demonstrated that with the overnight WDT (8hrs), only 20% of the subjects met the diagnostic criteria for DI, and the majority were diagnosed at 16 hrs of deprivation. The same study also found that 25% of the patients with possible partial DI could have been misdiagnosed as PP.

The direct measurement of AVP was studied as well in the past. It was found that upon osmotic stimulation, it provided great accuracy in differentiating primary polydipsia from diabetes insipidus, when compared to the water deprivation test, but did not gain a reputation in clinical practice. This is due to the limitations of the AVP measurement since it is not a stable peptide ex vivo.

If the level is less than 4.9 pmol/l, it is diagnostic of central DI. 96% of the patients with polyuria were accurately diagnosed with their respective diagnoses by measuring copeptin along with water deprivation/hypertonic saline infusion test. Given the cumbersomeness of the water deprivation test and the long duration involved with it, hypertonic saline infusion gained a reputation. Stimulation with hypertonic saline also requires frequent sodium checks and close monitoring. Keeping this in mind, a study was done with arginine infusion to measure the stimulated levels of copeptin instead of with hypertonic saline, which was promising.

Another condition that psychiatric patients can present with hyponatremia is pregnancy, where there is no polyuria or polydipsia, but one has to be aware of the fact that this is a physiologic change. Serum sodium levels can be lower, up to 3-6 mmol/l in pregnants, and is normal. This is due to a physiologic lower osmotic threshold for the thirst center and increased vasopressin secretion.