Neomycin has various routes of administration but has poor GI absorption, like most aminoglycosides.

**Hepatic Coma**

One gram of neomycin is administered every six hours for up to six days to treat hepatic encephalopathy.

**Surgical (Perioperative) Prophylaxis**

One gram of oral neomycin is given with 1 gram of erythromycin base at 2 pm, 3 pm, and 10 pm the day before surgery.

**Use in Special Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

No dosage adjustments are provided in the manufacturer’s labeling.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

No dosage adjustments are provided in the manufacturer’s labeling. Patients with renal insufficiency can develop toxic blood levels unless doses are properly regulated. If renal insufficiency develops during treatment, the clinician should reduce the dosage or discontinue antibiotics.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

Neomycin being an aminoglycoside, can cross the placenta. It may cause teratogenicity if administered to a pregnant woman. Hence, neomycin should be given to pregnant women only if needed. It is classified as FDA Pregnancy Category C medicine.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

There is a lack of data about the excretion of neomycin into milk; however, other aminoglycoside antibiotics are poorly excreted into breastmilk. In addition, newborn infants absorb small amounts of aminoglycosides; hence systemic effects of neomycin are unlikely. However, monitor the infant for possible effects on the gastrointestinal flora, such as candidiasis, diarrhea, and colitis.