The mechanism of action of fexofenadine is to selectively antagonize H1 receptors on the surface of cells in different organ systems. It is a second-generation H1 receptor blocker. Fexofenadine also affects inflammatory mediators.

In a study, second-generation antihistamines like desloratadine and loratadine demonstrated anticholinergic activity, but fexofenadine displayed no anticholinergic activity and high specificity for H1 receptors. Consequently, fexofenadine is one of the least sedating second-generation antihistamines.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Fexofenadine is rapidly absorbed, attaining peak plasma concentrations one hour after oral administration at 1 hour for the oral suspension and 1.5 hours for the tablet. Maximum histamine inhibition is achieved approximately 1–2 h after administration. Fexofenadine is a long-acting antihistamine that allows for once-a-day administration.

**Distribution:**Fexofenadine has approximately 60% to 70% plasma protein binding. Fexofenadine binds primarily with albumin and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein. Fexofenadine shows no receptor occupancy in the CNS at clinically relevant doses.

**Metabolism:**Fexofenadine undergoes minimal hepatic metabolism. OATP2B1(Organic anion transporting polypeptides) and P-gp(permeability glycoprotein) play an essential role in the metabolism and transport of fexofenadine. P-gp is involved in intestinal secretion and systemic disposition of fexofenadine.

**Elimination:**In healthy volunteers, the mean elimination half-life is approximately 14.4 hours after administering fexofenadine 60 mg twice daily. Fexofenadine is mainly excreted in feces via biliary excretion (80%). The half-life may be significantly prolonged in patients with renal disease.