Injuries to the sacroiliac joint can occur from various etiologies. 88% of cases of SI joint injury are due to either repetitive microtrauma or acute trauma. There is a high prevalence of SI joint injury in athletes. Separately, 20% of cases are pregnancy-related, while 4% are idiopathic.

There are also three types of fractures associated with SI joint injury. A type one fracture is a minor fracture of the anterior aspect of the S2 foramen. This fracture creates a large crescent-shaped fragment that is stable. Less than one-third of the SI joint is involved, and the fracture encompasses the least amount of ligament injury of the three types of fractures. Separately, a type two fractures occur between the anterior aspect of the S1 and S2 foramen. The fracture creates a smaller crescent-shaped fragment compared to the type one injury. Type two fractures occur when one-third to two-thirds of the SI joint is involved. Lastly, a type three fracture encompasses the superior and posterior aspects of the SI joint up to the S1 nerve root. Greater than two-thirds of the sacroiliac joint are involved and include a higher degree of ligament disruption. However, the fracture is typically smaller than a type one or type two fracture. A posterior fracture-dislocation of the SI joint involves variable disruption of the SI ligament complex.

The L5 nerve root crosses the sacral ala 2 cm medial to the SI joint. In the case of injury, the nerve root can be involved causing radicular pain. SI joint innervation occurs via the ventral rami of the L4 and L5 vertebra, as well as the dorsal rami of L5-S2, and the superior gluteal nerve. Injury to these nerves can cause neuropathic SI joint pain. Generalized gluteal pain can be secondary to an injury of the SI joint or local nerves surrounding the SI joint, causing radiculopathy. When the S1 nerve root is directly injured during SI joint injury, it can also create radiculopathy.

Separately, during pregnancy, laxity occurs within many of the joints in the pelvis. The hormone relaxin causes joint mobility during pregnancy. As the pelvis widens during pregnancy, the SI joint becomes more mobile. The expecting mother can experience SI joint pain as the hips rotate, putting stress on the SI joint. Pain can be both unilateral or bilateral during pregnancy.

Anatomical variations can lead to SI joint injury as well. An increase in lumbar lordosis, as well as an anterior tilt to the pelvis, can lead to SI joint dysfunction.

Osteoarthritis also plays a role in the development of SI joint pain. Typical of all osteoarthritic joints, joint space narrowing, osteophyte formation, and sclerosis of the SI joint can be seen on x-ray.

Furthermore, inflammatory arthritis can cause SI joint injury. Ankylosing spondylitis is the most common type of inflammatory arthritis of the SI joint. Erosion of the joint can occur over time, leading to disabling pain. Subchondral edema is the earliest sign of sacroiliitis on imaging. Ankylosing spondylitis causes bony erosions of the SI joint. As decay occurs, the joint space widens and becomes sclerotic. Over time the joint fuses as erosion occur across the entire joint.