To achieve a successful harvest and closure of a fasciocutaneous radial forearm free flap, it is imperative to proceed with the following steps:

1. Begin by elevating the flap toward the flexor carpi radialis, in an ulnar to the radial direction, and superficial to the muscular fascia. Keep in mind that the areolar tissue filling the space between the tendons of the arm and its respective sheaths must be kept intact. Do not incise the proximal aspect of the tissue flap yet.

2. Continue to elevate the flap from ulnar to radial direction until the brachioradialis tendon is encountered. In this step, it is important to include the cephalic vein with the flap and as well as to identify and preserve the superficial branch of the radial nerve to avoid numbness of its distribution.

3. Distally, ligate and divide the radial artery and venae comitantes, just proximal to their respective contributions of the palmar branches. An incision is then made at the proximal aspect of the flap, and the flap is elevated in a subdermal plane. This step is crucial to permit the harvest of the proximal subcutaneous tissue while preserving the cutaneous antebrachial nerves that will be part of the flap.

4. Attention is then focused on the proximal aspect of the skin paddle, and the skin overlying the cephalic vein is incised proximally to the antecubital fossa. Perforating veins and lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve are identified and are included within the flap. The skin paddle is then elevated off the flexor carpi radialis and brachioradialis while preserving the cutaneous perforator vessels to the flap.

5. Finally, the flap can be raised with its vascular pedicle from distal to proximal by elevating the radial artery and venae comitantes. At this point, the tourniquet can be released, and hemostasis should be meticulously achieved. The flap can be protected with moist towels, and the pedicle should be divided, completing the harvest when the recipient site is ready to accept tissue transfer.

6. After the flap harvest has been completed, the donor site is closed with the use of a split-thickness skin graft from the thigh. Utilizing the dermatome, the recommended harvesting depth is 0.018 - 0.023 inches. After the harvest of the split-thickness skin graft, epinephrine soaked surgical sponges are placed over the skin graft donor site to achieve hemostasis. The skin graft is used to close the distal aspect of the donor forearm and is inset where the skin paddle of the RFFF was harvested. The proximal aspect of the arm closed in a two-layer fashion after placement of a 10 mm perforated suction drain.

7. Depending on surgeon preference, a non-adherent bolster may be used over the skin graft to apply pressure and allow coaptation for maximal graft take. The donor arm is placed in a volar splint that places the wrist at 45 degrees of extension with care taken to avoid compression of the arm with the placement of the splint.