Trigger thumb is a clinical diagnosis based on history and physical exam. In the physical exam, the hands should be placed with the palms up in a relaxed position. The patient is asked to slowly actively flex and extend the fingers in an attempt to try to make the finger lock or catch. The provider can facilitate this by further flexing the digits of the patient. Alternatively, if active triggering is not present, the examiner places their fingers on the MCP joint as the finger is actively flexed and extended, noting the presence of a clicking sensation or loss of smooth motion. Locking may not occur with each motion.

Several differentials should be kept in mind when evaluating for trigger thumb. Such differentials include infectious tenosynovitis, non-infectious tenosynovitis, and metacarpophalangeal joint sprain. Infectious tenosynovitis presents with severe pain, decreased range of motion, warmth, erythema, and tenderness to palpation over the flexor tendon sheath. Evaluation should assess for minor trauma such as lacerations, punctures involving the thumb or hand. Early recognition is of utmost importance, as closed-space infection can cause tendon rupture limiting motion of the thumb. Non-infectious tenosynovitis also presents with pain, tenderness, and swelling along the flexor tendon. Underlying inflammatory arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis or reactive arthritis commonly link to non-infectious tenosynovitis. Unlike trigger finger, noninfectious tenosynovitis involves swelling and pain along the long axis of the affected tendon and joints. Treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), and systemic glucocorticoids improve symptoms markedly. A metacarpophalangeal joint sprain is commonly due to trauma. Patients will complain of tenderness on either side of the MCP joint associated with loss of full flexion; however, no clicking sensation is present.