The diagnosis of encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis can be made from a constellation of symptoms and the timing in which symptoms occur. EPS typically develops in a step-wise fashion with an inflammatory, encapsulating, and ileus stage. EPS can begin with an inflammatory stage in which patients can present with symptoms of fever, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, nausea, diarrhea, and an elevation in C-reactive protein. This is associated with the genesis of bowel encapsulation. The physical exam can often be unremarkable during the encapsulating phase, as the fibrotic capsule can also be too premature to inhibit intestinal peristalsis. Over time, the fibrotic capsule becomes sclerotic and causes bowel obstruction-like symptoms, which leads to the ileus stage. Early symptoms in the ileus stage are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, intermittent abdominal pain, anorexia, and loss of appetite.

The physical exam can also be unremarkable, but some patients on peritoneal dialysis have noted blood-tinged ascites or dialysis fluid during the procedure, especially after times in which the peritoneal dialysis cavity has been dry. Late symptoms in the ileus stage can progress to severe abdominal pain, intractable vomiting, malnutrition, constipation, and weight loss. At this point in the progression of symptoms, the physical exam may reveal an abdominal mass with tenderness in light and deep palpation, hypoactive bowel sounds, and potentially abdominal rigidity. The timing in which symptoms occur is also important as most patients (70 to 90%) will be diagnosed with EPS after terminating peritoneal dialysis, which can develop as late as five years later.