Objectives are to achieve an appropriate range of motion with an early rehabilitation start, elbow and forearm stability, and to avoid immediate and long-term complications (arthritis). Aspects to keep in mind for therapeutical decisions are patient-related and include age, bone quality, functional demand, comorbidities, fracture-related extension, location, displacement, and related injuries.

**Non-surgical Treatment**

Most isolated fractures. Indication for non-displaced fractures, displaced with a joint step under 2 mm, a joint surface condition under 30%, and angling under 30 degrees. However, some authors extend the indication to all fractures which do not block the joint (test through anesthesia) in spite of their having further displacements that evolve toward non-strengthening, and the fragment is to be dried similarly.

The local anesthesia test is used to search for mechanical occlusion which could determine surgical resolution. The initial immobilization may be carried out by plaster or sling in functional position. It is to be worn for two or three weeks and followed by an x-ray evaluation seven days later.

It is convenient, attempt active elbow flexion and extension while the humerus is on a flat surface.

**Surgical Treatment**

**Radial head excision:**Indication in severe pain in selected cases for instance older adults with a low demand with complex fractures but no associated fractures which compromise stability. One option is the differed excision with the same indication as the mentioned one or to enhance pronation-supination.

Open or arthroscopic: Fragment excision may be indicated in cases where these can obstruct joints and are too small for osteosynthesis and should not be part of the proximal radio-ulnar joint.

**Osteosynthesis:**As regards isolated fractures, it is an absolute indication when they cause a joint blockage. (Mason type 2) Step over 2 mm, joint fragment over 30%, neck fractures with angling over 30 degrees.

Low profile plates and screws implants or cannulated are applied.

Surgical approach: (Kocher) between the anconeus and extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU), it provides good access to the back fragments and safety to the posterior interosseous nerve. Another option is extensor digitorum comunis (EDC) splinting to avoid iatrogenic injuries.

Osteosynthesis should be placed in the safe interval to avoid interference with the proximal radio-ulnar joint which is located 110 external degrees with the elbow in neutral pronation-supination.

In complex fractures, osteosynthesis or prosthesis? It is convenient not to get more than three fragments with no impaction or deformity with enough bone quality and without metaphyseal bone loss to achieve stable internal fixation. In many cases, these fracture features are determined at surgery time.

Arthroplasty: Indication for non-repairable fractures. A prosthesis-sized appropriate choice is important to avoid articular stiffness.