The role of the emergency medical service (EMS) medical director in EMS medical oversight is multifaceted, complex, and often misunderstood. Reaching out to state and local EMS medical directors, as well as the previous EMS medical director at the current location of employment, can be invaluable in understanding the role. It is to the benefit of the EMS medical service, its employees, and the medical director of EMS oversight to have a clear understanding of the job description and the relationship it entails. The roles and requirements of the EMS medical director should be laid out clearly in the form of a contract. This should delineate the authority of the position and allow improvement of the system, the providers within the system, and the public in general. Numerous sources such as NAEMSP, AAEM, and ACEP have resources that can be modified to fit the legislative and regulatory statutes that govern regional practices.

EMS medical oversight requires an understanding of state, federal, and local legislation and regulations involving prehospital medical care and transport.

While EMS medical oversight is thought of to be on a continuum, it can be broken up into 3 parts. Prospective oversight deals with education, training, and protocol development. This is thought of as the planning and preparation stage of medical oversight. Concurrent medical oversight deals with online and offline medical control and also on-scene response. It is the in the field, in the action, the here and now of medical oversight. Considering the advancements in technology, concurrent medical control can be directed via cellular, radio, direct patient care on-scene, and even telemedicine. Lastly, retrospective medical oversight involves system-related research and run reviews.