Regardless of the specific type of diabetes, complications involve microvascular, macrovascular, and neuropathic issues. Microvascular and macrovascular complications vary according to the degree and the duration of poorly control diabetes and include nephropathy, retinopathy, neuropathy, and ASCVD events, especially if it is associated with other comorbidities like dyslipidemia and hypertension.

DM is also a common cause of blindness in adults aged 20 to 74 years in the United States. Diabetic retinopathy contributes to 12000 to 24000 new cases of blindness annually, and treatments generally consist of laser surgery and glucose control.

Renal disease is another significant cause of morbidity and mortality in DM patients. It is the leading contributor to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in the United States, and many patients with ESRD will need to start dialysis or receive a kidney transplant.

DM is also the leading cause of limb amputations in the United States; this is primarily due to vasculopathy and neuropathy associated with DM.

The duration of diabetes is the most crucial risk factor for the development of diabetic retinopathy. In people with type 1 diabetes, it typically sets in about 5 years after disease onset. Hence it is recommended to start the yearly retinal exams in these patients about five years after diagnosis. Among patients with type 2 diabetes, many patients might already have retinal changes at the time of diagnosis. Approximately 10% at ten years, 40% at 15 years, and 60% at 20 years will have nonproliferative retinal disease. In these patients, the recommendation is to start the yearly retinal screening at the time of diagnosis. Study after study has shown that reasonable glycemic control favorably affected the onset and progression of diabetic retinopathy. Uncontrolled blood pressure is an added risk factor for macular edema. Lowering the blood pressure in patients with diabetes thus also affects the risk of progression of the retinopathy. Injection of antibodies vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents are generally in use as the initial therapy in cases of macular edema. In cases of nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy, pan-retinal photocoagulation is being used. In cases of diabetic proliferative retinopathy, combined modalities of anti-VEGF agents and pan-retinal photocoagulation are now in use. Sudden loss of vision can occur for several reasons in patients with diabetes mellitus, the most common being vitreous hemorrhage. Less common causes that merit consideration include vascular occlusion (central retinal vein or branch vein occlusion involving the macula), retinal detachment, end-stage glaucoma, and ischemic optic neuropathy.

Furthermore, evidence suggests that T2DM may also contribute to cancer development, specifically bladder cancer, in those using pioglitazone.

Those with gestational diabetes are at a higher risk for cesarean delivery and chronic hypertension. Pregnant patients with T2DM generally have a better prognosis in terms of neonatal and pregnancy complications compared to those with T1DM. Generally, neonates of DM mothers will present with hypoglycemia and macrosomia.

The most acute complication of DM is diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), which typically presents in T1DM. This condition is usually either due to inadequate dosing, missed doses, or ongoing infection.