**1. Coagulopathy and anticoagulant**s: Guidelines are available to follow during day-to-day practice.

Warfarin

- Warfarin to be held for 5 days, and INR is confirmed at 1.5 or less.

- Warfarin resumed within 12-24 hr after the procedure.

Heparin

- Unfractionated subcutaneous or IV heparin - wait for at least 4 hr after the previous dose and check aPtt, resume 1 hr after the procedure.

Lovenox

- Withhold the last dose or wait for 24 hr after the previous dose. Resume 6 hrs after the procedure.

Fondaparinux

- Withhold 48 hrs before the procedure. Resume therapy after 6 hrs.

Rivaroxaban

- Withhold 48hrs before the procedure. Resume therapy after 48h.

Argatroban and Desirudin

- Wait for 4 hrs after the last dose to do the procedure. Resume therapy after 1 hr.

Aspirin

- 81 mg "baby" aspirin daily, no contraindication. 325 mg/day, withhold for 5 days.

Clopidogrel

- Withhold 5 days. Resume immediately.

Ticlopidine

- Withhold 5 days.

Abciximab

- Withhold 5 days.

**2. Increased intracranial pressure due to CSF obstruction:**If prior imaging is not available, obtain MRI or head CT.

**Relative Contraindications**

- Weight limit: Newer fluoroscopy tables have a weight limit of 400 pounds. Excess weight can potentially damage the fluoroscopy table hydraulic mechanism.

- Infection: A superficial infection of the lumbar region's skin is a relative contraindication because of the risk of meningitis.

- Unstable and uncooperative patient: Appropriate sedation may help patients not move during the procedure. However, sedation can reduce the ability of the patient to respond if there is an injury to the nerve or spinal cord.

- Pregnancy is also a relative contraindication, given the risk of radiation to the developing embryo.