The molecular mechanism of action behind this drug is the binding of nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated (PPAR) receptor gamma to the PPRE gene inducing the expression of several genetic networks. It increases insulin-stimulated IRS-1/2 in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, and subsequently, the expression of GLUT4 glucose transporter. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonistic effect potentiates insulin signaling and improves insulin sensitivity at various molecular steps by activating PI3K, PIP3, and serine/ threonine kinases. Peroxisome proliferator-activated-gamma activation in adipocyte tissue induces the expression of genes involved in insulin signaling such as GLUT4 glucose transporter and CAP, thereby improving insulin sensitivity. Finally, PPAR-gamma improves insulin sensitivity by three apparent mechanisms: 1) increases expression of GLUT4 glucose transporter, 2) regulates signaling factors in adipocyte tissue that affect insulin sensitivity in muscle tissue, and 3) inducing the production of more insulin sensitive adipocyte tissue.

Rosiglitazone and thiazolidinediones affect the vasculature by decreasing the intimal-medial thickness and the development of atherosclerosis in the vascular smooth muscle cells. The protective effect occurs by inhibiting the gene expression of AT1R, TXS, and TXR, involved with intimal medial thickness and atherosclerosis.

Rosiglitazone bioavailability is high (99%). The onset of action initially is delayed; the maximum effect is achieved up to 12 weeks. It is mostly protein-bound (99%). It is subject to hepatic metabolism and excreted by urine (64%) and feces (22%).