Keloids are benign, dermal growths related to previous skin trauma or inflammation. Lesions may develop as early as 1 to 3 months or as late as one year after injury. Spontaneous lesions have been reported. However, it is more likely that the injury was not recalled due to its insignificance or that the keloid development was delayed by months or even years. Keloids may develop anywhere, but the most commonly affected locations include deltoid, pre-sternal chest, upper back, and ear. Unusual locations for these growths include eyelids, genitalia, palms, and soles. Keloids present as firm, rubbery nodules and frequently project above the underlying skin. They may have a narrow base, resulting in pedunculated lesions, or develop into a more a broad-based plaque. As stated above, an important differential diagnosis includes hypertrophic scar which will not project above underlying skin further than 4 millimeters and, as a rule, will never extend beyond the initial area of injury. In contrast, keloids always extend beyond the area of original trauma. Color ranges from erythematous, flesh-colored, or hyperpigmented and may change with the evolution of the lesion. Although these lesions are benign, they are frequently symptomatic. In one study, 86% of patients complained of pruritus while 46% experienced pain. Other reported symptoms include tenderness and burning. Finally, keloids may have significant cosmetic implications for affected patients as they can grow to be large and disfiguring.