Management of erythromelalgia can be quite challenging and necessitates an interprofessional approach. Treatment should encompass patient education, behavior modifications, and the avoidance of triggers. Various treatment options have been suggested, though none are fully curative, rather aimed at symptom management and improving quality of life. While treatment of erythromelalgia is primarily focused on symptom control, secondary erythromelalgia can improve or resolve with treatment of the underlying disease process.

The mainstay of therapy for both primary and secondary erythromelalgia aims to **avoid triggers**, most often heat, exercise, and standing. Commonly used strategies include remaining in cool environments, decreased physical activity, limb elevation, and avoiding excess clothing. In addition, some patients find relief with cool water immersion or portable fans. It should be noted that excessive cooling via ice water immersion can lead to maceration, infection, and ulceration.

Some studies have shown that topical lidocaine patches, compounded topical amitriptyline-ketamine, and topical capsaicin applied three times daily may improve the pain associated with erythromelalgia. While 0.2% midodrine compounded in a moisturizing cream applied thrice a day might improve redness associated with erythromelalgia. Topical therapy should be continued for two to four weeks to assess the efficacy.

**Aspirin**is the drug of choice for erythromelalgia associated with thrombocytopenia or myeloproliferative disorder. Other NSAIDs like anagrelide may be used as an alternative. Diagnosing and treating the underlying myeloproliferative disorder is of utmost importance for the improvement of erythromelalgia. In this patient population, the addition of**hydroxyurea (chemotherapy)**to reduce the platelet count may also improve the symptoms of erythromelalgia, while phlebotomy might be useful for patients with polycythemia vera.

Primary erythromelalgia can be particularly resistant to treatment. Medications affecting the voltage-gated sodium channels (lidocaine, mexiletine, and carbamazepine) have shown promise in primary erythromelalgia. There is some evidence for the use of**mexiletine**100 mg to 200 mg three times a day. An alternative regimen consists of carbamazepine 300 mg twice per day with gabapentin, which is titrated up to 300 mg five times a day. Secondary erythromelalgia may be responsive to aspirin, 81 mg to 640 mg daily, and is often used as a first-line agent.

Other agents that may be effective in treating primary and secondary erythromelalgia include gabapentin, pregabalin, venlafaxine, amitriptyline, iloprost, and misoprostol, calcium channel blockers, and beta-blockers. However, these agents are less well studied, and no specific treatment regimen has been proposed.

Alternative therapies used rarely for refractory cases are epidural infusions of bupivacaine/ropivacaine, transcranial magnetic stimulation, subcutaneous injection of botulinum toxin A, and thoracic or lumbar sympathectomy.

Some studies postulate that pain rehabilitation programs and patient counseling can improve physical and emotional functioning in a patient with erythromelalgia.

**Approach to the management in steps:**(a) Avoid triggers (b) Aspirin for one month (c) Topical drugs for two to four weeks (c) Systemic drugs like gabapentin or pregabalin or venlafaxine for two to four months (d) Consider other systemic drugs and pain rehabilitation programs.

- Try the next step only after the failure of previous steps and treat underlying myeloproliferative disorder if present.