**Radiographic Evaluation**

Plain radiographs of the elbow are required to make the diagnosis. Anteroposterior and lateral views are needed to confirm the type of fracture (extension vs. flexion-type), degree of displacement, malrotation, and comminution. The elbow is mostly cartilaginous in children. The first epiphyseal center to appear is that of the capitellum at one year of age.

**Anteroposterior (AP) Radiographs**

A transverse or short oblique fracture line may be seen in the supracondylar region of the distal humerus. These can be difficult to identify and may even be missed in nondisplaced fractures.

**Baumann's Angle:**This is also known as the humerocapitellar angle in the coronal plane. It is the angle between a line along the longitudinal axis of the humerus and a tangential line across the capitellar physis. Normal is 64-81 degrees from the longitudinal axis line. Increased Baumann's angle is suggestive of cubitus varus deformity.

**Radiocapitellar Line:**A line drawn along the long axis of the radius should intersect the capitellum in all views. This is usually intact in supracondylar fractures unless there is an associated radial head/neck fracture.

**Lateral Radiographs**

**Posterior Fat Pad Sign:**In a flexed elbow, the posterior fat pad lies adjacent to the olecranon fossa. An intra-articular fracture from any bone within the elbow causes bleeding from the fracture site. The resultant hematoma/effusion causes the fat pad to lift away from the olecranon fossa. This creates a positive posterior fat pad sign. Several studies have reported on the utility of identifying the presence of a posterior fat pad sign in the identification of occult/nondisplaced intra-articular fractures of the elbow.

**Anterior Humeral Line:**A longitudinal line drawn along the anterior humeral cortex on the lateral view must bisect the middle third of the capitellum. The line may intersect the anterior one-third of the capitellum in those younger than four years of age.

**Angiography**

Angiography is not recommended before the reduction in cases of vascular compromise.

**Gartland Classification of Supracondylar Fracture of Humerus**

Supracondylar fractures in children have been classified according to Gartland.

The modified Gartland classification is as follows:

- Type I – Nondisplaced or minimally displaced (<2 mm) fractures

- Type IIA – Displaced fractures (>2 mm) with intact posterior hinge

- Type IIB – Displaced fracture with intact posterior hinge and malrotation

- Type III – Completely displaced fractures with disruption of the posterior periosteum

- Type IV - Completely displaced fractures with multidirectional instability