The fibular nerve has been historically referred to as the peroneal nerve because the fibula can also be referred to as the perone. It has recently become more commonplace to refer to the peroneal nerve as the fibular nerve to distinguish it from the similar-sounding perineal nerve. The fibular nerve terminology will be used in all parts of this article. Fibular neuropathy is considered the most common neuropathy in the lower extremities and tends to occur secondary to compression, entrapment, direct trauma, or ischemia.

Patients tend to present with either an acute or a gradual foot drop. Patients may give a history of falls and possibly tripping due to the foot drop. They may also complain of paresthesias or numbness in the lower leg's lateral portion and the foot's dorsum. Pain can be absent in many cases presenting with a foot drop.

Injuries to the common fibular nerve can be due to compression from the prolonged crossing of legs, poor positioning during surgery (most common in acute settings), weight loss (most common in a subacute or chronic setting), poor application of a cast, prolonged squatting position (carpet layers, carpentry workers, farmworkers), or diabetes mellitus.

Deep fibular neuropathy can occur by patients whose nerves are compressed by trauma (ankle sprains or fractures), footwear (high heeled shoes, tight shoes, or high boots), or intrinsic causes as the nerve passes under the extensor retinaculum (osteophytes, ganglion cysts, or lipomas). Pressure from an anterior compartment syndrome can cause an isolated injury to the deep branch.