The maxillary nerve arises from the anterior convexity of trigeminal ganglion between ophthalmic and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve. It is a medium-sized branch compared to the smaller ophthalmic nerve and the larger mandibular nerve. It courses forward embedded in the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus along with the oculomotor nerve, trochlear nerve, and ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve. It runs inferior and lateral to the ophthalmic nerve.  It then leaves the middle cranial fossa through foramen rotundum and enters the superior part of the pterygopalatine fossa. The pterygopalatine fossa is a bilateral cone-shaped space posterior to the maxilla, where the maxillary nerve communicates with the parasympathetic pterygopalatine ganglion and gives off most of its branches.

As stated previously, the maxillary nerve is exclusively sensory and carries pain, temperature, and tactile information from the region below the orbits and above mouth. This includes lower eyelid, skin that covers the side of the nose, cheek, maxillary sinus, nasopharynx, nasal cavity, palate, upper teeth, upper lip, and dura mater of the middle cranial fossa. The sensory information from these areas moves along axons whose cell bodies are located in the trigeminal ganglion, located within Meckel’s cave. The central processes of these nerve fibers form the large sensory nerve root of the trigeminal nerve, which enters the brainstem at the level of the pons. The sensory information travels in the sensory nerve root and is relayed through the main trigeminal nucleus and nuclei of thalamus before it is processed in the cerebral cortex.