The etiology of diplopia is either eye misalignment if diplopia is binocular or an optical phenomenon if it is monocular. Eye misalignment can occur due to a variety of causes, and in order to understand it, one has to follow the anatomical algorithm of what needs to happen in order for the eyes to be aligned together. Both eyes have to receive equal innervation of all of their extraocular muscles in order to be in the so-called primary position when the innervation to antagonist extraocular muscles in each eye is equal. Innervation to extraocular muscles is provided by the 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves; thus, all three have to be working well on each side in order to maintain both eyes in the primary position and aligned with each other. The nuclei of all three of these cranial nerves originate in the brainstem (3rd and 4th in the midbrain and 6th in the pons). Their fascicles then traverse the brainstem exiting it ventrally in the case of the 3rd and 6th nerve and dorsally in the case of the 4th nerve. The nerves then travel variable distances in the subarachnoid space, where they are susceptible to a variety of pathologies affecting cerebrospinal fluid (inflammatory conditions, infections, and malignancies). Eventually, all oculomotor nerves (3rd, 4th, and 6th) emerge from the subarachnoid space and converge in the space filled with venous blood located laterally to each side of the pituitary gland, which is termed cavernous sinus. The cavernous sinus is surrounded by a lot of structures, and pathologies affecting these neighboring structures (sphenoid sinus, pituitary gland, nasopharynx, intracavernous carotid arteries, etc.) can affect any of the oculomotor nerves and thus cause diplopia. As all three oculomotor nerves are located in close proximity to each other in the cavernous sinus, when encountering a patient with more than one oculomotor nerve palsies, one should think of cavernous sinus as the most likely location of the causative lesion. From the cavernous sinuses, all three oculomotor nerves travel in close proximity to each other to enter the superior orbital fissure, where they are also located close to the 2nd cranial nerve (optic nerve); thus, lesions in the superior orbital fissure produce decrease vision and often forward displacement of the globe (proptosis) in addition to multiple oculomotor nerve palsies. From the superior orbital fissure, each nerve travels to the extraocular muscle it innervates through the orbit; thus, orbital pathology can produce diplopia as well. Eventually, the nerve will join the muscle that it innervates, and pathology at the neuromuscular junction can also cause ocular misalignment and thus binocular diplopia. Finally, extraocular muscles themselves need to be intact in order for the eyes to be aligned with each other; thus, myopathies can also produce diplopia.

Monocular diplopia is almost always an ophthalmological problem and stems most commonly from the cataractous changes in the crystalline lens, abnormalities in the corneal surface (keratoconus or uncorrected astigmatism), and exceedingly rarely lesions affecting occipital cortex can produce monocular diplopia as well (termed "cortical polyopia") in which case they are almost always accompanied by homonymous visual field defects. Finally, when no organic etiology for monocular diplopia can be found, and diplopia does not disappear when looking through a pinhole, one has to assume that it is functional in nature.