The conservative approach, with bed rest, oral hydration, remains the cornerstone in the management gross hematuria.

- Severe cases of hematuria need urine alkalinization, loop diuretics to increase urine flow, and blood transfusion.

- Hydroxycarbamide or hydroxyurea is the only proven drug for the management of SCD. It acts primarily by increasing the levels of HbF diluting the levels of HbS and reduce the risk of tetramerization. No randomized adult trial is available, but it is proven to help with hyperfiltration and microalbuminuria in observational studies in children and adolescents and should be considered in patients with early signs of renal disease.

- Though a recent systematic review has concluded that available evidence is not sufficient to conclude use of renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockade in SCN

- In patients with hypertension, the goal of a patient with proteinuria is less than 130/80 mm Hg.

- Evidence on chronic transfusions is mixed with one retrospective analysis showed protection against the development of microalbuminuria in children younger than 9 years of age. Prolonged courses of transfusions can lead to iron overload which poses challenges to treating clinicians.

- Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESA), can be useful in combination with hydroxyurea. ESA should be commenced when hemoglobin(Hg) drops 10% to 15% below the normal reference range. Hg target should be lower in patients with SCD given the risk of vaso-occlusive episodes.

- Hg goal for patients with SCN is recommended to be no more than 10 to 10.5 g/dL, and the rate of correction rate of the anemia is less than 1% to 2% per week, given the risk of precipitating a vaso-occlusive crisis.

- Intermittent intravenous iron supplementation might be warranted given prolonged subclinical gastrointestinal bleeding.

- Aminocaproic acid, which inhibits fibrinolysis by inhibiting plasmin activity, or desmopressin acetate which improves clotting via the increase in plasma factor VIII and von Willebrand factor, can be used in patients with gross hematuria from papillary necrosis.

- High dose urea (up to 160 gm per day) can be used in patients with refractory cases as its shown to prevent the tetramerization of sickle hemoglobin.

- Hemopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is potentially curative and is largely limited to children who remain resistant to hydroxyurea and with severe cerebrovascular complications, VOC episodes, and acute chest syndrome.

- Renal transplantation offers the best survival outcomes in patients with SCN who require renal replacement therapy.