The OBGYN generalist holds an important role as a patient counselor and also as the link to the reproductive endocrinologist. Patient counseling should include general ways to optimize fertility, including maintaining a healthy weight and upholding a healthy lifestyle, including smoking cessation and reduction of alcohol intake.

Another important role for the OBGYN generalist is the recognition of age-related fertility decline as a diagnosis for their patients. A prompt evaluation must be undertaken for patients who are 35 years and older who have been unsuccessfully attempting to conceive for six months; this also includes prompt referral to a fertility specialist. Given the more rapidly advancing nature of the disease after age 35, time for evaluation and treatment is of the essence for patients.

Additionally, one should think of testing women for decreased ovarian reserve beginning at the age of 35; this age parameter may be lowered for women with decreased ovarian reserve risk factors such as having only one ovary, those who have a history of ovarian surgery, anyone exposed to chemotherapy or radiation, as well as those patients who present with unexplained infertility. It is important to note that while the tests for ovarian reserve can provide information regarding the number of gametes a woman has left, the values provide no information regarding oocyte quality. Additionally, testing for ovarian reserve can provide some prediction regarding a patient’s potential response to gonadotropin stimulation as patients with decreased ovarian reserve have been shown to have less likelihood of success of pregnancy with artificial reproductive technology.

The preferred biomarker to evaluate in patients is the level of the anti-müllerian hormone (AMH), which has been shown to correlate to the available oocyte number. There is an established pattern of predicted AMH value by age, which can serve as a guide to where a patient’s AMH value correlates to the general population’s and thus can guide a physician in diagnosing decreased ovarian reserve. The only true treatment for age-related fertility decline due to reduced ovarian reserve is to use donor oocytes. A woman with diminished ovarian reserve should be offered the option of donor oocytes as her successful pregnancy rate is greater than attempts to conceive with her eggs even while using artificial reproductive technology.