Patient history is the single most important tool for diagnosing acute uncomplicated cystitis, and it should be supported by a focused examination and urinalysis. It is also important to rule out a more serious, complicated UTI. The new onset of frequency and dysuria, with the absence of a vaginal discharge, has a positive predictive value of 90% for a UTI.

**Sign/Symptoms**

- Cystitis: Frequency, dysuria, urgency, suprapubic pain, cloudy urine, and hematuria

- Pyelonephritis: Similar symptoms of cystitis but usually will have flank pain, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, and other systemic symptoms

- Elderly: Apart from a typical presentation, they may tend to have altered mental status, lethargy, and generalized weakness

The presence of a strong odor and/or a cloudy appearance without other symptoms is insufficient to diagnose a UTI or to initiate antibiotic treatment.

Cystitis can be either complicated or uncomplicated, and the workup and treatment are guided by identifying which category of infection is present.

An uncomplicated UTI is defined as a urinary infection in the absence of anatomical, comorbid, or functional abnormalities in an otherwise healthy, premenopausal, non-pregnant female.

Complicated urinary tract infections are essentially all urinary infections that do not meet the definition of an uncomplicated UTI. These would include anatomical or systemic factors that increase the chance of infection like male gender, poorly controlled diabetes, immunosuppression, renal failure (polycystic kidney), dialysis, hospital-acquired, bladder outflow obstruction (prostatic hypertrophy, urethral stricture), neuropathic bladder (multiple sclerosis, diabetes mellitus), urethral catheterization or ureteral stenting, ureterolithiasis, genitourinary surgery or malignancy, vesicoureteral reflux, and incomplete bladder emptying.

In the elderly, mental status changes alone are not sufficient to make a diagnosis of a UTI. Improving hydration, assessing the patient for other causes, and appropriate observation are indicated.

Management of recurrent UTIs is best reviewed in the American Urological Association Guidelines on Recurrent Urinary Tract Infections.

Relapsing infections (recurrent infections with the same organism) suggest urolithiasis, and appropriate studies (non-contrast CT, renal ultrasound) should be performed.

**Physical Exam**

A physical examination with acute uncomplicated cystitis is typically normal except in 10% to 20% of women with suprapubic tenderness. Acute pyelonephritis may be suspected if the patient is ill-appearing and seems uncomfortable, particularly if the patient has a concomitant fever, tachycardia, or costovertebral angle tenderness. A pelvic examination should be done in cases of suspected organ prolapse or recurrent UTIs.

**Self Diagnosis and Diagnosis by Telephone**

Two recent studies suggest that women who self-diagnose a UTI may be treated safely via telephone management.