**Intraoperative**

Removal of the wrong eye is the most feared intraoperative complication and can be avoided by careful attention, good communication, pre-surgery checks, and marking of the eye to be enucleated. During surgery, the loss of a rectus muscle can occur and can be minimized by placing the traction sutures carefully. If the muscle is lost and retracts into the orbit, a detailed search among the soft tissues can be undertaken. Grasping of the Tenon's fascia with forceps in a hand-over-hand fashion can help to visualize the muscle. The inter-muscular septae that are present between the extraocular muscles can be used to identify the retracted muscle. Prior to surgery, the patient's anticoagulation status will need to be ascertained and, if appropriate, discontinued during the perioperative period. Careful dissection, tissue handling, and cautery can reduce the risk of intraoperative orbital hemorrhage. Retrobulbar injection of anesthetic with epinephrine will also decrease intraoperative bleeding.

In the presence of an intraocular tumor such as melanoma or retinoblastoma, it may be necessary to obtain a long section of the optic nerve as there may be the posterior spread of the tumor along the optic nerve. When the globe is full of tumors, it can be difficult to remove an adequate length of the optic nerve (FIG 1). In these cases, usually children with large intraocular retinoblastomas, we use the superomedial approach to the orbit to identify the optic nerve and cut it under direct vision (Fig 2 & 3). This avoids the complication of transecting the globe accidentally or obtaining an inadequate length of the optic nerve.

**Postoperative**

Early Postoperative

Postoperative orbital hemorrhage after enucleation is rare with the use of compression bandages, and the precautions discussed earlier. If severe hemorrhage occurs, surgical exploration may be necessary, and separate incisions can decrease wound dehiscence and fat atrophy. Edema of the orbit after enucleation is common and usually settles down with time. Orbital infection is a rare complication but can lead to wound dehiscence, implant exposure, and extrusion. Symptoms can be increased chemosis and persistent pain in the socket. Infection can be more common with integrated orbital implants, and treatment with systemic antibiotics can be inadequate, necessitating implant removal.

Late Postoperative

A lax socket can develop from the secondary effects of time, gravity, and stretching of the soft tissues of the orbit by the prosthesis. It is a common late complication following enucleation, leading to downward and anterior migration of the orbital implant. A larger and heavier prosthesis can provide temporary relief but will cause greater downward migration and deepening of the superior sulcus with lower lid laxity with time.

The post-enucleation socket syndrome or anophthalmic syndrome (based upon the sterling work of Ton Smit

- Enophthalmos

- Deep superior sulcus

- Upper lid retraction/ptosis (one or both may occur)

- Lower eyelid laxity

- The fullness of the lower eyelid and shallowing of the inferior fornix (caused by the rotation of the orbital tissues that occur in an enucleated socket)

- Posterior tilt of the prosthesis

Enophthalmos may occur early or late. Many methods have been described at restoring the orbital volume. Rose et al. proposed sequential volume replacement, firstly using dermis fat graft or implant followed by a silastic block into the extraperiorbital space.