The history is the most important initial diagnostic tool for ruling out complement immunodeficiency. Recurrent Neisseria infection indicates possible late complement deficiencies (C5-C9) and early alternative pathway (properdin) deficiency. Severe recurrent pyogenic infection early in life should be an indication to rule out C3 immunodeficiency.

Infants may develop Leiner disease, which presents as wasting, recurrent diarrhea, and generalized seborrheic dermatitis. It is attributed to a pathology of C5. However, there are reports suggesting a role of diminished C3 and reduced neutrophil mobility.

There are three major pathophysiological sequelae of complement deficiencies:

**Inadequate Opsonization**

Opsonization is the process of making a pathogenic organism easy to ingest by the macrophage system. Defects in C3b or its cleavage product C3bi can lead to inadequate opsonization. The following can be various presentations of inadequate opsonization:

- Frequent sinopulmonary infections with pathogens such as Streptococcus pneumonia

- Autoimmune syndromes

- Encapsulated bacterial infections such as Neisseria meningitides and S pneumoniae

- 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

- Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome

- Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis

- Age-related macular degeneration

**Defects in Cell Lysis**

The defect in terminal cascade proteins also predisposes individuals to infection; however, the clinical history in these cases is different. The following are some consequences of these defects:

- Infection at an older age as opposed to patients with other complement deficiencies

- Lack of protection against many other nonbacterial pathogens, such as viruses, fungi, and mycobacteria

**Immune Complex Diseases**

Patients with the classic pathway complement deficiencies are more prone to develop immune complex diseases. The following are some sequelae of such defects:

- Seizures secondary to neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus

- Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome

- Arterial thrombosis

The examination may be normal if the patient is not actively infected or has autoimmunity. In a patient with active pneumococcal pneumonia, a physical exam demonstrates crackles or bronchial breath sounds on lung auscultation at peripheral lung fields. Egophony can be noted when significant consolidation is present. Examination of patients with meningitis frequently reveals meningismus. Patients may have positive Kernig or Brudzinski signs that show meningeal irritation. Other signs of Neisseria meningitidis infection include petechial rash and, in severe cases, can present with septic shock or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).