Vericiguat is a novel agent, an oral soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator used to treat heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) patients. It is also useful for chronic heart failure with recently decompensated or worsening heart failure, high-risk heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, especially for patients who had been rehospitalized or are on intravenous diuretic therapy, or patients requiring urgent treatment for heart failure.

Vericiguat was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in January 2021. It can serve as an add-on therapy for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction following worsening heart failure. Surprisingly, vericiguat has per patient per month budget impact of fewer than 10 cents, the reason being the reduction in HF hospitalizations and CV deaths.

Based on the phase III VICTORIA (Vericiguat in Patients with Heart Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction) trial results, the FDA approved vericiguat for patients with HFrEF.

According to ACC/AHA 2022 guidelines, heart failure(HF) has been classified as stage A (at risk of HF), Stage B (Pre-HF), Stage C (Symptomatic HF), and Stage D (advanced HF). Vericiguat should be considered for patients with Stage C HFrEF(Structural heart disease with current or previous symptoms of HF).

Researchers are awaiting the result of an ongoing trial of vericiguat for HFpEF to answer questions like the importance of measuring plasma or urinary cyclic GMP levels or whether atrial natriuretic peptide would be helpful. Assessment of nitric oxide level would be required to assess the best response of vericiguat. An important concern of combining vericiguat and sacubitril-valsartan (soluble guanylyl cyclase and particulate guanylyl cyclase) would have a synergistic effect, and the effect on adverse effect of hypotension or syncope is unanswered.