The lateral corticospinal tract contains over 90% of the fibers present in the corticospinal tract and runs the length of the spinal cord. The primary responsibility of the lateral corticospinal tract is to control the voluntary movement of contralateral limbs.

When a motor act is planned and initiated by the premotor and supplemental motor cortex to the primary motor cortex in the precentral gyrus to move the leg, an impulse generated from the primary motor cortex will be conducted through the lateral corticospinal tract ipsilaterally through the corona radiata. It passes through the posterior limb of the internal capsule, through the cerebral peduncle and basis pontis, decussates at the caudal medulla (pyramidal decussation), and then continues to descend contralaterally into the spinal cord. Once that impulse reaches the cell body in the anterior horn (lower motor neuron) of the spinal cord, the motor fibers from the lower motor neurons will leave the spinal cord, proceed through the spinal nerve root, plexus, peripheral nerve, and finally to the neuromuscular junction where the impulse is transmitted to the muscle fibers resulting in contraction of that limb muscles. Damage to any of these structures may cause motor deficits.

Due to the pyramidal decussation of the lateral corticospinal tract in the caudal medulla, damage rostral or caudal to this decussation will be the defining feature of whether there will be ipsilateral or contralateral deficits. For example, if there is a lesion in the precentral gyrus of the left cerebral cortex, the patient will exhibit upper motor neuron signs with damage to the right side of the body. Contrarily, if there is spinal cord damage on the left side (below the pyramidal decussation), motor deficits will be present on the left side of the body. If there is spinal cord damage at the level of the anterior horn, then lower motor neuron signs will be present with ipsilateral deficits.