COVID-19 (coronavirus 2019) vaccines are indicated for the prevention of coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), which is caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus.

The virus's transmission mode is mainly through infected individuals' respiratory droplets.

The COVID-19 disease can have various manifestations, with increased susceptibility in individuals with comorbidities and immunosuppression.

Organ system manifestations include:

**Respiratory**

- Mild to severe pneumonia

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)

**Central Nervous System**

- Meningitis

- Encephalitis

- Encephalopathy

- Cerebrovascular event

- Chemosensory dysfunction (altered taste and smell)

**Cardiovascular**

- Myocarditis

- Dysrhythmias

- Coronary heart disease

- Cardiomyopathy

**Renal**

- Acute kidney injury

**Gastrointestinal**

- Moderate to severe diarrhea

**Currently Available Vaccines**

On December 11, 2020, an emergency use authorization (EUA) was granted by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to the BNT162b2 vaccine to prevent COVID-19 illness with vaccine distribution in the US 48 hours later. Soon after, the second vaccine, mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2, was granted emergency use authorization on December 18, 2020.

On August 23, 2021, the FDA approved its first COVID-19 vaccine, the BNT162b2 - COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA for individuals 12 years and above. The second approval was given on January 31, 2022, to the mRNA-1273 - COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA in individuals 18 years and above.

**FDA Approved**

- BNT162b2 - for 12 years of age and above

- mRNA-1273- for 18 years of age and above

**FDA Emergency Use Authorization (EUA)**

- **BNT162b2**
- For individuals aged 6 months to 4 years, the vaccine has EUA as a three-dose primary series.
- For individuals aged 5 years and above, the vaccine has EUA as a two-dose primary series.
- For immunocompromised individuals aged 5 years and older, the vaccine has EUA as a three-dose primary series.
- A bivalent vaccine formulation to include the original vaccine and Omicron BA.4/BA.5 is now authorized as a booster dose for individuals aged 12 years or older.

- **mRNA-1273**
- For individuals aged 12 to 17 years, the vaccine has EUA as a two-dose primary series.
- For immunocompromised individuals aged 12 years and older, the vaccine has EUA as a three-dose primary series.
- For individuals aged 6 months and above, the vaccine has EUA as a two-dose primary series.
- For immunocompromised individuals aged 6 months and above, the vaccine has EUA for a third primary series dose.
- A bivalent formulation of this vaccine with Omicron BA.4/BA.5 is authorized as a booster dose for individuals aged 18 years or older.

- **Ad26.COV2.S**
- Single-dose primary vaccine in individuals aged 18 years and above.
- Single dose booster in individuals aged 18 years and above two months following the primary vaccination.
- The EUA for this vaccine limits its use to individuals who cannot or elect not to use an mRNA vaccine due to the risk of vaccine-induced thrombotic thrombocytopenia.

- **NVX-CoV2373**
- It is an adjuvanted recombinant protein vaccine.
- Authorized for individuals aged 12 years or older as a two-dose primary series.
- Not authorized to be given as primary series for individuals with immunocompromising conditions.

**Vaccine Efficacy**

Covid-19 vaccines have been instrumental in curbing the intensity of this pandemic and decreasing the morbidity and mortality of this disease. COVID-19-associated hospitalizations and emergency/urgent care evaluations significantly improved with these vaccines.

A study from the United States evaluated the efficacy of BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273 vaccines in preventing severe illness for individuals at the highest risk of severe COVID-19 illness (those with advanced age and underlying comorbidities) by comparing their outcomes to unvaccinated individuals. The study stated that vaccine effectiveness 7 or more days after the second dose of the vaccine was 69% in preventing infection and 86% against severe disease/death.