**Contact Lenses Available for Presbyopia**

**Bifocals**

These lenses have two portions with different power. These are available in various forms as RGP lenses and hydrogel forms. The fitting of bifocal lenses is either based on the principle of alternating/ translating or simultaneous/ segmented design.

**Simultaneous Vision Contact Lenses**

The light enters simultaneously from far, intermediate, and near. These lenses simultaneously provide both distant and near vision and are not dependent on contact lens movement. Distance or near one image is selected by eth brain, and the other image is ignored.

- Concentric

- Aspheric

- Diffractive

**Advantages**

These lenses are available as rigid gas lenses and soft contact lens designs. The pupil has simultaneous near and distance vision correction—the larger the pupil, the better the alternating designs. The lenses are light-dependent, but they do not depend on gaze. These are more comfortable than segmented designs. These lenses are easier to fit, and the fitting characteristics are similar to single-vision lenses.

**Disadvantages**

These lenses are unsuitable for low illumination and give decreased visual acuity and contrast sensitivity. The lenses depend on pupillary size, compromise the intermediate vision and give difficulty in accurate over-refraction.

**Concentric Simultaneous Lenses**

These lenses demonstrate a sharp distinction between distant and near powers. They can be concentric near or concentric distance. The zones can be located on the front and back surface but are primarily designed on the anterior surface. The zone can be between 3 to 4 mm, and the lens functioning depends on the pupil size.

**Aspheric Bifocal Simultaneous Vision Lenses**

This is a progressive type of contact in which the anterior and posterior surface curvature is altered to allow simultaneous distance and near vision. The zones can be on the front surface as well as the back surface. There can be a center distance (C-D) and center near (C-N) surfaces.

The back aspheric surface allows distance fixation, and the front aspheric surface allows near fixation. The power of these lenses increases or decreases uniformly. These lenses are not true bifocal lenses; they improve the depth of perception and field depth of the retina associated with the near range of the subject. These lenses also provide a modified monovision mechanism approach.

**Diffractive Lenses**

These lenses have concentric rings, as seen in Fresnel prisms. These lenses are made up of multiple increasing-size zones arranged concentrically. These are the best fit for moderate myopia. These lenses provide high-resolution and sharp images. The pupil size has minimal to no effect on the lens performance. These are good quality lenses that are easier to fit.

**Disadvantages**

These lenses give poor visual acuity in low ambient illumination, and night driving also becomes difficult.

**Alternating or Translating Bifocal Contact Lenses**

These lenses can be rigid gas-permeable or soft contact lenses and have a reading segment located away from the center. These patients should look above for distance and below for near, as they have alternate sections. These lenses usually translate so that the vision alternate between distant and near.

**Considerations For Fitting Alternating Bifocals**

These lenses require a predetermined power for near addition. The size, shape, and height of the near segment above the lens's lower edge are considered. The thickness of the lowest edge of the lens, prism ballast, vertical meridian thickness, and lens stability are other factors in consideration.

**Advantages**

These lenses are ideal for patients who require higher addition for near, those who need better stereopsis at both distance and near, those with less tolerance for blur, and those who have failed the simultaneous lenses trial.

**Disadvantages**

The head position, patient attitude, and movement may require a change for the patient. The bifocal lenses should change without significant rotational power. There is an issue with the image jump. The translational movement must be good enough to relocate the near zones of the majority of the pupils. The translational change and re-centration must be faster. The non-ideal translational movement may result in reduced visual acuity.

**Requirements**

- Pupil coverage

- Translational movement from down to near in down-gaze

- The fitting of the lens to the anterior surface of the cornea must be acceptable

- The post-blink recovery should be rapid

- The orientation should be correct

- The centration must be inferior in downgaze

**Contraindications**

- Ptosis

- Lax lids

- High riding of the lower lid

- Large pupil

- Low blink rate

- High riding of lenses

- Poorly motivated patients

- Lower power needed

- Intolerance to RGP

- Near-vision activities performed close to the eye in the primary gaze

**Rules of Fitting Rigid Gas Permeable Bifocal Lenses**

- The lens is made to sit in the flattest K

- The back optical zone diameter (BOZD) must be larger

- The total diameter must be selected carefully

- The lens should move sufficiently over the eye to ensure that the correct area of the lens should be able to cover three-quarters of the pupil area for both distance and near.

**Monovision**

Monovision is a technique where one eye is corrected for distance, and another is corrected for near. It is based on the principle that the visual apparatus can reduce the central image of focus, and the intended object is seen clearly. In this fitting technique, there occurs some disruption in binocularity.

**Eye Dominance Test**

The prime requirement for this test is the arms and hands of the subject, and an object kept 3 meters from the subject. In this test, the subject's arms are extended in front of the body, and the hands are clubbed to make a small triangle between the thumbs and the knuckle. With both eyes wide open, the subject looks through the triangle and focuses on a small object. Next, the left eye of the examiner is closed. If the object remains in view, the subject is right-eye dominant, and if the hand moves away from the object and to the left, the subject is left-eye dominant.

**Contraindications**

- One-eyed patients (corneal scar, amblyopia, Phthisis bulbi, etc.)

- Absence of binocularity

- Reduced stereopsis

- Less or no adaptation to monovision

- Confusion

- Imbalance

- Reduced quality of vision

- Reduced contrasts sensitivity

- Suppression

**Difficulties Encountered in Monovision**

- Stronger ocular dominance

- Large pupil size poses difficulty

- Intermediate vision reduction if the power is more than two dioptres

- Difficulty in night driving

- Tasks needing smoother shifting of gaze

- Blurred, small, and bright stimulus against a dark background

**Advantages**

- These are simple lenses to fit

- These lenses are well suited for presbyopes

- The success rate of monovision lenses is approximately 73%

- These lenses are cheaper similar to simultaneous vision lenses

- In uncomplicated cases usually, less time is required

- The monovision lens fitting is simple

- The monovision lenses can also be optimized for distance as well as near

- These lenses are best suited for social or occasional users

- These lenses are accepted or rejected quickly

**Disadvantages**

- Reduction in stereoacuity

- Reduction in contrast sensitivity

- Reduction in distant acuity

- Loss of clarity for intermediate visual acuity

- The speed of near work is reduced

- These are not a suitable option for amblyopic patients

- These are also not suitable for patients with binocular visual anomalies

- These lenses may cause night vision problems

- These lenses may result in sustained refractive error after a long period of use.

**Contraindications**

- Issues with binocular vision

- Amblyopia patients

- Low lighting conditions

- Patients with finer visual tasks who require more stereopsis

**Guidelines for Monovision Lens Application**

- The first step is to identify the dominant eye.

- Correct the maximum distance visual acuity and correct astigmatism of more than 0.75D

- Use disposable contact lenses for a less costly trial

- Change the trial of the eye if required

- The lens should be discontinued if not acceptable

- The correction should start with the least plus lens that provides a clear near vision.

- The aim should be to maximize the spectrum of clear vision

- Newer presbyopes have difficulty in suppressing the power if the difference between the eyes is smaller

- Older patients have difficulty if addition is very high

**Factors Considered While Monovision Fitting and Prescription**

- Binocular visual acuity testing to assess the effect of the monovision phenomenon on stereopsis

- A good eye for near visual acuity must be selected

- The near power add should be explained to the patient

- Don't compare the two eyes of the patient

- The patient should be educated about vision improvement with time

- Night driving should be avoided

- The patient may require up to 2 to 6 weeks to fully adapt to monovision.

**Modified Monovision Strategy**

In this technique, the first eye is added with distant correction, and another eye is added with a bifocal lens. The binocularity is improved, and stereo acuity is reduced in these patients. This technique is also of greater use in highly sensitive patients to distant vision.