# Continuing Education Activity

Pulsatile tinnitus is a relatively rare type of tinnitus with a complex differential diagnosis. Practitioners need to know the proper workup for such patients to identify potential conditions that can increase patient mortality and morbidity. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of pulsatile tinnitus and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this symptom.

**Objectives:**
- Identify key aspects of patient history associated with pulsatile tinnitus.
- Summarize the etiologies of pulsatile tinnitus.
- Outline the management considerations for patients with pulsatile tinnitus.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by pulsatile tinnitus.

# Introduction

Tinnitus is the perception of sound absent an auditory stimulus and is a common complaint in the otologist's office. Tinnitus can be acute or chronic, depending on the underlying pathophysiology. Up to 75% of adults have experienced at least one episode of acute or chronic tinnitus.

# Etiology

The etiology of pulsatile tinnitus can be broadly broken down into two categories: vascular and non-vascular. Vascular causes can then be subcategorized into arterial vs. venous, with arterial causes being more common.

# Epidemiology

The epidemiology of tinnitus is poorly defined as there is no standard for determining tinnitus in patients. Up to 75% of adults have experienced at least one episode of tinnitus.

# History and Physical

When a patient presents with tinnitus, the most critical step is to obtain a thorough history. One of the most important distinctions to make is if the tinnitus is pulsatile or non-pulsatile. The next step is to determine if the tinnitus is unilateral or bilateral. This distinction will help with directing your questioning and eventually guide your workup. Both pulsatile and non-pulsatile tinnitus can be unilateral or bilateral. Other important questions include the onset of symptoms, aggravating or alleviating factors, duration, and change in symptom quality or severity.

The physical exam is essential for patients with pulsatile tinnitus. In general, the physical exam will allow the practitioner to further categorize the pulsatile tinnitus into subjective vs. objective. Every patient should receive an in-depth head and neck exam, paying particular attention to pneumatic otoscopy, cranial nerve exam, and tuning fork exams. Otoscopy may help in identifying paragangliomas, aberrant carotid arteries, otitis media, and eustachian tube dysfunction. Tympanic paragangliomas, also known as glomus tumors, may present as a pulsatile mass on the medial side of the tympanic membrane. A rhythmic motion of the tympanic membrane may be suggestive of tensor tympani myoclonus. Pneumatic otoscopy may suggest otosclerosis or cause nystagmus, which may be indicative of labyrinthine fistula. The palpation of the temporomandibular joint can help identify pathology, which may be contributing to symptoms.

In addition to a head and neck examination, it is important to do a full cardiac examination, including auscultation for carotid bruits. The cardiac examination, along with vitals, can help evaluate causes such as carotid bruits, hypertension, and aortic stenosis. This is also a good time to ascertain if the tinnitus is synchronous with the heartbeat helping to identify underlying arterial pathology.

Palpation can also help to evaluate if compression changes the patient’s symptoms, which may help differentiate venous vs. arterial etiologies. If compression of arterial structures decreases symptoms, it suggests an arterial cause. Compression of ipsilateral venous structures may decrease symptoms in venous etiologies such as a high-riding jugular bulb, while compression of the contralateral side may increase symptoms. Rotation of the head to the ipsilateral side of the tinnitus may also decrease symptoms in patients with pulsatile tinnitus due to venous pathology. Similarly, the Valsalva maneuver may reduce symptoms with a venous cause.

# Evaluation

The workup for patients with pulsatile tinnitus should begin with an audiologic evaluation, including pure tone and speech audiometry with tympanograms. If the examiner notes a low-frequency loss of at least 20 dB, it is appropriate to repeat an audiogram with light pressure over the ipsilateral internal jugular vein.

Following audiogram and basic labs, clinical suspicion should guide the work-up.

# Treatment / Management

Up to 70% of patients will have an identifiable cause of their pulsatile tinnitus, which will direct patient management.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential for pulsatile tinnitus is very broad and can be overwhelming. It is essential first to try and determine if the tinnitus is vascular or non-vascular. Vascular lesions require further categorization into arterial vs. venous etiology. Figure 1 has a helpful flowchart that includes an extensive list of potential etiologies. Using this progression will help direct management and care for the majority of patients presenting with pulsatile tinnitus.

Common conditions include:

- Arteriovenous fistula

- Atherosclerotic vascular stenosis

- Idiopathic intracranial hypertension

- Anomalous basilar artery

- Paraganglioma

- Tensor tympani myoclous

- Paget Disease

- Otosclerosis

# Prognosis

The prognosis for pulsatile tinnitus varies considerably based on the etiology. Pulsatile tinnitus due to extensive cardiovascular disease may have a detrimental impact on patient morbidity and mortality. However, other causes may have no serious long-term effects on the patient. It is also possible that patients will have a resolution of their symptoms following treatment of the underlying cause. Early detection and treatment are the optimal means to improve patient outcomes.

# Complications

Complications from pulsatile tinnitus will vary based on the etiology. Some pathology will be benign to the patient; however, the patient’s tinnitus may be a symptom of a much more serious disease. Morbidity is possible both from the pathophysiology itself and as a result of attempting to treat the patient with invasive modalities such as surgery and radiation.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is essential to allow the patient to partake in their treatment plan, achieved by keeping them informed about their diagnosis. Despite the wide variety of etiologies for pulsatile tinnitus, it is vital that patients understand their disease process. One such example would be patients with carotid bruits. This group of patients should receive counsel on ways to improve their cardiovascular health and the importance of following up regularly with their primary care team. It is also important to reassure patients with idiopathic pulsatile tinnitus that there is no significant identifiable pathology. Some patients can tolerate their symptoms as long as they receive reassurance that they do not have serious pathology.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with pulsatile tinnitus can present in many different clinical environments. Health practitioners in primary care need to know when it is appropriate to refer patients to an otolaryngologist. In the otolaryngology office, the physician will work closely with the audiologist to help begin the work-up on the patient. Otolaryngology specialty trained nurses play a crucial role as they will help coordinate future appointments and imaging studies that may be necessary. They will also assist in educating the patient and family regarding the condition and any medications they try. After a thorough workup, the otolaryngologist needs to begin constructing a treatment team based on the suspected etiology of the patient’s symptoms. This team may include practitioners from radiology, neurosurgery, cardiology, otolaryngology nurses, and the primary care team. If surgery becomes a treatment modality, the health-care team will grow immensely to include nurses, surgical technicians, pharmacists, and physical therapists. These health care professionals will all play a vital role in providing patients with quality care, and a team approach will produce the best outcomes. [Level 5]