**Dry cough**: In the lung tissues, ramipril inhibits the degradation of bradykinin which is a substrate of angiotensin-converting enzyme. Higher levels of Bradykinin cause a dry cough. This side effect is more prevalent in patients of Afro-Caribbean descent than in other cohorts. It usually occurs within a few months of treatment and resolves within one month after discontinuation of the medication.

**Postural hypotension**: Some patients may develop postural hypotension and may also have fallen as a result, which can lead to a higher risk of head injuries and bone fractures, especially in elderly patients. Dizziness and lightheadedness are related to postural hypotension when patients suddenly stand up from a sitting or lying position. Patients should receive counseling regarding symptoms of postural hypotension during treatment initiation.

**Elevated serum creatinine:**Ramipril may cause a transient increase in serum creatinine in 1% to 2% of the patients.

**Hyperkalemia:**In 1% to 10% of patients, hyperkalemia has been present.

**Anxiety-like symptoms:**Patients who are known to have anxiety or tremors should be watched for these symptoms for a few weeks at a minimum when initiating ramipril.

**Angioedema:**Ramipril can cause angioedema at any time during treatment. It involves the head and neck (which may compromise the airway) or the intestine.

A few other rare side effects include hypoperfusion, movement disorders, onycholysis, and oral disorders. [British National Formulary]