Histological examination of a prostate needle biopsy currently represents the gold standard in establishing a diagnosis of localized prostate cancer. The diagnosis is most commonly based on microscopic criteria such as glandular architecture (infiltrative growth pattern), perineural invasion, prominent nucleoli, and absence of a defined basal cell layer on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained slides.

Biopsy interpretation can be challenging; in equivocal cases, immunohistochemistry to specific basal cell proteins can differentiate benign from malignant tissue. Although these stains (e.g., p63, cytokeratin 5/6, keratin 903) can be helpful in establishing a diagnosis of cancer, there may also be a disrupted basal cell layer in some benign small glands. In these situations, a cancer diagnosis is based on morphology and confirmed by positivity for a-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) cytoplasmic staining. AMACR is expressed by approximately 80% of prostatic adenocarcinoma on needle biopsy.

Grading is assigned by the Gleason system, which was introduced in 1966 and updated in 2005 and 2014. Gleason grade is based on growth patterns with patterns ranging from 1 to 5. In practice, Gleason grades 1 and 2 are not usually described, and grade 3 (infiltrative growth pattern) represents the modern entry criterion for a diagnosis of prostate cancer.

Several grades often co-exist in a single biopsy core or in separate biopsy cores. In most cases, the Gleason score (GS) is the sum of the most common (primary) and the second most common (secondary) grade patterns. If a pattern 4 or 5 forms >95% of a specimen, any lower grade pattern representing <5% is ignored (for example, 97% pattern 4 and 3% pattern 3 is Gleason (4 + 4) rather than (4 + 3)). If any amount of pattern 4 or 5 is seen within a specimen, it is included in the GS, even if it forms the tertiary pattern.

For practical purposes, Gleason 6 (3 + 3) is the lowest score usually seen, and patients should be counseled that grade 6/10 is actually considered low grade. Most recently, the International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) has recommended that Gleason scores ≤6, 3 + 4 = 7, 4 + 3 = 7, 8, and 9-10 be reported as five Gleason group grades, i.e., ISUP groups 1-5 respectively (Table 2). This system provides additional prognostic benefit by separating out Gleason score 7 diseases into 3+4 (Group 2) and 4+3 (higher risk Group 3).