**Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)**is a non-encapsulated, poorly circumscribed mass with cystic components that can often be mistaken for mucoceles.

**Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma (AdCC)**presents as a non-encapsulated, well-circumscribed mass with biphasic ductal and myoepithelial components and three distinct patterns: tubular, cribriform, and solid.

**Acinic Cell Carcinoma (ACC)**presents with several growth patterns, including solid (most common), papillary-cystic, follicular, and microcystic.

**Carcinoma ex-Pleomorphic Adenoma (CExPA)**arises from an existing pleomorphic adenoma and can histologically resemble salivary duct carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or undifferentiated carcinoma.

**Polymorphous Low-Grade Adenocarcinoma (PLGA)**presents as an unencapsulated mass and is predominantly seen on the palate where there is a high concentration of minor salivary glands. Histologically, it can resemble AdCC and has an infiltrative growth pattern with a mixture of solid, cribriform, tubular, and cystic patterns.

**Salivary Duct Carcinoma**is similar in histology to high-grade duct carcinoma of the breast.

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC)**presents with intracellular keratinization, intercellular bridging, and keratin-pearl formation without any intracellular mucin.

**Melanoma**of the parotid presents with large, rounded eosinophilic cells with a pleomorphic nucleus and prominent nuclei.

**Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL)**of the major salivary gland presents with atypical lymphocytes with invasion into the adjacent ductal epithelium, lymphoepithelial lesions, and lymphoid follicles or germinal centers.

A high-grade transformation is a rare event that involves the transformation of a well-differentiated tumor into an aggressive, poorly differentiated, high-grade morphology that lacks any original histologic characteristics. It can be seen in AdCC, ACC, PLGA, and MEC.