**History:**

Rectoceles have a broad range of symptoms. Some patients may present as asymptomatic while others may demonstrate a significant impact on the quality of life, including the following symptoms

- Pelvic pain/pressure

- Posterior vaginal bulge

- Obstructive defecation

- Incomplete defecation

- Constipation

- Dyspareunia

- Erosions and bleeding of mucosa if there is tissue exposure to the outside environment

**Physical Exam:**

A thorough examination will include a vaginal exam, rectal exam, abdominal exam, and focused neurological exam.

The focused neurological exam consists of levator ani muscle tone and contraction strength.

The vaginal exam can be evaluated using the Baden-Walker or POP-Q exam. The Baden-Walker system utilizes one measurement. The distance of the most distal portion of the prolapse from the hymen while the patient is completing the Valsalva maneuver.

-  Grade 0 - normal position

-  Grade 1 - Descent halfway to the hymen

-  Grade 2 - Descent to the hymen

-  Grade 3 - Descent halfway past the hymen

-  Grade 4 - Descent is as far as possible past the hymen

The POP-Q system involves taking several measurements and is more complex, but it is highly reliable. The posterior points Ap and Bp are the measurements needed to determine the severity of the rectocele.

- TVL: total vaginal length after reducing the prolapse

- Gh: Genital hiatus length

- Pb: perineal body length

- Ap: A Point on the posterior vaginal wall that is 3 cm proximal to the hymen

- Bp: A point that is the most distal position of the remaining upper posterior vaginal wall

- C: Cervical depth

- D: Posterior fornix depth (only in patients with a uterus)

- Aa: anterior point analogous to Ap

- Ba: anterior point analogous to Bp

These points are measured while the patient is performing the Valsalva maneuver. The range of values for the Ap and Bp points, which are important for rectocele measurement, is -3 cm to +3 cm for the Ap point and -3cm to +tvl length in the Bp point. The POP-Q staging criteria are

- Stage 0: Ap, Bp at the leading edge (X) = -3 cm

- Stage I: X less than -1 cm

- Stage II: -1 cm less than X less than +1 cm

- Stage III: +1 cm less than X less than +(TVL-2) cm

- Stage IV: X greater than +(TVL-2) cm