The etiology of developmental delay is multifactorial. The etiology for the vast majority of developmental delay is idiopathic.  When known, etiology may include genetic, environmental, and/or psychosocial factors.

**Genetic:**There is no known genetic substrate for developmental delay, per se.  However, developmental patterns are often familial, including late walking and talking.  Nonetheless, these developmental delays can also represent risks for syndromes or developmental disorders.  There is a considerable variation in the genetics of developmental disorders, ranging from copy number variants (CNV's), insertions, deletions, and duplications. While most are rare variants, some represent common variants. The most common, known genetic factor for ID is Fragile X syndrome, a trinucleotide repeat disorder (CGG) targeting the Fragile Mental Retardation 1(FMR1) gene located on X-chromosome. Fragile X appears to confer risk for ASD, as well. Imprinting can also be seen as is the case of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndrome, which vary with paternal (Prader-Willi) and maternal (Angelman) loss of function on chromosome 15q. Both developmental delay and physical phenotypes can be associated with other disorders in which there are extra chromosomes or pieces of chromosomes, for example, Down syndrome (trisomy 21), Edward syndrome(trisomy 18) & Patau syndrome (trisomy 13).

**Environmental****:**A wide number of environmental factors can lead to developmental delays and subsequent developmental disorders.  These factors can affect development at a single of multiple points in the developmental process.

**Antenatal:**

- Heritable disorders — for example (e.g.) Fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome, or chromosomal microdeletion and duplications.

- Early maternal infections, (e.g., rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), toxoplasmosis

- Late maternal infections, (e.g., varicella, HIV, malaria, etc.)

- Primigravida

- Short inter-pregnancy interval

- Teen pregnancy

- Vascular — comprises of hemorrhage and occlusion

- Prescribed medications — include antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), cytotoxic

- Teratogens/toxins — include smoking, alcohol, opioids, etc.

- Poverty

**Perinatal:**

- Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR)**,**prematurity, periventricular leukomalacia

- Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), perinatal asphyxia

- Metabolic — Hypoglycemia, bilirubin-related neurotoxicity, etc.

- Poverty

**Postnatal:**

- Metabolic disorders like hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, or hypovolemia

- Inborn errors of metabolism - PKU

- Teratogens/toxins — such as lead, arsenic, mercury, etc.

- Trauma — head trauma

- Infections (e.g., neonatal meningitis, encephalitis)

- Maternal stress — such as depression, anxiety, etc.

- Maltreatment, intimate partner, and/or domestic violence

- Poverty

- Malnutrition — especially multivitamins and minerals deficiency, such as iron, folate, Vitamin D, calcium, etc.