The ocular surface has two types of epithelial cells that populate the corneal and conjunctival surfaces. The border of these cell types is the corneoscleral limbus. Stem cells for corneal epithelium are found in the basal cell layer of limbal epithelial ridges called the palisades of Vogt, although not exclusively. These papillary epithelial structures are heavily pigmented to protect from UV radiation and provides a microenvironment conducive for stem cell survival and function. The palisades of Vogt may be visualized, extending radially into the bulbar conjunctiva with slit-lamp microscopy.

The palisades of Vogt and consequently, limbal stem cells are found in higher concentrations in the superior and inferior limbal regions and less so in the nasal and temporal regions. This observation may be explained by the added protection eyelids offer to these regions from insults such as chemical agents or UV radiation.

Proliferation and asymmetric division of these limbal stem cells produce cells that migrate centripetally and anteriorly and eventually terminally differentiate and desquamate off the corneal surface. This maintains corneal epithelial integrity and heals epithelial defects. These stem cells also have the critical role of preventing the surrounding bulbar conjunctival epithelium from invading the corneal surface.

Limbal Stem Cell Deficiency (LSCD)

LSCD is an ocular surface disease resulting from depletion or dysfunction of the limbal stem cells, thus leading to corneal inflammation, vascularization, and pannus formation. However, these pathologies are seen in many disease processes other than LSCD. A characteristic feature of LSCD is conjunctivalization. Conjunctivalization is the result of conjunctival epithelium invasion and subsequent transformation into an epithelium composed of conjunctival epithelial cells with or without neovascularization or a metaplastic mixture of corneal and conjunctival cells. The invading conjunctival tissue may even lose goblet cells, normally seen in conjunctival epithelium.

Depending on the degree of stem cell damage, the corneal surface may have incomplete conjunctivalization with some normal limbus and corneal epithelium remaining seen in partial LSCD. In total LSCD, the entire corneal surface may be enveloped by conjuntivalized epithelium. The pathologic epithelium is thinner and more permeable to large molecules, which allows for the differentiation between normal and abnormal epithelium with fluorescein staining. Patients with LSCD may be asymptomatic or present with decreased vision, corneal discomfort, pain, recurrent epithelial erosions, and infections.

The causes of LSCD may be hereditary or acquired.

- Acquired and non-immune-mediated causes include chemical and thermal burns, contact lens-induced LSCD, surgery involving the limbus, drug toxicity, bullous keratopathy, and infectious keratopathy.

- Immune-mediated causes include Stevens-Johnson syndrome, mucous membrane pemphigoid, vernal keratoconjunctivitis, atopic keratoconjunctivitis, and graft-vs-host disease.

- Hereditary causes include congenital aniridia, xeroderma pigmentosa, dyskeratosis congenita, and epidermolysis bullosa.