DLTs have 2 endotracheal tubes (ETT) that are "bonded" together, to allow each tube to ventilate a specific lung. The DLT can be left-sided or right-sided depending on the main stem bronchus which its distal (longer) lumen is designed to fit in. The longer lumen (bronchial lumen) is designed to reach the main stem bronchus while the shorter lumen (tracheal) ends in the distal trachea. [Figure 1] There are several types of double lumen tubes. However, all are similar in design and made of Polyvinyl chloride. Most DLTs have color-coded cuffs and pilot balloons. The bronchial cuff, which is typically a high-pressure low volume cuff, and its pilot balloon are blue, while the tracheal cuff which is a high volume low-pressure cuff, and its pilot balloon are clear.

The DLT is supplied in a package containing the tube with a stylet, connector, and suction catheters. Depending on the manufacturer, they may also come with an apparatus to provide continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) to the non-ventilated lung. There are different manufacturers.

When seen in cross-section, each tube is D shaped. They come in different sizes  — 26 Fr, 28 Fr, 32 Fr, 35 Fr, 37 Fr, 39 Fr, and 41 Fr.

The margin of safety is higher for the placement of left-sided DLT due to the longer length of the left main stem bronchus. Placement of a right-sided DLT is more challenging with a lower safety margin due to the short length of the right mainstem bronchus and the origination of the right-upper lobe bronchus 1.5 to 2 cm from the carina.

Reviewing a chest x-ray, CT scan, or MRI before placing a right-sided DLT may help to locate the position of the right upper lobe take off from the right mainstem bronchus.

Because of the higher safety margin, a left-sided DLT is commonly used. However, right-sided DLT may be preferred when it is important to avoid manipulation of left bronchus or when left bronchus is narrowed or has anatomical variations, left pneumectomy, left lung transplant, left mainstem bronchus stent or suspected disruption of the left tracheobronchial tree.