Obesity is associated with cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance, in turn, causing diabetes, stroke, gallstones, fatty liver, obesity hypoventilation syndrome, sleep apnea, and cancers.

Association of genetics and obesity is already well established by multiple studies. FTO gene is associated with adiposity. This gene might harbor multiple variants that increase the risk of obesity.

Leptin is an adipocyte hormone which reduces food intake and body weight. Cellular leptin resistance is associated with obesity. Adipose tissue secretes adipokines and free fatty acids causing systemic inflammation which causes insulin resistance and increased triglyceride levels, which subsequently contributes to obesity.

Obesity can cause increased fatty acid deposition in the myocardium causing left ventricular dysfunction. It has also been shown to alter the renin-angiotensin system causing increasing salt retention and elevated blood pressure.

Besides total body fat, the following also increase the morbidity of obesity:

- Waist circumference (abdominal fat carries a poor prognosis)

- Fat distribution (Body Fat Heterogeneity)

- Intra-abdominal pressure

- Age of onset of obesity

The body fat distribution is important in assessing the risk for cardiometabolic health. The distribution of excess visceral fat is likely to increase the risk of cardiovascular disease.

Metabolically healthy obese (MHO) Individuals have BMI over 30 kg/m2 but do not have the characteristics of insulin resistance or dyslipidemia

Adipocytes have been shown to have an inflammatory and prothrombotic activity which can increase the risk of strokes. Adipokines are cytokines mainly produced by adipocytes and preadipocytes, in obesity macrophages invading the tissue, also produce adipokines.

Altered adipokine secretion causes chronic low-grade inflammation, which may cause altered glucose and lipid metabolism and contribute to cardiometabolic risk in visceral obesity.

Adiponectin has insulin-sensitizing and anti-inflammatory properties, the circulating levels are inversely proportional to visceral obesity.