**Opioids**

Endogenous opioids are present physiologically in the body, which help in the modulation of pain by acting on presynaptic μ-, κ-, and δ-opioid receptors to reduce excitatory neurotransmitter release by decreasing calcium influx in the presynaptic membrane and increasing potassium influx in the postsynaptic membrane.

Physicochemical properties, particularly lipid solubility and fraction un-ionized, dominate in determining distribution in the body and the rate of access to the biophase containing the drug receptors. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of opioids of the fentanyl group, methadone, and morphine are characterized with respect to their features. Alfentanil and remifentanil have equilibration half-lives between plasma and effect site of about 1 minute. It is followed by fentanyl and sufentanil, with equilibration half-lives of almost 6 minutes. Methadone has a half-life of about 8 min.

**Cannabinoids**

Similar to opioids, endocannabinoids are also synthesized physiologically and released in the body by synapses to act on the cannabinoid receptors present on presynaptic endings to perform the following functions:

- Decrease release of neurotransmitters

- Fire descending inhibitory pain pathways

- Decrease postsynaptic sensitivity and reduce neural inflammation

The pharmacokinetic properties of marijuana depend on its route of administration. Pulmonary inhalation of inhaled marijuana causes a maximum plasma concentration within minutes, and subsequently, psychiatric effects start within seconds to a few minutes, which reach a maximum after 15 and 30 minutes, and start tapering off within 2 to 3 hours. Following oral ingestion, psychiatric effects start with a delay of 30 to 90 minutes, reach their maximum after 2 to 3 hours, and last for about 4 to 12 hours.