9vHPV administration is an intramuscular (IM) injection in the deltoid region or anterolateral thigh area. A single dose for both adults and pediatric patients consists of a 0.5 mL suspension. 9vHPV is administered in a two- or three-dose schedule depending on patient age at initial vaccination.

Two-dose schedule for ages 9 through 14 years at initial vaccination:

- 0, 6 to 12 months – a minimum of five months in between doses.

- 0, 2, 6 months – if administration of the second suspension occurs before the 5-month mark, then a third suspension should be administered four months after the second dose, at the latest.

Three-dose schedule for ages 15 through 45 years at initial vaccination according to manufacturer's labeling (may not reflect current clinical practice):

- 0, 2, 6 months

It is important to know that the series can continue as previously scheduled and does not need to be restarted if the schedule is interrupted.

Current vaccination recommendations are based on CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and ACIP (Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices).

- Routine vaccination is advised at 11 to 12 years of age for all individuals (vaccination can start at age 9.)

- ACIP also recommends vaccination for everyone through the age of 26 years if not adequately vaccinated when younger.

- ACIP recommended shared clinical decision-making for patients aged 27 to 45 years.

**Age 9 to 15 years**

- Two doses of the HPV vaccine are recommended for most patients.

- The second dose of the HPV vaccine is administered 6 to 12 months after the first dose.

- Adolescents who have received two doses less than five months apart require a third dose of the HPV vaccine.

**Age 15 to 26 years**

- Three doses of the HPV vaccine are recommended for teens and young adults who start the series at 15 through 26 years.

- The recommended three-dose schedule is 0, 1 to 2, and 6 months.

- Three doses are recommended for a patient with immunocompromised conditions (e.g., HIV infection, immunosuppressive therapy)

**Age 27 to 45 years**

- ACIP(2019) recommended shared clinical decision-making for patients aged 27 to 45 years, as most adults in this age group would have very minimal benefits from vaccination.

- Individuals who are not already immunized to HPV (e.g., a previously unvaccinated person who has never had sex) and the person at risk for acquiring a newer HPV infection in the near future (e.g., who plans to have sex with a new partner) might get benefit from vaccination.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Hepatic Impairment:**The manufacturer's product labeling provides no information regarding dose adjustment in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer's product labeling provides no information regarding dose adjustment in patients with renal impairment.

****Pregnancy Considerations:****According to the CDC and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the HPV vaccine is not recommended during pregnancy. However, if the vaccine is accidentally administered to a pregnant woman, the patient should be informed that available safety data are reassuring. In addition, if a vaccine series is initiated and a patient becomes pregnant, the clinician should postpone the vaccine series until that pregnancy is completed.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:******According to CDC, vaccines given to a nursing mother do not impact breastfeeding safety for mothers or infants. For example, a slightly higher percentage of breastfed infants with the active quadrivalent human papillomavirus vaccine had pneumonia 30 days after maternal vaccination. Still, these effects were not attributable to the vaccine. Maternal vaccination is not a contraindication to breastfeeding; clinicians may administer the HPV to breastfeeding patients.