According to several studies, the main surgical approach to the substernal thyroidectomy is the transcervical approach, while in about 2% of cases, an extracervical one is preferred.

In patients with unilateral goiter and with no suspicion for malignancy, thyroid lobectomy can be performed with low recurrence rates.

To achieve a substernal goiter excision, an extended Kocher incision is usually performed in the lower cervical region, providing sufficient exposure of the goiter. The excision can be extended through a midline sternotomy. Should a lateral neck dissection be performed, a modified extended Kocher incision is executed.

During a total thyroidectomy, it is often useful, to commence with mobilization of the smaller lobe to facilitate the excision of the whole gland and the identification of the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the parathyroid glands. Preservation of the parathyroid glands, especially the superior ones, is of great importance. In cases of very large goiters, the sternothyroid muscles can be divided unilaterally or bilaterally to help identify and ligate the middle thyroid veins, preserve the anatomical structures, and mobilize the goiter. Additionally, the isthmus can be divided and the two lobes removed separately. Mobilization of the upper thyroid lobes facilitates traction of the gland towards the head and excision of the retrosternal goiter.

Localization and preservation of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is the milestone of total thyroidectomy. In cases of goiters, the position of the nerves is usually distorted and should be carefully identified at the cricothyroid junction or near the inferior thyroid artery. Nowadays, neuromonitoring of the nerves bilaterally is an invaluable tool. Attention is needed while managing Berry’s ligament, because of its proximity with the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Light traction should be exerted on the thyroid gland during this procedure to avoid nerve damage.

When an extracervical approach is required, several different techniques can be performed. Traditionally, full sternotomy, manubriotomy, and different types of thoracotomies have been described. Nevertheless, newer techniques have arisen during the last years.

Partial median sternotomy is most commonly performed in heart surgery, but good outcomes have also been reported in substernal thyroidectomies. The use of a microde-brider for volume reduction of large retrosternal goiters, followed by a transcervical excision has also been described.

Mediastinoscopy and video-assisted mediastinoscopy (VAM) can be used to excise benign goiters invading the mediastinum up to the aortic arch. The mediastinoscope enters through a cervical incision. Major bleeding in 0,4% of VAM operations is an important complication, which may require a thoracotomy.

Minimally invasive video-assisted thyroidectomy (MIVAT) is performed partially through endoscopy and partially under transcervical vision and concerns about 20% of these patients. Criteria for this procedure include thyroid volume of less than 25cm3, dominant nodule diameter of less than 35mm, presence of posterior nodules suspicious of malignancy, and the presence of infiltrated lymph nodes. MIVAT has similar complication rates with classic operations.

Robot-assisted trans-axillary thyroidectomy (RATT) is a minimally invasive technique commonly used in Asia but is less popular in the US. RATT is reported to have lower complication rates in comparison to sternotomy and is considered oncologically safe. However, it is much more expensive.