**Pressure Transmission and Quality Control**

Pressure transmission assessment is via cough signal, live signal, and baseline resting pressures.

A cough signal should show as similar peaks in amplitude in both the abdominal and vesical pressure traces. A cough should have a peak height of at least 15 cm H2O above resting pressure.

A live signal should detect small physiological fluctuations up to 10 cm H20 and should never be a constant flat trace

Initial resting pressure is the pressure recorded at the beginning of the test. Detrusor pressure should be 0 or close to 0 cm H2O at the beginning of bladder filling.

Normal ranges of vesical and abdominal pressures if appropriate calibration and quality control have been performed

- Supine: 0 to 18 cm H2O

- Seated: 15 to 40 cm H2O

- Standing: 20 to 50 cm H2O

If initial resting pressures are outside of the above plausible ranges, then quality control measures should be repeated. These measures would include zeroing transducer to atmospheric pressure, positioning transducer to level of the superior border of the symphysis pubis, and flushing the lines.

Other causes of poor signal or lack of pressure transmission include air in the line (line should be flushed), tap not open, kinking of the catheter or tubes, catheter resting on bladder wall causing inappropriate pressure transmission, or catheter displaced into the urethra. Such issues are easily rectifiable when identified.

**Position Change**

If the patient changes position, this reflects in pressure changes of equal magnitude in both vesical and abdominal pressure. This change in resting pressure is usually between 8 and 30 cm H2O. The transducer height should be adjusted to the level of the superior border of the symphysis pubis to compensate for this.

**Rectal Contractions**

Spasms or contractions of the rectum will present as low amplitude temporary pressure changes, which cause equal and opposite detrusor pressure changes.

**Rapid Filling**

If the filling is too rapid, it may give a false-positive diagnosis of loss of compliance. The filling should be according to maximum physiological rate (approximately 25% of body mass (kg) in ml/min) or a nonphysiological filling rate of 10% of the largest voided volume recorded on the bladder diary while not exceeding 50 ml/min.

**Situational Inability to Void**

The patient's ability to void is affected by emotional and psychological circumstances. Therefore an environment that replicates their normal voiding as closely as possible should be created with privacy and dignity maintained where possible

**Pump Vibrations**

Vibrations from the infusion pump can transmit and detected along a pressure monitoring tube, seen as constant frequency oscillations of small amplitude, usually <4 cm H2O, in the affected pressure line, and reflected in the detrusor pressure trace. Lines should be disentangled so as not to touch each other and prevent artifactual pressure transmission. In double lumen catheters, pressures should be recorded with the pump switched off.

**Tube Knock**

A sharp and short increase in pressure traces of one or more lines is demonstrated when moving the affected tube. Movements can lead to errors in pressure transmission. A cough test should be repeated following any movements to ensure quality control.