The ipsilateral activation of the XI nerve can activate the intrinsic laryngeal muscles fibers for the correct movement of the vocal cords of the same side. The main functions remain those of contracting the trapezius muscle and the sternocleidomastoid. According to recent research, the nerve not only has motor components but also sensitive components. Ganglions are found along its intracranial pathway with probable nociceptive function. These cell bodies could be involved in myalgias of the trapezius muscle and the sternocleidomastoid.

**Anatomy**

The accessory or spinal nerve has a double origin but always comes out of the jugular foramen. The jugular foramen develops embryologically from the otic capsule and the baseplate. Its spinal portion comes from a series of roots starting at C6-C7 and traveling cranially to enter in the foramen magnum. It then runs superolaterally along the floor of the posterior cranial fossa to enter in the dural canal of the jugular foramen, joining the small roots coming out of the medulla elongated caudally to the region of the ambiguous nucleus. From the jugular foramen, it comes out as nerve XI, together with X and IX, sigmoid sinus and the inferior petrosal sinus, while entering into jugular foramen the occipital and pharyngeal meningeal arteries. The nevus XI when it comes out of the jugular foramen is wrapped by the meningeal dura, which is attached to the periosteum. Once released, it separates into an internal and external branch: the internal branch is composed of fibers of the cranial part, giving an anastomosis with the vagus at the level of the upper edge of the transverse process of C1 and contributing to the vagal function of the pharyngeal and laryngeal area, transporting parasympathetic fibers; the outer branch mainly creates the fibers that will innervate the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles, which receive innervation also from C1-C4, that derive from the spinal portion and travel downwards.

It would seem that the cranial roots of the nerve are wider and in greater numbers on the right and for the male sex, but further data are expected. The external branch has a close relationship with the jugular vein, both in the jugular foramen and at the exit from the foramen at the cervical level, passing behind or in front or at the bifurcation.

According to current scientific literature, branches perforate the sternocleidomastoid and the trapezius muscle. It passes, with subjective anatomical variations, near an imaginary horizontal line from gonion towards the sternocleidomastoid, posterior to the edge of the muscle itself and about 4 to 9 centimeters below the apex of the mastoid process. Another point is located in the trapezius muscle, about 2 to 9 centimeters above the clavicula towards the acromion-clavicular joint.

According to Gray, there is another point, slightly below the first branch. To find the point, trace an imaginary, oblique line a few centimeters toward the caudality because the nerve has an oblique direction under the sternocleidomastoid.

An interesting anatomical note concerns the internal cranial area of the XI nerve before exiting the jugular foramen. The nerve rests on the vertebral artery entering and is also involved by the denticulated ligaments before exiting from the foramen. This means, on the one hand, that the vascular system (understood as the rigidity of the vessel) affects the function of the nerve and on the other side, that a traction of the cervical tract, both muscularly and vertebrally, can influence the nerve. A problem of deposits of calcium salts inside the vessel or of various vasculopathies that make the connective system of the vessel rigid and less able to adapt most likely will affect the elasticity of the nerve itself.

Likewise, for a previous traumatism of the high cervical tract, an incorrect postural attitude can disturb the function of the nerve. The number of fibers with myelin inside the cranial nerve XI can range from 1700 to 2000; the nerve diameter is about 2 millimeters.