An important differential diagnosis to consider is necrotizing enterocolitis. Necrotizing enterocolitis is also a gastrointestinal condition in infants with extremely low birth weight. Signs and symptoms of necrotizing enterocolitis overlap with that of spontaneous intestinal perforation. Due to these similarities, both conditions are frequently studied together. It is, however, extremely important to distinguish spontaneous intestinal perforation from necrotizing enterocolitis, as they have different pathophysiology and risk factors as well as mortality and other outcomes.

Spontaneous intestinal perforation can be differentiated from necrotizing enterocolitis based on the following factors:

- Spontaneous intestinal perforation appears earlier in life than necrotizing enterocolitis. The median age of presentation for spontaneous intestinal perforation is seven days compared to 14 days for necrotizing enterocolitis. In general, infants with spontaneous intestinal perforation are significantly more premature and have a smaller birth weight than infants with necrotizing enterocolitis.

- Antenatal infection and medications have been reported as risk factors for developing spontaneous intestinal perforation. Early enteral feeding has been associated with necrotizing enterocolitis, whereas early feeding with colostrum and breast milk has reduced the incidence of spontaneous intestinal perforation.

- Spontaneous intestinal perforation usually presents with acute abdominal distension and bluish-black discoloration of the abdomen, whereas necrotizing enterocolitis usually presents will initial signs such as emesis, bloody stools, and abdominal wall edema, crepitus, and induration.

- While necrotizing enterocolitis usually presents with radiographic findings such as pneumatosis intestinalis, portal venous air, thickening of the intestinal wall, and fixed dilated small bowel loops, the typical radiographic finding of spontaneous intestinal perforation involves pneumoperitoneum.

- On histopathologic exam, coagulative necrosis is observed in cases of necrotizing enterocolitis, whereas isolated hemorrhagic necrosis is the typical finding in spontaneous intestinal perforation.

- Necrotizing enterocolitis involves a variable degree of inflammation and ischemia of the bowel with extensive peritoneal contamination and bacterial translocation, whereas spontaneous intestinal perforation involves a focal area of perforation with normal-appearing proximal and distal intestines.