Most healthcare professionals are unaware that a pilot needs a separate medical certification from an FAA-designated AME or that such a thing as an AME even exists. There are cases of mid-level practitioners or other non-physicians writing something to the effect of "OK to fly the airplane" on a prescription pad or return-to-work slip, and the student pilot then brings this to their flight instructor thinking it is a valid "Flight Physical." There are cases of candidates being confused and setting up and getting Department of Transportation (DOT) exams thinking it is the same thing.

It is important to understand the difference between a clinical exam and a forensic exam. Similar to an IME (Independent Medical Exam) for Worker's Comp or Personal Injury, an FAA flight physical completed on a civilian, military/government pilot, or air traffic controller is not a medical clinical exam but rather a forensic examination. No diagnosis is made, and no treatment is rendered. As always, during the examination, clinical concerns may arise in the physician must report on them and or render any emergent treatment felt to be necessary to avoid further injury or impairment such as notation of melanoma, diastolic murmur, evidence of severe edema, or abnormal EKG.

With such regular follow-up and strict guidelines, pilots, even ones with underlying disease, usually receive regular care and follow-up that they might not otherwise have gotten. Many take better care of themselves and are more mindful of their health simply so they can enjoy the hobby of flying or engage in their profession.