The evaluation of paracusias consists of a general psychiatric interview that includes details regarding the evolution of the hallucinations, triggering factors, psychiatric review of systems, past psychiatric diagnosis, history of substance use, family history of psychiatric illness, and history of trauma.

Additionally, a detailed medical history and medication regimen--including over-the-counter supplements--should be obtained.

The clinician's most valuable assessment tool is the mental status examination, addressing mood, affect, appearance, behavior, speech, thought content, thought process, insight, and judgment. Furthermore, determination of the presence of 'first-rank' or 'Schneiderian' hallucinations--voices speaking to each other or narrating one's thoughts aloud--should be completed. The clinician should determine if the hallucinations are temporally associated with affective disturbances and, if so, if they are congruent with mood. To further assess the patient's safety and the safety of others, the patient should be asked to elaborate on whether the hallucinations command him or her to perform certain acts.

Lastly, organic medical etiologies should be ruled out using analysis and neurologic imaging. Laboratory analysis includes:

- Urine toxicology

- Complete blood count with differential

- Vitamin B12 and D levels

- Renal function test

- Serum electrolytes

- Hepatic function test

- Blood alcohol

- Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be considered if organic brain abnormalities are considered in the differential diagnoses.

- EEG for a seizure disorder