The management of CAS toxicity requires teamwork. Physicians involved in managing these cases should take expert advice from a toxicologist or a poison control center. Initial management should involve:

- Management of airway, breathing, circulation, and gastrointestinal decontamination, if needed.

- A complete history of the substance ingested, any co-ingestion, time of ingestion, any suicidal intent behind the ingestion, and any previous similar history in the past.

- The ordering of initial investigations, including digoxin levels, electrolytes, renal function tests, and electrocardiograms

- Prompt correction of any electrolyte abnormalities

- If the patient is stable enough, and the ingestion is acute with suicidal intent, getting a psychiatric history to assess the risk of self-harm, if any. If it is chronic toxicity, obtaining a detailed history of the digoxin dosage and frequency of intake, a list of other active medications, and any comorbidities that may coexist, including renal insufficiency and congestive cardiac failure, may be fruitful.

- Consult with toxicology or a poison control center about further management of the patient.

- Consult with a pharmacist about the calculation of the dosage of digoxin immune fab.

The management of digoxin toxicity should continue after the patient is admitted to an appropriate level of care. Patients require admission to an ICU level of care for life-threatening electrolyte imbalances or arrhythmias, or if the presumed clinical course of the patient is predicted to worsen based on the dose of digoxin consumed or the blood level. Symptomatic but otherwise stable patients may receive therapy on a general medical floor. Asymptomatic patients may undergo observation for 6 hours in the emergency department.

The admitting team shall continue therapeutic interventions initiated in the emergency department in conjunction with the medical toxicologist. Consult with a mental health counselor or psychiatrist to assess the risk of self-harm and the potential need for psychiatric admission in intentional or self-injurious exposures.