**1. Mitochondrial cytopathy syndromes:**It is a condition where the mitochondrial DNA is abnormal; this might interfere with the function of mitochondria in particular and the function of the cell in general. It is caused either because of nuclear DNA-mutations or mutation within the maternally inherited form of the mitochondrial genome. Even though the symptoms vary widely, they can present in the way of muscle weakness, high levels of lactic acid, and even degenerative lesions of the brain. Diagnosis is by examining the biopsies taken from the muscle cells under an electron microscope. It reveals para-crystalline inclusions of mitochondria, which is the characteristic feature of this disorder. Investigations also include the measurement of serum lactate, CSF lactate, and some neuroradiological tests. Almost 200 different types of mutations of mitochondrial DNA diseases have been identified, and more are being detected with better facilities and knowledge.

**2. Defects of Golgi apparatus:**Alteration in the structure and function of the Golgi complex is a feature in various cardiovascular diseases like heart failure, cardiomegaly, and arrhythmia. The dysfunction of the Golgi bodies is also seen in other conditions but primarily related to cardiovascular diseases as it is responsible for transport, biosynthesis, and distribution of proteins of the cardiovascular system.

**3. Cell membrane defects:**The cell membrane disorders are seen in red blood cells (RBCs) and usually inherited due to mutations in membrane leading to abnormalities within the RBCs, thus reducing their life span and early removal from circulation. This phenomenon is observable in hereditary conditions like hereditary spherocytosis, stomatocytosis, ovalocytosis, and elliptocytosis.

**4. Lysosome storage diseases (LSDs):**The lysosomes contain more than 50 different types of membrane proteins. It is worthwhile to note that the abnormality or dysfunction of some of the specific proteins in lysosomes has led to the detection of almost 50 different types of lysosomal storage diseases. Lysosomal mutation and lysosomal genes predispose the human to a whole array of conditions. The most prevalent diseases with LSDs like obesity, infection, cancer, and neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson disease, Gaucher disease, and Alzheimer disease.

**5. Nuclear defects:**Mutation in the nuclear structure and composition are also present in diseases like muscular dystrophy, cancer, aging, cardiomyopathies.

**6. Endoplasmic reticulum defects:**Researchers have observed that different ER-shaping proteins play a role in diseases such as hereditary spastic paraplegia and Alzheimer disease.

**7. Cytoplasmic errors:**As we know, every constitution of the cell should be an ideal quantity. Research has observed that an abnormally large amount of cytoplasm leads to defect in the chromosome alignment, spindle pole morphology, and checkpoint signaling leading to chromosome segregation errors.

**8. Mutation: **Abnormalities in mitosis results from prolonged exposure to radiation (especially nuclear radiation). It can also happen with certain chemicals and drugs. But some cells do not undergo mitosis like a neural cell, cardiac cells. They are said to be in theGo stage.

**9. Tumors:**The rate of division of cells dramatically varies in different cells. It is highest in the epithelial cells exposed to friction. Rate correlates with demand. Excessive uncontrolled growth leads to a condition commonly known as tumors**.**