# Introduction

The medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve, along with the posterior and lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerves, is responsible for providing sensation to the skin of the forearm.

# Structure and Function

Originating in the cervical and thoracic spine from spinal nerves C5 to T1, the roots of the brachial plexus divide sequentially into roots, trunks, divisions, cords, and terminate as branches.

# Embryology

In the fifth week of development, mesoderm-derived limb-buds grow outward from the developing embryo while the ectoderm-derived brachial plexus, and thus the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve, forms as segmental nerves from the spinal cord penetrate these limb-buds.

# Nerves

The anterior and posterior branches of the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve usually appear at the level of the medial and lateral epicondyles.

# Physiologic Variants

There have been several reported variations in the anatomy of the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve as well as its branching pattern. There are cases where the nerve itself arises from the inferior trunk of the brachial plexus instead of the medial cord.

# Surgical Considerations

Understanding the anatomy of the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve is important in transplant surgery using forearm flaps as donor tissue. Recipient tissues for such flaps have included the mouth, penis, and hands. Thus, successful sensory recovery for these areas relies on knowledge of the cutaneous innervation of the donor tissue.

Posterior branches of the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve cross the ulnar nerve, normally 2 cm distal to the medial epicondyle, and are therefore at risk of damage during ulnar nerve releases at the elbow to treat cubital tunnel syndrome. Complications of damage to the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve in such procedures include hyperesthesia and hyperalgesia, as well as painful neuromas.

# Clinical Significance

Knowledge of the anatomy of the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve is vital clinically as the nerve is prone to damage during various procedures such as venipunctures, therapeutic injections for elbow pain, and cubital tunnel releases.