**Leprosy**

According to the World Health Organization Expert Committee on Leprosy: Eighth report, there are three standard first-line drugs: rifampin (rifampicin), clofazimine, and dapsone. These are to be used in multidrug regimens of fixed duration, and none should be used as monotherapy. For multibacillary leprosy, the standard adult dose of dapsone is 100 mg daily for 12 months. The standard child dose is 50 mg daily for 12 months. For paucibacillary leprosy, the standard adult dose of dapsone is 100 mg daily for six months. The standard child dose is 50 mg daily for six months. Children under ten years of age should receive appropriately reduced doses of dapsone at 2 mg/kg body weight per day.

Dapsone administration is via the oral route. The drug is well absorbed from the gut, with approximately 70% to 80% of the single oral dose absorbed. N-acetylation and N-hydroxylation metabolize the drug. Dapsone and its metabolites are formed in the liver as dapsone glucuronide, which is water-soluble and rapidly excreted via kidneys.

**Dermatitis Herpetiformis**

In patients who are responsive to dapsone, there is a quick reduction in pruritus followed by the clearance of skin lesions. However, there is no effect on the gastrointestinal aspect of the disease. The starting dose for treating dermatitis herpetiformis is 50 mg daily administered orally, and dapsone should be titrated up to 300 mg per day to achieve the desired effect. A higher dose is given only if the patient is not responsive to a lower dose. The dose should be reduced to the minimum effective dose within the range of 50 to 300 mg per day as soon as possible to avoid potential adverse effects. Dapsone is not indicated in the pediatric patient for this condition.

The dosing schedule for other dermatoses is the same as that of dermatitis herpetiformis.

**Pneumocystis (carinii) jiroveci**

Dapsone is used, off-label, for the prophylaxis and treatment of Pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii), which is classified as a fungus. For prophylaxis, the adult dose is 100 mg daily administered by oral route or divided twice a day as monotherapy. It also can be administered orally at 50 mg daily in combination with weekly pyrimethamine and leucovorin. The pediatric dose also is administered by the oral route. For patients greater than one month of age, the dose is 2 mg/kg daily, not to exceed 100 mg per day, or 4 mg/kg/dose weekly not to exceed 200 mg/week. The adolescent dose is orally administered at 100 mg daily or divided twice a day as monotherapy. It also can be administered orally at 50 mg daily in combination with weekly pyrimethamine and leucovorin.

For the treatment of Pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii), the adult dose is 100 mg daily in combination with trimethoprim for 21 days. The dose is 2 mg/kg daily in conjunction with trimethoprim for 21 days for pediatric patients greater than one month of age. For adolescents, the dose is 100 mg daily in combination with trimethoprim for 21 days.

**Toxoplasmosis Prophylaxis**

Dapsone is also used off-label for prophylaxis against toxoplasmosis. The dose is 50 mg oral each day. It is not considered a first-line agent and should be given with pyrimethamine and leucovorin.

**Dose Adjustments**

No dose adjustments are necessary for patients with renal impairment. If the patient is on hemodialysis, dosing should be after dialysis, with consideration for a supplemental dose if the subsequent maintenance dose is not due immediately after dialysis. Peritoneal dialysis requires no dose adjustment and no supplemental dose.

Hepatic dosing has no specific recommendations, but caution is advised.