# Continuing Education Activity

Dental caries occur when the demineralization of the enamel exceeds its demineralization capacity. Dental caries is a dynamic process that involves susceptible tooth surfaces, cariogenic bacteria, mainly Streptococcus mutans, and a fermentable carbohydrate source. Sucrose is the most common dietary sugar and is considered the most cariogenic carbohydrate. Frequent consumption of carbohydrates in the form of simple sugars increases the risk of dental caries. This article discusses the role of sugar in developing dental caries, provides concise dietary guidelines for expecting mothers, children, and adults, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in preventing dental caries through dietary education.

**Objectives:**
- Explain how sugars are classified and summarize the types of sweeteners available.
- Review the role of sugar in developing dental caries, including the impact of the amount and frequency of intake.
- Describe the dietary recommendations to prevent dental caries according to age.
- Outline the role of an interdisciplinary health care team in providing dietary advice to prevent dental caries.

# Introduction

Dental caries is a dynamic process that involves susceptible tooth surfaces, cariogenic bacteria, mainly Streptococcus mutans, and a fermentable carbohydrate source. Sucrose is the most common dietary sugar and is considered the most cariogenic carbohydrate.

Other factors, including poor oral hygiene, salivary gland hypofunction, socioeconomic status, parenting practices, and genetics, also play a significant role. This article discusses the role of sugar in developing dental caries and provides concise dietary guidelines for expecting mothers, children, and adults.

# Function

**The Role Of Sugar In Dental Caries**

Dental caries occur when the demineralization of the enamel exceeds its demineralization capacity.

**Classification of Sugars**

The sugars most commonly found in an average diet are sucrose, glucose, fructose, lactose, and maltose, from which some regard sucrose as the most cariogenic.

Natural sugars are those intrinsically found in the structure of fresh fruits and vegetables, milk, and dairy products.

Added sugars, also called free sugars by the WHO, are the sugars added to foods and drinks by manufacturers or cooks and sugars present in edible products other than fresh fruit, vegetables, milk, and grains

**Starchy Food**

Dietary starches refer to a variety of food rich in starch (a polymeric carbohydrate), including bread, pasta, potatoes, potato products, rice, oats, breakfast cereals, and other grains. Dietary starches are of low cariogenicity.

**The Adhesiveness of Sugar**

The adhesiveness of food is directly related to its cariogenic potential.

**The Amount and Frequency of Sugar Consumed**

It is well established that sugar consumption positively correlates with the development of dental caries.

Several studies evaluate the association between the amount and frequency of sugar intake and dental caries. For example, one study found that 3-year-old children that ingested sugars four to five times per day were six times more likely to have a high caries rate than children with the lowest frequency of sugar intake.

The “sugar-caries relationship” also depends on oral hygiene, fluoride exposure, and socio-economic status.

**Types of Sweeteners**

Sugar substitutes pose numerous benefits for preventing and controlling mainly diabetes mellitus, weight, and dental caries. This article will discuss the most important features of sugar substitutes concerning oral health. Of course, sugar substitutes need to be safe for consumption; they must be non-toxic, non-oncogenic, and nutritionally appropriate for the specific drink or food.

Sweeteners are substances that provide sweetness to food and drinks and are classified into two main types according to their caloric potential: caloric (carbohydrate-based) and non-caloric (non-carbohydrate based).



****Non-caloric Sweeteners****

(high intensity)

**Chemically Synthesised:**

Saccharin

Aspartame

Sucralose



**Starch Sugars:**

Glucose

Maltose

Fructose

Starch syrup

HFCS

Powder sugar

Invert sugar

**Plant-derived:**

Stevioside

Thaumatins

Monellin

**Sugar Alcohols:**

Xylitol

Erythritol

Sorbitol

Mannitol

Lactitol

Laltitol

Reducing starch syrup

Palatinit

**Oligosaccharides:**

Palatinose

Galactooligosaccharides

Fructo-oligosaccharide

Lacto-oligosaccharide

Xylo-oligosaccharide

Table 1. Classification of sweeteners based on their caloric potential.

**Sucrose**

Sucrose is the most common dietary sugar.

**Sugar Alcohols**

Sugar alcohols result from reducing the carbonyl group of sugars.

They are not fermented or only a little by oral microorganisms; therefore, they are non-cariogenic.

All sugar alcohols, except erythritol, have been associated with unpleasant adverse effects, including abdominal discomfort and flatulence, and when taken in excess, they may induce diarrhea.

**Xylitol**

Xylitol is a non-cariogenic and antibacterial sugar alcohol.

Xylitol is believed to have an antimicrobial action on the biofilm. Studies have demonstrated that it impairs plaque formation and the adherence of bacteria.

However, the anti-cariogenic action of xylitol is still under study and is yet to be well supported by evidence.

**Non-caloric Sweeteners**

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves the following non-caloric chemically synthesized sweeteners to be consumed in the United States: aspartame, saccharin, acesulfame potassium, and neotame.

# Issues of Concern

Understanding how diet and eating behaviors contribute to caries rates in children and adults is essential to improving oral health. Dental caries is a multifactorial disease. Dietary sugars are the substrate for cariogenic bacteria to flourish and generate enamel-demineralizing acids. There is a strong correlation between the amount and the frequency of free sugar intake and dental caries. Refined foods and fermentable carbohydrates increase the risk of dental disease. By contrast, starchy staple food and fresh fruits have been shown to be associated with low levels of caries activity.

# Clinical Significance

**Dietary Recommendations To Prevent Dental Caries**

When a population consumes less than 15 to 20 kg/person/year of free sugars, the levels of dental caries remain low.

Food that stimulates saliva secretion has a protective effect against caries, e.g., hard cheeses, peanuts, wholegrain foods, and sugar-free chewing gum.

A diet rich in fresh vegetables, fruits, and wholegrain starches and low in added sugars and fat prevents chronic diseases associated with diet, including oral conditions like dental caries, periodontal infections, and oral malignancy.

**The Prenatal Stage**

Mothers and caregivers influence their children's diet and oral hygiene. Pregnant women have a unique opportunity to receive appropriate information about healthy dietary habits and general oral hygiene to prevent early childhood caries in their children. Furthermore, maintaining good oral hygiene must be emphasized, as mothers and caregivers are the sources of cariogenic bacteria in their children.

Poor nutrition in pregnant women may result in developmental anomalies in the infants' teeth.

Dietary recommendations for pregnant women to prevent dental caries in their children include the following:

- Following the healthy eating pyramid.

- Reduce the consumption of cariogenic food, particularly between meals.

- Taking prenatal supplements containing vitamins and minerals as prescribed by their general physician.

**From Birth to the First Year of Age**

The first few years after birth are critical since there is a massive dietary shift from exclusive milk and liquid diet to a modified adult diet. Breastfeeding is strongly recommended in the first year of life because of its nutritional and immunological benefits. Breast milk is insignificant in the development of early childhood caries as compared to night-time bottle feeding, which should be discouraged. Breast milk is low in fluoride.

Parenting plays an important role in the transition from milk to solid foods. Parents influence what the child likes or dislikes, the quality of diet, and overall weight status.

- Ensuring optimal nutrition.

- Decreasing the consumption of drinks other than breast milk, formula, and water.

- Avoiding putting the child to bed with a bottle.

- Prohibiting dipping pacifiers in foods with high concentrations of sugars, like honey or syrup.

- Dissuading constant sipping of drinks from a bottle.

**First and Second Year of Age**

Establishing a healthy eating pattern at a young age benefits oral and general health. Parents should make careful choices regarding types of snacks; low-cariogenic food such as fruits and cheese must be encouraged.

- Continuing to discourage constant drinking from a bottle and putting the child to bed with a bottle.

- Establishing a routine eating pattern.

- Offering non-cariogenic snacks, like cheese.

- Limiting the consumption of cariogenic food to mealtimes.

- Restricting the consumption of sugary drinks to 120 ml (4 oz) per day.

**From Two to Five Years of Age**

Children would prefer foods high in sugar and calories if exposed to repeated consumption of such foods early in infancy.

During this period, children begin to be more independent, make their own food choices, and increase food snacking between meals.

Dietary recommendations to prevent dental caries at this age include:

- Continuing to promote regular eating patterns.

- Promoting eating cariogenic foods only with meals.

- Offering non-cariogenic or low-cariogenic snacks, like cheese and fruits.

- Avoiding sugar-containing foods that are sticky or slowly eaten.

# Other Issues

Malnutrition, especially in children, results from improper dietary behaviors and feeding practices in infancy and childhood. It is usually related to limited access to fresh and nutritious food, which is replaced with low-cost and high in sugars food.

Besides dental caries, nutrition may contribute to developing other dental and oral mucosa pathologies. Delayed tooth eruption and salivary gland dysfunction may be linked to protein deficiencies. Vitamin A deficiency leads to impaired epithelial tissue development, tooth formation, and enamel hypoplasia. Vitamin D and calcium deficiency cause hypo-mineralization, delayed eruption, the absence of lamina dura, and abnormal alveolar bone patterns.

Delayed wound healing, dentin malformations, bleeding gums, and defective collagen formation may result from vitamin C deficiency. Angular cheilosis and periodontal diseases are associated with a lack of vitamin B.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The incidence of dental caries has increased significantly over the past few decades. Part of the reason is the excess intake of added sugars. Dental caries is associated with increased morbidity: dental pain, infection, and cosmetic disfigurement, ultimately leading to premature loss of teeth. Nutrition is a modifiable parameter that plays a crucial role in preventing dental caries, as sugar is required for the disease to occur.

The risk of caries increases with more frequent and higher free sugar intake and consumption of food, with a tendency to be retained in the oral tissues for longer.