Non-pharmacological treatments such as prolonging sleep times, scheduled naps, and behavioral therapy are not generally effective.

Pharmacological therapy is effective and includes medications that promote alertness:

Modafinil: Modafinil is considered the first-line treatment option for idiopathic hypersomnia per the latest clinical practice guidelines from the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

The most frequently reported adverse events were headaches and gastrointestinal disorders. Modafinil significantly improved self-reported sleepiness on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale by 5.08 points more than placebo (95% confidence interval (CI) 3.01 to 7.16). Furthermore, the ability to remain awake on the Maintenance of Wakefulness Test was significantly improved with modafinil by 4.74 minutes more than with placebo (95% CI 2.46 to 7.01).

**Other Medications for Idiopathic Hypersomnia**

- Oxybate in phase 3, multicentre (six EU countries and the USA), placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized withdrawal study showed that low dose oral solution once or twice nightly (with dose adjustment between 2·5 to 9·0 g/night) was effective in improving sleepiness (ESS decreased from mean of 15·7 (SD 3·8) at baseline to 6·1 (4·0)) [Level I].
- The reported adverse events included nausea (22%), headache (18%), dizziness (12%), anxiety (11%), and vomiting (11%). Mixed oxybate salts were FDA approved in 2021.
- The drug is recommended to be titrated slowly and started at a low dose of < 3g and increased by no more than 1.5 g per night per week.

- Amphetamines like central nervous system stimulants (such as methylphenidate).

- Other stimulates: Pitolisant is a selective histamine H3 receptor antagonist approved for the treatment of narcolepsy with or without cataplexy. It can have some role in some cases of IH [Level V].

- Clarithromycin: One trial studying 20 participants with different disorders of sleepiness included 10 participants with idiopathic hypersomnia, with or without long sleep time, and compared clarithromycin to placebo.

- Flumazenil: In a retrospective chart review study, sublingual and transdermal flumazenil (through its effect as GABA-A receptor antagonist) led to improved sleepiness in refractory cases of hypersomnia [Level V].

According to the recent American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) clinical practice guidelines for treating central disorders of hypersomnolence, modafinil is strongly recommended as the first-line option for treating idiopathic hypersomnia in adults. Other options for treating idiopathic hypersomnia in adults (such as clarithromycin, methylphenidate, pitolisant, and sodium oxybate had a conditional recommendation.