Understanding applications of the index of refraction in optics, optometry, and ophthalmology is vital for achieving the ideal refraction and clarity of vision. The human eye is a complex system of refracting surfaces, including the cornea and crystalline lens. The cornea, aqueous humor, crystalline lens cortex and nucleus, and vitreous humor all have their respective refractive indices, and each can cause or neutralize spherical aberrations in the human eye as these different structures age.

The cornea has a refractive index of 1.37, and the lens varies from a maximum index of refraction at the core of 1.42 to a minimum of 1.37 at the lens surface.

Multiple optical models of the human eye have been developed using these principles to explain optical phenomena and predict refractions in human eyes. The current lenticular theory postulates that presbyopia occurs as a result of changing optic parameters over time, including the growth of the crystalline lens, changes in mean refractive index, and changes in surface refractive index.

**Eyeglasses**

The use of spectacles to correct myopia and presbyopia dates back to the 13th century, but it was not until the 17th century that Willebrord Snell described the relationship between the angles of incidence and refraction, and the optics behind spectacles were understood.

Conventional lenses found in today's eyeglasses are made of glass or plastic with fixed focal lengths dependent on the refractive index, curvature, and thickness of the lenses.

High-index lenses have a much higher index of refraction, often between 1.61 and 1.74, to provide similar refractive power as conventional glasses but with a much thinner lens. This is beneficial for patients with high prescription powers. In general, as the refractive index increases, the thickness of the lens decreases. Lastly, different coatings can be added to glasses to achieve different features and cosmetic looks by layering materials with different refractive indexes. High-index lenses, which have a much higher refractive index than traditional lenses, will also reflect more light, and thus anti-reflective coatings can be applied to reduce this feature. The anti-reflective coating should ideally have a refractive index in between that of air and the material of the high-index lens and be equal to the square root of the lens' refractive index for minimal reflection.

**Contact Lenses**

Contact lenses are small, artificial devices placed on the eyes that use the inherent properties of lenses to provide correct, refracted vision.

The refractive index of a contact lens dictates the material it is made from. Contact lenses with a refractive index of less than 1.458 are generally made from a material called fluoro silicone acrylates.

**Intraocular lenses**

PMMA, silicone, and acrylic intraocular lenses (IOLs) consist of materials that vary in the index of refraction between 1.40 and 1.56.

Intraocular lens power calculations depend on certain assumptions that are made with regard to the index of refraction of the cornea. In the case of an eye that has undergone refractive surgery, this assumption is incorrect, and several adjusted IOL power calculation methods have been developed for these types of eyes.

While most monofocal and multifocal intraocular lenses have constant refractive index throughout the lens, the Fyodorov Gradiol or gradient refractive index optics multifocal IOL has been designed with variable refractive index. This lens may provide less glare compared to the diffractive type of multifocal IOL.

**Telescope**

The refractive index of air plays an important role in the design of ground-based optical telescopes. To avoid the impact of harmful weather patterns, most telescopes are housed within a glass or plastic dome, creating a temperature, pressure, and speed of air that is of atypical distribution and a resulting refractive index of air that has a nonuniform distribution.

This scenario results in a phenomenon called "dome seeing," in which the quality of the image through the telescope is degraded.

**Microscopy and Optical Coherence Tomography**

The refractive index is used in several medical imaging systems and devices to create optical contrast among tissue samples, making other dyes and labels unnecessary.

These techniques can also be used in confocal reflectance microscopy, light scattering spectroscopy, and quantitative phase microscopy to derive structural or morphological features of samples.