The number one priority is to treat the patient without putting rescuers at risk of injury. Immediate treatment includes the following:

- Remove the patient from the source of electricity (shut off the power source)

- Remove the patient's clothing, especially any metal that is in contact with the body (jewelry or equipment).

- Next, ACLS should be followed for patients without a pulse.

- In a conscious patient, pain control and fluid management (preferably Lactated Ringers) would be priorities.

- Large-bore IV access and large-volume fluid resuscitation is important in patients with anything more than a very minor low-voltage injury.

Fluids should be titrated to produce adequate urine output (75 to 100 mL/hr in adults or 1 mg/kg/hr in children). Avoid hypothermia in these patients. Patients who are pregnant, have chest pain, have a history of cardiac arrhythmias, or have a history of heart disease, or those with high voltage exposure should be placed on a cardiac monitor and observed for 6 to 12 hours. Pregnant patients at greater than 20 weeks gestation should also be placed on a fetal monitor, especially if exposed to high voltage.  Patients with severe burns should be referred to the nearest burn center.

Since internal injuries are more difficult to interpret in patients with electrical injuries vs simple thermal burns, one should have a lower threshold for transfer to a burn center overall.  If the patient is stable during monitoring, has no concerning findings on labs, and has unremarkable EKG, he or she may be discharged after the burns have been treated, injuries have been addressed, and the tetanus vaccination has been updated.