Found commonly in soil, presentations of Nocardia are:

- Primary cutaneous nocardiosis

- Cellulitic and sporotrichoid forms

- Actinomycetoma

- Disseminated disease (most common secondary to pulmonary involvement)

The most common form of Nocardia infection is pulmonary, and most common causing human infection are:

- 
N. asteroides

- 
N. brasiliensis

- 
N. caviae

Nocardia sp. is a member of the family Nocardiaceae (along with the genus Rhodococcus), belonging to the “aerobic actinomycetes” suborder. Currently, the genus Nocardia contains 80-100 species, of these, more than fifty have been implicated as human or animal pathogens.Nocardia asteroides was implicated as the most common cause of numerous Nocardial human infections. However, it was later found to be a group of bacteria that have been further classified into separate species.Nocardia species have been shown to be more prevalent in specific geographic locations. For example, Nocardia brasiliensis, a species associated with cutaneous infections (80% of all cutaneous Nocardia infection), is found more frequently in tropical and sub-tropical climates.Nocardia infections vary significantly in symptomatology based on the site of infection. However, Nocardia typically produces suppurative necrosis with frequent abscess formation at most sites of infection, including pulmonary, cutaneous, and CNS.  That being said, Nocardia also can form cavitary lesions, skin nodules, and cellulitis making diagnosis difficult as it is similar to many other bacterial and fungal infections.

Primary cutaneous nocardiosis is most commonly caused by N. brasiliensis. Cutaneous nocardiosis from N. asteroides is usually secondary to hematogenous dissemination. Primary cutaneous nocardiosis is divided into three entities:

- Lymphocutaneous infection (often misdiagnosed for sporotrichosis)

- Mycetoma

- Superficial skin infection (ulceration, abscess, cellulitis)