In cases of significant bleeding, the provider should focus on stabilizing the patient, with attention to the ABCs. If the patient is having uncontrolled bleeding, the provider may need to pack the vagina to slow blood loss. Transfusion of red blood cells should be performed in patients with significant symptoms.

Beyond this, treatment depends on the etiology of the patient's vaginal bleeding. In cases of mild vaginal bleeding, often no specific therapy is required urgently, and work-up for underlying etiology and treatment of that etiology becomes paramount.

In cases of menorrhagia where bleeding can be heavy over time, and if no underlying cause can be identified and treated, the focus of treatment is to reduce the amount of blood loss. This reduction may be accomplished in a variety of ways. Use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications on the first 5 days of the menstrual cycle reduces bleeding by 30%. Oral tranexamic acid taken on the first five days of the cycle or use of a combined or progesterone oral contraceptive pill reduces bleeding by about half, Use of a progesterone eluting intrauterine device reduces bleeding by 97%. Patients should also be provided with an iron replacement.

In patients with menometrorrhagia in whom an underlying source cannot be identified and treated, the provider's main concern is with reducing the patient's cancer risk. Patients with menometrorrhagia usually have infrequent bleeding and are less likely to have symptomatic anemia. Oral medroxyprogesterone for 10 to 14 days (to stimulate a withdrawal bleed and complete sloughing of the endometrium), low dose estrogen combined oral contraceptive pills, or placement of an intrauterine progesterone device all reduce the patient's risk of endometrial cancer.