# Introduction

The sensory system is the portion of the nervous system responsible for processing input from the environment. Beginning with detection through the transfer of stimuli to the central nervous system, the peripheral nerves and their associated receptors rapidly relay information. The peripheral nervous system consists of the somatosensory nervous system and autonomic nervous system. The sensory pathway of the somatosensory system involves spinal nerves which transmit information about the external environment to the spinal cord. The autonomic nervous system has visceral sensory neurons which are responsible for monitoring the internal environment and eliciting appropriate changes in effector organs to maintain homeostasis. This article will address both somatic and visceral sensory neurons with an emphasis on the clinical significance of somatic sensory neuropathy.

# Structure and Function

The anatomy of peripheral nerves consists of nerve fibers, supporting connective tissue, and blood supply. Sensory neurons are the afferent limb of somatosensory neural pathways. The neuron consists of a cell body, axon, and dendrites. Dendrites are finger-like projections that receive sensory input and transmit the signal through the axon to the cell body. Unipolar cell bodies of sensory neurons are located within sensory ganglia which may be in the dorsal root of the spinal cord or along cranial nerves. The receptive field of the neurons limits the ability of the sensory system to relay environmental information. An individual neuron's receptive field is the space in which a stimulus can modify the electrical activity of the neuron. There are different types of receptors for differing stimuli: thermoreceptors, mechanoreceptors, nociceptors, photoreceptors, and chemoreceptors. The receptors within a specific field react to stimuli by generating electrical activity along the associated first-order neuron in the form of an action potential.

Sensory nerves have different types of nerves fibers depending on their associated receptors. Classification of sensory nerves includes the numerical or Erlanger and Gasser system.

To summarize, in order of decreasing diameter and velocity:

- Proprioceptors: A-alpha, A-beta

- Mechanoreceptors: A-beta, A-delta

- Nociceptors and thermoreceptors: A-delta, C-fiber

The supportive structures of the nerve fibers include the mesoneurium, epineurium, perineurium, endoneurium, and myelin sheath.

Visceral sensory nerves transmit pain, stretch, temperature, and chemical change in visceral organs which gets interpreted as sensations like nausea, hunger, gas, cramping, etc.

# Embryology

The neural crest cells are the origin of the peripheral sensory nervous system. Neural crest cells are the detached cells of the neural plate as it separates from overlaying ectoderm. These cells give rise to the peripheral neurons with cell bodies and Schwann cells. A pair of dorsal root ganglia develop in a craniocaudal succession generating seven cervical, twelve thoracic, five lumbar, five sacral, and one pair of coccygeal dorsal root ganglia. Studies have shown that survival and differentiation of dorsal root ganglion cells rely on growth factors secreted by the neural tube including nerve growth factor, neurotrophin-3, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The endoneurial blood supply of peripheral nerves is the vasa nervorum. The vasa nervorum vessels are branches of adjacent vessels and are especially numerous near joints.

# Nerves

The receptive field of a peripheral sensory nerve (peripheral nerve field) crosses over different dermatomes. A dermatome is an area of skin supplied by a single spinal nerve. Therefore, the map of peripheral nerve fields over the body differs from the dermatomal distribution since individual peripheral nerves are composed of multiple nerve roots. Physicians use these known fields to map sensory deficits and localize lesions.

# Physiologic Variants

Recognizing physiologic variations in sensory anatomy is clinically significant because accurate EMG or NCV studies rely on the correct mapping of nerves.

# Surgical Considerations

Peripheral nerve surgery includes repair of acute nerve injuries, entrapment neuropathies, and nerve sheath tumor resection. Acute nerve injury can result from stretching, compression, or laceration. An example of nerve stretching is brachial plexus injury during vaginal delivery of an infant with shoulder dystocia resulting in Erb palsy.

Peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNST) can be benign or malignant. Benign tumors include neurofibromas or schwannomas, and malignant PNST are typically sarcomatous. Surgical consideration of the nerve fascicle that gave rise to the PNST involves intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring to establish if the associated fascicle has a motor function because that determines whether to do a complete or partial resection. Malignant PNST involves wide local excision, sometimes consisting of proximal amputation. Studies have shown that pre-operative biopsy of PNST results in increased risk of postoperative neurologic deficit, suggesting that referral for surgery without biopsy is recommended.

# Clinical Significance

The morbidity of peripheral nerve injury is highest in trauma patients, specifically the upper extremity with the radial nerve the most commonly injured. Approximately 34% of discharged upper extremity trauma patients require support services, and 16% require rehabilitation according to a recent international survey of surgeons.

The best clinical tools for objective measurement of the extent of peripheral nerve injury include EMG and nerve conduction velocity (NCV). Characteristic findings of a compressive neuropathy on EMG include positive sharp waves representing fibrillations from denervation of muscle fibers. NCV in focal compression will show increased latency, decreased conduction velocity, reduced amplitude of motor action potential and sensory nerve action potential.

The Seddon classification system of nerve injury can be used to predict the complexity of nerve regeneration.

The differential for non-traumatic peripheral neuropathy includes:

- Immune-mediated

- Metabolic

- Hereditary

- Toxic

- Infectious

- Entrapment

Sensory neuropathies can represent the neurologic manifestations of systemic disease.