# Continuing Education Activity

Vinca alkaloids, which belong to a class of cell cycle phase M specific anti-tubulin agents are one of the first plant alkaloids to be developed for use as anti-cancer agents in humans. This activity describes the incidence, etiology, clinical features, examination findings, differential diagnosis, assessment, and management of systemic effects of vinca alkaloids, with an emphasis on vincristine-induced neurotoxicity.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism underlying the use of vinca alkaloids as anticancer agents.

- Summarize ways to assess as well as prognosticate vinca alkaloid associated neurotoxicity. 
- Review the available modalities of prevention and management of vinca alkaloid associated neurotoxicity.
- Outline the impact of vinca alkaloids on the hematopoietic system.

# Introduction

Vinca alkaloids, which belong to a class of cell cycle phase M specific anti-tubulin agents, were one of the first plant alkaloids to be developed for use as anti-cancer agents in humans. Vinca alkaloids derived from Vinca rosea (Catharanthus roseus) consists of first-generation (vincristine, vinblastine), second-generation semi-synthetic derivatives (vinorelbine, vindesine), and third-generation (vinflunine). Vinflunine has also been classified by some as a second-generation agent.

Vinflunine, the newest, third-generation, fluorinated, anti-microtubule agent, has been used in the setting of transitional cell urothelial bladder cancer.  has been advocated to have a higher potency and lesser frequency of adverse events when compared to the older agents.

# Etiology

Vinca alkaloids function as microtubule inhibitors, inhibiting the polymerization of tubulin, which is necessary for spindle formation during the M-phase of the cell cycle.

# Epidemiology

**Vincristine**

Neurotoxicity is the most common side effect of vincristine.

The prevalence of vincristine-induced neuropathy is known to be 1.36 percent in the pediatric population.

The presence of pre-existent diabetic neuropathy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type I correlate with a higher risk of developing sensorimotor polyneuropathy.

Commoner in African Americans, dose-dependant.

The Incidence of peripheral neuropathy with the use of vincristine approaches 30 percent.

CYP 3A5 is involved in the metabolism of Vincristine. Lower expression of the CYP 3A5 gene slows down the metabolism of vincristine

**Vinblastine**

Although paralytic ileus is known to be more common with the use of vincristine, research shows it to occur with a frequency of 2 to 4 percent in patients receiving vinblastine.

Transient elevation of transaminases occurs in 5 to 10 percent of cases.

**Vinorelbine**

Mild-moderate neuropathy and constipation.

Mild to moderate nausea and vomiting has been shown to occur in a third of patients on vinorelbine, whereas diarrhea and stomatitis are less frequent.

Dose and duration dependant myelosuppression generally occurs 5 to 10 days after the administration of the drug and is known to subside after 1 to 2 weeks of cessation of use.

# Pathophysiology

The microtubular apparatus plays a pivotal role in axonal transport and secretory function. The inhibitory action of these drugs on the microtubular apparatus is responsible for their neurotoxicity.

Vinca alkaloids penetrate the blood-brain barrier poorly due to their large size and significant protein binding. As a result, effects on the peripheral nervous system predominate over central nervous system actions.

# History and Physical

**Adverse Effects**

**Peripheral Nervous System**

The incidence of peripheral neuropathy, which presents in a typical glove and stocking distribution, and proceeds from a distal to a proximal fashion, with vincristine, is known to range between 35 to 45%.

Autonomic neuropathy, which presents with constipation, ileus, and abdominal cramps, may require pre-emptive laxatives.

Autonomic effects on the cardiovascular system may present as arterial hypertension or hypotension and orthostatic hypotension.

**Central Nervous System**

Acute or subacute encephalopathy, seizures, visual loss can occur with the administration of these drugs.

Jaw pain with a neuropathic component, which is non-responsive to traditional pain medications has been reported with the use of vincristine. There is a hypothesis that this pain results from the fifth cranial nerve (trigeminal nerve) involvement.

Vincristine induced vocal cord palsy, which is a potentially reversible phenomenon and subsides with the cessation of the drug, has also been reported in the literature.

**Hematological Toxicity**

Vincristine is usually a bone marrow sparing agent.

**Renal Toxicity**

Vinblastine and its active metabolite desacetylvinblastine, vincristine, and vindesine have a low renal excretion (between 10 to 15%).

**Hepatic Toxicity**

Since vincristine is primarily metabolized in the liver, dose adjustments are recommended with hepatic dysfunction with hyperbilirubinemia, particularly in cases with an elevation of the direct bilirubin fraction.

**Pulmonary Toxicity**

Acute dyspnoea and bronchospasm may occur with the concurrent use of vincristine and vinblastine with mitomycin-C.

**Gastrointestinal Toxicity**

Vinorelbine and its metabolites are associated with chemotherapy-induced autonomic neuropathy which may present with constipation and urinary retention, through activation of the muscarinic receptors.

**Cardiovascular Toxicity**

Apart from the cardiovascular autonomic effects which present as disturbances in the hemodynamic parameters, these drugs have also correlated with cardiac ischemic pain presenting with electrocardiographic abnormalities and myocardial infarction.

**Local Effects**

Vincristine and vinblastine are known to act as vesicants and cause chemotherapy-associated extravasation.

Recommendations include caution against the intramuscular, subcutaneous, and intraperitoneal use of vinca alkaloids. A bolus injection is recommended whenever possible, due to the risks associated with local administration. Local reactions related to the injection include erythema, pain, and discoloration.

**Other Rare Adverse Effects**

Alopecia is a rare adverse effect of these drugs.

# Evaluation

There are various tools used for the evaluation of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy namely the "Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events" (CTCAE) developed by the National Cancer Institute, the "European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Core Questionnaire C30" (EORTC QLQ-C30), and the "Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy-20 Questionnaire" (CIPN20).

Both nerve conduction studies and electromyography are expected to demonstrate symptoms of an axonopathy but are not performed routinely due to the costs involved. An indirect laryngoscopic examination in patients presenting with hoarseness of voice will likely demonstrate reduced mobility of the affected vocal cord.

SIADH is known to be present with symptoms of hypovolemic hyponatremia and may require determination of urine and plasma osmolarity for its diagnosis.

Hepatic veno-occlusive disease is expected to present with symptoms of jaundice, anasarca, weight gain, and decreased or absent blood flow in the hepatic vein on duplex ultrasonography.sine qua non in the diagnosis, whereas transfusion refractory thrombocytopenia is an addition in a recent modification of the diagnostic criteria.

# Treatment / Management

Regular surveillance and patient education strategies are necessary for the early recognition of neurological symptomatic adverse events.

Secondary preventive strategies aimed at mitigating the impact of these adverse effects on the patient's quality of life can be beneficial. Patient and caregiver education, lifestyle interventions, physical therapy, and occupational therapy approaches, along with avoiding risk factors that predispose to a neurological insult, can also improve outcomes.

Fluid deprivation, supplementation with 3% hypertonic saline, and use of loop diuretics are the recommendations for the management of SIADH.

Clinicians should avoid concomitant use of these drugs with azole antifungals is to be avoided due to the risk of neurotoxicity, which has been known to present with seizures.

Given the low incidence of febrile neutropenia, no recommendations exist for growth factor support along with ABVD chemotherapy in Hodgkin's lymphoma (during the first 3 or 4 cycles of ABVD chemotherapy.

Defibrotide is a viable treatment option in the management of hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

Flushing of the veins after injection is advisable to minimize inflammation. Extravasations of vinca alkaloids have shown an association with skin ulceration occurring up to after 24 hours after the administration of these agents, for which hyaluronidase and corticosteroids can provide viable treatment options. Urgent surgical consultation and immediate debridement are necessary for severe cases.

The development of liposomal formulations may allow for the administration of more than the single recommended of 2 mg.

# Differential Diagnosis

Constipation - Electrolyte abnormalities (hypokalemia), reduced oral intake, opioid-induced constipation, and peritoneal carcinomatosis may be considered in the differential diagnosis.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Clinical trials examining the effect of putative neuroprotective agents such as glutamine, acetyl-L-carnitine, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6 against vincristine-induced neuropathy are underway.

# Prognosis

While mild symptoms of vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy generally subside over weeks to months with no residual deficits, severe symptoms may persist for months to years without complete resolution.

Vincristine-induced vocal cord palsy is generally reversible with complete recovery expected within 6 to 9 months.

# Complications

Long term sequelae of neuropathy have been reported in patients even after many years (nine) after cessation of treatment with vincristine, and a negative impact on the quality of life adds to the long-lasting morbidity associated with its use.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The importance of timely recognition of signs and symptoms of neuropathy along with measures to prevent their impact on the patient's quality of life cannot be overemphasized.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Considerable caution is necessary for the handling and administration of vinca alkaloids. Vincristine is a drug with considerable toxicity and a relatively narrow therapeutic index.

Neurotoxicity and extravasation need to be anticipated in the acute setting.

Capping the single maximum dose to 2 mg, irrespective of the body surface area has been suggested as an option to minimize the probability of occurrence of acute neurotoxicity.

Pharmacists and cancer care nurses should be well trained in the use of vincristine. The ready availability of Expertise and training in administering vincristine are essential in any unit providing chemotherapy services.

The role of physical and occupational therapists in preventing functional deterioration due to the potentially disabling impact of chemotherapy-induced neuropathy should not be ignored.

The utility of various drugs in the prevention of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy is an object of ongoing research. The recognition and management of positive signs of neuropathic pain which might be associated with a reasonable impairment of quality of life fall within the purview of cancer pain and palliative medicine specialists.