A trial of longstanding conservative management for at least one year should be the first line of treatment. This includes rest, activity restriction, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication, which is proven to be more effective than steroids. Rehabilitation with physiotherapy should focus on closed chain short arc quadriceps exercises and specific strengthening of vastus medialis obliqus, core muscle strengthening, and strengthening of hip external rotators. Quadriceps muscle strengthening with different exercises significantly reduces anterior knee pain in early cases of CMP.

Management of the patient with chondromalacia patellae is difficult, and there is no one specific form of treatment that is universally accepted as a standard of care. Medical management should be based on the physical exam findings. It can include patella stabilizing braces, physical therapy for quadriceps strengthening, orthotics that decrease pronation of the foot, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication. The use of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is sometimes advocated, but it is not the standard of care. PRP has not been shown to improve patient outcomes consistently. Likewise, prolotherapy has been recommended by some authors, but it is not the standard of care and has not been shown to improve patient outcomes consistently.

**Operative Management**

Failure of conservative management will result in exploring alternative surgical options. Even though multiple effective options are available, care should be taken when recommending the best procedure, considering the patient's age and severity of CMP. Each procedure has its own merits, indications, and limitations. Available options include patellar cartilage excision, shaving, drilling, proximal soft tissue, and distal bony patellar realignment surgery. The most effective and most straightforward surgery with avoidance of quadriceps fibrosis and dysfunction is a patellar tendon medial realignment with lateral release and reefing of the medial quadriceps expansion.

**Arthroscopic Evaluation and Debridement:**

Indicated for diseased cartilage or chondral abrasion, fibrillation, or traumatized cartilage areas (Outerbridge grade II, III, and IV chondromalacia patellofemoral joint).

Debridement is either mechanical or radiofrequency.

**Arthroscopic or Open Lateral Retinacular Release**

Indicated for lateral patellar tilt and presence of tight lateral retinacular capsule and loose medial capsule.

**Patellar Realignment Surgery**

This is based on restoring the biomechanical force axis of the patellofemoral joint, which would improve its function; however, it would result in patellofemoral joint degeneration to a degree.

Various techniques have been described in the literature covering tibial tuberosity osteotomy, tibial tuberosity anteversion, and tibial tuberosity elevation.

Maquet (anterior tubercle elevation): Not more than 1 cm is elevated to avoid the risk of skin necrosis.

Fulkerson (anterior-medialization):

This is indicated in cases of patellar instability with the presence of an increased Q angle.

Contraindicated in skeletal immaturity and in the presence of superomedial arthrosis ( It is recommended to perform an arthroscopic evaluation before surgery)

Elmslie-Trillat osteotomy

MPFL reconstruction

**Patellectomy:**either partial or total patellectomy. However, this procedure would be indicated only if a patient has excellent quadriceps function preoperatively and would be compliant to exercise regularly postoperatively. Total patellectomy is considered a radical procedure for managing  CMP. It is associated with greater damage to the surrounding ligaments and quadriceps femoris. Additionally, it changes the leverage effect of the extensor muscles. Several other complications have been reported in later stages after total patellectomy, such as instability of the extensor tendon and patellar tendon acute rupture. Hence partial rather than total patellectomy was usually performed in managing CMP.

**Salvage procedures (Historical)**

Patellar resurfacing: the McKeever prosthesis initially had a beneficial long-term effect for cases of severe CMP with advanced patellofemoral osteoarthritis; however, this procedure was abandoned due to multiple complications such as patellar tendon lesions, secondary patella fracture, avascular necrosis, patellofemoral joint instability, and prosthetic loosening.

**Other Treatment Modalities**

**Cell therapy:**

Autologous chondrocyte implantation was first reported in 1994 for treating cartilage defects in knee osteoarthritis.

**Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs):**

Intraarticular injections of MSCs from different sources were proven safe and clinically effective in treating chondromalacia patellar.

It has the advantages of being less invasive, providing symptomatic relief, and reducing inflammatory changes.

The mechanism of MSC injection is still an area of research, but it does have promising results.