Though much advancement has been made in IOL power calculations, there are certain situations where the power calculation becomes difficult. It is because of changing axial length, irregular corneal surface, or previous corneal surgeries. This article will discuss each scenario one by one.

**Aphakia**

In aphakia, the double lens spikes of A-scan are replaced by a single spike of the anterior vitreous face and posterior capsule. The immersion method is preferred over contact biometry. Optical biometers have inbuilt modes for aphakia and are the most accurate method.

**Pediatric Population**

The long-term refractive outcomes among the pediatric pseudophakic population are hard to predict, and it is one of the biggest challenges in managing pediatric cataracts. Elongation of the eyeball and changing corneal curvature produce a tendency for the myopic shift.

The target IOL power should prevent amblyopia in the growing age and achieve emmetropia in adulthood.

Enyedi proposed "the rule of 7". In this rule, the sum of the postoperative refractive goal and the child's age is 7. The target refraction is decided accordingly. Thus for a 1-year-old child, the postoperative refractive target should be +6, for a 2-year-old +5, for a 3-year-old +4, +3 for a 4-year-old, +2 for a 5-year-old, for a 6-year-old +1, 0 for a 7-year-old, and −1 to −2 for patients >8 years of age.

**Corneal Ectasia**

Certain conditions like keratoconus and pellucid marginal degeneration have irregular cornea. In them, reproducible estimation of corneal power is difficult because of disease progression and unstable corneal surface.

It also measures the flatter keratometry and thus avoids hyperopia. There are few studies on IOL power in corneal ectasia. In one study, Thebpatiphat et al. showed that in keratoconus patients, SRK II had the least postoperative error than the SRK and SRK/T formulae.

Wang et al. analyzed Holladay I and II, Haigis, Barrett, SRK/T, and Hoffer Q formulae in 73 eyes of keratoconus patients. He concluded that  Barrett Universal II had the least mild and moderate keratoconus error.

Previous studies have suggested good outcomes with measured K in cases with mild to moderate keratoconus (K<55D) provided slight myopia was aimed. In advanced cases (K >55D), standard keratometry with aimed slight myopia does well.

**Post-refractive Surgery**

In refractive surgery, the anterior corneal surface is ablated. This results in an altered ratio of anterior to posterior corneal surface power. This causes inaccurate estimation of ELP.

The Maloney formula uses preoperative anterior and posterior corneal power, and then post-LASIK anterior corneal power is added to calculate the post-refractive corneal power.

The Haigis-L formula uses ACD for IOL power calculation; thus, it does not require preoperative keratometry values. The Barrett True K similarly does not require preoperative data.

IOL power calculation in post-radial keratotomy (RK) eyes is a challenge. Certain inherent risks are associated with the procedure that makes accurate IOL power calculation challenging. Progressive hyperopia is one of the most common challenges. In conventional RK, the central zone is as small as 3 mm and falls beyond the usual range of the biometer's measurement (4 mm). This results in an overestimation of keratometry and subsequent hyperopia.

**After Posterior Segment S****urgery**

Pars plans vitrectomy with silicone oil tamponade have resulted in improved complicated retinal detachment surgery outcomes. But silicone oil can induce cataracts in phakic eyes. Thus phacoemulsification with lens implantation and silicone oil removal in cataractous patients. Sound velocity in aqueous and silicone oil is 1532 m/ s and  987 m/s, respectively.

The A-scan uses ultrasound to measure the axial length. Thus, the sound waves take longer to reach the transducer from the back of the eye in a silicone oil-filled globe. So the measured axial length is greater in the presence of silicone oil.

The mean ratio of true axial length to measured axial length in the presence of silicone oil is 0.71.