A comprehensive examination of a contracted socket, as well as the prosthesis, is of utmost importance. While evaluating a contracted socket, it is important to compare the appearance and symmetry with the fellow side.

- Evaluation with a prosthesis.: Prosthesis abnormality should be addressed in patients with a prosthesis in place. The motility, size, shape, color of the prosthesis should be examined. Any lid malformations like eyelid laxity, entropion, superior sulcus deepening, ptosis, levator function should be assessed.

- Evaluation without prosthesis: check the ocular surface for fibrous bands and symblepharon formation. The socket should be assessed for the depth of fornices, vascularity, loss of volume, and inflammation.

- Moist versus dry socket: It is crucial to identify if the socket is dry or moist as the management differs for both. The mucosa in a moist socket is healthy and clean. In a dry socket, there is foul-smelling mucosal keratinization, and the surface appears dry.

Several classifications to grade a contracted socket have been published in the literature.

- **Grade 0**: A healthy socket with deep and well-formed fornices

- **Grade 1**: Shelving or shallowing of the lower fornix.

- **Grade 2**: Loss of the superior fornix along with the inferior fornix.

- **Grade 3**: Involvement of all four fornices(superior, inferior, lateral, and medial)

- **Grade 4**: Involvement of all four fornices along with a reduction in the horizontal palpebral fissure length(HPFL)

- **Grade 5**: Recurrence of contraction after repeated failed attempts at reconstruction.

**Prosthesis Making**

Insertion of a well-fitted prosthesis maintains a healthy socket, increases patient's comfort, and creates a balanced facial appearance. They not only provide symmetry but also protect the eye cavity, thereby preventing infections. Two types of ocular prosthesis are available: ready-made artificial eyes and customized ocular prosthesis, the latter offering better fit and esthetics.

An impression of the socket is taken with an impression tray after injection of alginate paste into the socket. On solidification of the paste, a mold of the socket is obtained. The area of the iris is marked and painted. An acrylic dough is heated to get a white model and painted to match the fellow eye. It mainly comprises the sclera and iris and is colored and polished to make the prosthesis look natural.

Orbital implants are medical prosthetics used to replace the lost orbital volume and allow a prosthetic eye movement following enucleation (or evisceration). It may be integrated [porous polyethylene -(Medpor), Hydroxyapatite], non-integrated (Silicone, PMMA). The shapes of the implants are usually spherical and range from 12 to 24 mm in diameter. The wrapping materials act as a buffer to shield the conjunctiva and act as****an****attachment of the extraocular muscles.

Wrapping materials may be either organic (autologous and heterologous) or alloplastic. A-scan ultrasonography of the fellow eye provides a useful tool for predicting the implant size before surgery for optimal volume replacement. The use of the formula, axial length minus 2 mm, gives implant diameter, which is enough to replace the orbital volume.