In the United States, approximately 500,000 people seek care for burn injuries yearly. For civilians, these injuries are typically sustained in house fires, motor vehicle crashes, and work-related accidents. Burn injuries represent 5% to 10% of combat casualties in combat.

The World Health Organization (WHO) and the Center for Disease Prevention and Control (CDC) report burns as one of the most common causes of home injuries and children under 19.

The severity of burns is determined by the intensity of the thermal energy sustained, duration of exposure, and the area of the body affected. These parameters determine whether a patient will require treatment at a dedicated burn center.

Many burn injuries are sustained in motor vehicle crashes, which can often become multi-trauma events. It is imperative that the initial provider not become so engrossed in the apparent injury that they do not consider more life-threatening injuries that might be less overtly evident. Airway assessment, control of hemorrhage, and the advanced trauma life support guidelines must be followed.

Adequacy of resuscitation should be confirmed. This confirmation renders an invaluable part of patient management and should be considered in a timely schedule. Various monitoring methods for the adequacy of fluid resuscitation have been introduced. Accordingly, urine output monitoring with an indwelling catheter, including a Foley catheter, is considered the most common measure for this purpose and even more important than strict adherence to Parkland or any other fluid resuscitation formula. However, other clinical signs, including but not limited to the faint distal pulses in a newly burnt patient, implies inadequate fluid resuscitation and later peripheral edema due to a large amount of replaced fluid. Maintenance of an hourly urine output at 0.5 mL/kg/hr in adults is recommended. Oliguriec, and anuric patients with severe burns, despite appropriate fluid resuscitation, generally do not survive.