The GON-block can be performed unilaterally or bilaterally. However, no method has been identified as superior to the other.

The following steps will discuss how to perform the greater occipital nerve block:

- Optimally position the patient by placing them in a seated or prone position with the neck slightly flexed.

- Palpate the back of the skull to identify the occipital protuberance and the mastoid process on the side of the head where the patient is experiencing the majority of their pain.

- Locate the location of the greater occipital nerve. The location of the GON is approximately one-third of the distance from the occipital protuberance to the mastoid process. This location should be approximately 2 cm inferior and 2 cm lateral from the protuberance.

- Cleanse this area using povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine

- Obtain a syringe filled with the anesthetic. Use an inferior-lateral approach to insert the needle toward the greater occipital nerve. Gently advance the needle tip until resistance is appreciated, indicating contact with the periosteum.

- Withdraw the needle approximately 1 mm and aspirate to ensure the needle is not in contact with the occipital artery.

- Inject anesthetic in fan-like distribution. The provider may also elect to inject anesthetic directly without fanning distribution.

- Withdraw the needle and apply pressure for 5 to 10 minutes.

It should be noted that response to the greater occipital nerve block commonly varies from patient to patient, and the outcome can be difficult to predict. When a GON-block is successful, pain typically improves after 20 to 30 minutes and can last for several hours to several months.