# Introduction

The highly reactive superoxide radicals forms when dioxides interact with air, a process that can be achieved in all living organisms and can then be further purposed depending on its context and the process through which it is metabolized.

Even though it is known that these diseases thrive under the overproduction of free radicals, superoxides also have a pivotal role in maintaining physiological states. These include defense functions like antibacterial properties and phagocytosis, as well as their ability to act as signaling molecules.

Given its active part in many of the body’s reactions, intricate regulation is achieved by the enzyme superoxide dismutases (SODs), which catalyzes the deactivation of superoxide and maintains the physiological concentration of superoxides.

# Fundamentals

It is of utmost importance to understand the multitude of roles that superoxide and its derivatives have in the human body. Among the most studied mechanisms is the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by the phagocytic cells to eliminate pathogens that invade the body. This process is mediated by the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase by the production of superoxide, as well as subsequent production of hydrogen peroxide and other free radicals. Superoxide also plays a vital role in cell signaling and survival by activating membrane-bound receptors. It can also alter mitochondrial membrane permeability to promote apoptosis. Superoxides have also been demonstrated to be an underlying cause in the pathophysiology of many diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic inflammation, dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, among others. These pathological states have one thing in common; the intracellular and extracellular excess of superoxide and other radicals that can disrupt cellular homeostasis.

# Issues of Concern

Increasing knowledge in the various physiological and pathological aspects of superoxide and ROS has implicated these molecules in numerous diseases. Cardiovascular disease and malignancy are the first and second leading causes of death in the United States.

# Cellular Level

Currently, research has shown that the superoxide molecule and its progeny are present in most aerobic cells and that they portray an immense array of important functions in a variety of cell types.

One of the most studied and most relevant reactions involving superoxides is that of the respiratory burst, initiated by NADPH oxidase. This enzyme, found in phagocytic leukocytes, converts oxygen to superoxide radicals within the phagolysosome to defend the body from pathogens.

# Molecular Level

Contrary to what the name implies, superoxide can also act as a moderate reductant.

Nitric oxide (NO) plays an essential role in the aging process via its interactions with superoxide radicals. NO physiologically inhibits cytochrome c to decrease dioxygen consumption.

# Function

Superoxide and its partially reduced metabolites can react with various biomolecules, which implicates them in cell death, cellular dysfunction, inflammation, and several other pathophysiological conditions.

Large amounts of superoxide are produced as the body generates inflammatory NO, leading to increased peroxynitrite concentrations, a cytotoxic mediator molecule.

# Mechanism

The innate immune system, the body’s first line of defense, has an essential role in maintaining homeostasis. The phagocytic NADPH oxidase plays an important role in eliminating engulfed bacteria, specifically via the production of ROS.

# Testing

The concentration of superoxides in a given cell or environment is achievable by a process called electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, which has its basis in the nucleophilic addition of the superoxide molecule to a diamagnetic cyclic nitrone, technically termed as a spin trap. This addition then results in the formation of a spin adduct, a persistent radical that is directly measurable due to its characteristic spectrum.

Classically, testing used the nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction to detect superoxide, which reduced NBT to its deep blue diformazan form, thus producing a visible color change to purple.

# Pathophysiology

There are numerous pathological mechanisms in which superoxides play a pivotal role. Oxidative stress has been shown to be one of the major driving factors in cancer and angiogenesis.

The reversal of malignant phenotypes is achievable by reducing cellular levels of superoxide; this occurs by the expression of superoxide dismutases that have shown efficacy in reducing tumor growth, metastasis, and other malignant features.

ROS has also been implicated in disrupting the blood-brain barrier, resulting in the entry of toxic substances into the central nervous system and disruption of neuronal homeostasis.

# Clinical Significance

One of the most significant burdens of modern medicine is atherosclerotic and cardiovascular disease, besides various cancers. There have been numerous advances in the comprehension of these diseases, and ROS have been directly implicated. The presence of these molecules in higher than normal concentrations drives towards the formation of the atherosclerotic plaques and to defects in the endothelial relaxation, thus promoting the progress from asymptomatic disease to a broad clinical picture.

Mutations of SOD1 resulting in a decrease of 50 to 80% of function have correlated with the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a neural disorder that causes motor neuron death in the spinal cord and brain, that results in mixed upper and lower motor neuron symptoms and gradually leads to paralysis of the entire body.

As previously mentioned, NADPH oxidase is crucial in the endogenous production of superoxide and other oxidative species. Mutations that affect the function of this enzyme have been shown to cause chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), a rare disease (1 in 200,000 live births) that presents with multiple bacterial and fungal infections starting in infancy or early childhood.Staphyloccocus aureus, Burkholderia cepacia, Nocardia, Serratia marcescens, and Salmonella, all of which are catalase-positive organisms. These patients can also develop local or systemic disease after the application of the BCG vaccine.

Finally, reactive oxygen species also carry implications in developing neurodegenerative diseases, such as Huntington disease, Alzheimer disease, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, and Parkinson disease.