Infantile spasms and refractory complex partial seizures are challenging conditions to treat, given the complexity of their respective etiologies. Early diagnosis is necessary to optimize the treatment outcome in patients with prolonged EEG 1 to 2 weeks following the onset of symptoms. This evaluation should be followed by initiating treatment no later than one week. Investigations including MRI, genetic, and metabolic studies should be performed within four weeks of diagnosis to determine any possible etiology.

There are three first-line treatment options for infantile spams: vigabatrin, ACTH, or oral corticosteroids. The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) ranks ACTH the highest in terms of efficacy, taking the short-time response rate (76 to 87%) and chances of relapse into consideration. It ranks vigabatrin the lowest, given the significantly lower short-term response rate (35 to 54%).

After starting treatment, the prescriber should monitor for adverse effects. For ACTH and oral corticosteroids, patients should be screened for hypertension and infection, whereas for vigabatrin, patients should have screening for retinal toxicity. To mitigate the effects of vigabatrin, the FDA issued the “Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy,” under which patients are screened at baseline for any visual deficits just before treatment and after that every three months. It also mandates that patients and clinicians are taking or prescribing vigabatrin register in the SHARE program through which they acknowledge their understanding of possible adverse effects associated with treatment.

As discussed before, infants undergo electroretinography (ERG) to rule out retinal toxicity. A retrospective case series study addressed the high cost of performing the test as it involves hospital admission and the risk of sedating the patient. Furthermore, because patients screened for retinal toxicity had underlying visual problems before treatment, the study concludes that ERG, though important in clinical practice, is not feasible. It suggested that the development of newer techniques like awake ERG may solve the high-cost problem of hospital admissions and prevent the need for sedation.

An EEG should be repeated 2 to 3 weeks after initiating treatment. By then, the hypsarrythmia and clinical spasms should resolve; this would guide the clinician on the efficacy of the therapy. If no resolution occurs, the clinician should attempt alternative treatments such as the ketogenic diet, pyridoxine, or other anti-seizure medications. If all fails, surgery would be the last resort.

Therapy with vigabatrin requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners (NPs, PAs), nurses, and pharmacists. By utilizing open communication and collaborative efforts, vigabatrin treatment can better achieve therapeutic goals while minimizing interactions and adverse effects. [Level 5]