The withdrawal reflex can be tested using an electromyogram (EMG). This device measures the electrical activity of peripheral nerves and striated skeletal muscles and includes a needle EMG and nerve conduction studies (NCS). The EMG was first described in 1943 by Weddell et al., who pioneered its use in examining muscles.

Nerve conduction studies provide an efficient method of quantifying the conduction velocity (CV) of nerves and the amplitude of sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) and compound motor action potentials (cMAPs). The nerve CV reflects the speed of propagation of action potentials (APs) by saltatory conduction along myelinated axons in a peripheral nerve. SNAP amplitude is determined by the number of axons in a sensory nerve, while the amplitude of cMAPs reflects an integrated function of the motor axons, neuromuscular junction (NMJ), and striated muscle. Needle EMGs are utilized to detect myopathic changes in muscle in response to denervation. Very fine needles are inserted into several muscles, each with a microscopic electrode that can pick up muscles' normal and abnormal electrical signals.

In most cases, an experienced clinician will perform both elements of an EMG, but in certain situations, only one may be performed. Utilizing both of these procedures helps establish if damage occurred in the motor and/or sensory nerve cell bodies or within the peripheral nerves and can also determine if an issue is related to the axon or the myelin sheath (i.e., axonal vs. demyelinating neuropathies). Nerve damage may be focal, multifocal, or generalized, with focal nerve damage typically due to compression of a nerve at an entrapment site, as may occur at the carpal, cubital, or tarsal tunnel, radial groove, Guyon's canal, or fibular head.