**Percutaneous Mitral Balloon Commissurotomy**

The guidelines recommend performing percutaneous mitral balloon commissurotomy (PMBC) in a comprehensive heart valve center with cardiac surgery backup.

If the measurements meet the criteria to continue the procedure, then a guide wire is advanced into the left atrium. The femoral vein and interatrial septum are both dilated to ease the delivery of the Inoue balloon-tipped catheter. Once dilated, the balloon-tipped catheter is threaded over the guide wire in the left atrium and positioned at the site of the mitral valve. The tip of the balloon is dilated first, then the rest of the balloon is dilated to open the narrowed orifice of the mitral valve. This procedure is usually monitored under transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) and fluoroscopy.

Following commissurotomy, direct measurement of transmitral gradients is done along with an echocardiographic assessment of the transmitral gradients, and the mitral valve area is calculated using planimetry. Mitral valve regurgitation is also assessed with a transesophageal echocardiogram. If there is still significant stenosis with mild-to-moderate mitral regurgitation, the procedure is then repeated 1 mm below the maximal diameter. Once optimal results are obtained, the left atrial hemodynamics are repeated to calculate a new post-procedure residual transmitral gradient, and the post-operative planimetered mitral valve area is measured.

A right heart catheterization is then obtained to assess the right side of the heart hemodynamics, along with a left ventriculogram to evaluate mitral regurgitation severity. Guidelines recommend obtaining an echocardiogram a few days after PMBC as the pressure half-time calculation for the mitral valve area may be inaccurate due to post-procedure compliance changes in both the atrium and ventricle. An assessment of mitral regurgitation and atrial septal defect should be performed as well. A yearly clinic review and echocardiographic assessment are required. Anticoagulation should be continued in patients with paroxysmal or chronic atrial fibrillation. If mitral stenosis recurs, PBMV can be repeated. At that time, if there are significant valvular anatomic abnormalities, surgical mitral valve replacement would be recommended.