Newborns with a family positive for sickle cell disease should undergo a screening test. This screening test for sickle cell hemoglobin is mandatory in the United States. Prenatal diagnosis in genetically prone fetuses can be made using the chorionic villus sampling technique or amniocentesis.

A complete blood count with a peripheral picture is the initial test. Here, a reduced RBC number, reduced reticulocyte count, variable mean corpuscular volume, increased leukocyte count, reduced ESR, and the presence of sickle-shaped cells in the periphery usually indicate the diagnosis of sickle cell disease. The presence of Howell-Jolly bodies indicates functional asplenia in the patient. Subsequent hemoglobin electrophoresis confirms the diagnosis of sickle cell disease if the concentration of sickle cell hemoglobin is more than 90% of the total hemoglobin and the fetal hemoglobin comprises the rest of the hemoglobin isotype. However, if the concentration of sickle cell hemoglobin is at or around 45%, it indicates the presence of the sickle cell trait rather than the disease itself.

A urine analysis should be performed to rule out a urinary tract infection as a cause of hematuria and identify isosthenuria in sickle cell disease patients.

If a patient presents to the emergency department with an acute vaso-occlusive episode and the diagnosis of sickle cell disease is not yet established, one can administer an instant sickling test which may test positive for sickle cell hemoglobin. However, this test has a limiting factor. It can not differentiate between heterozygous and homozygous states of sickle cell hemoglobin.

Arterial blood gases are required to monitor pulmonary functions in case of acute chest syndrome. Serial arterial blood gases shall be obtained to monitor the severity of the pulmonary crises.

A chest X-ray shall be performed in patients with respiratory signs and symptoms, but it may be normal in the early phase of acute chest syndrome. Plain radiography of the peripheries is used in identifying acute and subacute marrow infarctions, as well as observing old infarcts. In the case of osteomyelitis, early radiographs are not useful because they do not show significant changes. However, in the subsequent two weeks, the plain radiographs may reveal the destruction of the bone, periosteal bone formation, sinus tract, and sequestra.

MRI scans are paramount in diagnosing osteomyelitis and avascular necrosis of the femoral and humeral heads. Technetium-99 scans are also used to detect osteonecrosis.