The skin is the largest organ in the body and is composed of the superficial epidermis, the underlying dermis (further divided into the upper papillary dermis and lower reticular dermis), and the hypodermis, composed of subcutaneous fat and connective tissue.

Thermal burn pathophysiology can be broken into local and systemic responses. When excessive heat is transferred to the skin, it radiates outward from the point of initial contact and forms a local response with three zones in all directions. The zone of coagulation is the central contact point of maximal damage in which cell death, denaturation of proteins in the extracellular matrix, and damage to the circulation occur. Damaged circulation near the zone of coagulation results in a second surrounding zone of stasis. The third peripheral zone of hyperemia results from increased circulation as the body responds to injury. The zone of stasis can recover with proper resuscitation and adequate wound care. On the contrary, prolonged periods of hypotension and inadequate wound care can convert the zone of stasis and even the zone of hyperemia into wider and deeper tissue damage.

The systemic response following a burn can be massive. In a large burn, two clinically significant processes occur. The release of systemic inflammatory mediators and cytokines results in increased capillary permeability and wide-scale extravasation of fluid and proteins from the intravascular to the extravascular space. This can result in life-threatening hypotension, pulmonary edema, and decreased circulation to end organs and the already stressed integument in a response similar to that of severe sepsis and septic shock. The second process is due to physical skin loss. The skin plays several important roles in homeostasis including temperature control, and fluid regulation, and it serves as a physical barrier to infection as well as a point of contact to mediate interpretation of our environment. Large surface area loss of this vital organ interrupts these important processes.

With a flash and flame burn in an enclosed setting, one can be exposed to high levels of carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide, which has a 40 times higher affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen, causes intracellular and extracellular hypoxia by displacing oxygen from hemoglobin as well as interrupting oxidative respiration by binding to proteins in the cytochrome oxidase pathway. Inhalation of smoke can also result in facial and supraglottic burns, but true subglottic and lower respiratory tract burns are rare due to the protective mechanism of reflexive vocal chord closure. The products of combustion can travel deep into the respiratory tract and cause mucosal irritation, leading to bronchospasm and local or systemic inflammation, and capillary leak. True inhalation injury causes a significant increase in mortality.

A burn wound is considered fully healed after final epithelialization. Open wounds epithelialize two ways, circumferentially inward from the intact epithelium at the periphery and from basal cells in underlying dermal appendages such as hair follicles and sebaceous/sweat glands. Therefore, the depth of a burn will largely dictate the healing process as deeper burns will no longer have dermal appendages and epithelialization will depend solely on circumferential growth from the wound periphery, a much slower process.

From superficial to deep, the first category of burn injuries includes first-degree or superficial burns. These are confined in the depth of the epidermis, and all dermal appendages and nerve endings are intact. Superficial burns generally heal in three to five days with minimal intervention and do not leave significant scarring. Second-degree burns are broken up into superficial partial-thickness burns, which involve the papillary dermis with intact dermal appendages and partially damaged nerves, and deep partial-thickness burns, which involve the deeper reticular dermis and have significant damage to nerves and dermal appendages. Superficial partial burns are very painful but generally heal in 10 to 15 days with minimal scarring, although pigmentary changes can occur. Deep partial burns can only epithelialize from the periphery of the wound and therefore heal at a much slower average of three to five weeks with significant scarring and scar contracture. Third-degree or full-thickness burns involve the entire epidermis and dermis and will form significant scarring and contractures with prolonged healing times without surgical intervention. Fourth-degree burns involve the skin, underlying subcutaneous fat, and even muscle or bone. These will require more extensive debridements, the use of dermal autografts, and possibly amputations during treatment.