The patient is intubated, and the airway is secured. The flap is harvested under general anesthesia.

**Allen Test**

An Allen test is performed on the extremity from which the flap will be harvested. The arm is elevated, and the palm of the hand is blanched by informally exsanguinating the hand and quickly applying pressure to the ulnar and radial arteries. With the palm blanched, ulnar artery compression is released and palmar rubor is evaluated. If the palm turns pink or red within five seconds, it suggests that there is a complete palmar arch that can support the distal extremity on ulnar artery blood flow alone. THe Allen test is best performed when the patient is warm; if the patient is cold, the hand's perfusion may appear worse than it actualy is.

It is the author’s preference to use the Doppler as an adjunct to the Allen test as well, especially if refill to the palm is sluggish. This test is ideally performed with two people. The assistant uses the Doppler on the palm of the hand to confirm a distal extremity pulse. The ulnar and radial arteries are then compressed by the surgeon, and the Doppler should go silent due to a lack of arterial inflow. The ulnar artery is then released, and the Doppler signal should resume with the pulse. If there is no return of pulse, the radial artery should be tested by confirming a pulse on the hand with the ulnar artery compressed. If the Doppler detects a pulse on the distal extremity with the ulnar artery compressed, the hand is supplied by the radial artery predominantly, and radial forearm flap harvest should be aborted in favor of another reconstructive option. One disadvantage of this method is that it cannot detect the rare instance of an incomplete superficial palmar arch. The Doppler should be used in conjunction with the Allen test to confirm the signs of capillary refill to the entire hand from the ulnar artery alone. If there is concern about the ability of the distal extremity to rely solely on the ulnar artery, the flap should be aborted in favor of a different reconstructive option.

**Patient Positioning**

As the majority of osteocutaneous radial forearm free flaps are used in head and neck reconstruction, the patient is usually in a supine position with the patient’s head at the top edge of the bed. The neck is generally extended with a shoulder roll, and one or two belt straps are used to secure the patient to the bed. The arm from which the flap will be harvested is left untucked and placed on an arm board. It is the author’s preference to harvest the flap on a pivoting arm board, as opposed to a hand surgery table, when the free flap is being harvested for head and neck reconstruction. The arm board has a smaller, slimmer profile, which reduces the displacement of the ablative surgeon or assistant from the head and neck if they are operating on the same side as the flap harvest; it will also move along with the operating table, thereby obviating the need to reposition it independently if the abltaive surgeon requires repositioning of the operating table. A hand surgery table, when attached to the operating table, can extend superior to the shoulder and even to the same level as the neck, which can displace the ablative surgeon or assistant from the optimal operating position.

**Tourniquet Set-Up**

A tourniquet may be placed in an unsterile or sterile fashion. If placed in an unsterile fashion, a cotton undercast is wrapped loosely around the biceps. A size-appropriate tourniquet is then fastened around the cotton undercast. If the tourniquet is placed in a sterile fashion, the entire arm is circumferentially sterilely prepped from the shoulder to the hand.

**Sterility**

The patient is prepped based on surgeon preference and patient allergies. If the tourniquet was placed in a non-sterile fashion, it is important to drape so as to keep the tourniquet from contaminating the field. If the tourniquet is placed in a sterile fashion, the arm should be circumferentially prepped from the shoulder to the hand. The arm and the operating table extension where the flap will be harvested are draped. Antibiotics are administered prior to skin incision. The antibiotic and dose are determined by surgeon preference.