Pathologic involvement of the lumbar or lumbosacral plexus can result from many causes ranging from tumors to trauma. While trauma is more common with brachial plexopathies, neoplastic processes involving adjacent pelvic organs are more commonly implicated with lumbar and lumbosacral (LS) plexopathies. The retroperitoneal and the intrapelvic location protects it from trauma. It can, however, be affected following high-velocity injuries, pelvic fractures, gunshot wounds, and rarely intrapartum from compression from the fetal head.

**Mechanisms of Lumbar Plexus Involvement From Tumors**

Neoplasms are the most common cause of lumbar plexopathy. Plexopathy is part of the initial presentation of cancer in approximately 15% of patients. Plexus involvement from cancers is seen in about 1% of the cancers.

- Direct tumoral invasion from adjacent pelvic organs:

LSP lies near many abdominal and pelvic organs, including the bladder, colon, ovaries, and cervix, and can be involved as an infiltrative or a compressive process.

- Distant metastases

These tumors, like elsewhere, can lead to distant metastases and cause lumbosacral plexopathy. The most common ones arise from the lung, the breast, and lymphomas.

- Compression of lumbar plexus from enlarged metastatic lymph nodes:

Enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes can cause direct compression of the plexus and cause LSP.

-  Epineural spread or Intraneural lymphomatosis:

Lymphomas can cause direct endoneurial invasion by the neurotrophic neoplastic cells leading to an entity called intraneural lymphomatosis.

- Perineural spread from prostate cancers

This is a rare but reported mode of spread, especially in prostate cancer. Capek et al. reported a case of bilateral LSP from prostate cancer, the probable mechanism of spread was postulated to be via the dural sac, which serves as a bridge to connect to the opposite side.

- Radiation for pelvic tumors (radiation-induced lumbosacral plexopathy - RILSP).

Tumors in the lumbosacral region, which are radiation-sensitive such as ovarian, cervical, colon, testicular, and prostatic tumors, and Hodgkin’s lymphoma involving the paraaortic and pelvic nodes, can lead to RILSP. The effects of radiation can be seen even up to 6 months after the initial radiation.

- Primary neural tumors – neurofibroma, perineuroma

Rarely, primary neural tumors can manifest with plexopathy.