The first and outermost layer of skin is the epidermis. The epidermis is a stratified squamous epithelium that contains four to five layers depending on its location:

- **Stratum Basalis (Basal cell layer):**This layer is deepest and closest to the dermis. It is mitotically active and contains melanocytes, a single row of keratinocytes, and stem cells. Melanocytes are the cell type responsible for producing melanin, a substance that gives our skin its color.  Keratinocytes from this layer evolve and mature as they travel outward/upward to create the remaining layers.

- **Stratum Spinosum (prickle cell layer):**This layer compromises most of the epidermis and contains several layers of cells connected by desmosomes. These desmosomes allow cells to remain tightly bound to one another and resemble "spines" architecturally.

- **Stratum Granulosum (granular cell layer):**This layer contains several layers of cells that contain lipid-rich granules. In this layer, cells begin to immortalize and lose their nuclei, as they move away from the nutrients located in the deeper tissue.

- **Stratum Lucidum:**This layer only exists in the thick skin of soles and palms and consists of mostly immortalized cells.

- **Stratum Corneum (keratin layer):**This keratinized layer serves as a protective overcoat and is the outermost layer of the epidermis. Due to keratinization and lipid content, this layer allows for the regulation of water loss by preventing internal fluid evaporation.

Deep to the epidermis lies the dermis. It is a thick layer of connective tissue consisting of collagen and elastin which allows for skin’s strength and flexibility, respectively. The dermis also contains nerve endings, blood vessels, and adnexal structures such as hair shafts, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands. The apical layer of dermis folds to form papillae that extend into the epidermis like tiny finger-like projections and is referred to as the papillary dermis, while the lower layer of the dermis is referred to as the reticular dermis.

The hypodermis is the third and deepest layer consisting mainly of adipose tissue.