A careful history is paramount to ensure that presenting symptoms are caused by degenerative changes and not more serious conditions.  Discussion with the patient about possible constitutional symptoms (weight loss, fever, chills, and/or sweats) and infections can be crucial, along with oncologic history and trauma.  If pain is a presenting symptom, a thorough pain history such as functional limitation, intensity, onset, alleviating and exacerbating symptoms, radiation, and related symptoms are needed.  A comprehensive history of neurologic complaints such as weakness, sensory loss, and gait are imperative.

Physical exam should always begin with the patient's vitals (i.e., fever). A thorough neurologic examination is necessary, which at a minimum should include motor testing of the upper and lower extremities, cranial nerve testing, gait and balance assessment, sensation, and reflexes (including Hofmann's and Babinski) and any clonus.  The range of motion of the cervical spine should undergo evaluation for both degrees of movement and elicit any symptoms.

Most commonly, patients present with axial neck pain and difficulty with movement.

Other signs and symptoms include changes of deep tendon reflexes, muscle atrophy, hypesthesias, paresthesias, or weakness demonstrated by specific nerve root signs. A significant proportion of flexion/extension motion of the cervical spine occurs between C4-C6. Interestingly, research shows that the C5-C6 interspace has the earliest and most significant amount of degeneration.

Provocative testing such as a Spurling test and a shoulder abduction (relief) test can evaluate for any radicular symptoms. A Lhermitte's sign can also help diagnose potential cervical myelopathy. Evaluation of the paraspinal muscular for spasm and trigger points is necessary. An assessment of the upper extremity would also be helpful, to help further distinguish presenting symptoms. For example, a patient may be complaining of a vague numbness and tingling in the hand, which may be secondary to carpal tunnel syndrome, double crush syndrome, or cervical radiculopathy.

Cervical disc disease may be asymptomatic and degenerative changes only found on imaging such as CT scan, X-rays, or MRI. A posterolateral symptomatic HNP will present with dermatomal pain, myotomal weakness, or sensory change.  The most common HNP is at C6-7, just anterior to the C7 nerve root.  When the C7 nerve root is inflamed or compressed, the patient will complain of pain from the neck radiating to the lateral forearm and then palm and possible radiation to the middle finger. Muscle weakness may be present in the ipsilateral triceps muscle, making extension at the elbow difficult.  The triceps reflex may also be depressed and asymmetrical.

C5 root compression can present with neck pain radiating to the shoulder along with peri-scapula pain. The deltoid may be affected, and weakness during shoulder abduction, external rotation, and elbow flexion may occur. The biceps and brachioradialis reflex may also be depressed and asymmetrical.

When the C6 nerve is affected, neck pain will radiate to the neck, shoulder down to the thumb and index finger, in addition to periscapular pain. This nerve root innervates the biceps along with the wrist extenders, and weakness during elbow flexion and wrist extension may be present. The biceps and brachioradialis reflex may also be depressed and asymmetrical.

The C8 nerve root provides sensation from the neck to the medial forearm and medial hand.  The muscle groups innervated are the finger extensors, and weakness during the thumb extension may occur.

Similar to the C8 nerve root, the T1 nerve root, when involved, will present with pain in the neck radiating to the medial arm and forearm but will rarely go to the hand. First dorsal interosseous muscle weakness may be present.

Severe cervical spondylosis, ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament, or disc herniation or any combination of these may cause cervical spondylotic myelopathy. This condition most commonly occurs in patients in their 50s or later. The signs and symptoms are widely variable and unique, describing their legs as feeling stiff and/or wooden. Some may complain of numbness and tingling originating from the fingertips to the hands as if they were wearing gloves).