Increased serum phosphate is associated with increased mortality among dialysis patients.

In chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients, cardiovascular disease is the most common cause of death, due in part to excess vascular calcification. Amongst dialysis patients, vascular calcification is detected in more than 80 percent of patients by computed tomography (CT) scan. Hyperphosphatemia, along with hypercalcemia and high PTH concentration, induces a phenotypic switch of vascular smooth muscle cells to osteoblast-like cells and local inflammation, leading to medial calcification. Microcalcifications of coronary arteries may increase the vulnerability of the atheromatous plaque to mechanical stress imposed by blood pressure. Calcification of large vessels like the aorta increases arterial stiffness, causing hypertension and increased pulse pressure.

Hyperphosphatemia complexes serum calcium, decreasing the levels of ionized calcium, and triggering the release of PTH, resulting in secondary hyperparathyroidism; this causes high bone turnover state, releasing calcium from the bone, to normalize the serum calcium level.

Elevated phosphate levels also inhibit 1-alpha hydroxylase, a renal enzyme required for activation of Vitamin D. The decrease of active vitamin D results in decreased intestinal absorption of calcium, decreased renal calcium and phosphate reabsorption, and impaired bone mineralization. Over months to years, bone density decreases and can cause abnormal bone architecture. Clinically, chronic hyperphosphatemia can manifest as bone pain and fractures.

Hyperphosphatemia, when due to tumor lysis syndrome, also correlates with increased potassium and increased release of purines and proteins, potentially causing an increase in uric acid and urea. Therefore, hyperuricemia and azotemia are common metabolic complications of tumor lysis syndrome.

In Rhabdomyolysis, myoglobin released from damaged tissue can cause heme pigment induced acute kidney injury.

In patients with acute kidney injury, hypercalcemia can occur during recovery due to the mobilization of tissue calcium phosphate deposits in response to a fall in serum phosphate levels.