Relationship of pressure, flow, and resistance in fluid movement

Fundamental to understanding hemodynamics, the functional basis of the vascular system is to appreciate the relationship between intravascular pressure (P), vascular resistance (R), and flow (F). Thinking broadly, resistance refers to the opposition to flow and is mediated directly by vSMCs, whereas pressure is a measurement of force. The gradient in pressure creates a conversion of potential to kinetic energy, which is flow. The change in P between two points in the circulation is determined by the R between them and the F, delta P = FxR. However, R depends for one on the average radius of the vessel, as described by the inverse of Poiseuille’s flow equation, R = 8nL/pi(delta P)r, where ‘r’ is the radius of the vessel, ‘n’ is the viscosity of the fluid, and ‘L’ is the length of the vessel. Second, R also depends on the number of vessels in parallel, where parallel circuits confer lower R (relative to circuits in series). Therefore, this explains why the aggregated R is highest in the arterioles, as while a capillary has higher individual R than an individual arteriole, capillaries exist far more than arterioles.

Pressure and blood flow of elastic vascular vessels

It is pertinent to realize that the Poiseuille flow equation is modeled after flow in a rigid tube, corresponding to a linear pressure-flow relationship. However, as described, arteries and veins contain elastic properties that alter the relationship between pressure and flow. Due to the capacity of elastic vessels to distend, thus increasing the vessel radius, resistance is able to decrease to facilitate an increase in flow as a nonlinear relationship. Likewise, the concept of distensibility, or ability to withstand transmural pressure, is mediated by the content of elastic and collagen fibers. An appropriate index of distensibility is compliance (C), where C = delta volume/delta pressure and is a localized measurement.  It is the difference in compliance between arteries (low compliance) and veins (high compliance) that stratify their function as resistance vessels and capacitance vessels, respectively. However, while the compliance of these conduits of the vascular system is to accommodate the flow of fluid, the outward transmural pressure that creates distension must be balanced by the ability of the vascular wall to apply and adapt to tension. Hooke’s law (Force = k x (delta L), where k = the spring constant, and delta L is the change in length) models the force necessary for deformation by an elastic solid such as a spring. This deformation force over a specified cross-sectional area refers to the stress (deformation force/cross-sectional area = stress). To avoid a breaking point, such stress must be countered by an appropriate fractional change in length, or strain, which is modulated by a proportionality factor, Young’s elastic modulus, that is specific to material undergoing deformation. Applying these principles of stress and strain allow one to understand the opposing tension force against transmural pressure. Tension (T) is a circumferential force and is modeled by Laplace’s equation, T = transmural pressure x r, where r is the vessel radius, and is expressed in units of ‘dynes/cm’, and is closely related to stress. Likewise, by this relationship, the wall tension is highest in the stiffer aorta and small arteries, followed by the vena cava, corresponding to not simply higher transmural pressures but also elastic tissue components as well. To note, the vSMC can reduce the radius of a vessel to provide a component of active tension that decreases the tension required by muscle exertion. In fact, such local vSMC control is modulated by extrinsic factors such as hormones, cytokines, oxygen free radicals, or shearing forces.