Strangulation is defined as the compression of blood or air-filled structures which impedes circulation or function. In this summary, strangulation will refer to compression of anatomical neck structures leading to asphyxia and neuronal death. Strangulation injuries can be divided into several categories. These include hanging injuries, manual strangulation, and ligature injuries.

Hanging injuries can be further divided into specific categories. Complete hanging is defined by the full weight of the patient being suspended by the neck. Incomplete hanging injuries encompass all injuries in which the patient is supported partially by another object such as the ground or furniture. For centuries hanging has been used in the penal systems as a form of punishment. The term “well-hung” referred to the erection a male experienced after a proper hanging was performed. This method of execution usually involved dropping the person from a height equal to or greater than their height, which often resulted in spinal fractures, spinal trauma, and spinal shock causing priapism.

Ligature and manual strangulation injuries occur when a force that is independent of the patient’s body is applied to the neck. Strangulation injuries can also be divided into categories of intent. These include homicidal, suicidal, accidental, and auto-erotic.

A significant number of pediatric strangulation injuries are accidental.

Strangulation injuries can occur during partnered sexual activity – either intentionally, accidentally, or both. It is a dangerous form of intimate partner violence, and survivors are at high risk for becoming victims of homicide.

Many “submission holds” within the world of martial arts are known to place direct pressure on cervical structures and can result in strangulation injuries. Along similar lines, police and military combatants are given training on "vascular neck restraint." This effective, but controversial, approach to subduing a target can result in permanent and debilitating injuries or even death.