# Continuing Education Activity

An umbilical hernia presents as a bulge at the site of the umbilicus; it is a common finding during routine well-baby visits for the first few months of life. New parents who are not very familiar with this anomaly might verbalize great concerns during these visits because they tend to become very worried when they see the bulge in their infant's belly button. In addition, parents might be concerned with the idea that their child will suffer serious complications from an umbilical hernia, and they wonder if there are any measures that they should take to avoid complications. This activity reviews the pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of umbilical hernias and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of infants with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of pediatric umbilical hernias.
- Describe the presentation of an infant with an umbilical hernia.
- Describe the treatment and management options available for umbilical hernias.
- Explain the importance of improving coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care for patients affected by umbilical hernias.

# Introduction

Umbilical hernia presents as a bulge at the site of the umbilicus. It is a common finding during routine well-baby visits for the first few months of life. New parents who are not very familiar with this anomaly tend to be very worried when they see the bulge in their infant’s belly button. On the one hand, parents might be concerned with the idea that their child will suffer serious complications from an umbilical hernia, and they wonder if there are be any measures that they should take to avoid complications. It is important to understand the normal embryology and etiology of the umbilical hernia in order to answer these questions and when it is time to refer the patient for surgical evaluation.

# Etiology

Umbilical hernia in children results from incomplete closure of the fascia of the umbilical ring, through which intraabdominal contents may protrude

# Epidemiology

Umbilical hernias are common in children, It is estimated 10-30 % of all white children at birth, decreasing to 2-10% at one year, with boys and girls affected equally

# Pathophysiology

During fetal development, the primitive umbilical ring appears as early as 4th week of gestation on the ventral surface of the body. It contains umbilical vessels (one vein and two arteries), allantois, vitelline duct, vitelline vessels and loop of midgut. As the herniated midgut return back, the definitive umbilical cord will develop which contains the umbilical vessels surrounded by Wharton's jelly. The Umbilical vessels obliterate after birth and will be replaced by a ligamentous structure

# History and Physical

During a well-child care visit, the history given by parents might include a swelling of the belly button, which increases when the baby is crying, coughing, or straining. The size of the umbilical hernia defect should be measured, determine the reducibility, or the presence of signs of incarceration or strangulation. Patients with incarcerated or strangulated umbilical hernia usually present with abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The physical examination will be significant for abdominal tenderness, distension and skin erythema

# Evaluation

In the majority of cases, there are no medical sequelae to umbilical hernias. No tests are recommended, a thorough physical exam is sufficient to make the diagnosis and to discuss the common course of the condition with concerned parents. Although pediatric umbilical hernias are a common entity in healthy infants, they are also associated with some specific conditions, which the pediatrician or the pediatric surgeon should keep in mind when evaluating a patient. Pediatric umbilical hernias are seen more often in common autosomal trisomies (e.g., Trisomy 21 and 18), metabolic disorders (e.g., hypothyroidism, mucopolysaccharidoses) and some dysmorphic syndromes (e.g., Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Marfan syndrome). For this reason, it is important to distinguish healthy patients with an innocent finding of an isolated umbilical hernia, from patients with an umbilical hernia and other syndromic features, for example, macroglossia or hypotonia, the latter group warranting further evaluation.

# Treatment / Management

Repair of the umbilical hernia in infants is usually postponed due to a low rate of complications and the majority of the umbilical defects will be closed spontaneously within 2 years

# Differential Diagnosis

- Epigastric hernia

- Hernia of the umbilical cord

- Omphalocele

- Pediatric Hydrocele and Hernia Surgery

- Varicocele in Adolescents

# Complications

Most studies looking into the complications of umbilical hernias have a significant selection bias because they only take into account patients that have undergone a surgical correction, leaving out a large proportion of patients with umbilical hernias who have never had any complication. The consensus remains that the risk of complications of an unrepaired umbilical hernia is very low

Umbilical hernia repairs have a low postoperative complications rate. Complications include superficial wound infection, hematoma, and seroma. There is also a 2% risk of recurrence on long term follow up

# Pearls and Other Issues

1. Timimg of the repair:

a. strangulated umbilical hernia should be repaired emergently with adequate resuscitation

b. incarcerated umbilical hernia should be reduced followed by repair at early convenient time

c. reducible umbilical hernia usually repaired at 4-5 years of age

2. Type of the repair:

a. usually performed as an open technique

b. through infraumbilical skin incision

c. fascial repair with sutures (Herrniorrhaphy)

3. How the umbilical cord is clamped or cut after birth has no effect on whether an umbilical hernia will develop or not develop.

4. strapping the umbilicus is not effective for the treatment umbilical hernias and it is associated with skin complications and may result in restriction of the normal activity of the abdominal muscles

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of an umbilical hernia is with an interprofessional team that includes a pediatrician, pediatric nurse, primary care provider, pediatric surgeon, and the emergency department physician. The key is to understand that the majority of pediatric umbilical hernias will spontaneously close by ages 5-7. Unless the infant has signs of bowel obstruction or incarceration, the child can be followed. If in doubt, a referral to a pediatric surgeon is recommended.