Treatment of patients with diffuse axonal injury is geared toward the prevention of secondary injuries and facilitating rehabilitation. It appears to be the secondary injuries that lead to increased mortality. These can include hypoxia with coexistent hypotension, edema, and intracranial hypertension. Therefore, prompt care to avoid hypotension, hypoxia, cerebral edema, and elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) is advised.

Initial treatment priority in traumatic brain injury is focused on resuscitation. In a non-neuro trauma center, trauma surgeons and emergency physicians may perform the initial resuscitation and neurologic treatment to stabilize and transport the patient to a designated neurotrauma center expeditiously. ICP monitoring is indicated in patients with a GCS of less than 8 after consultation with neurosurgery. Other considerations for ICP monitoring include patients that cannot have continual neurologic evaluations. These are typically in patients receiving general anesthesia, opioid analgesia, sedation, and prolonged paralysis for other injuries. Cerebral oxygen saturation monitoring can be used with ICP monitoring to assess the degree of oxygenation. Short-term, usually seven days, anticonvulsant treatment can be used to prevent early post-traumatic seizures. There is no evidence that this will prevent long-term post-traumatic seizures, however. There is emerging evidence that progesterone treatment in acute traumatic brain injury may reduce morbidity and mortality. This cannot be routinely recommended at this time.

Overall, the goal of the treatment of patients with diffuse axonal injury is supportive care and prevention of secondary injuries.