Tabes dorsal has to be differentiated from other causes of nonsyphilitic myelopathy, which presents similar clinical features. Regardless of etiology and pathogenesis, the diseases of the spinal cord mainly involving the dorsal column have similar manifestations. They should be excluded clinically and with nontreponemal and treponemal tests, and thorough evaluation to make the correct diagnosis and timely treatment of tabes dorsalis. These are:

**Vascular Disease Myelopathy**

Ischemia, hemorrhage, arteriovenous malformations, and venous congestion all lead to spinal cord tissue hypoxia due to decreased perfusion. Neuronal death after vascular insults is one of the common causes of spinal cord infarction and dysfunction. Clinically, the presentation of neurologic deficits mimics the other causes of myelitis, which can be ruled out by proper clinical assessment, and investigation (MRI).

**Hereditary and Other Demyelinating Disorders**

Hereditary diseases of the spinal cord are common, which include hereditary spastic paraplegia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spinal muscular atrophy, Friedreich ataxia, and adrenomyeloneuropathy. These all have elements of progressive neurodegeneration and demyelination. Muscle atrophy and weakness, ataxia, paraplegia, and sensory loss are common findings, but their associations with diabetes, cerebellar disease, scoliosis, and absence of primary and secondary syphilitic lesions, as well as nontreponemal and treponemal tests, help to rule out tabes dorsalis. MRI of the brain and spinal cord is important to make the correct diagnosis.

**Postinfectious Demyelination**

Myelitis may be associated with a wide variety of culprits, including bacteria (tuberculosis, staphylococci, streptococci, Pseudomonas, Escherichia coli, etc.), viruses (Cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus), fungi, and parasites (toxoplasmosis, cysticercosis, hydatid disease). Myelitis during ongoing infection of the spinal cord results in demyelination of spinal cord neurons, but these are not specifically located in certain segments except varicella, which remains latent in sensory ganglia.

**Spinal Tumors**

Neoplastic myelopathies are infrequent. Patients presenting with signs and symptoms of spinal cord dysfunction should be kept under high suspicion to make the diagnosis. Even MRI enhancement may be confusing with that of tabes dorsalis. Complete clinical assessment, nontreponemal and treponemal tests, and competent evaluation by neurologists may be required to achieve precision.

**Miscellaneous Spinal Cord Myelopathy**

Other causes of myelopathy consist of immune-mediated, nutritional, metabolic, and toxic myelopathies.

**Non-Syphilitic Argyll Robertson Pupil**

A pupillary finding of light-near dissociation is felt, when strictly defined and correctly observed, to be pathognomonic for neurosyphilis. An ophthalmological consult is recommended with pupillary abnormalities when considering the diagnosis of tabes dorsalis. Other diseases or associations which mimic Argyll Robertson pupil, such as diabetes mellitus, Adie pupil, Lyme disease, sarcoidosis, and multiple sclerosis, may confound the proper diagnosis of tabes dorsalis, especially in the setting of reactive RPR and VDRL.