In the controlled trial setting, common adverse effects at an incidence of 5% or more included peripheral edema, confusional state, and nausea. Adverse reactions at an incidence of 2% or greater included hallucinations, peripheral edema, nausea, confusion, constipation, and gait disturbances. Instances in which treatment was discontinued in patients treated with pimavanserin (8%), as well as patients treated with placebo (4%), included hallucinations (2% pimavanserin 34 mg versus less than 1% placebo), urinary tract infection (1% pimavanserin 34 mg versus less than 1% placebo), and fatigue (1% pimavanserin 34 mg versus 0% placebo).

As is the case with other antipsychotics, pimavanserin may cause QTc prolongation; this raises concern as it could potentially lead to the life-threatening tachyarrhythmia called torsades de pointes.

While the mechanism of action of pimavanserin differs from other atypical antipsychotics, namely the resulting lack of dopamine D2 receptor blockade, there is a remaining concern for the risk of death in elderly patients with dementia-related psychosis since pimavanserin could potentially have a similar effect. Therefore, like other antipsychotics, pimavanserin has a black box warning of increased mortality in elderly patients with dementia-related psychosis. Pimavanserin is safe to use in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment, and dosage adjustment is not required. Pimavanserin is not recommended for use in patients with severe renal impairment or any degree of hepatic impairment.