# Continuing Education Activity

Lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei (LMDF) is an idiopathic granulomatous disease affecting facial skin primarily. It shares overlapping features with other granulomatous dermatoses, including rosacea and sarcoidosis. This activity reviews the etiology, pathophysiology, and management of patients with lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei (LMDF) and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei.
- Summarize the management approach to lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei.
- Describe the differential diagnosis and features that distinguish lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei from other facial granulomatous disorders.
- Identify the importance of an interprofessional team approach to improve outcomes for patients with lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei.

# Introduction

Lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei (LMDF) is an idiopathic granulomatous disease affecting facial skin primarily. Nosologically, it is on a spectrum of facial granulomatous dermatoses and shares overlapping features with rosacea and sarcoidosis. In most cases, this disorder resolves spontaneously within several years but can leave potentially disfiguring scarring.

The name derives from a historic putative association with tuberculosis, as discussed below. More recent authors have proposed adopting the term facial idiopathic granulomas with regressive evolution (FIGURE) instead of the entrenched LMDF. However, it does not appear that a name change has been widely accepted.

# Etiology

The etiology of LMDF is uncertain. The earliest reports presumed that lesions of LMDF were related to tuberculosis based on similar clinicopathologic findings to other tuberculids. The term tuberculid was historically used for reactive conditions associated with tuberculosis, in which the actual infectious agent is present elsewhere and is not found in the skin lesions. However, nowadays, LMDF does not arise in association with pulmonary tuberculosis and does not generally respond to anti-tuberculous medications. Tuberculin skin testing is often negative in these patients.M. tuberculosis organisms within the LMDF granulomas.

Similar to other facial granulomatous eruptions, it is often postulated that initial immune-mediated damage to the hair follicle leads to subsequent rupture of the follicle and an allergic or foreign body granulomatous response to keratin, sebum, or microbial components in the dermis.

# Epidemiology

LMDF is uncommon, although precise incidence rates are not well reported. LMDF can be seen across a wide range of ages, but most commonly presents in young adults (33 years was the average age in one series) and is rare in older adults.

# Pathophysiology

LMDF has been considered by some as a variant of granulomatous rosacea, whereas other authors make the case for LMDF as a distinct entity.Demodex folliculorum mites are often found in skin biopsies from patients with rosacea and may play an etiologic role, but Demodex mites have not been consistently observed in skin biopsies from patients with LMDF.

As above, a ruptured follicular infundibular cyst has been found in histologic sections of some patients with LMDF.Propionibacterium acnes bacteria within granulomatous areas separated by microdissection, as compared with normal-appearing regions of skin. The authors suggested that the presence of P. acnes in the dermis around a disrupted hair follicle, in combination with host factors, may play a role in pathogenesis.

# Histopathology

The histologic hallmark of LMDF is a granulomatous infiltrate, in some cases centered around hair follicle structures. Both sarcoidal (non-caseating) and tuberculoid (with central caseation necrosis) granulomas have been observed, as have diffuse infiltrates of lymphocytes and histiocytes without well-formed granulomas. The latter may be characteristic of early lesions, and may also demonstrate a peri-adnexal pattern. Accompanying neutrophils with or without neutrophilic microabscesses have been variably observed. Fibrosis is seen in late lesions, correlating with clinical scar formation. There is significant histologic overlap with granulomatous rosacea and other granulomatous disorders affecting the face.

# History and Physical

Patients often present with a relatively abrupt onset of asymptomatic red, yellow, brown, or skin-colored papules or nodules, which are occasionally pustular and symmetrically distributed predominantly on facial skin. The lower eyelids are most characteristically involved, and involvement of forehead, cheeks, nose, upper lips, ears, chin, or neck is common.

# Evaluation

Symmetrically distributed inflammatory papules or papulopustules with histologically confirmed granulomatous inflammation should lead to consideration of the diagnosis. A background of erythema, telangiectasias, or a propensity for flushing would favor a diagnosis of granulomatous rosacea, as would exacerbation of disease by such triggers as steroid use, sunlight, alcohol, or spicy foods.

# Treatment / Management

The evidence for treatment of LMDF is limited to case series and retrospective reviews and should be considered even though the disease course is usually self-limited. This disease tends to be poorly responsive to topical or systemic therapies that are first-line for granulomatous rosacea. The efficacy of oral tetracyclines is poor, whereas the response to isotretinoin is mixed.

# Differential Diagnosis

As discussed, cutaneous tuberculosis or other infections, especially fungal, mycobacterial, treponemal, or leishmanial, should be considered. A bilateral, symmetric, relatively rapid onset in an otherwise well patient without associated symptoms makes an infectious etiology less likely. If an infection is excluded, the clinical and pathologic differential may include granulomatous rosacea at one end of the spectrum, and cutaneous sarcoid at the other.

Like LMDF, granulomatous variants of rosacea can present with bilateral, symmetric facial papules with similar morphology. There is considerable histologic overlap, including relationship to pilosebaceous units, although LMDF may have larger granulomas that are more prone to caseation necrosis, and is not expected to have actinic damage, vascular dilation, or the presence of Demodex mites.

Sarcoidosis should be excluded by clinical and/or laboratory investigations, especially in those whose disease is slow to regress or shows progression.

Other facial granulomatous disorders, including granulomatous perioral dermatitis, may also be considered in the differential.

# Prognosis

LMDF is a skin-limited disease. The natural history of the disease is usually spontaneous involution over months to several years, with a mean duration of 18 months in one series.

# Complications

The primary long-term complication is facial scarring, which can be significant and disfiguring. Early treatment may prevent or minimize significant scarring.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Unlike rosacea, there are no documented lifestyle risk factors for LMDF. Once the diagnosis is made after appropriate workup as above, patients should be reassured about the skin-limited nature of the disease, the expected eventual resolution, and the potential for treatment to reduce the risk of permanent scarring.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with LMDF should be managed by an interprofessional team approach in order to improve outcomes. Primary care providers and dermatologists will be involved. Certain treatment options, including dapsone and systemic corticosteroids, require careful education and monitoring, which should be reinforced by and coordinated with nursing and pharmacy professionals. (Level 5)