Patients with Waterhouse Friderichsen syndrome present with sepsis. A blood sample should be drawn, and treatment started immediately before obtaining the results. Management includes supportive therapy for sepsis with volume resuscitation, appropriate antibiotic coverage, vasopressor to ensure end-organ perfusion, and other supportive care. A bolus of D5 NS (5% dextrose with 0.9 % normal saline) 20 ml/kg is given over 1 hour so that underlying hypoglycemia is also corrected. If shock is persistent, repeat NS up to a total of 60 ml/kg in 1 hour. Hypoglycemia is treatable by giving 2 to 4 ml/kg of 25% dextrose as a bolus. Steroid replacement is in the form of hydrocortisone, given in the dose of 50 to 100 mg/m^2 as a bolus. The dose of hydrocortisone based on age is 25 mg for children up to 3 years, 50 mg for those from 3 to 12 years, and 100 mg for 12 years and older. The same dose of steroid as a bolus is given over 24 hours, either continuously or in four divided doses.

Mineralocorticoid replacement is not needed acutely because it takes a long time to show its sodium-retaining effects. The decreased production of antidiuretic hormone due to hydrocortisone administration along with normal saline infusion helps correct hyponatremia. In most instances, hyperkalemia improves with fluids and hydrocortisone. Rarely, one may need to administer insulin and glucose, especially if hyperkalemia is severe and symptomatic. The monitoring of electrolytes and water balance is essential throughout the treatment. Once the crisis is well controlled, the maintenance dose of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid gets administered regularly.

Conservative management is the recommended approach in cases of traumatic adrenal hemorrhage in the absence of ongoing bleeding.

Operative management in the form of angioembolization of one of the vessels supplying the adrenal gland may be necessary to control the ongoing bleeding.