Lung scintigraphy requires a chest X-ray in the posteroanterior and lateral views as a pre-requisite before the procedure. A portable posteroanterior X-ray chest is an alternative only if the patient is unable to tolerate routine X-rays. A CT scan is an alternative to a chest X-ray.

The test consists of two parts, namely ventilation scintigraphy and perfusion scintigraphy. Ventilation scintigraphy usually precedes perfusion scintigraphy and may also be excluded if not required.

The COVID-19 pandemic raised concern about the transmission of COVID-19 with the ventilation portion of the scintigraphy. The American College of Radiology (ACR) released a statement in 2020 stating the lung perfusion scan can provide helpful information and that a ventilation scan is unnecessary if the lung perfusion scan is normal or interpreted as having a low probability of pulmonary embolism. ACR also recommended that if a ventilation scan is considered necessary clinically, the risk of a patient having COVID-19 should be discussed with the referring clinician, and the scan should be performed in the context of the hospital or institution's COVID-19 policies. A negative COVID-19 test prior to the ventilation scan should be considered if feasible.

**Ventilation Scintigraphy (V)**

This component of the scan assesses air distribution in the lungs. Ventilation radiopharmaceuticals are classified as gases, aerosolized liquid, and aerosolized solid particles.

- 99mTc-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) is the most commonly used (57%) radiopharmaceutical in the form of liquid aerosol with a median aerosol diameter of 4.5 micrometers, a half-life of 6 hours, and a photopeak of 140 keV. A dose of 25 to 35 mCi (925–1295 MBq) of Tc-DTPA is administered via a nebulizer using a mouthpiece.

- 99mtc-labeled solid graphite hydrophobic particles is an aerosolized solid with a particle diameter of fewer than 2 micrometers and is currently not approved for use in the United States. by the US Food and Drug Administration.

Inert radiolabeled gases used for lung ventilation scans include 133Xe and 81mKr. 133Xe has a half-life of 5.3 days and a photopeak of 81 keV and is one of the most commonly used radioactive gas and is currently the only radiolabeled gas approved for scintigraphy use in the United States. The inhaled dose is 5 to 20 mCi (185 to 740 MBq).

81mKr has a shorter half-life of 13 seconds and a photopeak of 190 keV, requiring continuous administration and allowing ventilation images obtained after perfusion images. Both image sets can be matched without repositioning the patient. Another disadvantage of 81mKr is the higher cost making 133Xe a more favorable option.

**Perfusion Scintigraphy (Q)**

Perfusion scintigraphy involves a radiopharmaceutical agent 99mTc-macro aggregated albumin (99mTc-MMA) with a particle size of 10 to 100 micrometers which is injected intravenously. The usual administered dose is 40–150 MBq (1 to 4 mCi).

Afterward, lung imaging is performed using either planar imaging with a high-resolution gamma camera, SPECT, or 3D imaging with SPECT/CT.

**Imaging**

The various imaging techniques for lung imaging are planar imaging, SPECT, and SPECT/CT. Planar imaging uses a gamma camera, and images are obtained in anterior, posterior, lateral, and anterior and posterior oblique views. Planar imaging allows for two-dimensional imaging and is less sensitive compared to SPECT.

SPECT imaging technique has been shown in multiple studies to have better sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy when compared to planar imaging

SPECT/CT combines SPECT with low-dose CT, allowing for better anatomic information and visualization of an alternative etiology of patient symptoms.