A patient presenting with myotonia would be expected to describe an impaired and delayed relaxation of a muscle after contraction. The patient may also describe symptoms such as pain, weakness, and fatigue due to prolonged muscle contraction. Depending on the specific myotonia involved, the patient may present with abnormal muscle appearance, including muscle hypertrophy or under-development. Episodic muscle weakness may also be reported. Classically, the patient will also report muscle stiffness that improves with activity, called a ‘warm-up’ phenomenon. However, the warm-up phenomenon is absent in less common etiologies of myotonia, such as paramyotonia congenita and myotonia dystrophy type II.

In Dystrophic Myotonias, systemic symptoms will also frequently be present. Depending on the mutation and protein involved, you can expect to see patients reporting blurred vision from cataracts, hyperglycemia from insulin resistance, facial dysmorphisms, which can include a distinctive "carp-shaped" mouth or bone abnormalities on x-ray.

Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis patients would be expected to present within the first decade of life with complaints of episodic muscle paralysis lasting from 1 to 4 hours. Reported triggers could include rest after exercise, consumption of potassium-rich foods, fasting, stress, and fatigue. Respiratory muscle involvement could be seen in severe cases. Patients will typically recover to full strength between episodes but may develop weakness later in life.

In contrast, a patient with Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis would typically present with episodes of muscle weakness that most commonly occur at night or early in the morning. The attacks can last from hours to days, with variable severity from mild weakness to profound paralysis. The attacks can be of any frequency, from multiple per day to only a few in a lifetime. Attack triggers can include carbohydrate-rich foods, alcohol, stress, exercise, menstruation, and medications, including insulin and corticosteroids. With severe hypokalemia, ocular, bulbar, or respiratory muscles can be involved.