# Definition/Introduction

Meconium is the initial substance present in the intestines of the developing fetus and constitutes the first bowel movement of the newborn. Meconium can be green, brown, or yellow.

# Issues of Concern

The presence of meconium-stained amniotic fluid is about 12-20% of deliveries and is much higher in post-dated births (up to 40%).

# Clinical Significance

The passage of meconium within 24-48 hours after birth indicates that the intestines of the newborn are intact and patent.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

In the event of the rupture of the fetal membranes, the nurse should assess the color of the amniotic fluid. Amniotic fluid should be clear, or straw tinged with small vernix particles in the fluid.

Traditionally, during labor, if meconium-stained amniotic fluid is encountered, an intrapartum suctioning of airways was done.

If the infant is vigorous with good muscle tone and respiratory efforts, further newborn care could be provided in the delivery room.

If the infant is not vigorous with poor neurological tone, insufficient breathing efforts, and bradycardia (heart rate <100 beats/minute), routine postnatal suctioning of the airways was widely practiced in the past to decrease the possibility of development of meconium aspiration syndrome.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

During labor, the assessment of the amniotic fluid color can determine if the infant is at risk for amniotic inhalation upon birth. If the meconium-stained amniotic fluid is noted, a neonatal resuscitation team should be involved. In places with limited perinatal resources, an amnioinfusion could be tried, but the benefits of this procedure are unclear.