# Continuing Education Activity

Mitral regurgitation (MR) is one of the most common valvular abnormalities. Medical management, along with regular surveillance, is the typical recommendation for mild MR. Severe cases have traditionally been treated with invasive surgery. Recently, studies have shown increased utilization of a minimally invasive transcatheter approach for mitral regurgitation repair. The edge-to-edge leaflet repair device is a catheter-based therapy that uses a clip to bring together the leaflets, which lessens the regurgitation. This activity details primary and secondary mitral regurgitation, non-invasive catheter management options and their indications and contraindications, procedural techniques, and complications. This activity highlights the inter-professional team's role in caring for patients with mitral valve regurgitation.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of mitral regurgitation.
- Discuss the indications for percutaneous catheter-based management of mitral regurgitation.
- Describe the technique, echocardiographic guidance, and steps for FDA-approved catheter-based management of mitral regurgitation.
- Discuss the procedural complications from catheter-based management of mitral regurgitation.

# Introduction

Mitral regurgitation (MR) is one of the most common valvular abnormalities, second only to aortic valve stenosis.

Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is the initial imaging modality for screening and evaluating mitral valve morphology and pathology, determining the mechanism of Mitral regurgitation, and quantifying MR severity, assessment of Left ventricular function, size, and Left atrial size.

**[Table 1] Etiology of Mitral Regurgitation**

Infectious (Infective endocarditis, vegetation, perforation)

Inflammatory (Rheumatic, collagen vascular disease)

Drug-induced,

Radiation-induced

**[Table 2] Stages of Primary Mitral Regurgitation**

Moderate - Severe LA, LV enlargement

C1  LVEF >60%, LVESD <40 mm

C2  LVEF <60%, LVESD >/=40 mm

Recent studies have shown Percutaneous MV repair as an alternative option for high-surgical-risk patients with severe symptomatic Mitral regurgitation. The procedure can be accomplished with low morbidity and mortality rates in a substantial portion.

Many percutaneous options exist for patients with MR, multi-system dysfunction, and comorbidities, which may put them at high risk for surgical interventions.

This article will discuss primary and secondary mitral regurgitation and non-invasive catheter management options, including indications, contraindications, procedural techniques, and complications. We will discuss the FDA-approved edge-to-edge repair devices as the primary focus.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Andreas Vesalius first suggested the name " mitral " for the left-sided atrioventricular valve, given its resemblance with bishops' "miter."

MR can further classify as mild, moderate, and severe. Severe (or moderate-severe) MR is currently only recommended for catheter management. The echocardiogram is the primary tool used to assess the structure and function of the mitral valve- systolic competence and non-restriction during diastole. Severe MR is described as having a color flow jet that may be central and large (>6 cm or >30 percent of the left atrial area) or smaller, if eccentric, encircling the left atrium. Pulmonary vein flow may show systolic blunting or systolic flow reversal, vena contracta width >/=0.5 cm measured in the parasternal long-axis view, a regurgitant volume of >/=45 mL/beat, regurgitant fraction >/=40%, and/or regurgitant orifice area >/=0.30 cm^2 according to the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association.

**[Table 3] Mitral Valve Pathology Based on Echocardiography**

Annular dilation without leaflet tethering,

Cleft or indentation

Perforation

Systolic restriction

- Symmetric systolic (dilated or ischemic cardiomyopathy with leaflet tethering)

- Asymmetric systolic (segmental ischemia )



Systolic and diastolic restriction (rheumatic)

**Pre-procedural Anatomical Considerations**

The successful grasp of mitral valve leaflets during the procedure requires certain conditions to be met. The leaflets must be pliable and non-calcified at the grasping site, and there must be no significant clefts or perforations. Additionally, the shorter MitraClip NT and NTW require a minimal posterior leaflet length of 6 mm, while the longer MitraClip XT and XTW require a minimal posterior leaflet length of 9 mm.

Patients with an extensive flail, defined as a flail segment width of 15 mm or greater or a flail gap of 10 mm or greater, were not included in the initial clinical trials for TEER therapy, such as EVEREST II.

The EVEREST II trial only included patients with a primary regurgitant mitral jet originating from the center of the mitral valve (A2-P2 segments).

When considering TEER in secondary MR, it is important to differentiate patients with preserved LV function and annular dilation (atrial functional MR) from patients with LV dysfunction and leaflet tethering. A subgroup analysis of the COAPT trial demonstrated that patients with atrial fibrillation who underwent TEER maintained a clinical benefit; however, they had a worse prognosis compared to patients without atrial fibrillation.

Mitral Annular Calcification (MAC) is a degenerative process that predominantly affects the mitral valve annulus and is frequently associated with mitral regurgitation

Up to 35% of patients who have undergone surgical MV repair at high volume centers of excellence develop moderate to severe MR 10 yrs. after initial repair.

Pre-procedural TEE examination also helps in predicting the difficulty of repair. The following table [Table4] summarizes the predictors

# Indications

Currently, the edge-to-edge leaflet repair device is the only recommended intervention to treat MR, but there are many emerging technologies, including but not limited to neo-cords, transcatheter mitral valve repair, and rings. At present, the following are the indications

- Moderate to severe primary MR (3 to 4+)

- Moderate to severe secondary MR (3 to 4+)

- Symptomatic heart failure

- High or prohibitive risk for surgery

- Favorable anatomy

- Life expectancy >1 year

# Contraindications

There are very few contraindications to catheter intervention with the edge-to-edge leaflet repair device.

- Unable to tolerate anticoagulation

- Active endocarditis of the mitral valve

- Rheumatic mitral valve disease

- Intracardiac, inferior vena cava (IVC), or femoral venous thrombus

- Severe mitral annular calcification involving leaflets

- Presence of significant cleft or perforation in mitral valve leaflets

- Mitral valve stenosis

# Equipment

The transcatheter edge-to-edge leaflet repair (TEER) device procedure requires the supplies listed below:

- The edge-to-edge leaflet repair device

- Transeptal puncture kit including catheters, needle, or radiofrequency wire)

- Fluoroscopy machine

- Code cart

- Sterile gown

- Sterile drape

- Anesthetic

- Transesophageal Echocardiography, preferably with 3-D imaging capability

- Transducers and equipment for invasive hemodynamic monitoring

- Defibrillator in case of arrhythmia

- Availability of perfusionist and heart-lung machine in case of device embolization

For the treatment of both primary mitral regurgitation (PMR) and secondary mitral regurgitation (SMR), the MitraClip device is the first transcatheter technology to get FDA and CE approval

The PASCAL transcatheter MV repair technology was originally deployed in 2016 and has since been studied in a compassionate-use cohort of 23 patients with difficult anatomical features for TEER

# Personnel

A Heart team concept involving key stakeholders is necessary to establish the structural heart program and maintain quality assurance. The key personnel required to adequately and safely perform catheter-based MR treatment with the edge-to-edge leaflet repair device:

- Interventional cardiologist

- Echocardiographer (either cardiac anesthesiologist or cardiologist)

- Cardiac anesthesiologist

- First-assist for proceduralist (if available)

- Nursing and technical staff for the procedure

- Cardiac surgeon and OR staff in case of emergent complication

- Perfusionist if there is a need for cardiopulmonary bypass

# Preparation

Mitral valve edge-to-edge repair procedure is typically performed in a catheterization lab or hybrid operating room with fluoroscopic capability and requires real-time TEE. TEE is essential to confirm the pathology, guide the procedure and ensure adequate repair. This procedure is usually performed under general anesthesia (GA) to facilitate TEE evaluation and avoid patient movement, which can be catastrophic. Pre-operative echocardiography (usually TEE) should be done to assess the lesion and ease of repair. Pre-anesthesia evaluation should be done to optimize patients for general Anesthesia. Typically structural heart team discussion involves the entire peri-procedure team - interventional cardiologist, cardiac anesthesiologist, operating room personnel, and nursing staff. The equipment and devices should be available and preferably pre-procedure time out to ensure appropriate communication between the team.

Before undergoing a catheter-based approach to MR, management requires a thorough assessment of the mitral valve apparatus by echocardiogram and sometimes other forms of cardiac imaging by a trained cardiovascular interventionalist. Sometimes a cardiovascular imaging specialist is used for the consult. The principal preparation for any procedure is to obtain a sterile field. As in most catheterizations, the site of sterilization is the site of catheter insertion. All personnel close to the sterile field should scrub and be fully gowned. Clean and drape the area before beginning the procedure.

**Device Selection**

The primary criteria to be taken into account while choosing a device are shown in [Table 5]. Using 3D echocardiography, it is crucial to carefully assess the underlying etiology, baseline mitral valve area, mean transmitral gradient, and anatomical complexity before selecting the appropriate device.

Multiplanar reconstruction on precisely collected high-resolution 3D volumes of the mitral valve should ideally be utilized to quantify the mitral valve area. The deployment of a PASCAL P10 device reduces the mitral valve area by roughly 47%. The baseline mitral valve area is anticipated to be more significantly impacted by the use of rigid implants with extended arms (XTW/XT).  The mitral valve area reduction achieved with the NTR and XTR implants was  52% and 57%, respectively

Two key variables that affect device selection are treatment strategy and jet localization. In fact, a greater baseline mitral valve area of around 6 cm2 is needed in individuals with discrete jets, in whom the implantation of two distant clips is anticipated, to prevent causing significant mitral valve stenosis

# Technique or Treatment

**The Edge-to-Edge Leaflet Repair Device**

The structural heart team is comprised of an interventional cardiologist, cardiac surgeon, cardiac anesthesiologist, and operating room nurse; this is who is required to perform the transcatheter mitral valve repair with the edge-to-edge leaflet repair device. Procedural rooms are specialized with fluoroscopic capability. The procedure involves using fluoroscopic and transesophageal echocardiographic (TEE) guidance to image the heart before, during, and after the procedure.

The following table [Table 6] demonstrates the major steps of the procedure; TEE views to guide those steps, and potential complications with each step.

Pre-procedure  cardiac assessment and evaluation of mitral valve







_________________________________________



Femoral venous access



Confirm the valvular pathology. Rule out Intracardiac thrombus before starting the procedure.



Favorable echocardiographic features

Coaptation length >/=2 mm, coaptation depth </=11mm.

Flail gap <10mm , Flail width <15 mm







________________________________________

Ultrasound guidance for femoral venous access, follow the wire in fluoroscopic view to ensure no kinking/malposition.

Assess the size of the vessel to be able to accommodate the catheter and delivery system.

Compressibility and color doppler to rule out femoral venous thrombus.

For femoral venous cannulation, consider a micropuncture kit followed by the sheath and percutaneous suture devices.



Before femoral venous cannulation -

Mid esophageal 4-chamber, 2-chamber, modified bicaval, mid-esophageal long axis, and left atrial appendage focussed views to rule out intracardiac thrombus. Color and pulse wave doppler of the left atrial appendage. Evaluate inter-atrial septum anatomy.

Determine baseline MR severity, mechanism, Doppler gradients across the mitral valve, mitral valve area measurement, presence of any pericardial effusion, and Pulmonary vein doppler profile.

Determine if any pericardial effusions are present before starting the procedure and quantify the effusion.

________________________________________





After femoral vein cannulation-

Transgastric IVC views in short and long axis to visualize the wire as it advances into IVC to the Right atrium.

Mid esophageal bicaval view to guide trans septal puncture needle into the right atrium



Transseptal puncture --->



Insertion of steerable guide catheter (SGC)---->



Introducing the edge-to-edge repair device (clip) delivery system (CDS) into the left atrium (LA)

Septal puncture is performed in the posterior superior portion of Inter atrial septum (IAS).

The tip of the transeptal puncture needle on the Interatrial septum appears like an indentation (tenting). The tip should point toward the Left atrium and confirm the Anterior-posterior and superior-inferior orientation as well as the height of the puncture above the mitral annular plane before crossing the septum.

Typically the height of the transeptal puncture should be  4-5 cm from the mitral annular plane. A septal puncture with less height may limit the maneuverability of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system and may lead to adjustments made towards the ventricular side, thus risking chordae entanglement. A septal puncture too high can limit the ability of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system to pass below leaflets and make leaflet capture difficult.



Higher height of transeptal puncture for medial jets and lower height for lateral jets.



De-airing of device delivery system to avoid air embolism.



Consider a radiofrequency transeptal needle if the spetum is very "floppy," fibrotic, or lipomatous.



Real-time TEE monitoring during transeptal puncture to ensure the puncture needle is not directed towards the aorta or posterior left atrium. Consider orthogonal plane imaging and Wide sector full-volume view of the left atrium.



Activated clotting time >250 to decrease the risk of clot formation. Heparinize and monitor ACT q 15 -30 min.



Amplatz extra stiff wire is parked in the left upper pulmonary vein under TEE and fluoro guidance. Over this, a steerable guide catheter and dilator are advanced.

The dilator is identified by its cone-shaped tip, and the double ring echo bright radiopaque appearance characterizes the guide catheter.

Once the steerable guide catheter is placed in the left atrium, Amplatz extra stiff wire is retrieved first, followed by the dilator.

The edge-to-edge repair device delivery system is advanced through the steerable guide catheter under TEE and fluoro guidance.



TO position the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system above the mitral valve, posterior torque on SGC and medial deflection of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system with retraction of the whole system is required.

Edge-to-edge repair device alignment and adjustments are monitored medial-lateral and anterior-posterior under TEE and Flouro guidance.



Direct tip of edge-to-edge repair device towards the largest regurgitant area.

Mid-esophageal bicaval 120' to orient superior-inferior orientation with tenting of the fossa -  Superior towards  superior vena cava (SVC), inferior towards Inferior vena cava (IVC )

Mid-esophageal Aortic valve short axis - anterior-posterior portion of Inter atrial septum. The anterior part is towards the aorta/ aortic valve.

Mid-esophageal 4-chamber view - Distance from the point of septal puncture to the mitral annular plane.

Real-time 3D imaging from aortic valve short axis or mitral commissural views to get a 3-dimensional assessment of the guide catheter and delivery system in the left atrium.

Media 5





Media 15,





Media 16

If a transseptal puncture it's too anterior can cause injury to the aortic valve, ascending aorta, and aortic root.

Cardiac tamponade

Air embolism.

Mid-esophageal mitral commissural view - medial, lateral orientation on mitral valve

Mid-esophageal long-axis view - Anteroposterior orientation on mitral valve

Three-dimensional en-face view of the mitral valve to help guide edge-to-edge repair device delivery system and orient it in relation to MR jet.

Real-time 3d Enface can help guide the trajectory and motion of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system from the Left partial through the mitral valve into LV.

The device should be continuously visualized, especially the delivery system's tip, to avoid injury.

The delivery device should be perpendicular to the mitral valve's regurgitant orifice and coaptation line.

Confirm the position in relation to the regurgitant jet and mitral valve leaflets as the delivery system and device enter the left ventricle.

Ensure no entanglement exists in the subvalvular mitral valve apparatus and chordae tendinae.

May need rapid pacing or holding ventilation to add precision to the procedure.

3D en-face view of the mitral valve, looking both from the left atrial (LA) and left ventricle perspective.

Biplane imaging of mid-esophageal mitral commissural view and mid-esophageal long axis view, with and without color Doppler. To evaluate the orientation of mitral valve anterior and posterior leaflets in relation to the edge-to-edge repair device arms.

Fluoroscopy to aid orientation along with TEE

Integrate echo images and fluoroscopic images.

Orient before entering into LV and avoid too much manipulation of the device in LV, as it can lead to edge-to-edge repair device entanglement and injury to the subvalvular apparatus.

Consider holding mechanical ventilation or rapid ventricular pacing to decrease motion and achieve a better grasp.

If the coaptation defect width is significant, we may consider using the "zip and clip" technique, where the first edge-to-edge repair device can be deployed immediately medial or lateral to the largest coaptation defect and thus facilitate leaflet grip in the area of bigger coaptation defect.

Monitor for spontaneous echo contrast and monitor ACT to ensure no thrombus formation in the left atrium.

Simultaneous 2D Mid esophageal mitral commissural view and long axis view, visualization of the length of leaflets within the edge-to-edge repair device arms, and restriction of leaflet motion with edge-to-edge repair device grasping the leaflets.

Fluoroscopy to confirm the position and stability of the device.

Edge-to-edge repair device detachment, injury to mitral valve apparatus, Mitral valve leaflet injury causing severe MR not amenable to percutaneous repair,

Mitral stenosis

Assess for any complications and stability of leaflet capture and device stability.

Assess for residual MR, mitral stenosis, and edge-to-edge repair device dislodgement.

The transmitral gradient should be less than 5 mmHg.

Simultaneous assessment of 2 D mid esophageal commissural view and long axis view, 3 D  enface view from both Left atrial and ventricular perspective.

Doppler assessment of gradient at Mitral valve post deployment of edge-to-edge repair device.



Evaluate for iatrogenic atrial septal defect (ASD)

Reverse heparin with protamine to avoid bleeding and help with hemostasis

Monitor for protamine reaction

Monitor femoral venous sites for bleeding

Post-procedure complete echocardiographic evaluation to assess the repair and rule out complications

Mid-esophageal 4-chamber view, mid-esophageal commissural view, mid-esophageal long axis view, with and without color Doppler.

Mid esophageal view assessing pulmonary venous flow to assess the reduction in mitral regurgitation.

Continuous wave doppler assessment of mitral valve to assess for mitral stenosis.

The 3D enface view of the repaired mitral valve from the LA and LV view ensures leaflet grip and device stability.

3-D reconstruction and utilizing multiplanar reconstruction to assess the area of repaired double orifice Mitral valve

Mid-esophageal bicaval view, 3D imaging of Interatrial septum to assess for iatrogenic ASD

# Complications

Despite the significant load of comorbidities among the patients being treated, TEER is a very safe operation with a low likelihood of major consequences.

Table 7 provides a summary of the most common complications and their relative occurrence rates.

The increased risk of leaflet perforation, tear, or SLDA in patients with long-standing secondary mitral regurgitation, and calcified leaflets is a particular cause for worry. Percutaneous retrieval of embolized devices may be difficult, especially if larger clips are involved

The indication for MV surgery or re-intervention must be reviewed by the multidisciplinary team in the event of residual or recurrent mitral regurgitation. In order to comprehend the underlying disease, identify the residual leaflet anatomy for the implantation of further devices, and determine the likelihood that the patient would experience significant mitral stenosis, a transesophageal echocardiogram must typically be repeated. In case series with limited safety information, alternative interventional strategies for the therapy of considerable para-clip or inter-clip residual mitral regurgitation have been described. Examples include inserting an Amplatzer vascular plug (Abbott), which was initially intended to embolize the peripheral vasculature

# Clinical Significance

Catheter management of mitral regurgitations is a relatively recent innovation. At the risk of an understatement, it is a considerable advancement in cardiology. It offers a correction option for patients with severe MR and prohibitive surgical risks. Recently studies have shown catheter management to be superior to surgical intervention in some circumstances.

Post MV repair with the edge-to-edge device, left ventricular contractility and cardiac output remain constant, although total ejection fraction and global strain may decrease. This is likely due to a decrease in regurgitant volume after a repair, which reduces the Left ventricular end-diastolic volume, thereby decreasing myocardial Oxygen demand and can lead to improved NYHA functional class after three months.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Catheter management of mitral valve regurgitation is a serious procedure and can carry some potentially serious complications. Fortunately, most complications are rare, but the procedure should be taken seriously and performed by a highly trained cardiovascular interventionalist working with an interprofessional team. [Level 1] In addition to being a highly trained physician, it is important to have a team approach when assessing these patients. Before the intervention, the following should take place:

- Explanation of the risks and benefits of catheter management of mitral valve regurgitation as pertains to the specific intervention

- Evaluation by the pulmonary and cardiologist to optimize lung and heart function

- Obtain imaging such as an echocardiogram to assess the function and structure of the heart before planning the procedure

- Consult by a cardiovascular imaging specialist or structuralist

- Pharmaceutical consultation for post-op pain management, antiemetics, and use of blood thinners

- Consult by the anesthesiologist to ensure that the patient is optimized for general anesthesia

- Specialty-trained cardiology nurse to assist with the pre-operative, operative, and post-operative monitoring and education of the patient and coordination of follow-up care with the team

An interprofessional team approach that includes clinicians, nurses, and other ancillary support personnel will lead to the best outcomes. [Level 5]

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Standard post-anesthesia care unit monitoring, and if the patient has multisystem comorbidities monitor in the ICU setting post-procedure.