**Macroscopic Findings**

Invasive lobular carcinomas frequently present as irregular and poorly delimited tumors that can be difficult to define macroscopically because of the diffuse growth pattern of the cell infiltrate. The size of the ILC is additionally difficult to work out, although it has been reported to be slightly larger than that of invasive carcinoma of no special type in some series.

**Microscopic Findings**

Invasive lobular carcinoma is histologically characterized by a proliferation of small cells lacking cohesion and are often dispersed individually through a fibrous connective tissue or organized in single-file linear cords invading the stroma. The infiltrating cords often present a concentric pattern around normal ducts. There is usually little host reaction of the background architecture. The neoplastic cells have round or notched ovoid nuclei and a thin rim of cytoplasm with an occasional intracytoplasmic lumen, often harboring a central mucoid inclusion. Mitoses are typically infrequent.

**Histological Variants**

Several variants of invasive lobular carcinoma have been described that share either the cytological or growth pattern of classic invasive lobular carcinoma, but all lack cell-to-cell cohesion.

- Solid type

- Pleomorphic lobular carcinoma

- Tubulo-lobular variant

- Alveolar variant

- Mixed type

**Immunoprofile**

Although the literature suggests that 80% to 95% of invasive lobular carcinomas are positive for estrogen receptor (ER), in current practice, classic invasive lobular carcinomas are almost invariably ER-positive. In comparison, 70-80% of invasive carcinoma of nos special type are ER-positive. Progesterone receptor (PR) positivity is found in 60% to 70% of both tumor types.

HER2 overexpression and amplification are rare in invasive lobular carcinoma, although evident in some pleomorphic lobular carcinomas.

The expression of p53, basal markers (keratin 14, keratin 5/6, EGFR) and myoepithelial markers (smooth muscle actin, and p63), is rare in invasive lobular carcinoma.

The proliferation rate, measured by MIB1/Ki67 labeling, is generally low in invasive lobular carcinoma, although higher in the variants.

One of the most consistent molecular alterations in invasive lobular carcinoma and its variants is the loss of expression of the cell-cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, which contributes to the characteristic discohesive nature of lobular cells.

**Histological Grading**

Histologic grading of invasive lobular carcinomas consistent with the Nottingham system is suggested, although it clearly correlates with the nuclear grade. Pure lobular tumors receive a 3 for tubule formation, only nuclear grade 1 lesion is of histologic grade 1, whereas the majority of invasive lobular carcinomas display nuclear grade 2, qualifying thus for a histologic grade 2. Because the mitotic rate is low, except for some pleomorphic invasive lobular carcinomas, few tumors are of histologic grade 3.