**Suboccipital Puncture**

The classical technique used by Ayer in 1929 is positioning the patient in lateral decubitus, with slight cervical flexion and inserting the needle in the midline above the posterior spinal arch of the C1 cervical vertebra with a slight cranial inclination until the dura is perforated.

To avoid using the midline puncture, in 2017, Gong et al. developed a lateral technique called lateral atlantooccipital space puncture (also called lateral cisterna magna puncture) with the patient in a supine position.

When the needle is advanced, the atlantooccipital posterior membrane is entered first, followed by the perforation of the dura. The puncture depth for adults is 5.5 to 6.5 cm. After the dura is entered, an additional 1 to 2 mm is introduced, and the needle stylet is removed to see if there is CSF outflow or advance slowly until CSF flow is obtained. As needed, CSF is drained or collected, therapeutic drugs are injected, or myelographic dye is injected. When the procedure ends, the needle is withdrawn, and pressure is applied on the puncture site for one minute. During lateral atlantooccipital space puncture, the needle remains just underneath the occipital bone, and no vessels are located in the area. The vertebral artery runs in the sulcus located more posteriorly and medially.

**Lateral Cervical C1-C2 Puncture**

The lateral C1-C2 technique is performed under fluoroscopic control with the patient in the prone, supine, or lateral decubitus position with the head extended to increase the width of the dorsal subarachnoid space at C1–C2. If the patient is in the supine position, the head must be flexed to prevent the intracranial flow of contrast material. The entry point is marked at the posterior one-third of the spinal canal, approximately 2-5 mm anterior to the spinolaminar line and 4-6 mm inferior to the arch of C1. After area sterilization and application of local anesthesia, a 20 or 22-gauge long spinal needle is entered at the skin at the puncture site. The needle is advanced under intermittent fluoroscopic guidance with the bevel facing dorsally. An anteroposterior image is obtained to check the needle position. When the needle is up to a few millimeters of the medial border of the ipsilateral lateral mass of C1, the stylet is removed to check for CSF return. Dural tenting is expected, and CSF return may not happen until the needle is past the midline. Venous blood is commonly encountered as the needle enters the epidural venous plexus.

After the dura is pierced, an additional 1 to 2 mm is advanced to pierce the arachnoid, and the needle stylet is removed to see if there is CSF outflow. Once CSF flow is verified, the bevel of the needle is rotated either 90°, so the bevel faces toward the patient’s feet or 180 degrees, so it faces ventrally to optimize CSF flow. Manual aspiration is not recommended. As needed, CSF is drained or collected, therapeutic drugs are injected, or myelographic dye is injected. The contrast medium is injected slowly and always under fluoroscopic guidance. The patient’s head position should be adjusted by elevating the head of the table to avoid intracranial flow. When the procedure is finished, the stylet is reinserted, and the needle is withdrawn, and pressure is applied on the puncture site. Semi-sitting or sitting position is stressed while the patient is in bed to drop the contrast agent into the lower thecal sac and reduce post puncture headache.

Only a nonionic contrast agent should be used for myelography because ionic contrast agents have significant neurotoxicity. The recommended doses for myelography via C1–C2 puncture are 7–12.5 mL for iohexol 180 mg I/mL, 6 to 12.5 mL for iohexol 240 mg I/mL, and 4 to 10 mL for iohexol 300 mg I/mL.