The exclusion criteria for therapeutic hypothermia in neonates is as follow:

- Gestational age less than 36 weeks

- Birth weight less than 1800 gram (some units consider less than 2000 gram)

- More than 6 hours of age at the time of initiating therapeutic hypothermia

- Life-threatening abnormalities of the respiratory or cardiovascular system, E.g., diaphragmatic hernia requiring ventilation or complex congenital heart disease

- Significant chromosomal anomaly such as trisomy 13, 18

- Death appears inevitable

- Life-threatening coagulopathy with significant active bleeding is an exclusion criterion. Most infants have mild coagulopathy from the combined effects of asphyxia and cooling, and many have an increased rate of mild clinical bleeding but still benefit from therapeutic hypothermia.

- Neurologically significant head trauma or skull fracture, causing major intracranial hemorrhage. Subgaleal bleeding is a relative contraindication for selective head cooling (SHC). Consider whole-body cooling (WBC) for these infants after initial stabilization.

- Imperforate anus is an exclusion criterion for SHC because rectal temperature recordings can not be obtained. Imperforate anus is not a contraindication for WBC if we use an esophageal probe.

- Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) is a relative contraindication. Randomized controlled trials have confirmed that hypothermia would not worsen nor induce PPHN. So, PPHN is not an absolute contraindication for therapeutic hypothermia.