**Ultrasound Biometry**

Ultrasound biometry uses a high-frequency sound wave generated by a handheld probe to measure the axial length of the eye and various internal structures. The sound wave travels through the eye from anterior to posterior, passing through the cornea, anterior chamber, lens, and vitreous before reaching the retina. These different structures manifest as sharp spikes on the A-scan, with the initial spike being the probe tip on the surface of the cornea, followed by the anterior lens capsule, posterior lens capsule, retina, sclera, and the orbital fat. (Figure 1)

When the spikes are high and steep, the ultrasound beam is on the axis. If the sclera or orbital fat spikes are absent, the ultrasound beam is likely aligned with the optic nerve rather than the macula, and adjustment of the probe is necessary. The machine subsequently measures the transit time of the wave as it deflects from the internal structures of the eye. By assuming the velocity of the sound wave, the total distance traveled, which is the eye’s axial length, can be calculated.

In addition to the axial length, ultrasound biometry can measure the anterior chamber depth and the lens thickness. Ultrasound biometry does not provide keratometry measurements, so corneal power must be measured with a keratometer or topographer to calculate the IOL power.

There are two types of ultrasound biometry available; contact type and immersion type. Contract ultrasound biometry involves placing a probe directly onto the cornea. After administering topical anesthetic drops, the user must align the probe with the visual axis without applying pressure onto the cornea. A misaligned probe or inadvertent compression of the cornea may result in axial length measurements that are too low and, as such, an intraocular lens power that is too high. Because the probe is in direct contact with the eye, there is a potential risk of transmitting infection if it is not properly sanitized between patients.

Immersion ultrasound biometry involves placing a scleral shell filled with saline between the probe and the eye. Axial length measured with immersion may be more reliable than contact ultrasound because there is no risk of corneal compression. However, proper alignment is still necessary for accurate results. Some studies have found immersion to be more accurate than contact biometry - likely because it is not prone to compression errors.

**Optical Biometry**

Optical biometry is a non-contact automated modality used for measuring optical biometric parameters. Two models are widely available that employ two different techniques: Laser partial coherence interferometry (PCI) and optical low-coherence reflectometry (OLCR).

The PCI uses a 780 nm infrared laser in a dual-beam setup. In this setup, the eye and the photodetector are located at each leg of the interferometer, and both partial beams are reflected at the corneal surface and the retinal pigment epithelium. (Figure 2) Interference will occur if the path difference between the beams is smaller than the coherence length, and the photodetector will detect this interference signal. Because the position of the interferometer mirror is known, the machine can measure the optical length between the corneal surface and the retina. It can then derive the geometric intraocular distance based on the refractive indices of the ocular media (cornea, aqueous, lens, vitreous humor), with a resulting resolution of 12 microns.

The OLCR uses an 820 nm superluminescent diode in a standard Michelson interferometer setup. (Figure 3) In this biometer, the optical-path-length measurements are aligned on the visual axis of the patient’s eye, and a specialized rotating glass system embedded in the machine changes the optical path length. Doing so measures not only the axial length and corneal curvature but also the central corneal thickness, lens thickness, retinal thickness, and pupil diameter.

Because the OLCR-based device takes more anatomic measurements, the process takes twice as long as the PCI-based device.

Since the introduction of optical biometry, numerous studies have compared the different methods. In one study, both the OCLR-based and the PCI-based devices had comparable performances in determining the axial length and keratometry.

Other advantages of optical biometry result from its non-contact methodology; the risk of patient cross-contamination is eliminated, and there is no need for topical anesthesia. Unlike ultrasound biometry, optical biometry performs keratometry, so additional instrumentation is not necessary when calculating the IOL power.

There are situations in which the ultrasound method is preferred. Because both the PCL-based device and the OLCR-based devices require an adequate foveal fixation for optimal alignment, eyes with a visual acuity of worse than 20/200, corneal scarring, macular degeneration, and eccentric fixation can all lead to inaccurate measurements. Additionally, optical biometry provides less accurate axial length measurements in eyes with very dense or posterior subcapsular cataracts because the laser beams do not penetrate the lens as well as the ultrasound waves. Ultrasound biometry, therefore, is not obsolete and should be considered to be complementary to optical biometry.

Ever since Harold Ridley implanted the first intraocular lens in 1949, cataract surgery has continued to advance. The development of optical biometry combined with improved formulae for calculating IOL power has allowed for precise refractive outcomes. The goal of surgery is no longer simply to achieve the functional vision but rather to achieve the ideal post-operative refractive state based on patient preferences and expectations. Biometry is performed during the pre-operative assessment for all patients evaluated for cataract surgery. While optical biometry has become the mainstay in modern ophthalmology, ultrasound biometry plays a role in certain situations.