The frontal bone borders several bones on its external surface.  Anterior and medially it joins the nasal bone to create the area called the nasion.  Laterally to this, it joins the superior aspect of the maxillary bone bilaterally.  Laterally from the maxillary bone, it connects to various bones that form the posterior aspect of the orbit.  From medial to lateral, it connects to the lacrimal bone, sphenoid bone, and the zygomatic bone.  Posterior and lateral to the zygomatic bones, it connects again with the temporal surface of the greater wing of the sphenoid, then finally the parietal bones posteriorly. The frontal bone alone creates the roof of the orbit.  It also contains a small zygomatic process to connect with the zygomatic bone just lateral to the lateral wall of the socket.

Within the cranium, the frontal bone connects with the ethmoid bone inferiorly and medially.  Posteriorly and inferiorly, the frontal bone meets the sphenoidal bone.  As the frontal bone ascends posteriorly and laterally, it will meet the temporal bone, then finally the parietal at the top of the skull.

Sutural connections the frontal bone has to neighboring bones are dense fibrous connective tissue joints termed syndesmosis.

There are two anatomically important landmarks found on the external surface of the skull that the frontal bone contributes to the bregma and the pterion.  The bregma is the location where the sagittal and the coronal sutures meet.  The coronal suture is a syndesmosis that joins both parietal bones and the posterior aspect of the frontal bone.  The frontal bone has an involvement in the formation of the pterion, a joining of four cranial bones: frontal, sphenoidal, parietal, and temporal.

Lastly, the anterior aspect of the frontal bone contains two frontal sinuses, each superior to the orbital roof.