**Body Positions and Ventilation**

**The lateral decubitus position**: A change from the supine position to the lateral decubitus position brings about 2 physiological changes. Gravity increases blood flow in the dependent lung compared to the nondependent lung. However, there is also an increase in ventilation to the dependent lung. This change arises from the more efficient contraction of the dependent hemidiaphragm compared to the nondependent side. The dependent lung also lies in a more favorable part of the compliance curve.

**The lateral decubitus position under anesthesia**: Under anesthesia, there is a decrease in functional residual capacity. The upper lobe moves under anesthesia to a more favorable portion of the compliance curve versus the lower lung, which lies now on a less favorable portion of the compliance curve. Neuromuscular blockade contributes to abdominal contents pressing against the dependent hemidiaphragm, thereby restricting ventilation. Open non-dependent lung leads to variation in compliance and thus worsens ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch - thereby leading to hypoxemia.

Single-lung ventilation leads to a right-to-left intrapulmonary shunt as the nondependent lung continues to undergo perfusion with no ventilation, leading to a widened alveolar-to-arterial (A-a) oxygen gradient, which may contribute further to hypoxemia. Factors leading to decreased blood flow to the ventilated lung also lead to hypoxemia. Such factors include:

- Low Fio2 leads to hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in the dependent ventilated lung

- High mean airway pressures in the dependent ventilated lung

- Vasoconstrictor agents

- Intrinsic PEEP

Carbon dioxide elimination is usually unaffected in using single-lung ventilation with adequate maintenance of minute ventilation. Both lungs may be affected independently by single-lung ventilation. The ventilated-dependent lung is prone to ventilator-induced lung injury due to higher tidal volumes used. The nondependent nonventilated lung is prone to injury by surgical trauma and ischemia-reperfusion injuries. Considering these physiological changes in single-lung ventilation is vital to safely performing the anesthetic technique and airway management.