The impact of VLDL on cardiovascular diseases is mainly correlated to its role in atherosclerosis and coronary disease.

Beyond its direct relation with atherosclerosis, VLDL also plays an important role in metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance. In a normal physiologic state, insulin suppresses the production and secretion of VLDL. In subjects with insulin resistance, there is an enhanced synthesis, and reduced clearance of VLDL is often detected as increased plasma triglyceride levels.

VLDL cholesterol is also associated with hepatic disorders such as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and hepatitis. Liver fat content has been previously associated with other features of chronic insulin resistance, such as glucose intolerance, increased insulin levels, and intra-abdominal fat.

VLDL levels are also affected by various hormones, with its metabolism being closely related to several endocrinological mechanisms. In Cushing syndrome, the increased concentration of cortisol increases the plasma levels of both VLDL and LDL cholesterol by reducing the degradation of Apo B and increasing the rate of adipose tissue lipolysis.

In conclusion, VLDL cholesterol is synthesized in the liver to transport endogenous lipids such as triglycerides and cholesterol esters to the peripheral (mainly adipose, skeletal, and cardiac) tissues. It has been strongly associated with developing several multi-organ diseases such as atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, neurocognitive impairment, autoimmune disease, dermatological disorders, and cancer. It is crucial to study and understand the mechanisms behind VLDL’s biosynthesis, regulation, signaling, and secretion to comprehend its contribution to human health and to potentially develop targeted therapies that may lead directly to better patient care.