Knowledge of the anatomy of the external, middle, and inner ear systems is vital to enable clinicians to interpret what may be vague or misleading symptoms. The interaction and anatomical proximity of the ear to the brain, skull-base, and cranial nerves must also be appreciated, as certain pathology may involve these structures. In general, abnormalities of the external and middle ears will produce conductive hearing loss, and inner ear abnormalities will produce sensorineural hearing loss.

**External Ear**

The external ear is made up of the auricle (pinna), the external auditory meatus and canal, and the external (lateral) layer of the tympanic membrane. The external ear's function is the funneling of acoustic waves to the tympanic membrane and, therefore, the middle ear. Embryologically the pinna is formed by the fusion of six mesenchymal proliferations, known as hillocks of His, derivations of the first and second branchial arches. Incomplete fusion of these Hillocks can lead to the development of preauricular pits, cysts, or sinuses.

**Middle Ear**

This is a complex air-filled cavity found within the temporal bone of the skull. It contains the three ossicles, the internal (medial) layer of the tympanic membrane, and the Eustachian tube orifice. It is lined with respiratory epithelium, which is continuous with the lining of the Eustachian tube and the upper aerodigestive tract. The ossicles are termed the malleus, incus, and stapes (from lateral to medial).

**Inner Ear**

The inner ear is comprised of the vestibular system and the cochlea, both of which have a bony and membranous portion. The function of the inner ear is both the conversion of acoustic vibrations into neural impulses for hearing, as well as the detection and transmission of cranial movement for balance. No parts of the inner ear can be directly visualized during the ear examination. However, signs of inner ear disease, such as sensorineural hearing loss or vestibular dysfunction, can be elicited.