Calcium channels perform functions that act not only on a molecular scale through the transportation of calcium ions, but on a cellular level by participating in whole-cell processes that affect an entire organism. As a result, the regulation of calcium is exceptionally precise. As stated previously, the concentration of calcium during resting conditions is kept extremely low by the actions of various calcium pumps, channels, and exchangers. The purpose of this is so that calcium may act as an intracellular signal, which may be initiated or modified by calcium channels on the plasma membrane or in membranes of intracellular organelles. These rapid calcium fluxes exhibit characteristics that provide the cell with additional information than signal stimulus intensity. These signals also give information that shows both spatial and temporal properties.

Furthermore, calcium signals may be self-regulatory, whereby calcium channels are regulated by calcium itself. As a result, not only does calcium act as a signal itself, but it can modify its own signal through its actions on calcium channel function. Because of the unique features of calcium channels, they can participate in functions much more complicated than merely the transportation of ions. Each cell type can carry out specific physiological functions by the presence of unique combinations of calcium channels on their cell membranes. Together, they provide information concerning the precise duration, frequency, timing, and amplitude of a calcium signal to control a particular calcium-dependent signaling process.

All calcium channels generate brief pulses or transients of calcium by their opening.

Calcium waves spread throughout the cytoplasm and occur on the order of seconds to minutes. At this time scale, ryanodine receptors, for example, mediate a self-regenerative calcium amplifying process known as calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) through positive feedback, which is essential for muscle contraction. Calcium channel-generated calcium waves are also involved in modifying the actions of various calcium-dependent proteins such as CaMKII, MAP-kinases, and CREB, which can modify intracellular processes.

Calcium channels also generate signals that are spatial in nature that dependent on highly localized signaling structures and processes. For example, the release of calcium by a single calcium channel generates a localized increase in calcium just adjacent to the channel. This localized increase in calcium may create elementary calcium signals referred to as calcium "puffs" or "sparks," depending on the channel and can initiate highly localized responses; this is made possible by the ability of some calcium channels such as IP3 and ryanodine receptors to form organized and highly localized macromolecular complexes with other proteins such as receptors (i.e., G-protein coupled receptors or receptor tyrosine kinases) or calcium-binding/calcium-dependent proteins.

These organized macromolecular signaling processes are the bases of calcium signaling "units," which can function autonomously. These calcium signaling units can then be summed, multiplied, or otherwise calculated together to create even more complex cellular responses. Examples of processes that involve these organized macromolecular complexes include the synaptic integration of information by single neurons. Input-specific calcium-dependent synaptic modifications occur during the processes of learning and memory on individual dendritic spines, and they depend on localized processes that occur adjacent to single calcium channels.

Calcium channels do not simply open and close to allow the passage of calcium. Calcium channels can open and close in intricate patterns that contain specific temporal and spatial characteristics to produce complex cellular responses. The cell has utilized calcium channels not only to provide calcium for calcium-dependent cellular processes but to encode information that accompanies the release of calcium to produce specific intracellular signals. Through this, calcium channels mediate processes that affect the entire cell addition to the affecting processes at the molecular level.

An example of a whole-cell process controlled almost entirely by the actions of calcium channels is in the regulation of cardiac muscle contraction in cardiac myocytes. Calcium channels are the structural components of cardiac cells that provide a mechanism to modulate the force of contraction. One of the ways that this occurs is through beta-adrenergic receptor (b-AR) stimulation to cause a positive inotropic response that is regulated by protein kinase A (PKA). The initiation of a cardiac muscle contraction is mediated by the entry of calcium through L-type voltage-gated calcium channels on the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

During each action potential, cAMP is produced by the Ga(S) subunit of the B-adrenergic receptor upon activation by norepinephrine. PKA becomes activated by cAMP resulting in widespread changes in calcium channel function. As a kinase, it displays phosphorylative activity to modify the actions of calcium channels, specifically L-type VGCCs, SERCA, and RyRs. When L-type VGCCs are phosphorylated, each action potential can produce a larger flux of calcium resulting in potentiation of channel currents. Secondly, PKA phosphorylates phospholamban, which disinhibits the actions of the SERCA pump, which results in more calcium available in the sarcoplasmic reticulum for muscle contraction. Thirdly, phosphorylation of ryanodine receptors by PKA increases their ability to generate the calcium sparks necessary for calcium-induced calcium release (CICR), which is required to initiate muscle contraction. Ultimately, this process is an example where calcium channel activity can be modified to produce different responses by the sympathetic nervous system through kinase-mediated phosphorylation.