The mainstay of therapy is supportive and individualized according to the presentation. Cholangitis due to biliary obstruction is treated with antibiotics that cover gram-negative rods and anaerobic rods. Adequate biliary drainage may be required in the form of biliary stent placement through ERCP or IR-guided percutaneous trans-hepatic catheter (PTC) placement. PTC is usually more effective at draining intra-hepatic obstruction and patients sometimes require indwelling catheters with periodic flushing and changing of the catheter. Ursodeoxycholic acid is used to treat severe cholestasis. Some authors have recommended segmentectomy, lobectomy, or hepaticojejunostomy depending on the range of cystic formation for the treatment of Caroli disease.

Once hepatic fibrosis sets in, it leads to portal hypertension and its sequelae of variceal bleeding and recurrent ascites which should be managed as they are when related to liver cirrhosis, for example, with non-selective beta-blockers, endoscopic band ligation, and diuretic therapy for ascites. Liver transplantation is the only definitive treatment available at this time for Caroli syndrome. There are 3 indications for liver transplantation in Caroli syndrome: hepatic decompensation, recurrent cholangitis that is unresponsive to intervention, and development of focal adenocarcinoma.

Timely surgical treatment is of utmost importance in view of the grave prognosis of cholangiocarcinoma. Studies have shown excellent long-term outcomes with liver resection in unilobar and liver transplant in diffuse Caroli disease complicated with cholangitis and/or portal hypertension.