Methohexital has a variety of uses, including procedural sedation in pediatrics, electroconvulsive therapy, and as an induction agent during the delivery of anesthesia. Like all other sedatives, methohexital is best used and managed by an interprofessional team to ensure its safety.

It is essential to appropriately evaluate the patient pre-operatively and address factors like allergies, previous exposure to this drug class and adverse reactions, and pertinent medical history. It is also important to evaluate patients and their baseline status in terms of physical activity to assess their cardiopulmonary reserve. The professional administering methohexital to the patient should clearly and effectively communicate with the proceduralist regarding dose, timing, and anticipated time needed to complete the given procedure.

Guidelines suggested by organizations state that anesthesia standards of monitoring are crucial during procedural sedation; one person (nurse anesthetist) should be present whose job is only to monitor the patient.

In terms of care coordination in the OR setting, it is important to know that one person does not make a team and that it is the collective effort of the anesthesiologist, surgeons, nursing, and OR personnel who make it possible to deliver care to patients safely and effectively.

Methohexital is a barbiturate, and while it is a very useful agent in its applications, it is not without risks, so the entire interprofessional health team has to coordinate their activities when using this drug. The ordering clinician (MD, DO, NP, PA) decides as to using the drug, as well as dosing, but the pharmacist needs to verify the dosing, as well as checking any potential drug interactions Nursing will be monitoring and administering the drug and needs to report any undue circumstances to the clinicians and/or pharmacist. With a collaborative approach, methohexital can be a safe anesthetic that serves to help the team achieve positive outcomes for the patient. [Level 5]