**Medical Management:**

Immediately following the diagnosis of PA-IVS, an attempt should be made to initiate prostaglandin infusion to maintain the patency of ductus arteriosus. This action is vital for the preoperative survival of these patients, as ductus arteriosus is the sole source of pulmonary blood flow. Also, it is crucial to manipulate pulmonary vascular and systemic vascular resistance to achieve optimal pulmonary and systemic blood flow.

**Procedural management:**

The patients with PA-IVS will need an intervention, either a catheter-based intervention or surgical procedure, as a neonate. As a result of the complexity and heterogeneity of this disorder, there is no single procedure that will be effective for all patients. Even though the biventricular repair is the ideal and preferred surgical approach, the management of this disorder has to be highly individualized. The preferred surgical or transcatheter intervention is influenced by several variables, which include tricuspid valve size and function, RV anatomy, coronary artery anatomy, and type of pulmonary atresia.

The currently available therapeutic algorithms are quite diverse. Chikkabyrappa et al. published an article in which they discuss the various therapeutic options for this disorder.

- Patients with adequate and tripartite RV size, which is functionally tripartite, tricuspid valve z-score greater than 2.5, and normal coronary artery anatomy would benefit from biventricular repair Radiofrequency perforation of the pulmonary valve for pulmonary atresia and surgical right ventricular outflow tract reconstruction for long segment atresia.

- Patients with borderline bipartite hypoplastic RV, tricuspid valve z-scores between -2.5 to -4.5 might benefit from attempted biventricular repair ± systemic to pulmonary shunt. These patients require close surveillance for RV growth, in the absence of which, they will benefit from one and a half ventricular repair.

- Single ventricular repair (bidirectional Glenn followed by Fontan) should be a consideration in patients with severe RV hypoplasia and patients with RVDCC.

- Primary heart transplantation might be a reasonable approach in patients with myocardial ischemia related to coronary artery abnormalities.

Clinicians should recall that the patients in categories 2, 3, and 4 will need systemic to pulmonary artery shunt or stenting of the PDA in the immediate newborn period.