Prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) comes from the process of ion-exchange chromatography from the cryoprecipitate supernatant of large plasma pools and after removal of antithrombin and factor XI.

- **Urgent reversal of acquired coagulation factor deficiency induced by warfarin-induced anticoagulation in patients presenting with major acute bleeding (intracerebral hemorrhage-ICH) or a need for urgent invasive surgery or procedure:**This is the only FDA approved indication. Four factor PCC works to reverse a warfarin-induced major bleed in clinical practice. Treatment with either fresh frozen plasma (FFP) or oral/IV vitamin K was the cornerstone of vitamin-K reversal; however, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) published a consensus statement recommending using 4-factor PCC for the reversal of warfarin-induced bleeding.

- **Reversal of Direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC) induced anticoagulation**with major bleeding or requiring major surgery: PCC may be used to reverse DOAC induced anticoagulation when a more specific antidote is unavailable.

- **Treatment or prophylaxis of bleeding in congenital deficiency of any vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors**(**II, VII, IX, X)**when purified specific coagulation factor products are unavailable. Although the initial development of PCC was for use in hemophilia, with the development of purified factor IX, and recombinant factor IX, PCC is now rarely used. However, in the rare event that purified factor is not available, 4-factor PCC may be used; this is also an off-label use of this agent.

- **Peri-operatively to decrease bleeding in patients not taking oral anticoagulants:**Several multi-institutional studies have shown reduced perioperative bleeding and a decreased need for transfusion when 4-factor PCC is administered both prophylactically (in patients with coagulopathy as evidenced by a prolonged PT/INR) and for treatment of postoperative bleeding with a normal coagulation profile - this continues to be an off-label indication.

- **Trauma setting with massive transfusion:**Some studies have shown better INR reduction with PCC+ FFP compared to FFP alone.