Consider bladder instillation therapy for patients on dialysis and those performing regular intermittent self-catheterization.

Mandelamine with vitamin C or D-mannose is a reasonable option for UTI prevention in selected patients, although more studies are needed to confirm their effectiveness.

Gepotidacin is a new antibiotic in a novel chemical class called triazaacenaphthylene.E. coli and Neisseria gonorrhea that are resistant to current antibiotics.

Investigationally, initial attempts to make vaccines to help prevent urinary tract infections have only been marginally successful, but research in this area is continuing.E. coli bioconjugates or E.coli type 1 fimbrial adhesive protein.E. coli iron absorption (IreA, FyuA, IutA, and Hma), which are critical to the survival of the pathogen.E. coli recurrences.

Improving personal hygiene for many women appears to be helpful. Optimal personal hygiene suggestions include:

- Wash hands before wiping after voiding.

- Use adult or baby wipes instead of plain toilet paper.

- Wiping just once, from front to back, after voiding.

- Use showers instead of baths.

- Use a non-toxic liquid soap with minimal chemicals or perfumes to clean the vaginal area. Any liquid soap or shampoo safe for babies is likely to be acceptable.

- Use soft cotton or microfiber washcloths rather than hands, nylon, or luffa pads for soap application while washing.

- Wash the vaginal opening first to avoid contamination or movement of bacteria to this critical area.