The definitive diagnosis of the type of dementia can only be made at autopsy. A probable diagnosis can often be made using clinical history predominantly, sometimes aided by brain imaging and additional laboratory evaluation. Excluding treatable causes of cognitive impairment is also important to include in the initial evaluation.

All domains of cognition must be assessed. There are multiple cognitive evaluation tools available for use in a clinical setting, including the Mini-mental status examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Saint Louis University Mental Status (SLUMS), Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination–Revised (ACE-R), the modified mini-mental state examination, Mini-Cog, and Rowland Universal Dementia Assessment Scale (RUDAS). Each tool has different advantages; for example, the MoCA takes approximately 10 minutes and is better suited for detecting mild cognitive impairment in addition to major neurocognitive disorder. In contrast, the Mini-Cog takes approximately 3 minutes to administer and is predominantly used to screen for major neurocognitive disorder. The RUDAS is often used for use cross-cultural evaluations and can be administered in conjunction with an interpreter if needed. None of these cognitive evaluations alone can diagnose major neurocognitive disorder, as a decline in function of daily tasks is also needed to meet the diagnostic criteria. These studies can be repeated over time to document the progression of decline. They can give an idea of the severity of the deficit along with specific cognitive domains that are affected. Specialized, more in-depth neuropsychological testing can provide even further diagnostic information and help differentiate subtle differences or hard-to-diagnose cases.

Laboratory tests to check in all patients during the evaluation of dementia include complete blood count, urinalysis, metabolic panel, Vitamin B12, folic acid, thyroid function tests, and serological tests for syphilis and HIV. Under certain circumstances, it may be appropriate to check erythrocyte sedimentation rate, lumbar puncture, heavy metal screen, ceruloplasmin levels, Lyme disease titer, or serum protein electrophoresis.

Brain imaging is sometimes ordered, particularly if the age of onset is relatively early, atypical or rapidly progressing symptoms are present, or there is diagnostic uncertainty. A brain MRI without contrast is often the initial test ordered. It is valuable for evaluating signs of vascular or ischemic disease, as well as localized regions or global atrophy that may be seen. A DaTscan uses a radiotracer to highlight dopamine transporter proteins in a SPECT scan on the presynaptic dopaminergic neurons. This scan can aid in differentiating pathologies that involve loss of the striatal dopaminergic pathway, including Parkinson disease, multiple system atrophy, progressive nuclear palsy, cortical-basal degeneration, and Lewy body dementia from other syndromes.

Often reserved for academic settings, functional brain imaging with PET, SPECT, and fMRI can help in the early diagnosis and monitoring of patients with dementia, especially AD. These can also help differentiate the etiology of dementia. These are expensive and routine use in clinical practice is not indicated.