Recommendations for empiric therapy vary by geographic region, local resistance patterns, and expert opinion. For most patients with suspected early-onset neonatal meningitis, ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside (eg, gentamicin) or an expanded spectrum cephalosporin (eg, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, or cefepime) should be started empirically.

One recent source citing World Health Organization standards indicated that ampicillin or penicillin plus gentamicin are recommended empiric therapy in developing countries, with cephalosporins reserved for second-line treatment.L monocytogenes. Empiric antibiotic therapy for late-onset illness should cover additional organisms in the nosocomial environment, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and methicillin-resistant S aureus.

In late-onset meningitis, vancomycin should be added to the above empiric regimen when the suspicion of nosocomial pathogens is high.

It is important to remember that not all late-onset meningitis patients warrant nosocomial organism coverage. If the infant is discharged home after birth and presents in the late-onset period, they will be considered to have late-onset community-acquired neonatal meningitis. In this case, the empiric coverage may be the same as that of early-onset meningitis.

An LP should be repeated in 24 to 48 hours if the patient does not demonstrate clinical improvement. According to some experts, repeating the LP to show CSF clearance is unnecessary if there is clinical improvement.

Definitive therapy should be instituted when the causative organism and its susceptibilities have been determined. GBS therapy can be modified to ampicillin or penicillin monotherapy once repeat LP notes sterility and response to therapy. E. coli and other gram-negative pathogens are typically treated with a combination of a third-generation cephalosporin plus an aminoglycoside until sterility and response to therapy can be confirmed. At that time, the aminoglycoside is usually stopped. L. monocytogenes infection is commonly treated with ampicillin monotherapy following repeat CSF sampling.

There is no data to help determine the duration of antibiotic therapy for neonatal meningitis. The minimum acceptable duration by European guidelines is 14 days for GBS and L. monocytogenes infections and 21 days for gram-negative organisms.L. monocytogenes, and S. pneumoniae infections and 21 days for Pseudomonas and gram-negative enteric bacteria.

There are no clear guidelines on when to suspect and initiate empiric therapy for HSV meningitis. According to some infectious disease experts, empiric evaluation and treatment for neonatal HSV are warranted if there are clear signs of HSV infection (skin vesicles, seizures, or liver inflammation or failure) or CSF pleocytosis is found outside of the enteroviral season.

Intraventricular antibiotics, dexamethasone, intravenous immunoglobulins, granulocyte or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and oral glycerol are not recommended in routine practice.