Ephedrine may produce palpitations, headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, restlessness, and anxiety in the conscious patient. Ephedrine is also arrhythmogenic, and clinicians should be cautious when administering patients predisposed to arrhythmias or taking other arrhythmogenic medications, particularly digitalis. When used long-term, the catecholamine excess can result in contraction band necrosis of the myocardium, which predisposes the heart to ventricular arrhythmias.

Another common effect of ephedrine is an alteration in the time until the onset and duration of action of other drugs. This effect is most notable during induction when giving ephedrine to a hypotensive patient before rocuronium.

Additionally, ephedrine may be hepatotoxic, but there seems to be unclear evidence. This idea stems from case reports where ephedra species containing several compounds resulted in liver damage instead of a direct correlation.

A less common effect experienced mostly by illicit users of ephedrine and its derivatives is the development of radiolucent urological ephedrine-containing stones and paranoid schizophrenia.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Augmentation of the blood pressure: Clonidine, oxytocin, and propofol can increase blood pressure when administered with ephedrine.

- Interactions that antagonize the pressor effect: α-adrenergic antagonists, β-adrenergic antagonists, and reserpine can antagonize the vasopressor effect of ephedrine.

- Guanethidine: Ephedrine may inhibit the neuron blockage induced by guanethidine, resulting in loss of antihypertensive efficacy.

- Rocuronium: Ephedrine may decrease the onset time of neuromuscular blockade when used with rocuronium for intubation if administered simultaneously. No interventions are needed.

- Theophylline: Concomitant use of ephedrine and theophylline may increase nervousness and insomnia.

- Cardiac glycosides: Administering ephedrine with a cardiac glycoside, such as digitalis, may increase the likelihood of arrhythmias. Monitor patients on digoxin who are administered ephedrine.