Patients receiving tenecteplase require routine neurologic and cardiovascular monitoring to assess for bleeding and hypersensitivity reactions.

Nonessential handling and puncture should be avoided in the first few hours after tenecteplase administration. If an arterial puncture cannot be avoided, the preferred site is an upper extremity blood vessel that can be easily compressed. Direct pressure should be applied for 30 minutes following venipuncture.

A neurological exam must be serially performed to assess for deterioration in mental status or any new focal neurological deficits, which may suggest a bleeding event. An urgent brain CT should be performed if there is any sign of neurological deterioration. If the patient is also receiving concomitant anticoagulation such as heparin, the agent should be stopped, and the appropriate reversal agent should be administered. Other bleeding sites, such as puncture or surgical sites and bruising, should also be monitored.

Vital signs must be frequently evaluated for fever, hypotension, and tachycardia. Assessment of clinical signs of anaphylaxis, including angioedema, rash, and respiratory distress, must also be routinely performed. Supportive medication such as antihistamines and intramuscular epinephrine should be available.

Due to the risk of cardiac arrhythmia in tenecteplase, cardiac monitoring is necessary. In addition, antiarrhythmic therapy for bradycardia and ventricular instability should be available during tenecteplase administration.