A hysterectomy is not the standard of care to treat cervical dysplasia. However, the finding of recurrent cervical dysplasia may be treated with hysterectomy. Post hysterectomy patients will not develop cervical cancer as the cervix has been removed, but must still receive Pap smears of the remaining vaginal cuff for 20 years due to the risk of vaginal dysplasia and subsequent cancer. Vaginal cancer is extremely rare, with fewer than 5,000 cases a year, but individuals with a history of severe cervical dysplasia are at the greatest risk for this disease. Patients undergoing a hysterectomy for benign indications without a history significant for a high-grade cervical dysplasia no longer need cytological screening or HPV screening as her risk of vaginal cancer is very low. The three vaccines developed to prevent HPV infection are one which provides protection from HPV 16 and 18, another which covers 6, 11, 16 and 18, and most recently released, a 9-valent vaccine which protects from HPV 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52 and 58. Even though 6 and 11 are not oncogenic subtypes of HPV, they are responsible for genital warts, which are problematic to the patient and can be passed along to an infant during pregnancy. Genital warts are a significant source of medical spending in the US. Once the Gardasil 4 vaccines are depleted, the only vaccine to be manufactured in the United States will be Gardasil 9. This vaccine is indicated in girls and boys ages nine to 26, preferably before any sexual contact or exposure, to prevent cervical, vaginal, and vulvar cancers as well as penile, anal, and certain types of head and neck cancers. This is a virus-like particle vaccine which cannot reproduce in the human body and is considered safe by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).