Substance use in pregnancy is a common condition with substantial complications. A thorough medical history and physical examination will often lead to a diagnosis of SUD or reveal concerning substance use that does not meet the DSM-5 criteria for SUD. However, many women will not disclose sensitive information about their substance use, so clinicians must rely on other methods to identify those at risk.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends early, universal screening for substance use as part of comprehensive prenatal care in partnership with pregnant women.

A positive screen cannot be considered diagnostic of SUD in pregnancy. False positive and false negative results occur, and screening may reveal occasional substance use rather than SUD. The clinician's next step is a conversation regarding the frequency of substance use and whether there is any current use. It is essential to counsel pregnant women about the risks to themselves and their children and discourage further use. When SUD is suspected or confirmed, it is essential to provide information about local resources for counseling and treatment in a nonjudgmental manner. Medical providers should never assume family members or significant others know about a woman's substance use, and respecting patient confidentiality is of utmost importance. Clinicians should also be knowledgeable about local and state reporting requirements. SUD is a medical condition, not a moral failing, and punitive attitudes can negatively impact maternal and neonatal outcomes. Women with SUD who feel stigmatized may avoid continuing essential prenatal care.

Screening is often confused with drug or alcohol testing. Universal screening, but not routine drug or alcohol toxicology testing, is recommended in pregnant women. Screening is a test used for at-risk populations, including those without symptoms. However, testing for biological markers of substance use may be indicated in specific situations, especially when objective or specific information about multiple substances is required. Urine, hair, and meconium samples have shown adequate sensitivity as biological markers of substance use. Urine drug screening mainly detects recent use.

Mandated biological testing may be required for women in treatment programs or involved with the legal system. Drug testing does not distinguish between regular and occasional substance use and should be based on medical criteria rather than demographic profiling. Testing in the hospital during labor and delivery must occur before administering prescription medications that may produce a positive result. Each community has trends in drug use, which should be reflected in local and hospital laboratories' testing panels. False-positive test results have been linked to ingesting poppy seeds and dextromethorphan.