Since the neck houses vital structures, prompt evaluation, and rapid intervention are required. The initial assessment should be performed according to the ATLS protocols. An immediate trauma service consultation should be obtained for patients with suspicion of vascular, tracheal, or esophageal injury.

Priorities in the management of patients with neck trauma are like those for any other patient with a life-threatening condition.  The primary priorities are securing the airway, maintaining ventilation, controlling hemorrhage, and treating shock.  At the same time, check vital signs and determine the stability of the patient. Patients with neck injuries may have other life-threatening injuries that may take precedence.

Airway: As always, the priority is airway stabilization, particularly in patients with neck trauma, while maintaining cervical spine immobilization. Remember that in-line stabilization should always be maintained when there is a concern for a cervical spine injury. Up to 10% of patients with penetrating neck injuries may present with airway compromise. Be aware that despite a stable initial appearance, airway compromise can ensue rapidly.

Beware that swelling, distorted anatomy, and hematoma formation may contribute to impending airway obstruction in facial or neck trauma. Therefore, early airway control should be considered as the conditions may rapidly worsen.

Breathing: Evaluate the breathing and assess for any hemothorax or pneumothorax, particularly with penetrating zone 1 injuries

Circulation: Direct, simple pressure on the open wounds should be used to control bleeding in the emergency department. Wounds that have air sucking or bubbling should be covered with Vaseline gauze. No blind probing of the wound and no clamping of the vessels should occur in the emergency department. It is important not to occlude both carotid arteries or obstruct the patient's airway. Avoid nasogastric tube placement in patients with penetrating neck injury because of the risk of hematoma rupture. The agitation of the patient during tube insertion may precipitate bleeding.

Further management of the patient with penetrating neck trauma depends on the anatomic zone of injury, clinical presentation, and hemodynamic stability. Determine the zone of injury, as this will determine evaluation and management strategy.

**Zone 1:**Since up to one-third of patients with a clinically significant zone 1 injury may have no symptoms at their initial presentation, many centers advocate vascular evaluation of the aortic arch and great vessels, with an esophageal evaluation.

**Zone 2**: This area has easier surgical access and poses a low risk for adverse sequelae from exploration. The decision for surgical exploration depends on the symptoms.

Symptomatic penetrating zone 2 injuries should undergo neck exploration.

Asymptomatic patients with penetrating zone 2 injuries may be treated with either mandatory exploration or directed evaluation and serial examinations.

Indications for an angiogram: a stable patient with persistent hemorrhage or neurologic deficits. The presence of Horner syndrome (sympathetic nerve plexus injury) and hoarseness (recurrent laryngeal nerve injury). This suggests a violation of carotid sheath.

**Zone 3**

In this zone, there is potential for injury to major blood vessels and the cranial nerves close to the skull base. Beware that patients with arterial injuries may be asymptomatic at their initial presentation, and surgical exposure and control of bleeding in this location may be quite difficult.  In addition, many vascular injuries are amenable to definitive treatment by an interventional radiologist. Therefore, the injury can be potentially treated in the same setting as the one in which the diagnostic angiogram is done.

**Bottom Line**

- Zones 1 and 3:  Difficult access, and exposure, vascular control may be challenging

- No mandatory exploration, however, angiography is suggested.

For Unstable Patients

All unstable patients with evidence of vascular or aerodigestive injury should receive further evaluation by performing an invasive intervention. These patients should be transferred to the operating room for definitive care depending on the type and location of injury as well as associated injuries.

For Stable Patients

- Whether to perform mandatory exploration of all zone 2 injuries

- Whether to obtain invasive intervention in all zone 1 and 3 injuries

With improvements in multidetector (angiography, “mandatory” neck exploration for platysma violation, and “mandatory” arteriography for zones 1 and 3 injuries are falling out of favor. It is important that all patients with platysma muscle violation be admitted to the surgical service or the observation unit for ongoing observation, regardless of their stability.

**Blunt Trauma**

Up to 5% of traumatic injuries to the neck are due to blunt trauma. Motor vehicle accidents are the most frequent cause. It occurs when an unrestrained passenger may strike the neck on a dashboard or steering wheel.

Blunt trauma can damage the vessels by the following mechanisms

- Direct damage

- Excessive rotation and/or hyperextension: This causes stretching of the arteries and veins resulting in a shear injury.

It is often associated with other significant injuries. Beware that there are uncommonly isolated injuries, particularly in blunt trauma; therefore, always identify any associated injuries.