Different intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring techniques assess the function of the brain, brainstem, spinal cord, cranial nerves, and peripheral nerves during the procedure. They are immensely valuable in the detection and prevention of neurological insult. Intraoperative monitoring is now becoming part of standard medical practices and routinely used during many surgical procedures, including the risk of neurological injury. IONM employs a wide variety of physiological principles, each with a unique application and frequently used together in the same surgery, leading to improved patient outcomes. As the benefits of monitoring become apparent, the use of different neuromonitoring techniques during the additional surgical procedure has expanded. This activity reviews the different modalities of neurophysiological monitoring, their indications, and contraindications. This activity highlights the interprofessional team's role in evaluating and improving care for patients in providing high-quality peri-operative care to detect and prevent neurologic injuries.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring.
- Describe the different techniques of intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring.
- Explain the importance of intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring to detect and prevent neurological injury.
- Review the importance of effective communication and close cooperation between interprofessional teams in providing high-quality peri-operative care to detect and prevent neurologic injuries.