The clinical presentation of hypothalamic hamartomas depends on their region of attachment to the hypothalamus.

Parahypothalmic hamartomas, also known as pedunculated, occur in the anterior hypothalamus arising from the inferior surface of the hypothalamus, tuber cinereum. This subtype of hypothalamic hamartoma is associated with central precocious puberty.

Conversely, intrahypothalamic hamartomas, also know as ‘sessile’ occur in the posterior hypothalamus with an attachment level at the mamillary bodies.

Cognitive impairment can present as language delay with learning disabilities. Behavioral disorders are associated more commonly with hypothalamic hamartomas and gelastic seizures. These include attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (75%), aggressiveness, anxiety oppositional defiant disorders (83.3%), and conduct disorders (33.3%).

Patients with gelastic seizures present with affective aggression. The definition of affective aggression is as being out of control, damaging one's property, physical harm to oneself, aggressive without a purpose, aggressive with stronger children when aggressive, and express remorse after aggression. Some children also present with predatory aggression. Predatory aggression includes the ability to control their behavior when aggressive, protects oneself when aggressive, fights with weaker children, and tries to get something out from being aggressive. More commonly, patients with hypothalamic hamartomas and gelastic seizures support affective aggression. These aggressive episodes arise quite suddenly and are not motivated by ill will towards the victims.

Other predictive factors associated with an increased likelihood of aggression include male gender, the presence of intellectual disability, younger age at the time of first seizure, and multiple seizures. Postulates are that seizure activity in patients with hypothalamic hamartoma is a contributing factor to neurobehavioural deficits. The cause of rage and aggression are poorly understood but are thought to be influenced by gender and hormonal dynamics.