**Penetrating Keratoplasty**

Following the establishment of anesthesia, an eyelid speculum is inserted, and the patient’s eye is secured using a scleral fixation ring or sutures. The host corneal diameter is measured to determine the appropriate size for the donor button. The donor button is trephination aiming for 0.25-0.5 mm larger than the host trephination. A trephine is placed on the host’s cornea, and a button three-quarters through the stroma is excised, and a peripheral iridotomy/iridectomy is performed. The donor button is secured to the host corneal tissue using non-absorbable sutures, which are rotated to bury the knots. Viscoelastic hyaluronic acid may be used, if needed, to prevent the iris from sticking to the suture line. Antibiotic therapy is applied as per local protocols, and the eye is shielded.

**Descemet’s Membrane Endothelial Keratoplasty**

Following the establishment of anesthesia, an eyelid speculum is inserted, and the patient’s eye is secured using a scleral fixation ring or sutures. Two to four paracentesis sites and a temporal corneal incision are created, and the anterior chamber is filled with viscoelastic hyaluronic acid. A peripheral iridotomy is created to prevent pupillary block. The donor’s corneal epithelium with a circular ring to create a resection template and the DM is scored peripherally, peeled from the overlying stroma and removed. The donor button is stained with trypan blue solution to ensure visibility and inserted into the anterior chamber. An air or sulfur hexafluoride bubble is injected to ensure adhesion. Closure of the primary incision is with a buried non-absorbable suture. Antibiotic therapy is applied as per local protocols, and the eye is shielded.