Romosozumab is a new pharmacologic agent for the treatment of osteoporosis in women with a high risk of bone fracture. With new medication, it is imperative to educate clinicians, patients, and other healthcare team members regarding its use, indications, and possible adverse events.

All members of the interprofessional healthcare team and the patient should be aware of and be able to recognize the current known adverse effects of romosozumab to enhance healthcare outcomes. Clinicians or their staff must educate the patient on possible medication adverse events such as the signs and symptoms of a cardiovascular event, hypocalcemia, hypersensitivity reactions, osteonecrosis of the jaw, and atypical femoral fracture.

Due to romosozumab’s association with hypocalcemia, a medication review should be performed by healthcare team members to identify any medications that could exacerbate hypocalcemia before giving the injections. Healthcare team members need to perform serum calcium levels should they be indicated. Patients should be advised to take calcium and vitamin D supplementation as well.

The lack of long-term trials and data warrants continued monitoring of patients taking romosozumab and continued medical education for professionals and patients to recognize any new data and evidence regarding long-term treatment outcomes and potential adverse events. Pharmacists should be consulted to ensure proper dosing and to check for potential drug interactions, particularly drugs that affect calcium levels.

It is also essential for the healthcare team to recognize barriers to using romosozumab. Obstacles associated with its use include the high cost, the necessity for monthly appointments to receive the injection from their healthcare provider, and adverse effects specific to the individual. Healthcare team members must identify these potential barriers to ensure the patient receives the most optimal individualized treatment.