Due to its rarity, the diagnosis of pylephlebitis requires a high clinical suspicion and often times will go undiagnosed for an extended period of time. The radiologist is a key member in identifying the presence of a portal vein thrombus on ultrasound or cross-sectional imaging, but ultimately the diagnosis requires the knowledge and expertise of other physicians to include this in their initial differential diagnosis. It is imperative to secure the diagnosis in a timely manner in order to execute an appropriate treatment plan, ideally created by a team of multi-specialty physicians and other providers. Due to the paucity of high-level evidence in the literature, expert opinion from different specialists grounded in clinical experience will ultimately guide the therapeutic paradigm and the decision whether or not to include anticoagulation in addition to antibiotics.

Communication between physicians from various specialties, including gastroenterology, infectious disease, internal medicine, and general surgery, is paramount to effective, safe, patient-centered care. Other members of the healthcare team, especially nurses, play a vital role in facilitating inter-team communication and coordinating care for the patient. Additionally, nurses are crucial to identifying this disease process early in the clinical course as it is usually a complication of a more common disorder such as appendicitis or diverticulitis. Often times, it can be initially recognized by nursing staff as a patient failing to improve clinically (persistently febrile, unrelenting abdominal pain, unchanging elevation in transaminases, etc.) despite what is believed to be adequate treatment. The pharmacist is also an essential member of the healthcare team to ensure that the patient is receiving the correct dose of the appropriate antibiotic to successfully treat the patient with pylephlebitis in a safe manner. Each member of the healthcare team should complete their assigned tasks but should also focus on effective inter-team communication to provide the highest level of patient care.