Uncontrolled seizures represent a common neurologic illness requiring evaluation and management in the hospital setting. Critically ill patients may develop seizures due to multiorgan failure, severe metabolic disturbances, or primary central nervous system pathologies. Still, they may also present with seizures as the primary medical issue that gives rise to these complications.

Untreated isolated seizures can quickly give rise to nonconvulsive or convulsive status epilepticus, which are associated with elevated morbidity and mortality.

Early identification and treatment of seizures in critically ill patients is considered a pillar of neurocritical care. Still, clarity about whether a patient’s clinical disposition is reflective of an ongoing ictal process is not always feasible, owing to limitations of the diagnostic modalities used to identify these particular abnormalities in the clinical setting.

The rThe rising utilization of continuous video EEG in the acute care setting has revealed that LPDs and other periodic and rhythmic patterns are extremely common.

Since its initial description, IIC patterns have expanded to include other rhythmic and periodic patterns that are known to be associated with an increased risk of seizures, such as generalized periodic discharges (GPDs), bilateral independent periodic discharges (BIPDs), and lateralized rhythmic delta activity (LRDA).

To mitigate confusion, the American Clinical Neurophysiology (ACNS) convened a group of experts to standardize critical care EEG terminology. In the most recent iteration of this expert opinion published in 2021, patterns lying on the ictal-interictal continuum are now based upon well-defined electrographic and clinical criteria to increase uniformity among both providers and investigators.