Diagnosis may be delayed until the bone marrow failure develops. Different studies have summed up the average age of diagnosis as 7 years, although earlier diagnosis has been increased due to disease awareness and prenatal screening diagnostic enhancement. Early diagnosis may prevent severe complications.

Patients presenting with signs and symptoms of pancytopenia should be evaluated. Complete blood count reveals the level of RBCs, white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets. Raised mean corpuscular volume (MCV) indicates macrocytosis, and there can be high fetal hemoglobin levels due to increased stress. Serum erythropoietin is increased due to the low level of blood cells and the low response of hematopoietic stem cells. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy reveals hypocellularity, aplasia with fatty marrow, and absence of myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocytes stem cell lines. Myelodysplastic cases show hypo- or hypergranularity, hyposegmentation of myeloid precursors, and hypolobulated or hyperlobulated megakaryocytes. Clonic malformations are seen in leukemic transformations.

The chromosomal breakage test is diagnostic testing and is indicated in those with severe pancytopenia, i.e., absolute neutrophil count (ANC) less than 100/mL, hemoglobin less than 10g/dL with reticulocyte less than 40000/mL, bone marrow cellularity less than 25%, and platelet count less than 50000/mL. Testing with DNA cross-linkers such as diepoxybutane or mitomycin C stimulates the breakage of DNA in the absence of a DNA repair system. These agents increase the chromatids' breaks, gaps, reduplications, or rearrangements. Cultured fibroblasts also show chromosome fragility. Skin fibroblast is preferred in such patients that show negative T-lymphocytes chromosome fragility test and in those who have already undergone hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Cell cycle analysis flow cytometry is an alternative to the chromosomal breakage test. In this test, those cells with impaired DNA repair undergo G2 arrest following DNA cross-linking agent exposure. Immunoblotting of GANCD2 mutation is less commonly used. FA gene sequencing is recommended in patients with positive chromosomal breakage testing. The identification of genetic defects is confirmatory and excludes other chromosome breakage syndromes. Prenatally, abnormal chromosome breakage can be analyzed with amniotic fluid cells or chorionic villous biopsy. An elevated level of serum alpha-protein is a rapid screening diagnostic test, but it may not be identified in many cases.

Additional surveys are done to evaluate the other structural and birth defect abnormalities. A skeletal survey is done to identify bone defects. X-rays can detect the site and type of the exact defect. The X-ray of the head shows a crewcut appearance. Ultrasound of the abdomen is done to monitor the liver and kidney size and shape. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is crucial to identify CNS abnormalities, such as the absence of corpus callosum, cerebellar hypoplasia, and small pituitary.