Ocular toxocariasis can present with or without active inflammation. In cases with anterior chamber cells/flare and vitritis, the inflammation must be controlled with topical and systemic corticosteroids. This helps in reducing anterior chamber reaction, vitreous haze, and vitreous membranes.

Topical cycloplegic mydriatic prevents posterior synechia formation and seclusio pupillae. Increased intraocular pressure can be controlled with topical antiglaucoma medications. The role of systemic anthelmintic drugs such as albendazole and thiabendazole is unclear. It is not proven to kill intraocular Toxocara.

In one study, treatment resulted in an improved vision in all patients. There were no recurrences of uveitis during the study period of 13.8 months. In adults, the dose of albendazole was 800 mg orally twice a day for two weeks with prednisolone at 1.5mg/kg tapered over three months. The children received 200 mg orally twice a day for two weeks with prednisolone at 1mg/kg.

Sometimes, the larva is seen migrating in the subretinal space. It can then be destroyed with laser photocoagulation over and around it.

Some patients present late without active inflammation. There is a peripheral focal granuloma with a vitreal fold radiating from it to the posterior pole. There can be accompanying tractional retinal detachment and a cataract. In such cases, surgery is indicated. Lens aspiration with intraocular lens implantation is preferred for the cataract. Pars plana vitrectomy is done for vitreous opacification and membranes.

With such maneuvers, vision improves or remains stable in 85% of cases.

The most important step in the management of toxocariasis is prevention. Good hygiene should be maintained in children.