Paclitaxel has a black box warning for hypersensitivity reactions and bone marrow suppression. Patients should be premedicated with corticosteroids, diphenhydramine, and H2 antagonists prior to infusion to avoid anaphylaxis and severe hypersensitivity reactions. The recommendation is for dexamethasone at 20 mg IV or orally (10 mg if the patient has advanced HIV) 12 and 6 hours before the paclitaxel dose. Diphenhydramine should be administered 30 to 60 minutes before the dose at 50 mg IV. Cimetidine 300 mg, famotidine 20 mg, or ranitidine 50 mg would all be appropriate choices to be administered IV at 30 to 60 minutes before the dose. Severe hypersensitivity reactions would include dyspnea requiring bronchodilators, hypotension requiring treatment, angioedema, and/or generalized urticaria. In cases of serious hypersensitivity reaction, stop the infusion and discontinue paclitaxel. Minor hypersensitivity reactions do not require treatment to be interrupted or discontinued. Minor hypersensitivity reactions would include flushing, dyspnea, hypotension, skin reactions, or tachycardia.

The most prevalent side effects of paclitaxel are alopecia, nausea and vomiting, mucositis, neutropenia, leukopenia, anemia, hypersensitivity reactions, arthralgia, myalgia, and weakness. Peripheral neuropathy is another common side effect, and patients with preexisting neuropathies may have an increased risk. The dose should be reduced by 20% for patients who develop severe neuropathy.

Other less common side effects include flushing, edema, hypotension, skin rash, stomatitis, thrombocytopenia, hemorrhage, increased serum alkaline phosphatase and AST, local injection site reaction, increased serum creatinine, along with many more. Injection site reactions are generally mild (erythema, tenderness, skin discoloration, or swelling) and tend to occur more often with an extended infusion duration, for example, 24 hours. It is worth noting that delays of injection site reactions can extend from 7 to 10 days. Patients may also experience infusion-related hypotension, bradycardia, and/or hypertension. Due to that concern, the recommendation is that the patient's vital signs undergo frequent monitoring, especially during the first hour of infusion.