A detailed history focusing on the baseline function, specifically physical and cognitive ability, should be obtained from multiple sources. Getting the list of all medications and their frequency, duration, dose titrations, if any, over-the-counter medications, including herbal supplements, should be obtained in detail. A detailed evaluation of symptoms, including fatigue, difficulty with ambulation, recent weight loss, should be obtained as a part of the geriatric evaluation. Always use the Charlson comorbidity index to assess the severity of comorbidities. Evaluating nutrition status, including self-care, feeding, good sleep, ability to take medications, maintain weight, is crucial and requires frequent evaluation. Further history should be obtained from family members if available.

A general examination should include vitals, skin, head, and neck for thyroid, oral cavity. Organ system-specific examination should include a respiratory, cardiovascular, genitourinary, musculoskeletal, neurologic, and mental status examination. A detailed vision and hearing assessment should also be performed in all older adults.

There are multiple tools to evaluate cognition and physical frailty in the elderly. Cognitive impairment in older adults has multiple causes, and the most common is Alzheimer dementia. The other reasons for cognitive impairment are metabolic, endocrine, medication side effects, delirium due to infections, and depression. Identifying the cause of cognitive decline can help treat the underlying cause, comorbid conditions, utilize community support services, and create advanced directives and long-term care planning. Identifying cognitive decline during the early stages can help inappropriate referral to behavioral health specialists who can provide tools to help manage and organize memory loss. Educating caregivers with appropriate information is an integral part of evaluating cognitive decline in older adults.

The United States preventative task force does not necessarily recommend for or against the cognitive screening impairment in older adults age 65 and above, but clinicians should be vigilant to identify early signs and symptoms of cognitive impairment. Dementia screening indicators can help geriatricians and primary care providers screen for cognitive impairment in office setup. Tools like AD8, Quick Dementia Rating System (QDRS), and Mini cog (three-word registration, clock drawing, and three-word recall) can be used for dementia screening followed by a detailed evaluation.

The most commonly used cognitive performance evaluation tests are Mini-Mental score evaluation, word-learning task, verbal search speed task, Addenbrooke's cognitive examination, Frontal assessment battery, digit span backward test, and word list recall test.

The health care provider should have a clear understanding of all medications and their indications. Any change in cognition and a decrease in baseline function should raise concern for new or adjusted medication.