Postoperative complications are associated with comorbidities, higher pre-operative BMI, and previous bariatric surgery.

Wound healing is the most common group of complications after a panniculectomy. This group of complications includes cellulitis, wound dehiscences, and tissue necrosis. The underlying pathophysiology is relative hypo-perfusion of the expanded abdominal tissue and flaps, as well as the overall poor blood supply of adipose tissue. Conservative management and wound care are usually the treatments of choice, but some patients require surgical intervention in the form of wound debridements or revision closures of dehiscent wounds, with tension-bearing sutures or closure devices occasionally required in severe dehiscences.

Seromas are the single most common complication of panniculectomy, especially after a larger dissection. Once a flap is created, the body tries to fill the empty space with fluid, which is why suction drains are placed during the procedure in an attempt to evacuate fluid build-up in an ongoing fashion and facilitate the apposition of the dissected layers. This is also related to the relative hypo-perfusion of adipose tissue, both with blood vessels and lymphatics; both are significantly disrupted in panniculectomy. The best preventative management is the preservation of the Scarpa fascia with minimal dissection.

Postoperatively, compression garments and activity reduction can reduce seroma occurrence in select patients, particularly those with smaller-volume panniculectomy and lower overall BMI.

Simple cellulitis is a skin infection that responds to antibiotics and close follow-up. Complicated cellulitis is refractory to appropriate medical treatment and may result in abscess formation that could require surgical drainage and washout of the operative wound. Infected seromas are pseudo-abscesses and require intravenous antibiotics and surgical drainage.

A hematoma is the accumulation of blood under the abdominal flap. Surgical drains placed during the operation do not prevent hematoma but allow the surgeon to track the amount and rate of postoperative bleeding to facilitate recognition of a hematoma early, hopefully, before the vascularity of the overlying flaps becomes compromised by an expanding blood collection. The drains may sufficiently evacuate a hematoma, particularly a low-volume and low-flow venous hematoma, and management in this situation is conservative. Surgical exploration is required to achieve hemostasis if the bleeding does not spontaneously stop, the hematoma is expanding, or the blood visualized in the drain is bright red.

Wound dehiscence is the premature separation of a wound which can occur at any level. Postoperatively, patients are instructed to remain bent at the waist 30 degrees in a semi-Fowler position for a week and thereafter to slowly return to the full upright position, often with the use of abdominal dressings or binders. The slow return to a standing position allows the wound to form scar tissue gradually, absorbing the mechanical loads of the over- and underlying tissues as the posture returns to upright, preventing the sutures from bearing the entire weight of the repair in an upright position, which can lead to failure and dehiscence.

Blood supply to the wound is essential for optimal wound healing. Vascular compromise can lead to tissue necrosis and wound breakdown. The relative hypo-vascularity of healthy abdominal adipose tissue layers has already been discussed, and this is compounded by surgical dissection into these hypovascular planes. Additional risk factors include extensive lateral dissection, excessive liposuction, thin flap, and extreme tension. Once skin necrosis occurs, local wound care is the treatment of choice to allow the wound to heal by secondary intention. After scar forms, discussion about scar revision is an option.