Researchers have not identified the mechanisms of action for glucosamine sulfate in vivo, despite being the focus of various studies. However, what does seem certain is that glucosamine sulfate shows notable bioavailability following oral administration and decreased clearance compared to alternative formulations of glucosamine supplements such as glucosamine hydrochloride.

The theorized mechanism of action of glucosamine, and thus, glucosamine sulfate, is largely based on in vitro studies analyzing its interaction with cell types found in the joint space. The proposed mechanism of action of glucosamine sulfate is thus two-fold. First, the theory is that glucosamine sulfate stimulates the synthesis of glycosaminoglycans and augments type II collagen expression in chondrocytes. Secondly, it is believed that glucosamine sulfate prevents glycosaminoglycan and collagen degradation by down-regulating the production of inflammatory cytokines via decreased prostaglandin E2 synthesis, inhibition of nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB), and decreased expression of catabolic enzymes such as metalloproteinases (MPs).

The mechanism of action of glucosamine sulfate is often discussed in reference to the derangements in joint pathophysiology seen in osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis characteristically manifests an imbalance between the synthesis of structural proteins of articular cartilage such as proteoglycans and collagen and their degradation by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).  In patients affected by this disease, chondrocytes can become activated to release pro-inflammatory cytokines due to environmental stress.