**Contraindications**

- Concurrent use of ACE inhibitors

- Previous reaction to olmesartan: Patients should not take olmesartan if they have previous hypersensitivity reactions to the medication in the past or any components of the formulation. While research is limited, allergic reactions to other angiotensin receptor blockers could exhibit cross-reactivity to olmesartan due to a similar mechanism of action and chemical composition.

- Pregnancy (especially second/third trimester)

- Severe renal impairment

- History of hypotension

- Hyperkalemia

- Use of aliskiren with diabetes: In the ALTITUDE clinical trial, patients with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease were randomized to aliskiren or placebo in addition to ACE inhibitors or ARBs. The trial was stopped due to higher cardiovascular events and a significantly elevated risk of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and renal dysfunction. Additionally, the use of olmesartan is contraindicated in patients with diabetes mellitus with concomitant aliskiren use(direct renin inhibitor) during pregnancy, renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia. Also, olmesartan is not to be used with aliskiren in patients with diabetes mellitus due to the risk of cardiovascular and renal events. The ALTITUDE study suggests that combining this medication with concomitant diabetes can result in severe adverse events, including stroke, hyperkalemia, and hypotension.

**US Boxed Warning**

- Olmesartan contraindications include pregnancy due to teratogenicity. Olmesartan is especially teratogenic during second and third trimesters as it can cause anuria and oligohydramnios, leading to limb defects, pulmonary hypoplasia, and craniofacial abnormalities. Under its prior pregnancy classification system, the FDA classified olmesartan as a pregnancy class C medication during the first semester and as Class D medication during the second and third trimester, respectively.

**Caution**

- Coadministration of mTOR inhibitors: Patients using mTOR inhibitors such as sirolimus and everolimus should be cautious with olmesartan.  Studies show an increased risk of angioedema when using these medications concomitantly.

- Renal stenosis (bilateral):  Olmesartan should be prescribed cautiously to patients with known renal artery stenosis, as studies have shown an increased risk of acute renal failure. Also, olmesartan is contraindicated in patients with renal impairment, especially with creatine clearance of less than 60 mL/min.

- Liver disease: Patients with a history of liver disease should be cautious when using olmesartan because of partial hepatic clearance. Liver function tests should be monitored in the weeks following initiation to ensure therapeutic values.

- Children below the age of one should not take olmesartan, as undeveloped kidneys can suffer damage from the medication.

- In patients with an activated renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system who are volume or salt depleted(e.g., patients treated with high doses of diuretics), symptomatic hypotension may be expected after initiation of treatment with olmesartan. Initiate treatment under close supervision. If there is significant hypotension, place the patient in the supine position, and the patient should be administered an intravenous infusion of normal saline.