In order to successfully perform a splenectomy, it is important to understand the anatomy of the spleen. The spleen is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. The spleen lies under the left posterolateral aspects of the 9th to 11th ribs. The spleen is surrounded by the stomach, pancreas, colon, and left kidney. The size and weight of the spleen can vary among individuals. On average, the length, width, and thickness of a spleen measure approximately 12 cm, 7 cm, and 3 cm. The average weight of a spleen is 150 grams. The spleen is attached by multiple ligaments, including the gastrosplenic ligament and splenorenal ligament.

The gastrosplenic ligament extends from the greater curvature of the stomach to the hilum of the spleen. This ligament contains the short gastric arteries and the left gastroepiploic artery. The splenorenal ligament extends from the anterior surface of the left kidney to the splenic hilum. This ligament contains splenic arteries.

The splenic artery, a branch of the celiac trunk, is the sole arterial supply to the spleen. The splenic artery courses along the upper border of the body and tail of the pancreas. The splenic artery then bifurcates to the short gastric and the left gastroepiploic artery, which supplies the stomach prior to entering the splenic hilum. The short gastric then supplies the gastric fundus, and the left gastroepiploic artery supplies the stomach along the greater curvature. The venous tributaries join to form the splenic vein at the splenic hilum; the splenic vein travels behind the pancreas and joins the superior mesenteric vein behind the neck of the pancreas to form the portal vein.

The lymphatics of the spleen drain into the hilum lymph nodes and into the retropancreatic lymph nodes.

Accessory spleens are quite common. Approximately 10-30% of individuals have accessory spleens. Most commonly, they are located at the splenic hilum.