Management of systemic lupus erythematosus includes lifestyle management and pharmacological therapy. It is important to address physical protection like broad-brimmed hats and sun-protective clothing, along with the proper use of sunscreen. Educating patients about their disease and avoiding potential triggers like minimizing sun exposure and strict sunscreen adherence with chemical and/or physical blocking agents is essential. The application of broad-spectrum sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 50 should be applied in sufficient amounts about 20 to 30 minutes before expected exposure.

Tobacco is phototoxic, enhances toll-like receptor 9 responsiveness, and IFN type 1 production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells and up-regulates expression of metalloproteinases 1 through 8.

For the pharmacological approach, the use of topical corticosteroids (CS) and calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus 0.1% and pimecrolimus 0.3%) are usually the first-line treatment. Intralesional CS could be used in localized areas. When a patient with SCLE does not respond appropriately to topical therapy and/or the cutaneous disease is widespread, the use of systemic therapy can be considered.

It is recommended that all patients be started on antimalarials (hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, or quinacrine) due to their photoprotective and anti-inflammatory properties. Dosage recommendations are as follows: hydroxychloroquine, 6.0 to 6.5 mg/kg of ideal body weight; chloroquine, 3.5 to 4 mg/kg of ideal body weight; quinacrine, 100 mg/day.

In patients not responding to the initial treatment, further immunosuppressive agents may be added. Immunosuppressants that have been used methotrexate, dapsone, mycophenolate (MMF), azathioprine, and thalidomide.

Methotrexate was introduced in 1965 and is considered a second line of therapy. A significant reduction in autoantibodies in patients with lupus compared with the control group was found with the use of methotrexate.

Third-line treatments include belimumab and dapsone. Belimumab is an IgG1 monoclonal antibody that binds to B lymphocyte stimulator, found to be efficacious in SCLE. Cutaneous symptoms are among the treatment areas in which belimumab, in addition to standard therapy in these patients, is most efficacious.

Furthermore, there have been case reports of using intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and rituximab. Rituximab is a chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody; it induces B-cell lysis through antibody-dependent cellular toxicity. It is the first choice for patients with severe autoimmune diseases, resistant to conventional treatment, including severe cases of subacute lupus.