A detailed clinical history regarding the onset and duration of current symptoms, underlying medical comorbidities, the severity of COVID-19, and medication history must be obtained by treating providers during the follow-up visit.

Hospitalization records of COVID-19 related admission, if applicable, must be reviewed thoroughly, including the pertinent diagnostic tests performed and duration of hospitalization.

Given post-acute COVID-19 syndrome is an evolving clinical entity, currently, there are no guidelines regarding its management. Nevertheless, until further guidance is available, this novel clinical entity should be considered a diagnosis of exclusion. All other complications associated with COVID-19 and other acute alternative diagnoses must be first ruled out with pertinent laboratory and radiologic assessment.

Multiple case reports have reported reactivation and relapse of SARS-CoV-2 in COVID-19 recovered patients. Hence, reinfection with SARS-CoV-2 needs to be ruled out.

Other postviral secondary bacterial and fungal infections or other viral illnesses also need to be ruled out.

Routine laboratory assessment with complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) that includes testing for renal, liver function, and a coagulation panel must be considered in all patients.

Other tests such as C-reactive protein(CRP), fibrinogen, D-dimer, troponin, and ferritin can also be considered if clinically indicated.

Repeat pulmonary imaging, preferably with a high-resolution CT scan (HRCT) or CT Angiogram, can be considered in patients presenting with predominantly respiratory symptoms.

Cardiac function tests such as EKG and echocardiography must also be considered to rule out an underlying cardiopulmonary disease process.

Neuroimaging that includes vascular (CT/MRI) and neuropsychological testing must be performed if clinically indicated in patients presenting with neuropsychiatric manifestations.