The clinical manifestations of lead toxicity vary depending on the dose and chronicity of exposure. In the US, hundreds of thousands of children have elevated blood lead concentrations, but the vast majority of them are asymptomatic, meaning they have no overt clinical or laboratory findings that would indicate toxicity aside from the lead concentration itself. The primary concern in this group is that multiple meta-analyses have demonstrated that, even at low blood lead concentrations, there is an inverse relationship between blood lead concentrations and intelligence quotient (IQ) scores and markers of academic achievement. Especially worrisome is the finding that the dose-response curve is steeper at lower blood lead concentrations, meaning that the number of IQ points lost per unit increase in blood lead concentration is higher in the 1 to 10mcg/dL lead range than in the 10 to 20mcg/dL range.

As the dose and duration of exposure increase children may develop nonspecific signs and symptoms often dismissed as typical toddlerhood maladies, such as irritability (tantrums), constipation and abdominal pain (often attributed to poor dietary choices or lack of fiber), and anorexia (often perceived as picky eating). Adults also demonstrate similar nonspecific signs and symptoms, and because of the likely longer duration of exposure, may additionally develop hypertension, associated cardiovascular disease, and adverse effects on fertility. As concentrations continue to increase in adults, many of them will go on to develop further evidence of toxicity such as peripheral neuropathy and arthritis secondary to saturnine gout.

Eventually, if lead exposure continues, patients develop much more dramatic features of severe plumbism. In children, acute lead encephalopathy characteristically presents as unusual behavior, developmental regression, ataxia, vomiting, seizures, and at times, cerebral edema and resultant increased intracranial pressure, coma, and death. Generally, this syndrome occurs in children with extremely elevated blood lead concentrations (above 70 to 100 mcg/dL). Adults with extremely high blood lead concentrations also demonstrate similar neurologic findings, including encephalopathy, confusion, headaches, seizures, and obtundation. Generally, such severe lead toxicity does not occur in adults from occupational exposures but rather from unusual exposures such as large ingestions of contaminated folk remedies or contaminated moonshine.