A thorough history aims to identify potential triggers and exacerbating factors and to exclude differential diagnoses. This should explore time course and clinical features of urticarial rash, associated angioedema, associated systemic and infective symptoms, personal or family history of allergies and autoimmune diseases, social and occupational history, induction by physical factors, recent newly administered medications, relationship to foods, and any exacerbating factors.

If the patient cannot recall the time course of wheals, drawing around an individual lesion with a skin marking pen is useful to document resolution within 24 hours. Where history is unrevealing, an external cause is highly unlikely to be identified for patients with CSU.

Routine diagnostic work-up for CSU is limited to blood tests for complete blood count and inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein and/or erythrocyte sedimentation rate), mostly to rule out other potential diseases. Eosinophilia may be associated with atopy and parasitic infection. Elevated inflammatory markers should prompt consideration of associated systemic disease. Further investigations without clinical suspicion, as guided by history, are unlikely to yield any additional diagnoses.

A number of tools have been developed to assess disease activity (e.g., urticaria activity score), disease control (e.g., urticaria control test), and impacts on quality of life (e.g., chronic urticaria quality of life index). Baseline assessments should be performed to help guide treatment decisions and monitor progress.