The clinical presentation of Crohn disease is immensely diverse and may include any or a combination of any of the following: abdominal pain, anorexia, weight loss, diarrhea, hematochezia, melena, malnutrition, fatigue, fevers, and bowel obstruction secondary to stricture formation. The cutaneous manifestations of Crohn disease may also aid in establishing the diagnosis of Crohn disease as their presence may antedate the formal inflammatory bowel disease diagnosis. Although Crohn disease is well known for its ability to affect any part of the GI tract, from the oral mucosa to the anus, most of the disease is non-contiguous and restricted to the ileum and colon.

Each of the respective categories of the cutaneous manifestations of Crohn disease and their manifestations will be discussed below:

Specific lesions:  lesions with histopathological findings consistent with Crohn disease on biopsy.

a) Cutaneous lesions that occur due to a direct extension of bowel disease to the skin and are typically seen in the perianal and orofacial areas. Clinically, on the exam, the lesions may be ulcers, fistulae, fissures, or even abscesses, and on biopsy, non-caseating granulomatous inflammation can be seen. Many do not actually consider these to truly be an "extra-intestinal" manifestation of Crohn disease.

- Perianal fissures/fistulae: Very common finding in up to 33% of patients with Crohn disease and is generally more indicative of colonic involvement. Some authors do not consider this to be a true extra-intestinal manifestation of Crohn disease due to its close location to the anus. Patients may develop acrochordons or "sentinel tags" in the perianal area as well.

b) Metastatic Crohn disease: Rare manifestation of cutaneous Crohn disease characterized by skin lesions with findings of Crohn disease on biopsy, but at sites distant and noncontiguous with the GI tract (must be separated from the GI tract by normal tissue).

- Generally, the lesions are plaques and/or nodules with a red to a purple hue that may even have an ulcerative component. They may also appear similar to those mentioned above in the category of direct extension of intestinal disease. The most common sites of involvement include the intertriginous area, extremities, face, and genitalia.

Reactive lesions: Inflammatory lesions that do not share the same histopathological findings but are believed to share similar pathogenesis with Crohn disease, perhaps due to impaired function of neutrophils or altered cellular immunity.

- Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG): Although pyoderma gangrenosum is more commonly associated with ulcerative colitis, it may still be seen in patients with Crohn disease as well. The presence of a pyoderma gangrenosum should prompt physicians to consider a diagnosis of IBD in these patients as well, as 20% to 50% of patients with PG have coexistent IBD. These lesions classically start as tender papulopustules with a surrounding erythematous to the violaceous rim. The area then starts to undergo necrosis, leading to an ulcerated area. Fully developed lesions are best described as an ulcer with a sterile, purulent base with an irregular, undermined, gun-metal border. The most common location in adults is in the lower extremities, but in children, they are more likely to occur on the head or in the anogenital region. Lesions of PG may be initiated or aggravated by seemingly minor trauma and may also exhibit pathergy. Lesions tend to heal with significant scarring. Diagnosis is generally made clinically as histopathological findings are non-specific.

- Sweet syndrome: Sweet syndrome, also known as acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, is a relatively uncommon disease entity. Although it does have an association with IBD, it is more commonly seen in association with upper respiratory infections due to Streptococcus, gastrointestinal Yersiniosis infections, hematological malignancies (AML), and solid tumors of the breast, colon, and GU tract. Female patients are more commonly affected than males, and children are rarely affected. The lesions typically start as tender, erythematous, edematous papules and plaques that favor the head, neck, and upper extremities. As with pyoderma gangrenosum, the lesions of Sweet's syndrome may also exhibit pathergy. Systemic findings, including fever, leukocytosis, arthralgias, myalgias, and ocular involvement (conjunctivitis, episcleritis), are commonly seen in Sweet's syndrome. Diagnosis is generally made clinically, and biopsy generally shows a nodular and perivascular neutrophilic infiltrate.

Associated lesions: likely arise due to shared HLA-gene types or secondary to a chronic inflammatory response. Interestingly, the presence and severity of the cutaneous manifestations listed below generally parallel intestinal disease activity.

- Erythema nodosum (EN): Erythema nodosum is a fairly common cutaneous finding associated with Crohn disease, with reports ranging from 6% to 15% of patients affected. The presence of EN is not exclusive to Crohn disease and has many other disease associations, including malignancies, pregnancy, use of oral contraceptive medications, autoimmune disease, and infections, such as streptococcus and tuberculosis. The typical clinical presentation includes a female patient with tender, erythematous nodules overlying the anterior tibia. A biopsy is seldom needed to make the diagnosis, but early lesions may reveal septal panniculitis if examined histologically. A biopsy may also prove beneficial to help rule out metastatic Crohn disease.

- Oral lesions: Oral lesions are also a common cutaneous finding associated with Crohn disease, with approximately 10% of patients experiencing either aphthous ulcerations, pyostomatitis vegetans, or periodontitis. The presentation of each of the previously mentioned manifestations differs, but all three are similar because they cause oral pain and discomfort. Patients with aphthous stomatitis develop painful, shallow ulcerations, with a fibrinous base and surrounding erythema on the buccal or labial mucosa. Pyostomatitis vegetans also affects the labial and buccal mucosa with friable mucosa scattered with erosions and ulcerations. Peridontitis is not specific to Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis, but the more severe disease has been noted in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. The biopsy is rarely required to diagnose any of those above.

Treatment-induced: A novel category of cutaneous findings that are most commonly associated with the treatment of Crohn disease with anti-TNF biologics. The cutaneous manifestations of anti-TNF treatment do not correlate with disease activity status.

- Anti-TNF-associated skin lesions: Anti-TNF-associated skin lesions were previously regarded as a rare occurrence but are becoming more prevalent with the popular use of anti-TNFs in numerous different disease entities, including rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. It has been estimated that 5% to 10% of patients with IBD treated with an anti-TNF will develop an anti-TNF induced skin lesion. Eczematous and psoriasiform skin changes are the most common findings.

The relative absence or presence of the above cutaneous extra-intestinal manifestations may help monitor the disease course of Crohn disease, particularly in patients displaying oral aphthous ulcerations or erythema nodosum, as they may clue to the physician to evaluate for active intestinal disease, even in relatively asymptomatic patients.