Neuroplasticity, the process of structural and functional changes to the brain after internal or external insult, is an encompassing term that includes multiple different processes. Synaptic plasticity, functional reorganization, and diaschisis demonstrate unique processes that the brain utilizes in response to damage and the restoration of function. As research continues exploring the functional connections in the brain and what influences those connections, we will be able to develop more targeted therapies to help the brain regain function more quickly and more completely.

Clinically, several treatment options can be used to help guide neuroplasticity in restoring function and treating unwanted symptoms. An example is mirror therapy, a technique used in phantom limb pain. In a basic premise, the patent uses a mirror to cover their amputation and focuses on watching their intact limb perform activities while imaging that both limbs are performing the same activity. This has been shown to have increased activation and functional connectivity in the frontoparietal network.

One of the most studied rehabilitation techniques is constraint-induced movement therapy (CIMT). Used in patients with a stroke, the premise is that by constraining the functional limb, the affected limb is engaged in repetitive task practice and behavioral shaping. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) technology, patients who engage in this therapy have been shown to have increased activity in their contralateral premotor and secondary somatosensory cortex in association with improved function.

While therapies can be used to help guide neuroplasticity, multiple medications can also be used to influence brain healing. These include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) like fluoxetine, serotonin and noradrenergic reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) like duloxetine, cholinergic agonists such as donepezil, glutaminergic partial antagonists like amantadine, and several others.

Maladaptive plasticity: While neuroplasticity can be beneficial (i.e., restoring function), it can also be harmful. Maladaptive plasticity is when a connection that is made in the brain produces aberrant or negative symptoms. This can be seen in the examples of use-dependent dystonia (writer’s cramp) and phantom limb pain.

Lastly, a great deal of research has been focused on influencing neuroplasticity through the modification of environmental factors. Music therapy has been shown to influence neuroplasticity positively. It has been shown to improve cognition and other executive functions.