**Treatment of the Primary Tumor**

Radical orchiectomy through the inguinal approach is the primary surgical standard treatment for testicular cancer with normal contralateral testes. It will allow exact histopathological diagnoses and T staging of the tumor. In stage I disease, it is the curative treatment in 75% of cases. Only an inguinal approach should be used for testicular surgery whenever there is a suspicion of possible cancer. This is because lymphatic drainage from the scrotum is different from the testis, and therefore, scrotal lymph channels should not be exposed to possible tumor cell contamination. Non-absorbable sutures with a longer tail are recommended for tying off the spermatic cord in suspected or confirmed cases of testicular cancer. This is to make it easier to find in the event that a retroperitoneal lymph node dissection might be needed at some point in the future.

The patient should be counseled for a possible biopsy of the contralateral testes when appropriate. This would include patients with risk factors for GCNIS, like a history of undescended testes or cryptorchidism.

Intra-testicular lesions require meticulous investigation, and the diagnosis should be made through both imaging modalities and histopathological techniques. Orchiectomy is overtreatment in cases of obvious benign disease and solitary testes. Low volume malignant lesions can often be managed by organ-sparing surgery.

**Active Surveillance**

Active surveillance implies delayed therapy for relapse after orchiectomy. Relapse occurs in 35% of patients, but cause-specific survival is 98%.

A combination of concurrent factors served as the impetus for this management strategy. The factors that can help select surveillance for stage I NSGCT are greater accuracy of clinical staging by CT and serological studies of tumor markers, correct identification of risk stratification criteria by AJCC, and confidence that chemotherapy can be given in cases of recurrences as salvage therapy. Most relapses are detected simultaneously by more than one modality, with an abdominal/pelvic CT scan being the predominant modality indicating disease recurrence. The use of tumor markers alone is not an adequate indicator of recurrent disease, which still requires periodic CT scans.

It is expected that patients who are candidates for active surveillance will have their tumor markers return to normal after surgery and be able to maintain frequent, typically monthly, office visits with routine tumor markers, chest x-rays, and abdominal CT scans. This routine is recommended every 3 to 4 months for the first year, then periodically over the next 4 years with gradually decreasing office visit frequency. Overall, 65% of patients will not demonstrate any recurrence, relapse, or metastasis over the subsequent 5 years. For those who do, surgery (retroperitoneal lymph node dissection) and/or chemotherapy offer a cure rate greater than 90%. Using CT scans at 3 months post-op and again at 12 months proved to be a reasonable and safe protocol in selected low-risk patients.

Supraclavicular or inguinal adenopathy presents as a palpable disease. Inguinal lymph node involvement usually happens only after a surgical scrotal violation. In patients who adopted active surveillance, the risk of developing testicular tumors in the contralateral testis is only 1 to 2%, but these malignancies should be considered separate primary tumors. The factors which should be considered in the initial recurrence of NSGCT are the site of recurrence, the recurrence detecting modality, and documented time of recurrence. The majority of NSGCT progression and recurrence are detected in the first year during surveillance.

**Neo-adjuvant Chemotherapy**

Non-seminomatous germ cell tumors are the most sensitive testicular cancers to cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Patients with elevated markers are typically given 3-4 cycles of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) chemotherapy. After completion of chemotherapy, tumor markers are repeated to see the decline in values, along with a contrast-enhanced CT scan to evaluate for any residual mass. If a mass is present with normal tumor markers, this is considered an indication for RPLND. In patients who developed pulmonary fibrosis or with a history of significant pre-existing pulmonary disease, bleomycin would be contraindicated. If the patient still has elevated markers, second-line chemotherapy, including vincristine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin (VIP), should be considered. Other second and third-line agents include gemcitabine, etoposide, paclitaxel, and oxaliplatin. Chemotherapy causes azoospermia in most patients for at least 2 to 3 years after treatment. Cisplatin and similar alkylating agents are the most injurious to spermatogenesis, with Sertoli cells being relatively sensitive but Leydig cells being relatively resistant. Sertoli cells are also very radiosensitive. Overall, fertility is reduced by an average of 30% after chemotherapy treatment for NSGCT.

Other potential side effects of chemotherapy include peripheral neuropathy, renal failure, myelosuppression, loss of hearing, increased cardiovascular disorders, and hypogonadism.

**Primary Retroperitoneal Lymphadenectomy**

Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) with adjuvant chemotherapy is the mainstay of managing low-stage non-seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT) in the United States. RPLND is a staging, diagnostic and therapeutic procedure for patients with NSGCT. One of the benefits of RPLND surgery is that it helps identify those patients who might benefit from postoperative chemotherapy. Also, men with NSGCT who do not undergo RPLND will require more intensive surveillance protocols even for stage I disease than similar patients who may only need routine tumor markers and chest x-rays after RPLND surgery, retroperitoneal relapse rate drops to <1%.

The retroperitoneal lymph nodes are the primary nodal sites involved in the spread of NSGCT. Removal of these draining lymph nodes results in a high cure rate for testicular tumors. The cure rate for stage I NSGCT is about 93-95% with RPLND alone. It is generally 3-4 hours of surgery with a mortality rate of less than 1%. It involves the dissection of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes with the resulting possibility of retrograde ejaculation, loss of fertility, and incontinence due to disruption of pelvic nerves during the dissection. It is still the gold standard for stage I NSGCT for staging and therapeutic purposes. RPLND may also be used for stage IIA, but for stage IIB and higher. Initial chemotherapy is the standard of care. In general, patients with residual lymph nodes 1 cm or larger after definitive chemotherapy are candidates for RPLND.

Modern modifications include a nerve-sparing approach to save the nerves supplying the bladder neck to preserve ejaculatory function and continence.

Complications of RPLND, even in experienced hands, are relatively common at 18% as the surgery is technically demanding and often complicated by patient comorbidities.

Relapses after RPLND are typically pulmonary, with a reported incidence of 10% for those with negative nodes and 28% for patients with positive nodal disease.

**Adjuvant Chemotherapy**

In clinical stage I of non-seminomatous germ cell tumors, the relapse rate is about 64%. Relapsed cases are generally considered high-risk for metastatic disease. In the United States, RPLND is offered to re-confirm the pathological stage as well as for curative treatment. However, in European countries, patients are usually offered adjuvant treatment consisting of two cycles of BEP, which is generally reserved for NSGCT with high-risk features, such as vascular invasion. After treatment, 95-97% of patients remain relapse-free, with a cure rate approaching 100%. Adjuvant chemotherapy with two cycles of BEP in the high-risk group can provide a long-term progression-free survival rate of 97%.

**Summary of Treatment Options by Stage:**

Clinical Stage I NSGCT would include those cases where serum markers are normal or return to normal after radical orchiectomy. CT scans are negative for lymphatic or organ spread of disease, and the CXR is also negative. This stage represents about 70% of all cases of NSGCT. However, it should be noted that about 30% of these patients will have undetectable micrometastases at the time of their orchiectomy. For most patients with stage I disease, radical orchiectomy alone is curative. For those that do relapse, curative treatment is likely with long-term disease-specific survival exceeding 99%.

Patients whose primary testicular tumors contain a significant proportion of teratoma may benefit the most from an RPLND. Active Surveillance is a reasonable and recommended choice for Clinical Stage IA NSGCT which is a primary tumor less than 3 cm in diameter that is confined to the testis. Initial treatment with RPLND is also reasonable and provides optimal staging information, and possibly cures early metastatic disease. However, this may represent overly aggressive surgical treatment for most stage IA patients, even though the overall cure rate with RPLND is about 90%. For Clinical Stage IB (initial tumor larger than 3 cm) or where there is a high-risk disease (such as a large percentage of embryonal carcinoma or evidence of vascular or lymphatic invasion in the primary tumor as these patients face a much higher risk of micrometastases and delayed retroperitoneal metastases), RPLND may be preferred. Tumors with both lymphovascular invasion and a predominance of embryonal carcinoma have relapse rates of over 50%.

Clinical Stage IIA NSGCT includes patients where the CT scan indicates enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes but smaller than 2 cm in diameter. In Stage IIB, the lymph nodes are between 2 cm and 5 cm in diameter. Treatment is usually with initial RPLND or primary chemotherapy. Patients who have a larger volume of disease tend to have higher relapse rates, and adjuvant chemotherapy should be considered. The American Urological Association Guidelines on Early Stage (Stage I - IIB) Testicular Cancer can be found at https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/testicular-cancer-guideline.

Clinical Stage IIC NSGCT (Bulky Metastatic Disease) is usually treated with primary chemotherapy as the initial recommended treatment. Initial RPLND has a very high relapse rate in such cases. RPLND can be done after chemotherapy for any remaining retroperitoneal lymphatic disease.

Clinical Stage III NSGCT (Metastatic Disease Above Diaphragm) patients are usually classified into low, intermediate, and high-risk groups with 5-year overall survival is 92%, 80%, and 48%, respectively. The risk stratification is based on their tumor marker levels, histology, size of metastatic deposits, presence of cervical lymph node enlargement, and the size as well as the number of pulmonary metastases. (Patients with persistently elevated levels of tumor markers after radical orchiectomy without any evidence of metastatic disease radiographically are also considered clinical stage III.)

**Surveillance After Definitive Therapy**

The median time to relapse in NSGCT patients is 7 months. The majority (90%) of NSGCT patients who develop a recurrence will experience it within the first 2 years after definitive therapy. Therefore, the recommended surveillance schedule is relatively intense for the first 2 years. For most patients, this means a physical examination of the remaining testicle, a chest x-ray, CT scan, and serum marker levels every 2 months. Late relapses after the first 2 years are relatively uncommon at only 2% to 4%. When present, such recurrences are typically found in the retroperitoneum.

A more liberal monitoring plan has been suggested for low-risk patients with clinical stage I disease who may be able to avoid most of the routine surveillance CT scans, just performing them at 3 and 12 months rather than the standard scan every 2 months.

Complete, detailed, and comprehensive reviews of the most recent recommended surveillance guidelines can be found on the NCCN website under "Guidelines for Testicular Cancer" or the American Urological Association Guidelines on Early Stage (Stage I - IIB) Testicular Cancer.

**Primary Extragonadal Mediastinal and Retroperitoneal Non-Seminomatous Germ Cell Tumors**

Extragonadal tumors are those where there is no evidence of a primary testicular malignancy. They are relatively rare. Their pathogenesis is not clearly understood, but there are two theories. 1) They develop from primordial germ cells that fail to normally migrate along the urogenital ridge due to a defect in the microenvironment or an abnormal germ cell. 2) They develop from germ cells in the testis but undergo reverse migration. There is current evidence supporting both theories.

For mediastinal tumors, the initial diagnosis is usually by chest X-ray or CT scan. Initial symptoms (in decreasing order of frequency) include chest pain, dyspnea, cough, weight loss, superior vena cava syndrome, fever, and nausea. Gynecomastia may be present if HCG is elevated. Most patients are symptomatic at presentation. A definitive diagnosis is made from an open or percutaneous biopsy. Patients with Klinefelter syndrome have an increased risk of mediastinal germ cell tumors. All patients should have tumor markers drawn and testicular ultrasound. Extragonadal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors will demonstrate elevated alpha-fetoprotein and/or HCG in 85% of cases. Typically, primary mediastinal NSGCTs are more likely to have an elevated AFP compared to similar tumors of the retroperitoneum or testicles.

Anterior mediastinal germ cell tumors are more likely to be primary cancers as metastatic germ cell testicular malignancies rarely metastasize to the anterior mediastinum. Any poorly differentiated cancer of the retroperitoneum or anterior mediastinum should be considered a possible germ cell tumor, especially if the AFP is elevated. Among extragonadal non-seminomatous germ cell malignancies, yolk sac tumors are quite common (60%), with choriocarcinoma also being seen relatively frequently (12%) while embryonal carcinoma is relatively rare (6%).

Treatment is based on the underlying pathology but is usually chemotherapy followed by surgery to remove any residual tumor. Overall prognosis is guarded, with 5-year survival at only 40 to 45%.

Primary retroperitoneal tumors are typically quite bulky at the time of diagnosis. They are initially diagnosed based on symptoms or noted on imaging. Initial therapy is usually cisplatin-based chemotherapy such as BEP, the same as for testicular NSGCT. Residual masses after chemotherapy should be surgically removed when feasible. Prognosis: Typically, patients can expect a 5-year progression-free survival rate of 42% and an overall survival rate of 65%.