- Complete blood count to rule out anemia as a possible cause of patients' symptoms. Besides, anemia is associated with higher HF severity, and intravenous iron replacement is important to improve functional status and quality of life if ferritin is under 100 ng/ml or 100 to 300 ng/ml if transferrin saturation is below 20%.

- Serum electrolytes (including calcium and magnesium levels) and kidney functions (blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine): serum creatinine and blood urea are prognostic factors in hospitalized patients with HF, and hyponatremia plays a prognostic factor role in chronic patients with HF. Besides, some HF medications can cause electrolyte abnormalities and kidney dysfunction (like spironolactone, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi), and furosemide).

- Measurement of B-type Natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) is helpful to support the clinical diagnosis of HF in the ambulatory setting and to support the diagnosis of acutely decompensated HF in hospitalized/ER patients.

- Other laboratory workups include glucose, fasting lipid profile, liver function tests, and thyroid-stimulating hormone.

- EKG is necessary for all patients with suspected HF, and it helps rule out HF if completely normal, with a sensitivity of 89% but low specificity.

- Chest X-ray is also useful and may show pleural effusions secondary to volume overload, cardiomegaly, and Kerley B-lines (interstitial edema).

- Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) is the most useful test that helps establish the diagnosis of HF and classify it as HFrEF, HFmrEF, or HFpEF. Abnormal parameters in HFrEF that can be measured by echocardiogram include increased end-diastolic diameter and volume (LV diameter over 60 mm or 32 mm/m with LV volume exceeding 97 mL/m) and end-systolic diameter and volume (LV diameter greater than 45 mm or 25 mm/m with LV volume over 43 mL/m).

- Genetic testing: some CMP can be genetic, especially DCM, HCM, and autosomal dominant ARVD/C, and screening the family members may be important in family-based management.

- Computed tomography (CT) scanning or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMR): neither are routinely indicated in the diagnosis and management of HF, and the role of imaging modalities other than TTE was restricted in the 2106 ESC guidelines. Cardiac CT can help to evaluate the coronary arteries in patients with HF with low to intermediate pretest probability of CAD. They provide information about cardiac function and have a high anatomical resolution of all aspects of the heart and surrounding structures (ventricular mass, chamber size, heart valves, and pericardium and wall motion).

- Left heart catheterization or coronary angiography is indicated in patients with HF and angina symptoms or ischemic changes by ECG or noninvasive testing. Indications also include worsening HF symptoms without a clear cause, when the pretest probability of underlying ICMP is high, before cardiac transplantation or LVAD, and in post-infarction mechanical complications like a ventricular aneurysm. It may be useful in patients with HF without angina but with LV dysfunction. In patients without CAD, CAD should be considered as a potential etiology of HF and impaired LV function and should be excluded whenever possible. It is only necessary if patients are potentially eligible for revascularization.

- Stress nuclear imaging or echocardiography may be an acceptable option for assessing ischemia in patients presenting with HF who have known CAD and no angina unless they are ineligible for revascularization.

**Diagnosis**

The diagnosis of HF is based on clinical signs and symptoms, laboratory workup, and echocardiogram. The Framingham clinical criteria help to diagnose (with low specificity) HF.

Measurement of natriuretic peptides (NPs) like BNP/NT-proBNP is also helpful in supporting the diagnosis in ambulatory and inpatient settings. BNP has 70% sensitivity and 99% specificity for HF diagnosis, and NT-proBNP has 99% sensitivity and 85% specificity.

**Screening**

The cost-effectiveness of routine periodic population screening for asymptomatic reduced LVEF is not a current recommendation. Screening for hemochromatosis or HIV is reasonable in selected patients with HF (Class IIa, LOE: C).