Alendronate is FDA-approved for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis, steroid-induced osteoporosis, male osteoporosis, and Paget disease of the bone. Alendronate is an option for maintaining or increasing bone mass, although risedronate is the preferred agent in men with osteoporosis.

Alendronate is not FDA-approved for use in Crohn-induced osteoporosis. Studies have evaluated the optimal treatment of Crohn-induced osteoporosis with evidence indicating the use of pamidronate infusions to avoid upper gastrointestinal (GI) adverse effects associated with oral alendronate. However, current evidence supports bisphosphonates as first-line therapy, administered orally or parenterally.

Alendronate is not FDA-approved for use in osteopenia secondary to cystic fibrosis of the lung. A multicenter, randomized controlled trial with 56 participants conducted in Canada indicated alendronate therapy was well tolerated and improved bone mineral density over 12 months compared to placebo.

Alendronate is not FDA-approved for use in fibrous dysplasia of the bone. Current data endorses the use of pamidronate in decreased bone remodeling measured through decreased serum alkaline phosphatase and urinary hydroxyproline, but no current studies support alendronate use.

Alendronate is not FDA-approved for use in growth hormone deficiency. A randomized controlled trial in osteoporotic adult-onset growth hormone deficiency demonstrated that adding alendronate therapy for 12 months provided no significant difference in bone turnover, bone mineral density, or prevalence of vertebral fractures. However, participants maintained by using recombinant growth hormone in addition to alendronate indicated a significant decrease in bone turnover and an increase in bone mineral density of the lumbar spine. Further study is necessary to validate these results.

Alendronate is not FDA-approved to treat hypercalcemia of malignancy. Previously, bisphosphonates were the mainstay of treatment, but intravenous calcitonin has demonstrated superior efficacy.

Clinicians frequently employ alendronate in the treatment of male hypogonadism-induced osteoporosis. A randomized controlled study of 22 osteoporotic men with long-standing hypogonadism demonstrated that femoral neck bone mineral density increased with long-term alendronate administration and testosterone replacement.

Rarely, alendronate is used off-label in pediatric populations with bone necrosis, hypervitaminosis D, and secondary amenorrhea. Due to the unknown teratogenic effect and the long half-life of bisphosphonates, there is not sufficient evidence to support bisphosphonate therapy in pediatric populations.

Wang L. et al. conducted an in vitro study on human SW1353 chondrocytes exposed to alendronate for 12 hours and observed the expression of extracellular matrix-related genes Col2α1, COL9α2, and Acan.