The perineum receives its blood supply primarily from the internal pudendal artery, which is a terminal branch of the anterior division of the internal iliac artery It runs along the lateral pelvic wall anterior to the pyriformis and sacral plexus. It exits the pelvic cavity via the greater sciatic foramen and courses around the ischial spine lateral to the nerves and traverses through the Alcock's canal (pudendal canal) along the lateral wall of the ischiorectal fossa before entering the perineum, via the lesser sciatic foramen.

The branches of the internal pudendal artery supplying the contents of the superficial perineal space include the perineal artery and the terminal branches of the internal pudendal arteries.

The perineal artery originates from the internal pudendal artery in the distal part of the pudendal canal and supplies the muscles of the superficial perineal pouch. It also gives rise to the posterior labial artery that supplies the skin of the labia majora and labia minora in females and the posterior scrotal artery which supplies the skin of scrotum in males. The deep artery of the penis or clitoris originates from the internal pudendal artery in the deep perineal space, passes through the perineal membrane, and runs between the corpus cavernosa of the penis/clitoris and supplies these structures. The artery of the bulb of the penis, a branch of the internal pudendal artery supplies the bulbourethral glands and then passes through the perineal membrane to supply the corpus spongiosum of the penis. In females, the artery to the bulb of the vestibule supplies the vestibular bulbs and the related areas of the vagina. The terminal branch of the internal pudendal artery: the dorsal artery of the penis/clitoris, runs between the perineal membrane and pubic symphysis and supplies the corpus spongiosum and the glans of the penis in males and the glans and prepuce of the clitoris in females.

The venous drainage to the superficial perineal space is derived from the internal pudendal vein that is formed from the venae comitantes of the internal pudendal vein that unite to drain as a single vessel into the internal iliac vein.

The lymphatics from the skin over the external genitalia drain into the superficial inguinal lymph nodes and the glans, corpus spongiosum, and the corpora cavernosa drain to the deep inguinal lymph nodes and external iliac lymph nodes.