Many patients with neuropathy have mild to moderate numbness symptoms yet still retain protective sensations in their feet. They may only need reassurance and education as to the cause of the numbness. Periodic follow-up is essential. With improved glycemic control, paresthesias and dysesthesias may diminish within one year. After peripheral arterial disease and radiculopathy are ruled out, painful symptoms that disturb sleep or activities of daily living can be treated with pregabalin, gabapentin, or anti-depressants.

Depleting substance P with topical capsaicin cream may help some patients who can tolerate the initially increased burning.

Diabetic gastroparesis may be managed with erythromycin and metoclopramide. Tegaserod is a newer agent but is only available on an emergency basis because of serious adverse cardiac effects.

Some patients may benefit from the use of vitamins, especially zinc.

Erectile dysfunction is managed with phosphodiesterase inhibitors, but not everyone has a response. A penile prosthesis may be of benefit.

Orthostatic hypotension may be managed by increased salt and fluid intake and compression stockings. If that fails, steroids may be required. Glycopyrrolate is used to manage sweating but often does not work.

- All infected diabetic foot ulcers need debridement or amputation

- Gastroparesis may be managed by a jejeunostomy tube, especially in patients losing weight.

- A pancreas transplant is an option and has been shown to stabilize autonomic function.

- Physical therapy is a must for all patients with PN, especially those with muscle pain and weakness. Also, occupational therapy may be necessary when there is a functional loss. Speech therapy is needed to help patients with dysphagia and the risk of aspiration.