- Ocular shedding of SARS-CoV-2 via tears is a distinct possibility of which ophthalmologists should be aware.

- Conjunctivitis or tearing can be the first presentation and even sole manifestation in a patient with the COVID-19 infection.

- Several ocular manifestations of COVID-19 have been observed, including retinovascular disease, uveitis, optic neuropathies, and orbital fungal co-infections.

- SARS-CoV-2 may trigger or exacerbate inflammatory/demyelinating disease.

- Patients may present with chemosis in advanced cases (Fig 2) or follicular conjunctivitis (Fig 3).

- The ocular examination should be performed while wearing gloves and using extension instruments (cotton swabs, etc.) to avoid direct contact with secretions.

- As many patients who visit the ophthalmic clinic are elderly, many with comorbidities, it is important to screen the need for the visit ahead of time and only see patients who need urgent care. We continue to practice telemedicine for many of these patients.

- As advocated in many countries, social distancing means being 6 feet away from others: this is clearly impossible in the clinical world and certainly in the small confines of ophthalmic examination lanes. One way to practice it is to have only one person in the room with the patient.

- Anecdotally, it has been observed that physicians most at risk of becoming infected include ophthalmologists, otolaryngologists, and anesthesiologists because of the proximity of the examiners to mucosal surfaces.

- When performing surgery under general anesthesia, it has been recommended that surgeons and other staff do not enter the room for 15 minutes after intubation or extubation. This standard is applied to all general anesthesia cases in many facilities, whether the patient is COVID-19 positive or negative.