The patient is evaluated by the vascular surgeon/ interventional cardiologist to determine eligibility and determine the most appropriate procedure (plain angioplasty, stent placement, and type of stent, atherectomy). Usually, this does not require anesthesia and, therefore, does not require pre-procedure evaluation by an anesthesiologist unless the patient has a high Mallampati score. When involved, an anesthesiologist evaluates the patient for the determination of the risk of the procedure and assessment to optimize medication and medical conditions.

It is important to evaluate patient allergies (to iodinated contrast) and medication compliance. It is important to evaluate renal function in these patients as these procedures require a significant amount of contrast material for appropriate visualization throughout the procedure. Preoperatively, any nephrotoxic medications are held, including NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, loop diuretics, and metformin.

Anticoagulants (warfarin, rivaroxaban, apixaban) are also withheld before surgery, and the patient is premedicated with aspirin alone or in combination with ticagrelor/ prasugrel/clopidogrel. The patient is made NPO for 8-12hr before the procedure. A few hours before the procedure, the patient is evaluated for hemodynamic stability and monitored continuously throughout the procedure. The procedure area is prepared by shaving the target area, antiseptic application, and drapes are placed around the target access site.

Angioplasty is performed under moderate to deep sedation for most adult patients, but pediatric patients may require general anesthesia.