**Work Up**

Fitness for surgery is assessed in all patients during the pre-operative assessment clinic; this includes a clear, in-depth past medical history and basic investigations such as full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, group and save, and electrocardiogram (ECG). Additional tests (spirometry, transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), and cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)) may also be performed where indicated to investigate cardiovascular and respiratory fitness in high-risk patients.

Patients should be warned about the possible risks in the surgical clinic, most notably sexual dysfunction, parastomal herniation, and chronic pelvic pain. Normally, a stoma nurse will also meet the patient pre-operatively to discuss the practicalities of stoma care and mark them for a suitable stoma site, considering the patient's body morphology, lifestyle and preferences.

In patients undergoing elective surgery, many studies have been conducted around the use of mechanical bowel preparation and antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent surgical site infection. Current guidance recommends using mechanical bowel preparation before surgery and a single administration of intravenous prophylactic antibiotics.

**Preparing the Patient in Theatre**

- The colostomy site is marked by the surgeon if not already done so pre-operatively. The ideal position is in the left iliac fossa, avoiding scar tissue, abdominal folds, and bony prominences.

- Parenteral prophylactic antibiotics are given just before the operation.

- Once under general anesthesia, the patient is typically placed in the modified lithotomy position using stirrups. The sacrum is cushioned to avoid a pressure point while the coccyx is positioned at the end of the operating table. A urethral catheter is inserted to decompress the bladder and monitor urine output during the procedure.

- A digital rectal examination is performed to determine the position of the tumor relative to the anal verge.