Infection with H. pylori represents the common cause of chronic gastritis. Most patients may present to the general practitioner, mid-level practitioner, pharmacist, or emergency department because of complications. Because of the difficulty in diagnosis and varied presentation of gastritis, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team. The key is to cure the patient of the disorder.

Successful eradication therapy should heal chronic non-atrophic gastritis and prevent patients from complications. Clinicians should provide the public and patients with information about the transmission of infection via the fecal-oral route, the importance of handwashing habits, and hygiene practices to prevent infection with H. pylori. However, it is not known how to help the general population maintain handwashing habits and hygiene practices in the long run.

The presentation and symptoms of gastritis are poorly defined in terms of the clinical picture. Therefore the definite diagnosis is only based on a histological examination of the gastric mucosa. Since that is an invasive procedure, the diagnosis is often estimated and suspected but not confirmed. Healthcare workers, including doctors, nurses, and pharmacists, need to be aware of this fact when suspecting the disease and be aware of the diagnosis, sequelae, and complications. The pharmacist should assist the team by educating the patient on the importance of medication compliance if a cure is to be achieved.

Patients with autoimmune gastritis need regular surveillance for early cancer detection since the risk of gastric neuroendocrine tumors and gastric carcinoma increases. The risk of gastric cancer is also high in patients whose H. pylori is not eradicated. Thus, regular endoscopy is required in high-risk patients.

Finally, the nurse and pharmacist should assist the team by educating the patient on the avoidance of alcohol and the discontinuation of smoking and informing the clinicians of any failure in therapy or changes in patient status.

Gastritis diagnosis and treatment require an interprofessional team approach, including clinicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]