Since the original description of the deep plane rhytidectomy, several modifications have been made by various authors to further improve rejuvenation of the midface, jawline, and neck.

Incisions are as outlined above.

A subcutaneous flap is elevated uniformly slightly anterior to the marked deep plane entry point using a combination of sharp dissection (facelift scissors or scalpel), a multi-prong retractor, direct counter-tension, and backlighting of the flap. The postauricular skin is then dissected in a similar subcutaneous fashion and connected to the anterior facial dissection with care not to injury the great auricular nerve overlying the sternocleidomastoid muscle.

The deep plane is then entered by incising the SMAS sharply from just above the angle of the mandible to the lateral orbital rim.

The composite skin/SMAS flap is then carefully elevated off the parotid–masseteric fascia. There is a natural glide plane between the SMAS and the parotid-masseteric fascia. The masseteric ligaments, located at the anterior border of the masseter are released, and dissection is carried anteriorly towards the oral commissure until the surgeon identifies the facial artery.

The elevation of the deep plane is then focused superiorly by developing a pocket superficial to the lateral orbicularis oculi. This dissection is carried medially into the premaxillary space and nasofacial crease, where the composite flap transitions from skin/SMAS to skin/malar fat pad. The superficial aspect of the zygomatic major muscle is clearly identified during this step.

Sharp release of the zygomatic ligaments (now isolated between the superior and inferior deep plane pockets) is performed with care to stay superficial to the zygomatic muscle to protect the facial nerve branches innervating the muscle from below.

Dissection continues inferiorly along the zygomatic muscles to the nasolabial fold where the surgeon performs the release of the maxillary ligament, completing the midface release.

If excessive jowling exists due to buccal fat pseudo-herniation, this may be addressed at this time. With an assistant applying pressure to the buccal fat pad transorally, a small incision is made sharply in the overlying fascia. A conservative amount of buccal fat is then teased out and excised using bipolar cauterization with care to avoid injury to the buccal branches of the facial nerve which run around this buccal fat pad.

The SMAS flap is then suspended, working inferiorly to superiorly, with several half-mattress sutures (4-0 nylon or 3-0 polypropylene) placed along the cuff of SMAS at the deep plane entry point and anchored to the parotid and deep temporal fascia in a vertically oblique vector of about 60 degrees.

After resuspension of the SMAS, the redundant skin is meticulously excised and suspended in a similar vector as the deep-plane flap to allow a tension-free skin closure. A combination of deep (4-0 Vicryl) and superficial (5-0 nylon) suture are options for closure with attention to preserving the continuity of the hairline by avoiding stepoffs during closure, everting the skin edges, excising bunched skin, and recreating a natural pre-auricular area hollow and tragus by thinning the skin prior to redraping the tragus and debulking the SMAS anterior to the tragal cartilage. A pixie ear deformity is avoided by ensuring a tension free closure inferior to the lobule.

Before final skin closure, a small drain is inserted through a stab incision posterior to the occipital hairline and placed under bulb suction.

Antibiotic ointment applied to the incision line, and placement of a compressive facelift dressing, complete the procedure.