**Xenon imaging**

Xenon, Xe-133 gas can serve as a contrast agent in nuclear medicine and modern laser technology. It is a beta emitter with a physical half-life of 5.2 days, a photopeak of 81 keV, and beta-decay.

**Xenon Anesthesia**

**Pharmacokinetics**

Xenon is absorbed by the pulmonary alveoli. The percentage of xenon flow into the brain correlates with the concentration available in the inspired air and with the patient's ventilation. Since the blood-gas solubility coefficient of xenon is the lowest of all inhaled anesthetics (xenon 0.115; other inhalation anesthetics 0.115-1.14), induction of anesthesia is very rapid. The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) is a measurement of anesthetic potency corresponding to the concentration of the inhaled anesthetic in the alveoli that is needed to prevent motor response in 50% of subjects in response to surgical painful stimuli. For xenon, the MAC is very high as it is approximately 63% in adults (previously indicated as 71%)

The saturation concentration at the effector site (brain) is reached in a few minutes whereas the washout phase at the end of anesthesia is very fast. As a consequence, during emergence from general anesthesia, eye-opening, orientation, and reaction on-demand account for about 4 minutes.

Xenon is an inert gas, so no metabolism occurs under normal conditions and it does not interfere with renal or hepatic systems. Therefore, it is eliminated unchanged from the lungs. Regarding the elimination half-life, due to the reduced solubility coefficient of xenon, the elimination of the anesthetic begins already during its administration.

**Pharmacodynamics**

The glutamatergic presynaptic responses are the major target of anesthesia-induced neuronal responses. In particular, xenon decreases glutamate (Glu) N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated whole-cell currents through noncompetitive inhibition. Probably, xenon binds to the glycine binding site on the NMDA receptor reducing the glutamate affinity.

Interestingly, the commonly used anesthetic agents work by enhancing the inhibitory transmission via the GABAA receptors and have no or nonessential effects on the glutamatergic NMDA-mediated activity. This aspect explains the greater neuroprotective effect of xenon and a potential reduced impact on memory and learning processes during anesthesia.

The glutamatergic effect of xenon, due to the inhibition of NMDA receptors in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, is responsible for analgesia that is about one and a half times higher than that of nitrous oxide.