Respiration is a biomechanical wonder that requires normal motion of fascia, diaphragm, ribs, and other thoracic cavity structures to function optimally. Somatic dysfunction may negatively affect respiration, especially if other disease processes are present such as musculoskeletal disorders, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), pneumonia, and asthma. HVLA, which is a type of OMT technique, can be utilized by a proficient healthcare provider when somatic dysfunction is present. In a pilot study by Zanotti et al., OMT was shown to improve exercise capacity in patients with severe COPD compared to soft manipulation.

One major weakness of both of these studies was that the number of patients receiving HVLA was not reported in their publication. Furthermore, in the study by Noll et al., a thorough description of how they performed HVLA was not reported, unlike seven of the other techniques that they used.

All doctors of osteopathic medicine and doctors of chiropractic receive training in performing OMT. Doctors of chiropractic commonly use HVLA.

An osteopathic physician is a graduate of an osteopathic medical school. A survey done in the United States by Teng et al. found that third and fourth-year medical students that had additional OMT clinical exposure increased their comfort level with the underlying topic of musculoskeletal disorders and their comfort level with OMT.

Musculoskeletal pain remains a major reason patients present to emergency departments and primary care settings in both developed and developing countries.