Divers who present with acute decompression sickness should be treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy by established protocols, for example, the United States Navy's treatment tables found in the U.S. Navy Diving Manual, available for download.

Divers who have suffered from unexplained severe sudden-onset neurological decompression sickness, inner ear decompression sickness, and/or cutis marmorata and are subsequently found to have a patent foramen ovale should be cautioned against returning to diving. More than one such decompression sickness incident increases the gravity of this recommendation. However, clearance to dive is based partly on the judgment of the trained, experienced practitioner. Some of these divers may safely return to diving provided they exercise caution, which can mean diving with nitrox using air tables or using the "air" setting on a dive computer, avoiding decompression diving, and not diving to the limits of their computer's tables or decompression algorithms

Divers with patent foramen ovale may inquire about percutaneous closure. This is an individual decision that should be made in consultation with a cardiologist and a physician trained in diving medicine. PFO closure is not without risk, and this risk must be balanced against the individual risk of decompression sickness when evaluating divers with PFO. Mas et al. (2017) reported a major device and procedural complication rate of 5.9% using eleven different devices (N=238)

Torti et al. (2004) reported an incidence of serious DCS of 5 per 10,000 dives (0.05%) in divers with PFO (N=63) without PFO was 1.3% (N=36)

PFO closure should not be routinely considered in divers with asymptomatic patent foramen ovale who have not suffered from decompression sickness. These divers should instead be counseled to dive conservatively, as outlined above

A diver who has undergone patent foramen ovale closure may return to diving after he or she is cleared for full activity by the cardiologist and a physician trained and experienced in the examination of divers. Post-closure echocardiography should show "adequate reduction or abolition" of the patent foramen ovale, and the diver should be off all anticoagulants other than aspirin