**Rejection**

Considered to be the largest lymphoid organ, the small bowel creates a substantial lifelong challenge for managing both acute and chronic allograft rejection. The introduction of novel immunosuppression agents in the 1990s catapulted MVT into a viable armamentarium for patients. Graft survival did not significantly change after the introduction of cyclosporin A compared to the improvements seen in other solid organ transplants. It was not until the introduction of tacrolimus in the 1990s that patient outcomes and rejection rates improved.

Histologic confirmation of rejection is considered the gold standard for diagnosis. The tissue is obtained through endoscopic transtomal biopsies taken from multiple areas of the graft, with increased suspicion of rejection in ileal segments due to the increased amount of Peyer’s patches. Depending on the surgical approach, biopsies of the transplanted abdominal wall flap can provide a less invasive approach for the diagnosis of rejection. The development of laboratory screening has also played a role in the early recognition of rejection. Low levels of serum citrulline and high fecal calprotectin are emerging as reliable noninvasive measures of allograft rejection.

**Graft versus Host Disease (GVHD)**

Graft versus host disease occurs when donor cells recognize the host cells as foreign antigens and begin to mount a donor mediated immune response against the recipient tissue.  Along with the significant concerns of rejection in intestinal transplant, the amount of lymphoid tissue also creates concern for the allograft assaulting the recipient. Thankfully, the incidence is relatively low (approximately 6%), but GVHD carries significant mortality, as high as 70%.

**Posttransplant Lymphoproliferative Disorder (PTLD)**

PTLD is a well-documented complication for many solid organ transplantations and should be briefly mentioned in this review of complications. While not classified as a single disease, but more of a syndromic presentation that involves potentially neoplastic lymphocytic proliferation that can create a difficult and deadly presentation for post-transplant care. The growths are common with B lymphocyte origin that is typically related to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Treatment includes reduction of immunosuppression and antiviral therapy; but, this comes with the risk of graft failure secondary to rejection. The median time for development for one institution was 25.3 months, and all patients were able to recover clinically. There has been some data to suggest that the transplantation of the spleen could increase the incidence of PTLD.

**Infections**

Opportunistic infections, from bacterial to viral, are well-established as a necessary risk in all solid organ transplantations. Subjecting the body to immunosuppression medication opens the body up to life-threatening in otherwise unremarkable infections in immunocompetent individuals. Some institutions make every effort to preserve the native spleen to prevent acquired asplenic opportunistic infections (from encapsulated bacteria) and attempt to reduce the incidence of asplenic sepsis. In the setting of MVT, cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a clinically significant pathogen due to CMV’s higher tropism in gastrointestinal cells and the increased amount of potential cellular hosts (due to the increased lymphoid cells in the small bowel). In one study, up to 94% of MVT patients developed infections post-transplant.

**Surgical Complications**

Post-surgical complications vary depending on the organs transplanted but tend to occur in the early posttransplant period. These can include anastomotic leaks, arterial and venous graft thrombosis, and bleeding. Some are managed non-operatively, but the most feared complication is arterial thrombus creating an emergent relaparotomy. Unfortunately, the graft is often unable to be salvaged in this setting, and retransplantation may be required. Signs of arterial graft thrombosis are like that of acute mesenteric ischemia. In a single institution of 500 transplants, the arterial thrombosis incidence was 3.8%