The mechanism of action of this combination is from the accumulation of the components' effects; each component has a different mechanism of action.

**Caffeine**

Caffeine has anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anticholinesterase, and anti-TLR-4 properties. Studies on rats showed that these properties play an essential role in sleep deprivation-induced inflammatory response and anxious behavior.

Caffeine is a methylxanthine that antagonizes adenosine receptors (e.g., A1, A2A, A2B, and A3) non-selectively. These receptors appear in high concentrations in the nucleus accumbens, which modulates the behavioral activation and effort-based-decision making. This effect may modulate the work effort in those who are not intrinsically motivated, although there are individual differences in the energizing effects of caffeine. A clinical study showed that antagonizing the adenosine receptor (A2A) can reverse the behavioral effect of dopamine (D2) antagonist (haloperidol). Another clinical study showed mild, partial reversal effects on the D1 antagonist. These findings can have implications for treating psychiatric symptoms (psychomotor slowing and fatigue) that are observable in depressed patients.

Continued caffeine consumption does not lead to consistent changes in the functional availability of cerebral adenosine receptor A1.

Caffeine reduces the cerebral blood flow in the brain but with an increase in brain entropy, which reflects the information processing capacity, especially in the lateral prefrontal cortex. It also increases the oxygen extraction fraction as compensation for reducing cerebral blood flow, and no significant changes occur in the whole brain's cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen or electrical brain activity. Researchers noticed variations in the change of cerebral blood flow between the regions of the brain. The decrease in cerebral blood flow was smaller in the posterior cingulate cortex and superior temporal region, whereas it was more significant in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and medial frontal cortex. One may conclude that caffeine's effect on vasculature may be region-specific and can result from the spatial distribution of the adenosine receptors. Another study showed that caffeine might stimulate ketone production as an alternative fuel for the brain during decreased concentrations of glucose (aging or Alzheimer disease), but the ketogenic effect or the effect on medium-chain triglycerides are still unknown. Caffeine can affect the quality of sleep and increase performance in sleep deprivation. EEG showed that it reduces slow-wave sleep and slow-wave activities, increasing stage-1 wakefulness and arousals.

Caffeine down-regulates the calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and phosphorylated and total CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein). This association plays a vital role in learning and memory. A clinical study on mice showed that caffeine reduces amyloid-beta concentrations in the brain, which accumulate during Alzheimer disease.

Caffeine metabolism is affected by many factors (age, gender, hormones, liver disease, obesity, smoking, and diet). CYP1A2 isoform of cytochrome P450 mainly metabolizes it. Polymorphism at the level of this isoform explains the variability of pharmacokinetics among individuals. Research has located several loci involved in caffeine consumption, and they have consequences for sleep, anxiety, and neurodegenerative/psychiatric disorders.

Caffeine as therapy can be taken intravenously (IV) or orally.

**Acetaminophen**

Acetaminophen inhibits central and may weakly inhibit peripheral cyclooxygenase (COX), strongly inhibits prostacyclin synthesis, and increases nitric oxide (NO) synthesis. However, NO synthesis is not affected at pharmacologically relevant concentrations. There is experimental evidence that acetaminophen inhibits cyclooxygenase-3 in the CNS, accounting for its analgesic and antipyretic effects while explaining its lack of anti-inflammatory effects in the periphery.

A study showed that caffeine induces faster absorption and prolonged half-life of acetaminophen, and this effect is profound in hepatic patients.

At the genetic level, acetaminophen increases the expression of the gene GRIN2C, which encodes the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2C subunit.

**Aspirin**

Aspirin is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that irreversibly inhibits cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 and COX-2, thus suppressing prostaglandin E2. It stimulates the regulatory braking signals such as lipoxin, resulting in decreased concentrations of:

- C-reactive protein

- Tumor necrosis factor-alpha

- IL-6

However, the concentrations of regulatory cytokines (IL-4 and IL-10) will not decrease; TGF-beta is a possible target for acetylsalicylic acid.

Chronic, high-dose aspirin intake inhibited the terminal differentiation of dendritic cells. This inhibition is observable by the suppressed levels of CD83 and the secreted p40 unit of IL-12, which are markers of mature dendritic cells.

Analgesic effects of aspirin were found in primary and secondary somatosensory cortices and anterior parts of the anterior cingulate cortex, whereas the antihyperalgesic effects mainly appeared in the primary somatosensory area, parietal association cortices, and anterior portions of the anterior cingulate cortex. Aspirin showed an attenuation of glutamate, which may play a role in its neuroprotective effect.

Aspirin's protective effects on tumors and inflammation may be demonstrated by inhibiting mTOR, which leads to an inhibitory effect on tumor angiogenesis. Also, it is biotransformed into salicylic acid, which binds to human high mobility group box1 (HMGB1), which is an inflammatory molecule.