The glomerular capillaries are lined by fenestrated endothelium, which sits on the glomerular basement membrane, covered by glomerular epithelium, or podocytes, which envelop the capillaries with the capillaries' cellular extensions called foot processes. These processes interdigitate with special cell-cell junctions called the slit diaphragm, which together form the glomerular filter. Normally, larger proteins (greater than 69 kD) are excluded from filtration. The destruction of podocytes above a critical mass also leads to irreversible glomerular damage.

In a healthy person, the loss of plasma albumin through the glomerular filtration barrier is less than 0.1%.

**Pathogenesis of Edema**

The following are the two hypotheses for the occurrence of edema in nephrotic syndrome:

**Underfill Hypothesis**

Increased glomerular permeability causes albuminuria, eventually leading to hypoalbuminemia. Consequently, hypoalbuminemia results in a decline in plasma colloid osmotic pressure, in turn causing increased transcapillary filtration of water in the body. Subsequently, this process leads to the development of edema. Capillary hydrostatic pressure and oncotic pressure control the fluid movement from the vascular compartment into the interstitium. Protein content mainly determines the oncotic pressure. For edema to occur, the amount of fluid filtered should exceed the maximal lymphatic flow, which happens secondary to a low enough intravascular oncotic pressure and a high enough capillary hydrostatic pressure. In nephrotic syndrome, this results in reduced plasma volume, with a secondary rise in sodium and water retention via the kidneys.

**Overfill Hypothesis**

An alternative hypothesis states that an intrinsic defect in the renal tubules leads to a decline in sodium excretion. This might occur if the intraluminal protein directly causes renal epithelial sodium reabsorption.

- Sodium retention occurs even before the serum albumin level starts to fall

- Intravascular volume is normal or even raised in many patients with nephrotic syndrome

- There is an exaggerated peripheral capillary permeability to albumin, as reported in the radioisotopic technique in studies of 60 patients with nephrotic syndrome.