Bowel preparation can be divided into 3 categories: isosmotic, hypoosmotic, and hyperosmotic agents.

Isosmotic agents include high-volume polyethylene glycol (PEG) preparations, low-volume PEG preparations, and sulfate-free PEG-electrolyte solutions (ELS).

- High-volume PEG preparations are osmotically balanced with nonfermentable electrolyte solutions to help prevent fluid and electrolyte shifts. PEG is an inert polymer of ethylene oxide that is designed to pass through the bowel without absorption. High volume PEG preparations consist of 4 L of solution and can be taken either as a single dose or split dose preparation. There is growing evidence that split-dose regimens are superior in bowel preparation.

- Low-volume PEG preparations were designed to have the same efficacy as high-volume preparations but in a more tolerable amount. The only FDA-approved. low-volume PEG preparation is low -volume, 2-L, PEG-ELS with ascorbic acid.

- Sulfate-free PEG-ELS was created to improve the smell and taste of PEG-ELS.

Hyposmotic agents include a low-volume PEG preparation called PEG-3350 (PEG-SD) that requires an additional electrolyte solution (sports drink) and is often combined with bisacodyl.

Hyperosmotic agents include magnesium citrate, oral sodium sulfate, and sodium phosphate.

- Magnesium citrate is a magnesium-containing, osmotically-acting saline solution that also stimulates the release of cholecystokinin, leading to intraluminal fluid and electrolyte shift in the small intestine and possibly the colon. It is not typically recommended as a bowel preparation due to potential magnesium toxicity leading to bradycardia, hypotension, nausea, and drowsiness. Moreover, magnesium is secreted via the kidneys and should be avoided in those patients with kidney disease.

- Oral sodium sulfate has not been associated with significant fluid, or electrolyte shifts thought to be due to the sulfate, a poorly absorbed anion.

- Sodium phosphate is no longer recommended as a bowel preparation regimen due to its serious side effects. Those with renal dysfunction, dehydration, hypercalcemia, or hypertension treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker have had developed phosphate nephropathy.

There are also combination agents such as sodium picosulfate/magnesium citrate and sodium sulfate/sulfate-free PEG-ELS that have been used for bowel preparation.

- Sodium picosulfate/magnesium citrate acts dually as a stimulant laxative to increase the force and frequency of peristalsis by sodium picosulfate and as an osmotic laxative to retain fluid in the colon by the magnesium citrate component.

- Sodium sulfate and sulfate-free PEG-ELS combination typically consist of oral sodium sulfate and 2 L of sulfate-free PEG-ELS.

The Boston Bowel Preparation Scale (BBPS) was developed to assess bowel preparation after all cleaning maneuvers. Each segment of the colon, the right colon, transverse colon, and left colon are assigned points from 0 to 3 with regards to the cleanliness of the colon.