The axial shortening of the eyeball or decreased converging potential of the cornea or crystalline lens due to flattening are common responsible factors for simple hyperopia. Congenital or acquired absence of the crystalline lens resulting in loss of converging capacity leads to the pathological hyperopia. Senile changes in cortical lens fibers lead to change in the refractive index causing index hyperopia. Paralysis of accommodation (by cycloplegic drugs) and loss of accommodation due to complete third nerve palsy or internal ophthalmoplegia cause functional hyperopia.

Accommodation is a dynamic factor in controlling the state of refraction, specifically in hyperopia. Depending on the accommodation, manifest hyperopia may subdivide into:

- Absolute hyperopia, which can not be overcome by accommodative effort

- When a patient can not see 20/20 without glasses, absolute hyperopia is denoted by the weakest plus lens with which the patient can see 20/20.

- Facultative hyperopia which can be overcome by accommodation

The manifest hyperopia is the sum of absolute and facultative hyperopia. Clinically, it is measured by the strongest plus (or convex) lens with which the patient can still maintain the maximum vision (20/20).

Latent hyperopia is due to the inherent ciliary muscle tone. Usually, the magnitude of latent hyperopia is 1D, but it is higher at an early age and gradually decreases as age progresses. Cycloplegic agents like atropine unmask this condition. This latent hyperopia causes asthenopic symptoms without dimness of distant vision. Cycloplegia is a must to elicit the amount of latent hyperopia in children.

- Total hyperopia = Latent hyperopia + manifest hyperopia

- Manifest hyperopia = Absolute hyperopia + facultative hyperopia