Treatment for hearing loss depends on the type of hearing loss present, the underlying cause and often there is an element of patient/parent preference.

Conductive hearing loss due to otitis media is treated with antibiotics. Some children may benefit from a myringotomy tube. Sensorineural loss cannot be treated with medical measures. Mild cases may be treated with amplifcation aids and speech therapy is useful. However, amplifcation of sound can result in ear pain and discomfort.

**Conservative management**

A key element to managing hearing loss in family support and advice. There are a number of behavioral measures that can be used to improve hearing without the need for adjuncts or surgical intervention. The principles of this are rooted in creating a deaf-friendly environment such as limiting background noise, talking face-on, and clear intonation. There are also a range of hearing assist devices that can be used such as television listeners. It is also crucial that the child educational support which could be in the form of special equipment or positioning in the classroom.

**Hearing Aids**

There are a variety of hearing aid types that are used in specific situations. Each type will be briefly covered here.

Binaural air conduction hearing aids rely on at least a partially functioning inner ear and central auditory processing system. They work by converting sound detected by a microphone into digital signals which can then be amplified and re-converted into audible sounds that are transmitted to the ear. They can be classified based on whether these key parts are housed in an earpiece that sits externally (behind-the-ear), inside the canal (in-the-canal) or further inside the canal (in-the-ear).

Bone conduction hearing aids are used typically in a conductive hearing loss when there are ear problems that impede the use of a regular air conduction hearing aid such in children with external ear deformities (anotia, microtia) or when there are chronic ear infections. Bone-anchored hearing aids (BAHA) are fitted surgically under general anesthetic over two stages. A titanium implant is fixed into the temporal bone. Through this setup, a sound is conducted directly to the inner ear by way of the bone, bypassing the middle ear. Typically the BAHA is fitting from 4 years of age once the temporal bone has developed, however, soft-band bone conducting aids can be used from several weeks of age.

Contralateral routing of sound (CROS) hearing aids are used when there is a unilateral sensorineural hearing loss. The sound in the problem ear is diverted to the better hearing ear without amplification. In cases where neither ear has normal hearing but one side is significantly better, a variation on this can be used called a BiCROS.

**Cochlear Implant**

Cochlear implants work by converting sound into digital signals that are transmitted directly to the auditory nerve via an electrode array. In the UK, the National Institue of Clinical Excellence (NICE) recommends cochlear implants in children who have severe to profound deafness in one or two ears with minimal benefit from conventional hearing aids after 3 months of use.

**Other options**

Ventilation tubes are indicated in conductive hearing loss secondary to flue ear, or less frequently in the context of recurrent otitis media. They are inserted surgically and typically self-extrude on average a year of insertion. Children found to have cholesteatoma invariably require surgical clearance of disease via a mastoidectomy.