Migraine treatment is warranted in children if the headaches prevent the child from going through daily activities like going to school, playing, etc.

Since migraine is prevalent in children and impacts the cause of their disability, effective treatment is likely to result in improved outcomes. Previous studies suggested that a biopsychosocial approach that applies interdisciplinary multimodal care is most effective for treating pediatric migraines. Key elements are as follows: (1) effective and timely acute pharmacological interventions (such as NSAIDs and/or triptans), (2) education of patients regarding self-management techniques, and (3) psychological interventions such as biofeedback, relaxation, and cognitive-behavioral therapy.

The treatment regimen can be both non-pharmacologic and pharmacologic. Non-pharmacologic measures include sleep hygiene patterns, diet, managing stress, exercise, and avoiding triggers. On the other hand, Pharmacologic treatment includes beta-blockers, calcium channel antagonists, serotonin antagonists, antidepressants, and antiepileptics.

Amitriptyline manifested a suitable effect on controlling headaches as well as adverse side effects. At the same time, nutraceuticals are found to be promising as effective drugs with fewer side effects. Coenzyme Q10 was observed to have promising therapeutic effects, especially in long-term use, with fewer side effects; however, amitriptyline presented a more rapid response.

Moreover, observational studies, randomized controlled trials, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses showed the efficacy and safety of single-compound nutraceuticals for managing migraine in children. The following nutraceuticals were reviewed: vitamin D, riboflavin, coenzyme Q10, magnesium, butterbur, and polyunsaturated fatty acids. However, due to low-quality evidence and limited studies, there were no definite conclusions on the efficacy of nutraceuticals for treating pediatric migraine.

Prophylaxis should be considered when migraine symptoms cause frequent school absenteeism, poor quality of life, recurring emergency room visits, and frequent analgesic use. Since the majority of the patients can be treated with lifestyle changes and acute attack prophylaxis, a study was conducted to compare the efficacy and side effects of drugs used in migraine prophylaxis, such as propranolol, topiramate, flunarizine, and cyproheptadine. There was a significant improvement in all drug groups, but topiramate was found to be the most effective drug in reducing the frequency of attacks. All four drugs in this study may be utilized for migraine prophylaxis in terms of effectiveness and safety, with palpitations as the most common side effect.

Triptans plus non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reinforce triptan's effectiveness. lmotriptan and rizatriptan are effective as oral formulations. Meanwhile, sumatriptan and zolmitriptan are effective as both oral and nasal spray formulations. There are suggestions for considering dopamine receptor antagonists in cases of severe migraines.

On the other hand, another study revealed that sumatriptan and zolmitriptan nasal spray are above placebo in the two efficacy outcomes, but almotriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan with naproxen sodium, ibuprofen, and ibuprofen suspension were on top of placebo only in one of the efficacy outcomes. In addition, the findings showed that the best treatments for achieving pain-free effects are ibuprofen suspension, ibuprofen, and rizatriptan. In conclusion, most triptans and NSAIDs are effective in terms of pain-free or pain-relief. The most effective for pain-free is sumatriptan with naproxen sodium, while for pain relief, the most effective are ibuprofen and ibuprofen suspension.

Topiramate (TPM) decreases the frequency of headaches, and studies revealed that topiramate is effective and safe for migraine prophylaxis among children. The following are observed after TPM treatment: reduction in headache frequency, severity, and duration.

Prophylactic vitamin B12 therapy is used on migraine patients in adults, but limited studies were done regarding vitamin B12 and folic acid levels in pediatric patients diagnosed with migraine. Data showed a statistically significant difference between migraine patients and the control group regarding vitamin B12 and folic acid levels. The results indicated the requirement for routine evaluation of vitamin B12 and folic acid levels in pediatric patients diagnosed with migraine.

**Strategies for Migraine Management**

- Counsel patients about the possible trigger factors and subsequent avoidance. Maintaining a headache diary may help identify such triggers.

- Relaxation and biofeedback techniques with counseling about diet and proper sleep

- Analgesics for intermittent headaches

- Antinausea agents such as promethazine and metoclopramide

- Prophylaxis with a daily preventive medication

**Recommended Abortive Treatment**

Abortive treatment may be required for children with migraine headache attacks. In a study conducted in Israel, about 87.5% of children, during the first recorded migraine attack, reported intake of only one type of medication for each headache episode, particularly ibuprofen or acetaminophen, and less than 25% used dipyrone (metamizole). After 2 hours of treatment, the rate of improvement was 65.4% ± 27 for ibuprofen, 59.8 ± 35.3 for acetaminophen, and 50.9 ± 27.4 for dipyrone without statistical difference. It was also noted that male children responded significantly better to acetaminophen than ibuprofen (95% ± 28 vs. 75 ± 20). Although the most common abortive treatment is ibuprofen, the one that showed a better response was acetaminophen.

Studies compared the efficacy of oral paracetamol and oral ibuprofen for managing acute headaches in children with migraines without aura in India. There was no significant difference between the Paracetamol and Ibuprofen groups. This means that both paracetamol and ibuprofen are effective and safe for treating acute migraine attacks in children.

At the same time, ibuprofen and paracetamol are included in the World Health Organization Essential Medicines List (WHO EML) as the two analgesics for treating acute migraine attacks in children. Meta-analysis and assessments of evidence indicated that ibuprofen was superior to placebo for pain-free at 2 hours or pain relief at 2 hours, without difference in adverse events. At the same time, there were no differences between ibuprofen and paracetamol.

For mild headaches - acetaminophen with a dosage of 15 mg/kg every 4 to 6 hours; ibuprofen 10 mg/kg every 6 to 8 hours; naproxen 15 mg/kg every 4 to 6 hours.

For moderate to severe headaches, adding a triptan may be necessary. Rizatriptan and sumatriptan, along with a combination of analgesics, have been FDA-approved for use in children. Based on clinical studies, sumatriptan is an effective and well-tolerated treatment when administered intravenously, subcutaneously, or orally. Sumatriptan also relieves photophobia, nausea, headache, and functional disability.

The protocol involves a non-opioid analgesic and dopamine receptor antagonist for emergency department treatment. Meanwhile, treatment with valproic acid is used as a continuous infusion. Administration of ketamine or propofol and peripheral nerve blocks could accelerate the treatment of pediatric migraine. Although there is an increasing variety of abortive treatments for pediatric migraine, there Is still a need for further research to validate these approaches.

A study compared pediatric migraine treatment efficacy in the emergency department before and after the implementation of a comprehensive migraine initiative in terms of the following: (1) standardized treatment protocol, (2) provider educational series, and (3) standardized physician documentation template. Results showed improvement in the efficacy and efficiency of migraine through a standardized treatment protocol, improved provider education, and ease of documentation.

**Recommended Preventive Treatment**

Preventive treatment is needed during frequent migraine attacks, an impairment of the quality of life, severe accompanying or aura symptoms, and the failure of acute drug treatment. Below is a list of recommended pharmacological classes: (a) antidepressants, (b) antiepileptics, (c) antihistamines, (d) beta-adrenergic receptor blockers, and (e) calcium ion channel antagonists, as well as onabotulinum toxin A and nutraceuticals (butterbur).

If preventive medications are chosen, propranolol or nadolol (beta-blockers) can be given daily. Caution is advised in patients where beta-blockers are contraindicated, such as asthmatics, etc. Other medications that have proven useful include amitriptyline or nortriptyline, verapamil, antiepileptic agents (divalproex, topiramate, levetiracetam, and as used more in the past, phenobarbital and phenytoin), trazodone, and naproxen sodium.

Studies are conducted to update evidence-based recommendations for migraine prevention using pharmacologic treatment with or without cognitive behavioral therapy in the pediatric population using the American Academy of Neurology 2011 process, as amended. Children with migraine receiving propranolol have at least a 50% reduction in headache frequency. Children receiving topiramate and cinnarizine have a decrease in headache frequency. Children with migraine receiving amitriptyline with cognitive behavioral therapy have a reduction in headache frequency. Other recommendations include counseling on lifestyle and behavioral factors that influence headache frequency and assessment and management of comorbidities related to persistent headaches.

Another study found that serum magnesium levels were significantly low among children with migraine compared to those without migraine. Therefore, natural remedies such as magnesium, CoQ-10, ginkgolide B butterbur, riboflavin, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and oral melatonin have also proven efficient and have a lower side effect profile.

Since most preventive migraine treatments modify the brain's excitation/inhibition balance and/or serotonin metabolism, they most likely produce unfavorable side effects. Biological therapies blocking CGRP transmission are effective and better tolerated; however, they are expensive and may not influence brain dysfunctions upstream in the pathophysiological cascade of migraine, including premonitory and aura symptoms. On the other hand, biochemical and clinical studies mentioned a complementary treatment strategy that focuses on the metabolic facet of migraine pathophysiology. Findings revealed that riboflavin and coenzyme Q10 are effective for migraine prevention and quasi-devoid of adverse effects. Their response rates are similar to those of topiramate, propranolol, and CGRP/CGRPrec mAbs but are weaker for thioctic acid. Therefore, metabolic treatments of migraine demonstrated an effective, well-tolerated, inexpensive, and evidence-supported therapeutic option for migraine prophylaxis and may be used as the first treatment line among children.

Moreover, another study evaluated the efficacy of riboflavin treatment among pediatric patients. Findings revealed that children treated with riboflavin had reduced frequency of headaches, acute medication usage, and absences in school. Riboflavin prophylaxis also demonstrated a reduction in migraine intensity and duration. Therefore, riboflavin is recommended as a safe, inexpensive, and effective nutraceutical in pediatric migraine treatment.

Recent findings on Phytomedicines, or plant-based medicinal formulations, appear promising in identifying therapeutic targets in migraine as clinical and preclinical evidence of efficacy increases. Studied reviewed the mechanisms of action of the phytomedicines potentially useful for migraine, namely treatment-feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium), butterbur (Petasites hybridus), marijuana (Cannabis spp.), Saint John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) and the Damask rose (Rosa × Damascena). Findings for feverfew are mixed; butterbur is effective with potential risks of hepatotoxicity related to preparation; marijuana has limited data and mostly did not show effectivity in migraine treatment; Saint John's Wort shows relevant physiological activity but is a hepatic enzyme inducer; the Damask rose when used in topical preparations did not show efficacy in one clinical trial.

Several studies showed that melatonin is effective for adult migraine prevention and has been used acutely for procedural pain in children. For acute treatment of pediatric migraine, both low and high doses of melatonin are involved with pain reduction; however, higher doses and napping after treatment predicted greater benefit.

Natural remedies such as ginkgolide B butterbur, riboflavin, magnesium, CoQ-10, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and oral melatonin have also proven efficient and have a lower side effect profile.

For status migrainosus, consider intravenous or intramuscular administration of a drug like a valproate sodium (10 to 15 mg/kg), metoclopramide (5 to 10 mg), or prochlorperazine (2.5 to 5 mg).

Previous studies mentioned that the majority of pediatric migraine patients are successfully discharged, and findings revealed that prochlorperazine appeared to be superior to metoclopramide in preventing a revisit. Diphenhydramineuse is associated with increased rates of return.

A study assessed the efficacy and safety of a common monotherapy (intravenous [IV] metoclopramide) versus a combination strategy (adding IV ketorolac to metoclopramide) in children with acute treatment of migraine headaches in the emergency department. Findings revealed that the combination of IV metoclopramide and ketorolac failed to improve pain scores compared to metoclopramide monotherapy. Most of the patients were discharged with residual pain. The study also recommended counseling in terms of the following: (1) reassurance of prognosis to the parents; (2) trigger avoidance; (3) importance of lifestyle modification like proper sleep and water intake; and (4) importance of using analgesics at the early onset of headache.

However, some studies characterize the dystonic reactions to metoclopramide and prochlorperazine in children. It was revealed that dystonic reactions are rare among pediatric patients treated for acute headaches, but they are more common with prochlorperazine than metoclopramide.

Other studies mentioned that migraine is a response to a cerebral energy deficiency or oxidative stress levels that exceed antioxidant capacity. The ketogenic diet (KD), which causes the elevation of ketone bodies (KBs), targets cerebral metabolism that has recently shown great potential in preventing migraines. Ketone bodies are an alternative fuel source for the brain and are thus likely able to bypass some of the abnormalities in glucose metabolism and transport found in migraine. Recent findings revealed that KBs-D-β-hydroxybutyrate could potentially influence other pathways believed to be part of migraine pathophysiologies, such as mitochondrial functioning, oxidative stress, cerebral excitability, inflammation, and the gut microbiome. However, further studies are suggested to check whether the absence/restriction of dietary carbohydrates, the presence of KBs, or both, are significant for the migraine protective effects of KD.

Recent studies have been conducted to review the following treatment use in children, namely angiotensin antagonists such as candesartan, more selective 5-HT1F agonist like lasmiditan, new calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antibodies and antagonists, peripheral nerve blocks and botulinum toxin and electroceuticals which are therapeutic electric devices such as external trigeminal nerve stimulator (e-TNS), a non-invasive vagal nerve stimulator (nVNS), a single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulator (sTMS) and a remote electrical neuromodulation device (REN). However, there is still a lack of evidence for their effectiveness in children.

Counseling- Additional aspects of counseling include the following: (1) reassurance to the parents about the prognosis; (2) avoidance of triggers (3) the importance of lifestyle adjustments such as proper sleep and water intake, and (4) the importance of using analgesics early in the headache.

Addressing these issues may reduce the frequency and severity of headaches. Inadequate sleep might be due to obstructive sleep apnea, among other possibilities.