Accessory muscles of the posterior leg compartment may be present in patients and lead to potential sequelae. Reported accessory muscles have included an additional muscular tissue connecting the lower flexor hallucis longus and the tibialis posterior muscle. There are cases where this muscle crosses the posterior tibial artery and may be a source of entrapment. Additional accessory muscles have been said to originate in the interosseous membrane, near the tibia,  and insert into connective tissue surrounding the posterior tibial vessels. These situations also serve as a potential source of compression for the vasculature.

Aside from anatomical compressions of neurovascular bundles, injury may also take place iatrogenically. For example, fibular graft harvests, tibial osteotomies, and fasciotomy are all procedures in which there is an increased risk of tibial nerve injury. Knowledge of the branching points of the tibial nerve into the specific muscles of the posterior leg is essential to avoid such injuries and subsequent motor loss.

Focal myositis is a rare inflammatory pseudotumor that may present in the posterior leg compartment. Diagnosis is difficult as clinicians may often misinterpret the tumor for other neoplastic processes and inflammatory myopathies. However specific histopathological changes that should be noted include B cell and dendritic plasmacytoid cell lesions, without any viral or molecular infectious source. Additionally, the presence of IgG4 and fibrosis has also been associated with focal myositis.

Physiologically, the pressure of surface veins in the leg decreases when a person is ambulatory.

Restless leg syndrome is characterized by spontaneous, nocturnal leg movements and has a prevalence of about 2-9% in elderly patients.

Leg cramps are characterized by involuntarily, episodic, skeletal muscle contractions of the calf muscles, associated with pain, and typically occurring at night.