Renal mass management varies depending on multiple factors, including patient and size, shape, and renal tumor pathology. Different interventions include close monitoring, biopsy, surgical resection, and thermal ablation. The decision to choose one over another depends on balancing the risks and benefits. As with many other interventions, it is essential to take the age, comorbidities, risk factors, and ESRD status of a patient into consideration. For example, it is beneficial to offer patients a short life expectancy of either surveillance or ablation, depending on tumor characteristics. They are more likely to succumb to their comorbidities or surgery than from the complications of the tumor.

A renal biopsy is indicated when the renal mass characteristic is unrevealing. Significant non-diagnostic results (15%) after a renal biopsy require patients to undergo additional biopsies.

Thermal ablation is indicated in patients who are not surgical candidates. It is most useful for tumor size less than 3cm. Ablations are less invasive than surgery; however, it increases the risk of recurrence of cancer, the need for close and active surveillance, and the potential for further treatment. Percutaneous Biopsy is recommended for post-procedural surveillance.

Surgery is the most definitive intervention for malignant renal masses. The two most common approaches are partial and radical nephrectomy. Partial nephrectomy is preferred as it preserves kidney function compared to radical nephrectomy, especially in patients with CKD stage 3 or worse.

Active surveillance is indicated in many situations, especially in small masses with benign characteristics. When a tumor is less than 1cm with a gradual growth rate, further imaging and biopsy are not beneficial due to minimal malignant transformation risks. These patients should be offered active surveillance instead. Surveillance should also be offered to patients who are not surgical candidates. An elderly patient with a short life expectancy with a less than 4 cm tumor size is a suitable candidate for active surveillance. Although there is no unified guideline for the frequency of active surveillance, consensus indicates that renal ultrasound, CT, or MRI can be used for monitoring renal mass every 3 to 6 months for the first year. It can be spaced out depending on the renal pathology and progression.