The umbilical cord, together with the placenta, contributes to the flow and regulation of fetal circulation. The two umbilical arteries arise from the internal iliac arteries of the fetus and enter the umbilical cord before further branching at the level of the placenta. At the placental level, each umbilical artery bifurcates into smaller arterioles that continue to branch further to distribute blood to the chorionic villi. The capillaries of the villi fuse to form venules that converge to form the umbilical vein. The umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood and nutrients from the mother to the fetus.

As fetal growth ensues, both placental intervillous circulation and umbilical circulation develop gradually, until maturation is complete at the end of the first trimester. At midgestation, the percentage of umbilical blood in fetal circulation is about 30% of the fetal cardiac output. During the last trimester of pregnancy, umbilical blood flow declines significantly as it becomes inversely proportional to the fetal weight measured in kilograms. That percentage decreases considerably during the last trimester till it reaches less than 20%. The umbilical vein enters the abdominal region of the fetus. It carries the oxygenated blood with nutrients to the fetal liver parenchyma and ductus venosus. Then, blood flows to the inferior vena cava and foramen ovale of the fetal heart.

On the other hand, the role and distribution of lymphatic drainage for the placenta, as well as the umbilical cord, has been scarcely discussed in scientific resources. However, recent research has shown D2-40 expression at the level of placental stromal has a vital role in the fetal lymphatic drainage. This expression links to podoplanin-expressing cells whose function is related to forming a lymphatic-like reticular network. The thinking is that those cells are responsible for providing lymphatic drainage for the umbilical cord and the placenta.