Hydrops fetalis carries a poor prognosis if fetuses develop pulmonary hypoplasia, have underlying heart diseases, or are diagnosed before 24 weeks of gestation. Termination of pregnancy is considered if hydrops is diagnosed in early gestation with no treatable cause. NIHF is associated with an overall perinatal mortality rate of 50 to 98 percent.

Prognosis depends upon the etiology, the gestational age at onset, the gestational age at delivery, and whether pleural effusions are present. In general, the earlier hydrops occurs, the poorer the prognosis. In particular, pleural effusions and polyhydramnios before 20 weeks of gestation are poor prognostic signs because of increased risks of pulmonary hypoplasia and preterm prelabour rupture of membranes/preterm delivery, respectively. On the other hand, the absence of aneuploidy and major structural abnormalities confer a better prognosis.

Recurrence in future pregnancies is uncommon unless it is associated with Rh incompatibility or chromosomal abnormalities. Repeated antenatal care with ultrasound surveillance is required every 1 to 2 weeks if the hydrops is resolving, and the mother is frequently evaluated for the signs of mirror syndrome. Patients treated for immune hydrops are delivered at 37 weeks of gestation or when the fetus's lung maturity is confirmed. There is no substantial evidence that a cesarean section has a superior outcome. Delivery is performed in a tertiary center with neonatal intensive care in the presence of an experienced neonatal team. Immediate resuscitation is done, and proper postnatal care is needed for newborn babies.