In 1753, Carlo Curzio first described a case of scleroderma, which was later thought to be scleroedema. The word "Scleroderma" was first used in 1836 to describe skin changes in an adult by Fantonetti, a Milanese physician.The principles and practice of medicine by Osler. Thibierge-Weissenbach syndrome was described in 1910, which was later described as CRST syndrome in 1964 by Winterbauer.

Scleroderma is a rare connective tissue disorder with unknown and complex pathogenesis. Scleroderma can be divided into two forms, localized Scleroderma (morphea, linear scleroderma, and scleroderma en coup de sabre), or Systemic sclerosis, which can further be classified as either limited systemic sclerosis (formerly known as the CREST syndrome comprising of calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia) or diffuse systemic sclerosis based on clinical and serological criteria.

Localized scleroderma is a disease of the skin and subcutaneous tissue, leading to patches of thickened skin which on biopsy reveals dermal fibrosis similar to the histopathological changes seen in the thickened skin in Systemic Sclerosis. However, Localized Scleroderma is not associated with Raynaud phenomenon, digital ischemic events, or internal organ involvement. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) may be present in up to 50% of cases of localized scleroderma; however, the more specific autoantibodies such as anti-centromere, anti-SCL70, and anti-RNA polymerase III are absent.

On the other hand, systemic sclerosis is associated with several systemic manifestations and internal organ involvement and is associated with increased mortality. The classification of systemic sclerosis is based on skin involvement.