**Complications**

**Adverse Reactions**

All medications have the potential for an adverse reaction, and antibiotics are no exception. One in five hospitalized patients has been shown to develop an adverse reaction to an antibiotic, and nearly the same proportion of drug-related Emergency Department visits are due to adverse antibiotic reactions.

The anticipation of adverse events is warranted when initiating antimicrobial therapy. Certain patients are at higher risk, for example, the elderly, patients with multiple co-morbidities, and hospitalized patients.

**Adverse Reactions Associated with Organ Systems**

**Renal**

- Acute tubular necrosis

- Interstitial nephritis

- Renal failure

- Crystallization in renal tubules

**Cardiac**

- QT prolongation

**Hematologic**

- Thrombocytopenia

- Leukopenia

- Agranulocytosis

- Abnormal platelet aggregation

- INR increase (often due to drug interactions)

**Dermatologic**

- Rash

- Erythema multiforme

- Stevens-Johnson syndrome

- Toxic epidermal necrolysis

**Neurologic**

- Ototoxicity

- Vestibular dysfunction

- Seizure

- Peripheral neuropathy

**Other**

- Hepatotoxicity

- Myopathy

- Electrolyte abnormalities (i.e., hypokalemia, hypoglycemia)

- Drug-induced fever

- Drug-induced diarrhea

**Antibiotic Resistance**

The increased use of antimicrobial agents in clinical practice and other industries such as livestock farming has led to bacterial resistance to antibiotic agents. Bacteria have developed mechanisms to promote this resistance to survive.

The MIC of a bacterial isolate can serve as a metric for bacterial susceptibility to certain antibiotics.Mycoplasma species that lack this cellular component.

Bacteria also have the capability to gain resistance through attaining resistance genes from other bacteria or developing a mutation resulting in reduced or elimination of antibiotic efficacy. This type of resistance is known as acquired resistance.

More than one type of bacterial resistance may be present in a bacterial organism. Common resistance strategies are listed here.

**Mechanisms of Resistance and Examples**

**Reducing Intracellular Antibiotic Concentrations**

- Increased efflux

- Decreased influx

**Antibiotic Inactivation**

- Enzymatic modification

- Chemical degradation

**Target Site Alteration**

- Mutation of the target site

- Antibiotic modification

- Target site protection

- Elimination of the target site