Treatment of end-stage renal disease involves correcting parameters at the level of the patient's presentation.

- Treating the underlying cause and managing blood pressure and proteinuria. Blood pressure should be targeted to a systolic blood pressure of less than 130 mmHg, and diastolic blood pressure of less than 80 mmHg in adults with or without diabetes mellitus whose urine albumin excretion exceeds 30 mg for 24 hours. For diabetic patients with proteinuria, an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or angiotensin 2 receptor blocker (ARB) should be started in cases where urine albumin values range between 30 and 300 mg in 24 hours and greater than 300 mg in 24 hours. These drugs slow the disease progression, particularly when initiated before the GFR decreases to less than 60 mL/min or before plasma creatinine concentration exceeds 1.2 and 1.5 in women and men, respectively.

- Other targets in preventive care and monitoring should include tight glycemic control, cardiovascular risk reduction, and general lifestyle recommendations such as smoking cessation and dietary restriction. Glycemic control is critical. A hemoglobin A1C of less than 7% is generally recommended to prevent or delay microvascular complications in this population. Management with sodium-glucose transporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors may reduce the disease burden in those with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

- Treatment of chronic metabolic acidosis with supplemental renal bicarbonate also may slow the progression of end-stage renal disease.

- Patients with CKD tend to have dyslipidemia, particularly hypertriglyceridemia. Monitoring fasting lipid panels and initiation of cholesterol-lowering agents such as HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors should be done early in the course of the disease.

- Volume overload or pulmonary edema should be treated with loop diuretics or ultrafiltration.

- For uremic manifestations, long-term renal replacement therapy (hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, or kidney transplantation) is needed.

- Anemia is treated with an erythropoiesis-stimulating agent (ESA) such as erythropoietin.

- Hyperphosphatemia is treated with phosphate binders (calcium acetate, sevelamer carbonate, or lanthanum carbonate) and dietary phosphate restriction.

- Lifestyle modification and dietary restrictions are routinely recommended. For example, adhering to a low salt diet (less than 2 g/day), a renal diet (avoiding foods that are high in phosphorus), and restricting daily protein to 0.8 g per kg body weight per day is essential to managing disease burden.

- Hypocalcemia should also be monitored. A 25-OH vitamin D level less than 10 ng/mL warrants initiation of ergocalciferol 50,000 IU weekly for 6 to 8 weeks before switching to cholecalciferol 800 to 1000 IU daily.

- Hyperparathyroidism should be treated with calcitriol, vitamin D analogs, or calcimimetics.

**Planning for Long-term Renal Replacement Therapy**

Early patient education should be initiated regarding natural disease progression, different modalities for dialysis, and renal transplantation. For patients in whom transplantation is not imminent, a primary arteriovenous fistula should be created in advance of the anticipated date of dialysis.

Indications for renal replacement therapy in patients with CKD include the following:

- Severe metabolic acidosis

- Hyperkalemia

- Pericarditis

- Encephalopathy

- Intractable volume overload

- Failure to thrive and malnutrition

- Peripheral neuropathy

- Intractable gastrointestinal symptoms

- Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 5 to 9 mL/min/1.73 m^2, irrespective of the symptoms or the presence or absence of other comorbidities