The diagnosis and management of ORN are best carried out with an interprofessional team that includes a dentist, surgeon, pharmacist, hyperbaric medicine specialist, and a nurse.

The prevention of ORN is extremely important. Therefore, the approach to ORN treatment is separated into two phases: pre-radiotherapy prevention and ORN rehabilitation. ORN can be managed dentally, medically, surgically, and hyperbaric oxygen.

The pre-radiotherapy phase of a patient who will be undergoing radiotherapy of the oral cavity includes a pretreatment, dental evaluation, and management by a dentist experienced with head and neck cancers. The pretreatment evaluation should include full mouth radiographs, dental and periodontal diagnosis, and extraction of teeth with poor prognosis. Medical treatment plays a small role in the prevention and management of ORN. Maintaining adequate nutrition and saline irrigation helps to manage oral mucositis.

Treating diagnosed ORN requires surgical intervention. First, the non-viable bone will need to be removed. For planned surgery or tooth extraction in a tissue area with more than 60 Gy, HBO should be utilized prophylactically. The role of HBO is to promote angiogenesis in hypoxic tissues, thus promoting optimal reparative conditions.

The prognosis of patients with ORN is guarded and related to the severity of the ORN, location of the affected bone, and overall medical and dental health of the patient. It is essential to rule out persistent or recurrent malignancy before treatment of any kind is initiated for suspected ORN.