For results and interpretation of tuning fork tests, see the “Procedures” section. Notably, tuning fork tests are no longer used as definitive diagnostic tools. Instead, tuning fork tests are considered a convenient preliminary clinical test.

Specific patterns on audiograms can be recognized as indicative of particular causes of hearing loss. It is often diagnostically beneficial to distinguish between SNHL, conductive hearing loss, and mixed hearing loss by calculating air-bone gaps. For instance, in patients with tympanic membrane perforation, an air-bone gap is often measurable, especially at lower frequencies. This finding indicates that BC is better than AC at those frequencies, as would be expected in a patient whose tympanic membrane is not functionally contributing to conductive hearing due to injury.

Another example of a critical finding on audiogram includes bilateral downward sloping high-frequency threshold increases with no significant air-bone gap, which is consistent with presbycusis, a leading cause of SNHL. This finding is due to selective high-frequency hearing loss in the aging inner ear.

In patients with bilateral noise-induced SNHL, as is often observed in patients who work in loud environments without adequate hearing protection, there is no significant air-bone gap, and a threshold increase spanning from approximately 3,000 Hz to 4,000 Hz is characteristically observed. A final critical finding includes a large unilateral increase in thresholds centered at approximately 1,000 Hz with no air-bone gap. This finding is consistent with unilateral SNHL, which often requires further workup to rule out causes such as a vestibular schwannoma or other mass-occupying lesions.