# Continuing Education Activity

Perioperative acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common yet under-recognized problem that increases mortality, morbidity, and increases the cost of hospitalizations. It can lead to the development of chronic kidney disease and the need for renal replacement therapy. AKI is a complication of both cardiac and non-cardiac surgery. Once renal injury develops, there are few therapeutic options available that can reverse the damage, and as such, prompt recognition and early intervention are critical to prevent the progression of the disease. This activity reviews the risk factors, diagnosis, and treatment of perioperative AKI and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of perioperative acute kidney injury. 
- Outline the risk factors for developing perioperative acute kidney injury.
- Summarize the treatment considerations for patients with perioperative acute kidney injury. 
- Review the importance of collaboration and communication among members of the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by perioperative acute kidney injury.

# Introduction

Perioperative acute kidney injury (AKI) is a serious yet under-recognized problem in patients who have recently undergone surgery. Due to increasing age and number of comorbidities, perioperative AKI is increasing in incidence and has significant morbidity and mortality.

# Etiology

Perioperative acute kidney injury is defined as an abrupt decline in renal function that occurs within hours to days of surgery.

# Epidemiology

Perioperative AKI is a common and highly underrecognized medical problem.

# Pathophysiology

Perioperative AKI does not arise from a single insult, but instead develops as the result of several, with hypoperfusion and inflammation thought to be the main drivers.

# History and Physical

Overall, AKI is non-specific in presentation, and clinical signs on physical examination are related to the degree of renal function that has been lost and the underlying insult, i.e., hypotension or hypovolemia.

# Evaluation

Several criteria are used to define AKI, including Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN), Risk, Injury, Failure, Loss, ESKD (RIFLE), and Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO).

AKIN: Any of the following within 48 hours: Increased sCr x1.5, sCr increase 0.3 mg/dl or more, or urine output less than 0.5 ml/kg/h for more than 6 hours

RIFLE: Any of the following within 7 days: Doubled sCr, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) decrease more than 50%, or urine output less than 0.5 ml/kg/hour

KDIGO: Any of the following: Increase in sCr by ≥ 0.3 mg/dl (≥ 26.5 micromoles/l) within 48 hours, increase in sCr to 1.5 times baseline which is presumed to have occurred within the prior seven days, or urine volume less than 0.5 ml/kg/hour for 6 hours

Innovations in laboratory analysis of AKI have determined the existence of AKI biomarkers that can be detected before renal mass is lost.

Early identification of high-risk patients can be made using these biomarkers, with early application of KDIGO bundles. In patients for whom bundled care is initiated early, there are lower rates of moderate and severe AKI when compared to patients with AKI that are treated with standard therapy.

# Treatment / Management

When AKI develops, goal-directed therapy to reach adequate cardiac output and oxygen delivery levels has been documented to reduce mortality resulting from AKI.

Several medications have been controversial in the treatment of AKI. Dopamine was thought to be useful in AKI as it promoted increased renal blood flow at low doses, but this has not been born out in studies. Fenoldopam is a selective dopamine-1 agonist that has been shown to reduce the need for RRT. Nonetheless, this has only been consistently demonstrated in patients having undergone cardiac surgery, and its use is limited by its ability to cause systemic hypotension. Diuretics are beneficial in improving urine output. However, diuretics increase serum creatinine and can worsen AKI. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is effective in reducing the need for RRT in post-cardiac surgery patients, yet, like fenoldopam, its utility is limited by systemic hypotension.

The KDIGO bundle recommends specific measures to help prevent AKI. These include avoidance of substances that are nephrotoxic, optimizing volume status to maintain sufficient perfusion pressures, maintaining normoglycemia, and monitoring serum creatinine, urine output, and perhaps monitoring of hemodynamics. The KDIGO bundle, if implemented early based upon biomarkers, reduces the development of AKI in postsurgical patients.

Prompt nephrology referral is vital in the management of AKI. Studies of hospitals without nephrology coverage have demonstrated recognition of AKI was delayed with an associated increase in resulting CKD and decreased survivability.

# Differential Diagnosis

There are a variety of perioperative AKI syndromes that must be considered, including hemodynamic, nephrotoxic, damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP)-induced inflammation, and obstruction. If oliguria develops as the presenting symptom of AKI, mechanical obstruction of the urinary tract must be considered. Obstruction is especially common in colorectal, urological, and gynecological surgical procedures. Additionally, drug-induced urinary retention should also be excluded. If a Foley catheter is in place, it should be inspected to ensure that it is not obstructed or kinked. Increased release of antidiuretic hormone secondary to pain, nausea, surgery, and other non-renal stimulation should be considered, as should increased aldosterone secretion.

# Prognosis

Perioperative AKI is associated with an up to ten-fold increase in mortality, reduced long-term survival, and increased development of chronic kidney disease with subsequent need for hemodialysis following hospital discharge. AKI requiring renal replacement therapy is an independent risk factor for death.

# Complications

As previously discussed, the development of perioperative AKI places the patient at risk of progression to chronic renal disease and may require long-term renal replacement therapy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

For patients that have developed perioperative AKI, there are several things they should be advised of in order to preserve renal function, including avoiding nephrotoxic agents. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are known to cause interstitial nephritis, which can lead to the development of AKI or the worsening of existing AKI. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers are known to affect renal autoregulation, although the avoidance of these mediations in the perioperative period is currently a topic of debate.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Early recognition of perioperative AKI is the first step in improving care. The risk-adjusted cost of caring for a patient with perioperative AKI is $42,600 per episode of care, versus $26,700 per episode of care in a patient without AKI.