In all the cases of volvulus, patients need to be resuscitated prior to surgery. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should also be administered in these patients preoperatively. Vitals monitoring including measurement of the urine output should be done periodically. Some clinicians also advocate nursing the patient in a left lateral position to avoid compression over the vena cava. The initial treatment for sigmoid volvulus is sigmoidoscopy. Sigmoidoscopy can also help in establishing a diagnosis of sigmoid volvulus. Spiralling of the mucosa and difficulty to negotiate the scope beyond the site of obstruction are classical features of sigmoid volvulus on sigmoidoscopy.

Surgical options for sigmoid volvulus include bowel resection and bowel conservative surgery. Bowel resection is recommended over conservative surgery (sigmoidopexy or mesenteric plication) as recurrence rates are higher with the later. If there is no faecal peritonitis, a primary resection can be done. While if there is bowel perforation, then a Hartmann procedure can be performed. Minimally invasive approach for sigmoid volvulus can be considered depending on the surgeon's preference and experience. Elderly patients may benefit from minimally invasive procedures.

Endoscopic decompression for cecal volvulus has low success rates (nearly 20%) and is also associated with high recurrence rates. In a cecal volvulus, the cecum can be detorsed and cecopexy can be performed. However, a part of cecum often needs to be removed. The ideal procedure for cecal volvulus right hemicolectomy. If the bowel is obviously necrotic, then resection with an ileostomy or a colostomy is necessary. If the patient is critically ill and is not fit for general anaesthesia, a percutaneous tube cecostomy can be performed as an interim procedure. A definite procedure can be attempted when the patient is declared fit by the anaesthesia team.