**Viral Hepatitis**

Most of the time, hepatitis results from hepatitis viruses A, B, C, D, and E. It is unclear whether the Hepatitis G virus is pathogenic in humans or not. Hepatitis A, B, C, and D are endemic to the United States with hepatitis A, B, and C viruses causing 90% of acute viral hepatitis in the United States and Hepatitis C being the most common cause of chronic hepatitis.

Hepatitis A is an RNA virus from the Picornaviridae family. It is usually present in the highest concentration in the stool of infected individuals with the greatest viral load shedding occurring during the end of the incubation period. The most common mode of transmission of hepatitis A is via the fecal-oral route from contact with food, water, or objects contaminated by fecal matter from an infected individual. It is more commonly encountered in developing countries where due to poverty and lack of sanitation, there is a higher chance of fecal-oral spread. International travel is the most significant risk factor identified from the cases reported in the United States. People who come in contact with infected individuals are also at risk, and the secondary infection rate for household contacts is about 20%, which may also play a more prominent role in the maintenance of hepatitis A virus outbreaks

**Hepatitis B**

Hepatitis B virus is a DNA virus and is a member of the Hepadnaviridae family. The composition of the viral core is nucleocapsid, hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg), which surrounds hepatitis B virus DNA, and DNA polymerase. The nucleocapsid is coated with the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), which is a viral surface polypeptide. The gene that codes for hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg), also codes for hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg). Intact hepatitis B virus virion is known as the Dane particle. Hepatitis B virus is known to have eight genotype variants but is not used in clinical practice to determine the severity of the infection. Hepatitis B virus can be detected in serum, semen, vaginal mucus, saliva, and tears even at a lower level but not found in the stool, urine, or sweat. In the United States, estimates are about 2.2 million people have chronic hepatitis B virus infection. It is transmitted parenterally and sexually when individuals come in contact with mucous membranes or body fluids of infected individuals. Transfusion of blood and blood products, injection drug use with shared needles, needlesticks, or wounds caused by other instruments in healthcare workers and hemodialysis are all examples of parenteral and percutaneous exposures, but parenteral mode remains the dominant mode of transmission both globally and in the United States. Intravenous drug users, men who have sex with men, healthcare workers with exposure to infected body fluids, patients who require frequent and multiple blood transfusions, people who have multiple sexual partners, prisoners, partners of hepatitis B virus carriers, and persons born in endemic areas are all at high risk for hepatitis B virus infection. The virus can be transmitted perinatally also, and it occurs in infants of HBeAg positive women where the infants would have a 70% to 90% chance of infection, and 90% of those who become infected end up developing a chronic infection with hepatitis B virus

**Hepatitis C**

Hepatitis C virus is an RNA virus and is a member of the Flaviviridae family with one serotype, but at least six major genotypes and more than 80 subtypes. The extensive genetic variability makes it challenging to develop a vaccine to prevent hepatitis C virus infection. Transmission can be parenteral, perinatal, and sexual, with the most common mode being the sharing of contaminated needles among IV drug users. Also, other high-risk groups include people who require frequent blood transfusions and organ transplantation of organs from infected donors. Sexual and perinatal transmission is not very common

**Hepatitis D**

Hepatitis D is an RNA virus and a single species in the Deltavirus genus. It contains the hepatitis D antigen and RNA strand and used HBsAg as its envelope protein; therefore, those who get hepatitis D virus infection have coinfection with the hepatitis B virus as well. Hepatitis D virus has similar modes of transmission as the hepatitis B virus, but perinatal transmission is uncommon

**Hepatitis E**

Hepatitis E is an RNA virus and a single species in the Hepevirus genus. The primary mode of transmission is the fecal-oral route. Fecally contaminated water is the most common means, but person-to-person transmission is rare. However, occasionally maternal-neonatal transmission can occur as well

**Hepatitis G**

Hepatitis G virus is an RNA virus and is a member of the Pegivirus A species of the Flaviviridae family. The primary mode of transmission is through infected blood and blood products. It is usually a coinfection in people who have chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis C infections. It is associated with acute and chronic liver disease, but research has not clearly established it as an agent that causes hepatitis by itself

Other less common causes of hepatitis are viruses like cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, and Varicella-zoster virus, but these viruses do not target the liver primarily.

**Autoimmune Hepatitis**

The exact etiology of autoimmune hepatitis is unknown. Various factors like drugs, environmental agents, or viral infection with hepatitis viruses or Epstein-Barr virus may trigger an autoimmune response. Patients develop autoantibodies, and they more commonly present in those who have chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Drugs like nitrofurantoin, minocycline, adalimumab, infliximab, or methyldopa can trigger autoimmune hepatitis. In these cases, hepatitis improves when the patient stops the offending drug

**Alcoholic Hepatitis**

The exact mechanism of how alcoholic hepatitis is not well defined; many factors play a role that includes genetic factors, metabolism of ethanol and its metabolite acetaldehyde causing damage to hepatocyte cell membranes, malnutrition, immunologic factors such as stimulation of cytokines accelerating cell death, steatotic changes, free radicals, and oxidative injuries, etc. All these factors are known to play a role in causing alcoholic hepatitis