Neuroimaging is a critical component of stroke management, with computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) being the primary modalities.

When a patient with AIS presents within 6 hours of symptom onset and has a small core infarct on NCCT, CT angiography (CTA) or MR angiography (MRA) is recommended for guiding mechanical thrombectomy patient selection. When a patient with AIS presents in the 6- to 24-hour window following symptom onset and has a large-vessel occlusion (LVO) in the anterior circulation, diffusion-weighted MRI with or without MR perfusion or CT perfusion (CTP) is recommended.

In patients with a "wake-up" stroke or an unclear time of onset, an MRI should be obtained to identify diffusion-positive fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) negative lesions, as it can help determine if the patient would benefit from thrombolytic therapy.

In patients with ICH, CTA within the first few hours of symptom onset can help identify those at risk for hematoma expansion (HE). Additionally, serial head CT can assess for HE within the first 24 hours.

Diagnosis of SAH relies on NCCT, followed by lumbar puncture if the CT is negative and the clinical suspicion is high. In a recent study, the diagnosis of SAH was 95.5% sensitive and 100% specific when the Ottawa SAH rule was used when interpreting a CT scan done within 6 hours of headache onset.

CTA may be considered when evaluating SAH; however, if inconclusive, digital subtraction catheter angiography (DSA) with 3-dimensional reconstruction is the gold standard study for detecting aneurysms.

According to the 2019 AHA/ASA guidelines, all patients require blood glucose assessment before initiating IV alteplase because hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia may mimic AIS. Additionally, baseline electrocardiographic assessment is recommended in patients presenting with AIS but should not delay initiating IV alteplase, and baseline troponin assessment is recommended but should not delay initiating IV alteplase or mechanical thrombectomy.