Complications associated with the intrathecal delivery system can subdivide into surgery-related complications and device-related complications.  Surgery-related complications generally occur in the perioperative period.  Possibly the most worrisome and avertible surgery-related complication is a pump pocket hematoma.  Focusing on hemostasis during pocket formation can potentially prevent this complication.  Placing an abdominal binder around the abdomen for modest compression in the early postoperative period can prevent blood or fluid buildup.  Another surgical-related complication is the likelihood of an epidural or intrathecal bleed with associated neurologic sequelae.  To decrease the risk of this complication, preoperatively, care should be taken to reverse any anticoagulation and stop any nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use.

Signs of a developing hematoma include a precipitous increase in back pain, progressive numbness, and weakness in the lower extremities, and loss of bowel and bladder control.  This clinical presentation justifies immediate MRI or CT myelography scanning and emergent surgical decompression if there is neurologic deterioration.  An additional surgery-related complication is wound infection.  Prophylactic antibiotics and intraoperative antibiotic irrigation can likely protect against this.  Furthermore, consideration on the part of the ancillary surgical staff to manage all aspects with care and avoid contamination will also help limit infection.  Unless the infection is superficial, wound infections require an explantation of the device.  Infection can track along the intrathecal catheter and can cause either meningitis or an epidural abscess.

Neurologic injury is a risk whenever there is a penetration of the CSF space.  Needle placement, even when guided fluoroscopically, is truly "blind" with respect to intraspinal neural structures.  Injury to the nerve roots can occur. However, the placement of the catheter under conscious sedation can decrease this risk.  Because they are awake, the patient under conscious sedation can report a shock-like or burning sensation in the distribution of the involved nerve root.  In response, the needle should be promptly withdrawn and placed at a different level.  Aside from needle placement, catheter placement also puts the spinal cord at risk.  Catheters are designed with some stiffness so they can be steered through the intrathecal space.  The catheter must not be forced through the spinal canal because the tip may end up in an intramedullary position.

Penetration of the spinal cord often results in dysesthesias or burning, stinging pain below the lesion, and neurological signs are usually observable immediately.  Intramedullary infusion of the drug may result in developing signs of a spinal cord lesion and should be immediately evaluated with MRI or CT myelography and evaluated by a neurosurgeon.  CSF leaks are a probable consequence of placing catheters in the intrathecal space.  The opening developed in the dura mater by introducing a needle larger than the entering catheter predisposes to leakage.  This leakage can precipitate into a post-dural puncture headache.  This headache should initially be managed conservatively with fluids, maintaining a supine position, increased caffeine intake, and utilizing non-narcotic analgesics such as acetaminophen.  If the headache is refractory to conservative management, a blood patch consisting of 10 to 20ml of autologous venous blood injected one level above the catheter entry point under fluoroscopic guidance (to avoid catheter shearing), should treat the headache effectively.

Device-related complications typically involve either the catheter system or the pump. Catheter-related complications are more frequent than pump complications