Considering the high probability that sarcopenia may co-exist with the below conditions and considering the overlap between conditions, an accurate differential diagnosis may be difficult.

- Frailty: While sarcopenia and frailty present with significant overlap of symptoms, they remain distinguishable. Frailty is defined as multi-system impairment and encompasses a broader range of dysfunction than sarcopenia, whereas sarcopenia mainly includes the musculoskeletal system. One condition may contribute directly to the other, as they often co-exist in elderly patients.

- Malnutrition: Both malnutrition and sarcopenia present with low muscle mass, though sarcopenia more often presents with the additional loss of function. Additionally, as a function of caloric restriction, reduced fat mass is observed in patients with malnutrition – this is often not the case with sarcopenia. Functional tests for strength and performance may be administered to rule out malnutrition.

- Cachexia: Cachexia is thought to have a more complex etiology than sarcopenia. Cachexia is described as severe weight loss and muscle-wasting associated with conditions such as HIV, cancer, and end-stage organ failure. While cachexia and sarcopenia may co-exist, a patient with severe muscle wasting diseases such as HIV or cancer is more likely to have cachexia.

- Osteoarthritis of the hand: Patients with osteoarthritis of the hand may elicit a false positive test when performing the handgrip strength test. In cases where severe osteoarthritis is suspected, patients may perform methods to measure isometric torque of the lower limb to more accurately assess or rule out sarcopenia.