**Summary of Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

- Visual inspection and mobility testing to determine the depth of the fracture.

- Radiographs may assist in categorizing the extent of the fracture into the tooth root and/or alveolar bone.

- Pulp vitality to evaluate the viability of the exposed pulp.

- Initial treatment consists of applying calcium hydroxide liners, but ultimately this will need to be covered with a composite resin or glass ionomer. Restorative procedures may be required if the tooth fragment is unavailable.

- Pulp capping or partial pulpotomy may be indicated if the pulp is exposed.

- An interdisciplinary approach is recommended for fractures that extend past the cementoenamel junction.

- Subluxation: tenderness with light touch and percussion with abnormal loosening on physical exam.

- Luxation: displacement of the tooth out of its alveolar socket in any direction (incisal/axial, apically, or laterally).

- Radiographs may assist in evaluating the exact location of the tooth and identifying the extent of the injury.

- Initial treatment involves relocating the tooth into its alveolar socket.

- The tooth needs to be stabilized in a passive and flexible splint for 2-4 weeks with regular outpatient dentistry follow-up.

- Visual inspection demonstrates a missing tooth from its alveolar socket.

- Radiographs can evaluate for dental fragments or foreign bodies within the alveolar socket.

- Replantation is the preferred treatment and is best if done within 30 minutes.

- The replanted tooth should be stabilized in a passive and flexible splint for two weeks.

- Regular outpatient dentistry follow-up is recommended.

**Summary of Infectious Dental Emergencies**

- Physical exam shows demineralization of the enamel subsurface.

- Active carious lesions tend to be white, matte, with rough texture, and are cavitated.

- Inactive carious lesions are brown, shiny, smooth, and nonactivated.

- Radiographs may also assist in detecting caries.

- Non-invasive procedures can be attempted for early lesions that can be reached by cleaning implements and that have not invaded far into the dentin.

- Restoration with resin compounds is required for noncleansable cavitated lesions that have invaded the dentin layer.

- History of severe pain with temperature changes.

- If reversible, pain is intermittent. If irreversible, the pain is constant.

- Dental caries are evident on exam.

- If reversible, initial treatment consists of the insertion of resin materials.

- If irreversible, treatment consists of root canal therapy or tooth extraction.

- History of severe pain that is constant.

- The tooth is discolored and can progress from yellow to gray, brown, and then black in color.

- Treatment requires a root canal or dental extraction.

- History of gingival pain, bleeding after teeth brushing, and halitosis.

- A physical exam will show gingival inflammation with deep periodontal pockets.

- Mitigation of risk factors such as tobacco use and uncontrolled diabetes.

- Proper home oral hygiene in connection with professional dental cleanings.

- Rarely requires oral antibiotics.

- A physical exam will demonstrate a palpable swelling at the base of the tooth without or without evidence of purulent drainage.

- Conservative management with incision and drainage is preferred, but dental extraction may be required.

- Oral antibiotics are indicated if there is surrounding cellulitis.

- Inpatient treatment with intravenous antibiotics is indicated if the abscesses are large or have progressed to deep-space infections.

- History of pain exacerbated with biting. Purulent discharge may be elucidated by biting.

- A physical exam will demonstrate perioral swelling.

- Conservative management with incision and drainage is preferred, but dental extraction may be required.

- Oral antibiotics are indicated if there is surrounding cellulitis.

- Inpatient treatment with intravenous antibiotics is indicated if the abscesses are large or have progressed to deep-space infections.

- History of rapid development of gingival pain, bleeding, and ulcerations.

- A physical exam will demonstrate "punched-out" gingival ulcerations, gingival necrosis, and pseudomembrane development.

- Initial treatment consists of local oral care involving the debridement of necrotic tissue, removal of pseudomembrane, aggressive oral hygiene, and antiseptic mouth rinses.

- Oral antibiotics are recommended if fever, lymphadenopathy, or other systemic symptoms are present.

- History of pain in the posterior mandible or maxilla.

- Physical exam with fully or partially erupted tooth with surrounding inflamed and erythematous gingiva.

- Aggressive oral hygiene with irrigation of the pericoronal space.

- Oral antibiotics to decrease the bacterial load.

- Surgically removing the operculum overlying the erupting third molar if conservative measures fail.

**Summary of Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

- Bleeding that occurs immediately after and up to several hours after a dental extraction or procedure despite initial hemostatic measures.

- Rarely, bleeding can occur up to one week after the procedure.

- Local interventions are utilized first and involve manual pressure, hemostatic pharmacologic or biologic agents, or cautery/suture.

- Systemic inventions may be required if there is a known congenital coagulopathy, a systemic illness that augments bleeding, or anticoagulant therapies are used.

- History of recent dental extraction followed by severe pain onset 1-5 days post-operatively.

- Physical exam with partial or complete loss of alveolar socket blood clot; exposed alveolar bone may be difficult to visualize.

- Initial management involves intra-alveolar irrigation to remove clot debris and necrotic tissue.

- Local analgesia via topical anesthetics gels.

- Systemic analgesia via oral NSAIDs.

- Chlorhexidine oral rinses or topical gel application.

- Temporary application of medicated dressings.

- Low-level laser therapy (LLLT) is suggested to be comparably effective to other treatments.