The left subclavian artery directly originates as a branch of the arch of the aorta. The right subclavian artery arises as the brachiocephalic artery, also known as the innominate artery, splits into two arteries: the right common carotid artery and the right subclavian artery. On both the right and left side of the body, the subclavian artery gives rise to the vertebral artery, internal thoracic artery, thyrocervical trunk, costocervical trunk, and dorsal scapular artery before becoming the axillary artery when it crosses the lateral border of the first rib.

The internal thoracic artery branches off of the proximal portion of the subclavian artery and begins its descent along the inner surface of the anterior chest wall. The internal thoracic arteries travel inferiorly and are located approximately 1-2 centimeters lateral to the sternal margin on either side. It travels in a between the transversus thoracis muscle posteriorly and the internal intercostal muscles and costal cartilages anteriorly. It continues to descend inferiorly giving off anterior intercostal arteries at each intercostal space and perforating cutaneous branches along the thorax. Once it reaches the sixth to seventh costal cartilage, the internal thoracic artery bifurcates into its terminal branches, the musculocutaneous artery, and superior epigastric artery.

To recap, the internal thoracic artery originates off of the subclavian artery giving off several branches as it descends along the inner surface of the anterior thorax:

- Anterior intercostal arteries at each intercostal space

- Perforating cutaneous branches

- Pericardiophrenic artery

- Musculophrenic artery (terminal branch)

- Superior epigastric artery (terminal branch)