Protein synthesis involves a complex interplay of many macromolecules.

- Ribosomes:

- 
              
- The eukaryotic ribosome has two subunits: a 40S small subunit and a 60S large subunit. Together, the eukaryotic ribosome is 80S. There are several sites of functional significance, but the most important ones are the A (aminoacyl), P (peptidyl), and E (exit) sites. The eukaryotic ribosome is a ribonucleoprotein complex composed of 4 RNAs and 80 proteins. Many of the functions of the ribosome, including catalyzing peptide bond formation, are attributed to ribosomal RNA (rRNA) rather than ribosomal proteins, which instead play a primary role in subunit assembly. Ribosomes can be found either adherent to membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum or free within the cytoplasm.
              
              
- Bacterial ribosomes have two subunits, 30S and 50S, that join to form a 70S particle. In general, bacterial ribosomes are smaller than their eukaryotic counterparts, including fewer ribosomal proteins (55) and shorter rRNAs (3 in total). Certain regions of rRNA and some of the ribosomal proteins remain conserved between bacteria and eukaryotes. Other regions of rRNA and proteins are unique to either eukaryotes or bacteria and account in part for differences in mechanisms of protein synthesis discussed above.  
              
              
- 
                  
- Eukaryotic cells contain a second type of ribosome found within the mitochondrion, which maintains a system of protein synthesis distinct from that found in the cytoplasm. Despite their presence in eukaryotic cells, the origins of the mitochondrial ribosome are traceable to bacteria, consistent with the endosymbiont theory of mitochondrial origins.  Care must be taken during antibiotic development to avoid targeting characteristics of the mitochondrial ribosome shared with bacterial ribosomes.

- Messenger RNA (mRNA): the mRNA is another type of ribonucleic acid that functions to carry the coding section of a gene for protein synthesis. It contains portions of non-coding and coding sequences. The coding sequence groups nucleotides into codons, which are three specific nucleotides that correspond to a particular amino acid specified by the genetic code.

- Transfer RNA (tRNA): tRNAs are adaptors bridging the nucleotide sequence found in mRNAs to the amino acid sequence found in a growing protein. Transfer RNAs assume a cloverleaf-like secondary structure with an amino acid linked to its 3’ end through an ester linkage and a stretch of three nucleotides at the base of the cloverleaf referred to as the anticodon. The three bases of the anticodon base pair with complementary codon sequences in an mRNA during the process of protein synthesis.  This base-pairing interaction plays a critical role in the readout of the genetic code from mRNA to protein. There are 20 different aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, one for each of the 20 common amino acids. Once an amino acid links to its cognate tRNA it is referred to as an aminoacyl tRNA, or “charged” tRNA.

- Genetic code: The genetic code sequence is three nucleotides originally encoded an organism’s genome that specifies individual amino acids found in proteins. There are 20 common amino acids used by the protein synthetic machinery and 64 potential sequence permutations of the four bases used to specify the 20 amino acids.  Early studies revealed that the code was degenerate, with many of the amino acids specified by multiple 3-base combinations. In general, when multiple codons specify a single amino acid, degeneracy is found at the third or “wobble” position.

- 
              
- **Genetic code and human disease:**Appropriate readout of the genetic code is essential for human health. Mutations that alter protein-coding sequences can affect proteins in many different ways.  The effect of mutations on the coding sequence can classify as either synonymous or nonsynonymous depending on whether they are predicted to alter the primary structure of a protein.
              
              
- 
                  
- Synonymous mutations relate to the degeneracy of the code and the fact that changes in base sequence may not have an effect on which amino acid a codon represents (though it should be noted that some synonymous mutations may affect pre-mRNA splicing and so influence a protein’s primary structure). Synonymous mutations typically fall in the third position of a codon.
                  
                  
- Nonsynonymous mutations fall into three different classes:
                  
                  
- 
                      
- Missense mutations where there is substitution of one amino acid for another.
                      
                      
- Nonsense mutations which introduce a premature termination codon in an mRNA sequence.  These mutations typically result in a truncated protein.
                      
                      
- Frameshift mutations result from insertion or deletion mutations that shift the reading frame of a coding sequence such that sequencing downstream of the mutational event no longer code for the correct amino acid sequence of a protein.

- Protein factors– the process of protein synthesis requires multiple non-ribosomal proteins that transiently participate during the initiation, elongation, and termination phases of protein synthesis.  These factors are named for the phase in which they function (for example, eukaryotic initiation factor 2, eIF2).