**Individual Level**

For individual patients, a well-budgeted healthcare operation can positively impact their care experience, quality, and outcome. In wound care management, 15% of costs are from dressings and materials, 35% are from nursing care time, and 50% are from hospitalization.

If a wound care clinic erroneously increases the budget for dressings and materials but reduces the budget for nursing staff, then this budgetary decision would directly reduce nursing wound care time, worsen wound healing, and ultimately increase hospitalization and associated costs.

**Organizational Level**

Ross emphasizes that budgeting is an important management tool that enables a healthcare organization to translate its visions into actions.

**Community Level**

If healthcare budgeting is considered complex for a single organization, one could imagine how interwoven and intricate the process can be for a local government or state. The State of Maryland, for example, has been operating under an all-payer global budget system since 2014, which has led to cost savings and demonstrated collaboration among stakeholders, including hospital leaders, state and federal regulators, and payers.

**National Level**

At the national level, healthcare budgeting directly impacts access, delivery, staffing, and quality of care. In the United Kingdom, the National Health Service (NHS) is tasked with delivering care to the public. In 2021, the NHS announced that it would add £5.9bn ($8.1bn) to its annual budget to tackle the long waiting time for diagnostic studies and elective medical care.