Arm contouring procedures including liposuction [suction-assisted (SAL), power-assisted (PAL), ultrasound-assisted (UAL)], cryolipolysis, non-ablative radiofrequency, and focussed ultrasound are all suitable alternatives to brachioplasty in appropriately selected patients.

Patient selection and counseling are paramount in achieving acceptable results and a satisfied patient. MWL patients should be at least 1-year post-bariatric surgery and have a stable weight (defined as within 5kg of target weight) for at least 3 to 6 months, preferably 12 months.

Patients should have a current BMI<30, although many surgeons will selectively offer brachioplasty, among other body contouring procedures, to those with a BMI > 30.

Smoking cessation is critical, as smoking alone is associated with a significant risk of complications.

Patients undergoing body contouring are unique in that they pose a greater risk of complications; thus, some surgeons recommend smoking abstinence for three months before considering body contouring surgery.

The surgeon must also assess patient comorbidities and, where possible, optimize these through liaison with relevant specialties. Particular emphasis should be placed on optimizing diabetes and glycemic control, although many patients have a reversal of their diabetes following MWL. Furthermore, it is imperative to ascertain whether there is an increased likelihood of thrombosis (previous deep vein thrombosis/pulmonary embolism) and coagulopathies (either congenital or acquired through medications). The surgeon should specifically enquire about over-the-counter and herbal medications, as these are often unreported, and recommend that they be omitted at least two weeks preoperatively.

Many MWL patients are prone to micronutrient deficiencies, including iron, folic acid, Vitamins B12, A, D, E, K, and minerals such as zinc and selenium.

Finally, the psychosocial assessment of the patient should not be neglected, as it often governs whether the surgeon should proceed with the operation. Patients may have unrealistic expectations. They may have had no treatment or suboptimal treatment for any psychiatric disorders, with a reported prevalence of 40% in patients with MWL.

About 15% of patients with MWL can also suffer from body dysmorphic disorder (BDD); thus, they may remain dissatisfied with the outcome of their brachioplasty, regardless of the aesthetic result and in the absence of complications.