The workup of aortic regurgitation includes the following tests.

**Echocardiography**

Echocardiography is the main diagnostic tool as it provides an accurate assessment of the aortic valve anatomy, aortic root, and the LV.

Left ventricular dilation is seen in chronic AR. Systolic function is normal until later stages, signaled by a decrease in EF or an increase in the end-systolic dimension.

With severe AR, the central jet width assessed by color flow Doppler exceeds 65% of the LV outflow tract (LVOT), the regurgitant volume is ≥60 mL/beat, effective regurgitant orifice area is >0.30, the regurgitant fraction is ≥50%, vena contracta is > 0.6 cm, and there is diastolic flow reversal in the proximal descending thoracic aorta.

The continuous-wave Doppler profile of the AR jet shows a rapid deceleration time in patients with severe AR. A steep slope indicates a more rapid equalization of pressures between the aorta and LV during diastole.

A high-frequency diastolic fluttering of the anterior mitral leaflet produced by the impact of the regurgitant jet may be seen in acute and chronic AR.

In patients with acute AR, diagnosis can be made with a bedside transthoracic 2-dimensional and M-mode echocardiogram (TTE) and/or transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE).

**Cardiac Magnetic Resonance**

Cardiac MRI (CMR) is an alternative diagnostic tool especially used in patients who need further evaluation despite echocardiography due to suboptimal acoustical windows. It is the most accurate noninvasive technique for assessing LV end-systolic volume, diastolic volume, and mass. It can accurately quantify the severity of AR on the basis of the antegrade and retrograde flow volumes in the ascending aorta.

**Cardiac Catheterization**

Angiography can also provide information about the severity of AR, hemodynamics, and coronary artery anatomy if a discrepancy exists between the clinical picture and noninvasive imaging. It involves a rapid injection of contrast material into the aortic root, and filming in the right and left anterior oblique projections.