A patient discharged with GBS or MFS may need a lengthy and intense program of physiotherapy to recover function. Complete recovery is dependent on many factors, including the severity of neurological deficits at onset, the age of the patient, complications, motivation, and goals of the patient, among others. A thorough physical and occupational therapy assessment in the hospital is essential to identify the patient’s needs and goals of therapy. Patients with GBS and MFS frequently begin acute care and PT/OT therapy in the intensive care unit, then progress to a sub-acute setting in a rehabilitation department or outside nursing/rehab facility and eventually translate to home-based or outpatient therapy. The assessment includes a patient/caregiver interview, sensory function, skin inspection, testing joint range motion, manual muscle testing, functional testing (e.g., ADL/IADL pre and post-illness), mobility, respiration (e.g., vital capacity and inspiratory force), autonomic dysfunction, and endurance.

The principal goals of therapy include achieve optimal muscle use as tolerated by pain and use supportive equipment to help the patient resume functional activity as close to baseline as possible. Activities are increased gradually as tolerated, with increased muscle repetitions at low resistance to avoid injuries, teaching energy conservation, and training caregivers in transferring technique and mobilization of the patient at home. In summary, PT/OT are integral parts of the recovery and management of MFS. An appropriate plan of care can help a patient minimize pain, increase strength and endurance, and prevent secondary complications including overuse damage to muscles and joints while improving balance, mobility, and restoring functional activity.