# Definition/Introduction

Primitive reflexes are involuntary motor responses originating in the brainstem present after birth in early child development that facilitate survival. Several reflexes are important in the assessment of newborns and young infants. These central nervous system motor responses are eventually inhibited by 4 to 6 months of age as the brain matures and replaces them with voluntary motor activities but may return with the presence of neurological disease.

Primitive oral reflexes include sucking, rooting, and snout reflexes. The sucking reflex is important for coordination with breathing and swallowing.

The palmomental reflex involves puckering of skin on the ipsilateral side and brief contraction of the mentalis muscle after brisk stroking of the patient’s palm. Glabellar tap reflex occurs in response to repeated tapping of the patient’s head between eyebrows, which elicits blinking that normally would disappear after 4 to 5 taps. This test should be performed from above and behind the patient to remove visual stimuli. This reflex is thought to be an adaptive response to protect newborn eyes from injury.

The asymmetric tonic neck reflex is performed by manual rotation of the infant’s head to one side. The infant will extend its arm to the side of the rotated face and flex the contralateral arm. Onset at 35 weeks gestation and disappears by three months.

The Moro reflex is a protective response to the abrupt disruption of body balance and is elicited by pulling up on the arms with an infant in the supine position.

The grasping reflex can be elicited by providing sustained pressure on the palmar aspect of the hand, resulting in flexion of the patient’s fingers grasping the object providing the pressure. This reflex develops by 28 weeks gestation and disappears by six months.

# Issues of Concern

Primitive reflexes are necessary for newborn survival, and abnormal reflexes can be a sign of central nervous system dysfunction.

# Clinical Significance

**Infants**

Primitive reflexes are important in the newborn neurological examination. An absent or abnormal sucking reflex is an indirect indicator of neurological maturity in newborn infants. When an abnormal sucking reflex is associated with other signs of CNS involvement, it suggests basal ganglia or brainstem dysfunction. In a 2011 study, morbidity-related factors statistically correlated with the sucking and Babinski reflexes. Moro reflex is weak in preterm infants compared to full-term infants due to their poor muscle tone and resistance to passive movements.

**Adults**

Primitive reflexes, also known as frontal release signs, can be normal in the adult population. Multiple frontal release signs observed on neurological examination correlate with frontal lobe brain pathology, including Alzheimer disease, multiple sclerosis, and schizophrenia.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Oral primitive reflexes are necessary for newborn feeding. Lactation specialists and neonatal nurses should understand these reflexes to help identify early problems with infant feeding.