The TFCC undergoes progressive degenerative changes from the third decade of life. These changes more frequently occur in the ulnar portion of the triangular fibrocartilage disc proper. These are due to reduced cellularity, loss of elastic fibers, and erosion, which culminate in degeneration and fenestrations of the central part of the disc.

TFCC injuries can occur in three areas. In the horizontal section, it is at the periphery or its attachments, which can result from trauma or degenerative changes. Trauma is usually associated with a fall on a pronated outstretched forearm, axial load, or distracting injury to the ulnar part of the forearm. Repeated axial loading seems to be associated with degenerative injuries. A classification has been described by Palmer et all. It distinguishes between traumatic (Class 1) and degenerative injuries (Class 2).

Clinically the ‘ulnar fovea sign’ is a useful bedside test for disruption of the DRL and ulnotriquetral ligament injuries. With a sensitivity of 95.2% and specificity of 86.5% in a study of 272 patients.

Imaging of TFCC is best performed with MRI in a neutral forearm position with axial, coronal, and sagittal views. MRI arthrogram appears to be a superior method to identify TFCC injuries.

Although distal radius fractures are not predictive of TFCC injury, an ulnar styloid fracture is predictive of a TFCC injury.

Given the lack of blood supply, lesions to its central portion are unlikely to heal. On the other hand, injuries to its vascularized peripheral area may be amenable to surgical repair, as there is a higher chance of healing.