# Continuing Education Activity

Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis is a sporadic form of hypokalemic periodic paralysis, which most commonly presents as sudden onset weakness in the proximal muscles. It is a reversible condition that can be treated with quick replacement of potassium and normalization of thyroid hormones. This activity reviews the pathogenesis, clinical features, laboratory findings of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis.
- Explain the common physical examination findings in patients with thyrotoxic periodic paralysis.
- Outline the management of patients with thyrotoxic periodic paralysis.

# Introduction

Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (TPP) is an uncommon but dangerous complication seen in thyrotoxic patients. It is characterized by hypokalemia associated with acute proximal symmetrical lower limb weakness and can progress to involve all four limbs and the respiratory musculature. The mechanisms of hypokalemia are incompletely understood. The prevailing theories include increased Na-K ATPase pump activity and mutations in genes encoding Kir channels in skeletal muscle. It is often confused with familial periodic paralysis (FPP) due to the similarity in presentation but can be differentiated based on the presence of thyrotoxic features and biochemical testing. Commonly recorded and described in East Asian males, the incidence of TPP has been rising in the West and other parts of the world. Knowledge regarding identification, early treatment, and prevention of future episodes of TPP is essential in mitigating this potentially lethal complication.

# Etiology

Any cause of hyperthyroidism can lead to thyrotoxic periodic paralysis. They include Grave disease (most common), toxic nodular goiter, solitary toxic nodule, iodine-induced thyrotoxicosis, excess exogenous thyroxine use, thyroiditis, thyrotropin-secreting pituitary adenoma, and amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis.

Common factors triggering attacks of periodic paralysis include the consumption of carbohydrate-rich foods, strenuous physical activity, high salt/sodium intake, stresses (surgical, infectious, psychological), trauma, and drugs (diuretics, estrogens, acetazolamide, epinephrine, laxatives, corticosteroids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, licorice, fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, and ecstasy).

# Epidemiology

TPP has been well-documented in the Asian population. Reported incidences vary from 1.9% in Japanese thyrotoxic patients to 1.8% in Chinese thyrotoxic patients.

Cases of TPP have also been reported in children, Europeans, Hispanics, Indians, Malaysians, Vietnamese, Saudis, Polynesians, and the Turkish populations.**.**

# Pathophysiology

The mechanism of TPP involves two major factors: the occurrence of hypokalemia and associated muscle paralysis. Skeletal muscles house the largest share of total body potassium in the body (2600mmol) and play a vital role in maintaining extracellular potassium homeostasis. This balance is maintained by the sarcolemmal Na-K ATPase pumps and K channels. The former regulates the intracellular movement of potassium, whereas the latter, including the inward rectifying (Kir) and delayed rectifying potassium channels, regulates the extracellular movement of potassium.

Thyrotoxicity can contribute to hypokalemia by a direct increase in the genetic transcription of genes coding for the Na-K ATPase pump as well as an increase in the pump's intrinsic activity.

Hyperinsulinemia seen in attacks of TPP may also contribute to a depletion in extracellular potassium.

# History and Physical

Patients usually present with sudden onset of episodic muscle weakness, more in the proximal muscle compared to distal, along with myalgias. Weakness is also more common in lower extremities compared to upper extremities. Paralytic symptoms usually appear after symptoms of hyperthyroidism appear. They might also present with palpitations, tachycardia, dyspnea, dysphagia, and speech and visual changes. Some patients might present with rhabdomyolysis.

# Evaluation

Hypokalemia is present in most of the patients. Hypomagnesemia and Hypophosphatemia are also present in some patients which might be one of the distinguishing features from other forms of familial periodic paralysis.

Abnormal electrocardiograms with arrhythmias might be present. The most common Electrocardiogram (EKG) changes include ST depression, sinus tachycardia, U waves, and AV blocks.

# Treatment / Management

Here are important treatment goals:

- The goal is to quickly supplement potassium along with the reduction of thyroid hormones. We need to monitor for the risk of rebound hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia during the recovery phase.

- Intravenous potassium replacement is preferred, especially when patients present with severe symptoms, especially arrhythmias. Acute treatment suggestion is with 30 mEq of potassium given orally, every two hours until recovery begins, with a maximum oral dose of 90 mEq in 24 hours. Some suggestions include replacing at a rate of less than 10 mEq orally.

- Prophylactic potassium supplementation between attacks has not shown to be beneficial.

- Non-selective beta-blockers have been shown to improve neuromuscular symptoms by reducing the intracellular shift of phosphate and potassium.

- Medications that induce hypokalemia like glucocorticoids should be carefully monitored and should be avoided if possible in these patients. The ultimate goal is to reduce thyroid hormone levels and restore euthyroid status.

- Antithyroid drugs, radioactive iodine, and or surgery might be necessary based on the etiology of hyperthyroidism.

- Precipitating factors like strenuous exercise and high carbohydrate meals should be avoided.

# Differential Diagnosis

Other muscular disorders like myasthenia gravis, Guillain Barre syndrome, transverse myelitis, botulism, tick paralysis, and other familial periodic paralysis syndromes should be ruled out when patients present with acute muscle weakness.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education is one of the very important steps in treating and preventing the disease.

Patients should be educated about symptoms, including muscle weakness, arrhythmias, and symptoms related to hyperthyroidism, including heat intolerance, goiter, hyper defecation, and exophthalmos. They should avoid heavy meals, intense exercise, high sodium intake, etc.

Patients are instructed to go to the nearest emergency room if they experience any of the symptoms of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis is a sporadic form of hypokalemic periodic paralysis, which most commonly presents as sudden onset weakness in the proximal muscles. It is a reversible condition that can be treated with quick replacement of potassium and normalization of thyroid hormones. Interprofessional communication by the total team is essential to timely treat these patients and minimize complications.

Pharmacists should be very vigilant when dispensing intravenous potassium, and they should clearly label the instructions about how to infuse the drug, as it can cause complications, including local skin reactions to severe complications like fatal arrhythmias if given too fast. Nursing staff should double-check the instructions on electrolyte infusion bags to prevent complications. The patients need to be carefully monitored for any rebound symptoms from hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia. The discharge staff should provide educational materials for patients and family members upon discharge, as this can be a recurrent condition.