The primary goal in treating laryngeal cancer is oncologic control of the disease. Secondary goals include preserving speech and swallowing functions and avoidance of tracheostomy. Treatment regimens for laryngeal carcinomas may include radiotherapy, chemotherapy, surgery, or a combination. The expertise of an interprofessional team, such as a tumor board or within a multidisciplinary clinic, often determines the treatment for laryngeal cancer. Treatment is based on the tumor type, location, function of the larynx, and medical and social comorbidities of the individual patient. Total laryngectomy is the standard of care for surgical salvage in laryngeal cancer that has failed or recurred after nonsurgical management; it is also performed routinely as a primary treatment for advanced-stage laryngeal malignancy.

Several anatomic, physiologic, geographic, and vocational factors may affect treatment selection. The most important parameter influencing treatment selection is the stage of the malignancy; the location and extent of the primary tumor and the status of the regional lymph nodes determine the stage. Early-stage (I and II) tumors can be treated with single-modality therapy, which can be primary radiation therapy or surgery (cordectomy or partial laryngectomy). Advanced-stage (III and IV) tumors require multimodality treatment, which may consist of a combination of radiation therapy and chemotherapy or surgery followed by radiation therapy.

In the last decade, the focus of therapeutic approaches for malignant laryngeal tumors has shifted to "organ preservation." Treatment modalities such as transoral laser microsurgery (TOLM) and transoral robotic surgery (TORS) have expanded surgical options and decreased the morbidity of partial laryngeal surgery. Radiation therapy remains an important, organ-preserving treatment option for Stage I and II laryngeal malignancy. Total laryngectomy remains a first-line therapeutic option for patients who are unsuitable for organ-preserving techniques or in the setting of treatment failures. More rarely, a total laryngectomy may be performed for chronic aspiration.