Distal radioulnar joint instability may result from traumatic injury or chronic degeneration. These carry varying significance and treatment options, as discussed in the surgical considerations section of this article. Chronic tears should be suspected in older patients, while acute tears occur in the setting of upper extremity trauma. Injuries to the distal radius and fractures of the ulnar styloid are often implicated in these traumatic injuries to the distal radioulnar joint. The clinical importance of these injuries is a matter of debate, and functional outcomes more than likely correlate with appropriate treatment of radial fractures than treatment of ligamentous or ulnar styloid fractures. Evaluation of distal radioulnar joint instability should include a thorough history and physical exam, including the use of the piano key and press tests. The piano key test is when the examiner has the patient pronate the forearm and applies a volar force to the ulnar head, with a positive test indicated by increased translation when compared to the contralateral extremity. The press test is when the examiner has the patient pronate both forearms and press into a table. A positive test presents with the volar translation of the ulnar head. Most patients can undergo management with nonoperative therapy, including wrist and forearm strengthening, as well as functional bracing.

Subluxation-related ulnar neuropathy (SUN) syndrome is a potential complication of chronic instability of the distal radioulnar joint. Compression and kinking of the ulnar nerve can occur within the Guyon canal leading to numbness and tingling of the fourth and fifth digits with potential weakness of the intrinsic muscles of the hand in more advanced cases. Evaluation of symptoms of ulnar neuropathy should include stressing the distal radioulnar joint to verify the etiology of the condition.