Good communication between health professionals working as an interprofessional team is necessary for the management of patients with vitreous hemorrhage. As soon as a patient presents with complaints, which can be as minor as floaters, a proper history should be taken. Urgent ophthalmic reference should be given. The medical providers must check the best-corrected visual acuity, pupillary reactions before sending the patient. A retina specialist should be consulted for further management. It has been proven that early management leads to better outcomes in cases with vitreous hemorrhage.

Vitreous hemorrhage is a sign and not a disease per se. To find the cause of VH can be quite a challenge if there are no associated comorbidities. Diabetes mellitus, hypertension, sickle cell anemia, prematurity are a few of the many causes that can lead to vitreous hemorrhage. Hence just treating the vitreous hemorrhage and not managing the cause will not cure it. Hence a multitude of medical disciplines like pediatricians, hematologists, radiologists, neurologists, oncologists are involved in its management. Even various ocular subspecialties like glaucoma, pediatric ophthalmology need close follow-ups. A regular follow up is needed to avoid any future complications.

Trained nursing staff is needed to check the vitals and run the necessary tests for surgical assistance, pre and postoperative care of patients, and to educate the patient and family. A pharmacist is needed in the postoperative period to help patients with appropriate medications and drops. Hence, it cannot be emphasized enough about the need for a good interprofessional team strategy in improving care, coordination, and communication to advance and improve outcomes in cases with vitreous hemorrhage.