Drug-induced lupus may develop a few weeks to several months after starting the drug, which may make the diagnosis difficult. Further, it is not possible to differentiate DIL from SLE based on clinical features alone, although DIL tends to be milder and renal or CNS involvement, vasculitis, leukopenia, and pericarditis are rare.

Arthralgia is common and often is the first symptom and presents in up to 90% of the patients. Constitutional symptoms including myalgia, fever and weight loss are also common. Cutaneous involvement is frequent and may include photosensitivity, purpura, erythema nodosum, malar rash, and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) rash. Scarring alopecia, discoid lesions, and mucosal ulcers are less common in DIL than in SLE. Serositis especially pleuritis is also commonly seen. Although pericarditis has rarely been reported with DIL secondary to some drugs, large pericardial effusion or cardiac tamponade is rare to occur in DIL.

Hydralazine induced lupus is frequently manifested by arthralgia, myalgia, fever, rash (malar rash is common), hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and pleuritis. Rare cases of glomerulonephritis, neuropsychiatric manifestations and pericarditis have been reported. While arthralgia, myalgia, fever, and pleuritis are common in procainamide induced lupus, rash and lymphadenopathy are less common, and glomerulonephritis or CNS involvement is rare. Minocycline induced lupus is usually characterized by fever, arthralgia, arthritis, rash, and rarely pneumonitis and cutaneous vasculitis.

Anti-TNF agents, which are the mainstay of treatment of rheumatoid arthritis now, have been frequently reported with positive autoantibodies as well as drug-induced lupus. While there is a high incidence of positive autoantibodies including ANA and Anti-dsDNA in patients treated with anti-TNF agents (up to 50%), only a few of those patients develop DIL (less than 1%).

Both interferon-alpha and interferon-beta have been linked to the development of DIL. As the case with anti-TNF agents, autoantibody development including ANA and Anti-dsDNA is common, while DIL develops in less than 2% cases.

Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) may be idiopathic but is drug-induced in about one-third of cases. Hydrochlorothiazide is the classic drug associated with SCLE. Other drugs reported to cause SCLE include terbinafine, anti-TNF agents, antiepileptics, proton pump inhibitors, NSAIDs, antiarrhythmic medications, calcium channel blockers, and ace inhibitors.