All types of caries, including nursing caries, result from the interaction of cariogenic microbiota, fermentable carbohydrates, and susceptible teeth that interact during a prolonged period.

**Cariogenic Microorganisms**

Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus sobrinus are the main bacteria found in early childhood caries.

Children that acquire Streptococcus mutans earlier in life, even before the first tooth's eruption, are at greater risk of developing caries. This period is called the window of infectivity. If preventive measures are put in place during this crucial period, the risk of developing caries is much lower because less pathogenic bacteria will colonize the oral niches.

**Direct Transmission of Infection**

The vertical transmission of Streptococcus mutans from the mother to the child occurs through infected saliva and sharing food and utensils. Droplet infection through habits in the mother such as tobacco or betel-nut chewing can also spread the bacteria.

Babies delivered by the cesarian section have a higher risk of developing caries than those born vaginally as the aseptic environs and atypical microbial environment increases the chances of opportunistic Streptococcus mutans colonization. Studies suggest that mothers are the primary source of Streptococcus mutans in their children. Therefore, the level of Streptococcus mutans in children correlates with those of their mothers.

**Improper Dietary and Feeding Practices**

A retrospective cohort study on early childhood caries and associated risk factors was performed among mothers with 25- to 30-month-old infants from a community where prolonged breastfeeding was common practice. The study concluded that children that consumed sugary food or rice that was pre-chewed by the mother and fell asleep with the breast nipple in the mouth were found to have ECC.

**Sugary Diets**

Studies have found that early childhood caries are more frequent in children who consume juice between meals and sweetened solid food.

**Developmental Enamel Defects**

Developmental enamel defects, such as enamel hypoplasia, have been recognized as a significant risk factor for developing ECC

**Systemic Diseases and Medications**

Children with juvenile diabetes mellitus due to high blood sugars or children with special needs who may have to cope with reduced oral hygiene are more susceptible to caries. Cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy consume sugary lozenges to increase salivary flow, posing a greater risk for caries.

**Socioeconomic and Ethnic Factors**

Early childhood caries is most common in children from a low socioeconomic background: prenatal and perinatal malnutrition predisposes to enamel hypoplasia;

Leroy et al. showed a proportional correlation between children exposed to environmental tobacco smoke at home and early childhood caries, although probably linked to the socioeconomic background of their parents.