The management of avascular necrosis of the femoral head ranges from conservative to invasive. The exact therapy utilized is dependent upon many factors, and each patient must have their case evaluated individually for optimization. Such factors include the age of the patient, level of pain/discomfort, location and extent of necrosis, comorbidities, and of course, whether the collapse of the articular surface has occurred or not. Treatments are best implemented at the pre-collapse stage and include both operatives as well as non-operatives options. If left untreated, femoral head necrosis may lead to subchondral fractures within only 2 to 3 years.

Treatment decisions should be based on the staging of the lesions but mainly on the presence or absence of collapse. Generally, non-operative treatments or core decompression can show value in asymptomatic and symptomatic small to medium-sized pre-collapse lesions. Medium to larger-sized lesions can have treatment with bone grafting (vascularized or non-vascularized), or osteotomies. If femoral collapse has occurred or acetabular involvement is present, arthroplasty is indicated.

Conservative management spans a variety of non-operative treatments. These may include physical therapy, restricted weight-bearing, alcohol cessation, discontinuation of steroid therapy, pain control medication, and targeted pharmacologic therapy, among others. Since avascular necrosis of the femoral head shows a marked variation in the time to progression and/or collapse, and evidence is scarce; there is no agreement on conservative treatments. Despite small asymptomatic lesions being able to resolve spontaneously, most progress and require treatment. Vasodilators, statins, bisphosphonates, and anticoagulants have been used off-label in an attempt to revascularize the femoral head. Vasodilators, including iloprost (PGI2), are intended to decrease intraosseous pressure, allowing for increased blood flow.

There are several surgical options for those who require more invasive treatment. They fall into categories as either joint preservative or joint reconstructive procedures. The joint preservation interventions include core decompression, bone grafts, use of biologics and/or cellular therapies, and osteotomy; while reconstructive interventions entail a joint replacement.

Core decompression is the surgical removal (via drilling) of affected tissue from the inside the femoral head to decrease pressure and increase perfusion and is the most common intervention during pre-collapse stages. Cell-therapies have been used as adjuvants to core decompression and have been reported to be safe and suggest improved clinical outcomes with lower disease progression rate than core decompression alone.

Bone grafting is an alternative to treatment of larger size lesions with no early collapse. A bone graft can be taken from another part of the patient’s own body (autograft), from another part of the patient’s own body along with intact vasculature (vascularized bone graft), or another person via a bone bank (allograft). The vascularized bone graft has the added value of carrying a new blood supply that can improve the revascularization of the bone and potentially revitalize the necrotic zone. Osteotomy is the removal of portions of bone to alter the weight distribution of the joint to the healthy, uninvolved bone. These procedures usually include rotational trans-trochanteric or angular intertrochanteric procedures, in which the necrotic region of the femoral head can be moved away from weight-bearing regions, theoretically allowing healing or delaying progression.

If the damage is extensive, the collapse has occurred, and/or there is acetabular involvement; then arthroplasty may be required; this involves the removal of the ball-and-socket of the hip and replacement with a prosthetic.