Morphea is classified into various subtypes, and clinical presentation varies with each phenotype.

Early lesions of morphea present as erythematous skin lesions with some itching and tenderness. As the lesions progress, they develop sclerotic centers surrounded by a violaceous border. The lesions eventually result in hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation with atrophy of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. In most patients, the lesions are self-limiting and resolve in a few years, but some patients can develop new lesions with ongoing symptoms.

Circumscribed morphea presents as isolated oval or round lesions over the trunk or chest. The superficial variant tends to be mild, with inflammation localized to the dermis. In the deep variant, the inflammation spreads to the cutis and involves the fascia and the muscles and results in scarring. A deep variant can often cause complications like joint contractures.

Linear morphea is characterized by the presence of band-like lesions, which usually manifest over the head and neck or the limbs. The sclerosis is localized to the dermis but often has a protracted course and is the most common type in childhood-onset morphea. It can involve deeper tissues causing complications like muscle weakness, joint contractures, and limb deformities in children.

Morphea that is the “en coup de sabre” (the blow of a sword) type causes a lesion over the forehead and extends over the scalp leading to alopecia. The patients with deeper lesions can develop ocular and neurologic symptoms like headaches and seizures and very rarely develop progressive hemifacial atrophy.

Generalized morphea is a severe form of plaque morphea characterized by multiple lesions or coalescence of individual plaques. It is predominant in females, and the lesions are frequently deep and associated with limited range of motion in underlying joints. Generalized morphea is defined by the presence of more than four lesions in at least two different anatomic locations.

There are other variants like bullous and guttate morphea, which are very rare. Other clinical entities like eosinophilic fasciitis and Parry Robertson syndrome are often considered to be related to morphea.

Mixed morphea is a term used to describe the simultaneous presence of more than one subtype.