Complaints related to bladder prolapse may be divided into vaginal pressure, urinary symptoms, sexual dysfunction, and, rarely, defecatory symptoms.

To aid history taking, a set of questions called the Pelvic Floor Impact Questionnaire (PFIQ) can be used to assess pelvic prolapse related symptoms.

Women may complain of a feeling of pressure or sensation that something is bulging or about to come out of the vagina. Usually, this symptom develops when the prolapse is at the level of the hymen or beyond. With advanced stages of bladder prolapse, discharge, bleeding, or vaginal pain may be present.

Urinary symptoms may include stress incontinence (SUI) or symptoms such as frequency and urgency associated with an overactive bladder.

Sexual dysfunction may be due to physical, psychological, or partner-related factors. Prolapses can results in dyspareunia, urinary incontinence during intercourse, obstruction, and dryness.

It is reported that sexual dysfunction is associated with fear and embarrassment due to the possibility of urinary incontinence during intercourse.

Defecatory symptoms are rare but most commonly include constipation and incomplete emptying. These symptoms are more common with posterior and apical vaginal wall prolapses.

A vaginal examination should be carried out with the patient in the dorsal lithotomy position. A cystocele is diagnosed and staged using the Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification System (POPQ) which provide an objective description tool and measure severity.

Subsequently, examination with a Sims speculum is performed to better visualize the vaginal walls. Simulated apical support may also be performed to establish whether a pessary may be of benefit. This is achieved by using forceps or a cotton swab and pressing the vaginal apex. To conclude, a bimanual examination is performed to exclude any other masses or pelvic pathology.