High-resolution computed tomography (CT) is the gold standard for diagnosing and classifying temporal bone fractures. In most cases of injury sufficiently severe to produce a temporal bone fracture, a CT scan will have been ordered as part of the initial trauma evaluation. If not, CT scans of the temporal bone without contrast should be ordered in the presence of facial paralysis, cerebrospinal fluid fistula, disruption of the superior wall of the external auditory canal or scutum with potential trapping of epithelium, suspected vascular injury, or when surgical intervention is anticipated.

For patients with complete paralysis (House-Brackmann VI) ipsilateral to the temporal bone fracture, electrodiagnostic testing of the facial nerve may be helpful to determine prognosis and candidacy for surgical facial nerve decompression. Electroneuronography (ENoG) is the most commonly employed testing modality. It involves stimulating the facial nerve transcutaneously where it exits the skull base at the stylomastoid foramen and recording the amplitude of the compound muscle action potentials in the face via surface electrodes placed over the orbicularis oculi and orbicularis oris muscles. If >90% of the action potential amplitude is lost on the injured side, the patient is considered a candidate for facial nerve decompression.

Because it requires an uninjured side to serve as a control, ENoG testing can only be performed effectively in cases of unilateral facial paralysis. Even though some cases of facial paralysis occur immediately after injury to the temporal bone, ENoG testing should not be performed three days after the fracture to permit sufficient time for Wallerian degeneration. Wallerian degeneration is the process by which axons and myelin distal to the site of injury degenerate to allow for regrowth of the axon and its supporting Schwann cells. The process takes at least three days in the case of transection injury but can take weeks or months to complete in the case of crush injuries; the protracted course of Wallerian degeneration in crush injuries explains why some patients do not reach House-Brackmann grade VI paralysis until several weeks after suffering a temporal bone fracture. If ENoG is performed before Wallerian degeneration is complete, the results will underestimate the severity of axonal injury. Patients with slowly evolving facial paralysis should be followed closely until they reach a functional nadir. If that nadir occurs at House-Brackmann grade VI, ENoG testing should be performed.

While it is generally accepted that in the case of Bell's palsy, there is no benefit to surgical facial nerve decompression if it is performed after 14 days, that does not appear to be the case in temporal bone fractures; temporal bone fracture patients may benefit from facial nerve decompression even if it is performed two months post-injury.

The advantage to an EMG is that in the case of nerve recovery, the ENoG, which relies on synchronous action potentials at the neuromuscular junction, may not demonstrate significant recovery of action potential amplitude, while the EMG may show polyphasic action potentials, which indicate recovery in progress and may forestall an unnecessary surgical procedure.

Audiometry, particularly acoustic reflex testing, can also be helpful in the setting of temporal bone fractures to indicate whether a hearing loss is present, whether it is conductive, sensorineural, or mixed in nature, and whether there is a facial nerve injury. Ossicular injury or chain disruption is uncommon in temporal bone fractures but may occur at the incudostapedial or incudomallear joint and may require reconstruction.