Protein synthesis is an essential requirement of any cell. It involves the use of ribosomes, whose job is to translate an mRNA code into functioning proteins. In eukaryotes, this occurs on ribosomes with the 40S and 60S subunits. In prokaryotes, such as bacteria, protein synthesis occurs using ribosomes with the 30S and 50S subunits. At these sites, the ribosome transfer RNA (tRNA), which is charged with an amino acid, binds to the mRNA template. The subsequent binding of each tRNA charged with an amino acid contributes to the formation and elongation of cellular proteins. Tetracyclines specifically inhibit the 30S ribosomal subunit, hindering the binding of the aminoacyl-tRNA to the acceptor site on the mRNA-ribosome complex. When this process halts, a cell can no longer maintain proper functioning and will be unable to grow or further replicate. This type of impairment by the tetracyclines makes them “bacteriostatic.”

There is a growing concern over bacterial strains that are resistant to tetracycline antibiotics. Bacterial genes that are resistant to tetracyclines are often encoded on plasmids or transferable elements like transposons. There are two well-documented mechanisms of resistance, which include alteration in ribosomal protection proteins or efflux pumps. The former mechanism allows the ribosomes to proceed with protein synthesis regardless of the high intracellular levels of the drug. The latter mechanism consists of various subtypes of transmembrane pumps that drive out solutes, in this instance, antimicrobials, out of the cell to prevent cell death. There is documentation of a third, less studied mechanism of resistance, which is that of tetracycline modification. All of these mechanisms reduce the efficacy of tetracyclines, calling for increased diligence when clinicians prescribe these drugs.