Cefotaxime is available and distributed in powder form and as a premixed solution for intramuscular and intervenous administration. The powder form is available in 500 mg, 1 g, 2 g, and 10 g vials. The premixed solution is available as 1g and 2g for injection.

**Gonococcal Infections**

- Urethritis (Males): 0.5 g intramuscular injection (can be administered as a single dose)

- Cervicitis (Females): 0.5 g intramuscular injection (can be administered as a single dose)

- Rectal infection (Males): 1 g intramuscular injection (can be administered as a single dose)

- Rectal infection( Females): 0.5 g intramuscular injection (can be administered as a single dose)

Cefotaxime has no coverage for Chlamydia trachomatis, and treatment should be added if this organism is suspected.

**Septicemia**

- 2 g I.V. every 6 to 8 hours. (Daily dose of 6 to 8 grams)

**Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis (SBP)**

- Cefotaxime is the drug of choice in patients with SBP due to its ability to achieve excellent levels in the blood and ascitic fluid. The typical dose in SBP would be 2 g intravenous every 8 hours.

**Uncomplicated Infections**

- 1 g intramuscular or IV every 12 hours. (Daily dose of 2 grams)

**Moderate to Severe Infections**

- 1 to 2 g intramuscular or IV every 8 hours. (Daily dose of 3 to 6 grams)

**Life-threatening Infections**

- 2 g intramuscular or IV every 4 hours. (Daily dose of 12 grams)

**Cesarean Section**

- First dose: 1 g IV (Umbilical cord should be clamped)

- Second dose: 1 g intramuscular or IV (six hours after the first dose)

- Third dose: 1 g intramuscular or IV (twelve hours after the first dose)

**Surgery Prophylaxis**

- 1 g intramuscular or IV 30 minutes before surgery.

**Neonates (age 0 to 4 weeks)**

- (Age 0 to 1 week) 50 mg/kg per dose IV every 12 hours

- (Age 1 to 4 weeks) 50 mg/kg per dose IV every 8 hours

**Infants and Children (age 1 month to 12 years old)**

- 50 to 180 mg/kg intramuscular or IV every 6 to 8 hours (for individuals with body weight <50kg)

- 1 to 2 grams intramuscular or IV every 8 hours. (for individuals with body weight >50kg)

Individuals with a body weight>50 kg should follow adult dosing. The daily dosage should not exceed 12 grams for infants and children.