Diazepam is a fast-acting potent anxiolytic popular due to its broad therapeutic index, low toxicity, and improved safety profile. Nonetheless, diazepam is still a drug with a high potential for use disorder associated with severe adverse/toxic effects. Therefore, clinicians should identify the proper indication for the prescription of diazepam. Psychiatrist consultation is necessary in the cases of anxiety disorders. Neurologists should prescribe diazepam in spasticity and status epilepticus, considering the risk vs. benefit ratio for the individual patients. The pharmacists are responsible for the proper dosing of diazepam, medication reconciliation, and patient counseling. The pharmacist should report to the clinician or nurse if there are significant interactions.

In acute overdose of diazepam, triage nurses and emergency department physicians are responsible for rapid diagnosis and stabilization of the patient. Critical care physicians should manage respiratory depression, which can be life-threatening if not treated promptly. In ICU, regular assessment of RASS(Richmond agitation-sedation scale) and CAM-ICU (confusion assessment method for the ICU) scoring should guide the proper use of sedatives. Consulting the psychiatrist is especially important if the diazepam overdose is intentional.

A randomized controlled trial, EMPOWER (Eliminating Medications Through Patient Ownership of End Results), for reducing inappropriate benzodiazepine prescriptions for older adults through direct patient education was conducted to compare the result of a direct-to-consumer educational intervention against usual care on benzodiazepine discontinuation in older adults. At the end of six months, 27% of the intervention group discontinued benzodiazepine compared to 5% in the control group using the stepwise tapering protocol.

As illustrated above, managing patients on diazepam requires an interprofessional team approach consisting of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, nurses, pharmacists, and other healthcare providers. As stated previously, prescribing clinicians should be responsible for checking state and federal controlled substance databases to detect benzodiazepine use disorder, diversion, and prevent improper drug use.