The occurrence of asymptomatic bacteriuria versus urinary tract infections varies among different patient populations. Younger, healthy individuals can have asymptomatic bacteriuria, but it is rare compared to older adults. The Infectious Diseases Society of America found a prevalence of 1% to 5% in healthy, premenopausal women and 1.9% to 9.5% in pregnant women. Increasing age is a risk factor, but prevalence is typically higher in females and those living in a long-term care facility (with or without a catheter). Women and men at least 70 years old were found to have a prevalence of 10.8% to 16% and 3.6% to 19%, respectively. Long-term care residents also had increased prevalence with 25% to 50% in women residents and 15% to 40% in male residents. Long-term use of indwelling urinary catheters is also associated with a 100% prevalence of asymptomatic bacteriuria, unlike short-term usage with up to 23% prevalence. Female diabetics have also shown an increased prevalence rate when compared to male diabetics, 9% to 27% versus 0.7% to 11%, respectively.

In regards to UTIs, women are more likely to develop them than men, although an increase is seen in men after the age of 50. Approximately 50% of women will develop at least one UTI within their lifetime, with 1 in 3 women having a UTI by the age of 24. In younger women, UTI recurrence is 25% within 6 months of the first occurrence. If pregnant women with asymptomatic bacteriuria are not treated, up to 40% will develop a UTI, but the actual incidence of UTIs in pregnancy is as low as 4%. UTIs are the second most common infection for all elderly individuals not in long-term care, accounting for 25% of all infections.  Individuals with indwelling urinary catheters are at higher risk of developing UTIs. The most common nosocomial infection in hospitals and nursing homes is catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs).