Cefepime is contraindicated in patients with prior hypersensitivity reactions to the drug in the past.

Cephalosporins have a long history of being contraindicated in patients with severe hypersensitivity reactions to penicillin. Early testing of cephalosporins (up until the 1980s) came from the Penicillium mold of penicillin. The thinking is that these early cephalosporins were contaminated with penicillin and accounted for cross-reactivity allergic response. Thus, avoiding cephalosporins in patients with penicillin allergies likely developed from these early studies.

Cephalosporins are similar to penicillins with the beta-lactam ring but differ by the various side chains. The similarities of these side chains to the penicillin structure account for the IgE mediated cross-reactivity and not the beta-lactam ring, as previously thought. The newer the generation of cephalosporins have, the greater difference in the side chain structures. A severe IgE mediated hypersensitivity reaction to cefepime in a penicillin-allergic patient is rare. It is worth mentioning that the delayed T-cell hypersensitivity reactions can still occur because T-cells can recognize the entire beta-lactam ring and the side chains.

Caution is advisable with use in patients with compromised renal function (creatinine clearance less than or equal to 60 mL/min) as roughly 85% of the drug is excreted through the urine unchanged. Caution is necessary with cefepime in pregnant or breastfeeding women and should only be used if the benefits outweigh the risks.