Although congenital smooth muscle hamartoma is present at birth, the diagnosis may get delayed and only made in early infancy. It is mostly asymptomatic. In some patients, history may include itching, pain, or numbness. Besides the lumbosacral area, the congenital smooth cell hamartoma can also occur on the trunk and proximal extremities. Many other atypical locations were reported, such as the scalp, the eyelids, the nipple, the scrotum, and on the foot. Variable in size, it can reach up to 10 centimeters.

There are three clinical aspects of congenital smooth muscle hamartoma described: classic, papulo-follicular, and mixed.

The classic form presents as a well-limited skin-colored or pigmented plaque covered with prominent overlying hypertrichosis. The papulo-follicular form is less common. It presents as large patches with multiple perifollicular skin-colored papules. These papules may coalesce to form irregularly-shaped plaques. Unusual clinical presentations were reported, such as linear atrophic plaques, micro-papular plaques

The characteristic clinical hallmark of congenital smooth muscle hamartoma is the positive pseudo-Darier sign (rubbing of the skin results in transient piloerection associated with erythema and induration of the skin). It requires differentiation from authentic Darier sign characteristic of cutaneous mastocytosis. However, the pseudo-Darier sign only presents in 50% of congenital smooth muscle hamartomas. Occasionally, vermiform movements at the surface of the lesion occur after the rubbing of the skin. Both signs result from the contraction of the smooth muscle cells of the hamartoma.