The prognosis of middle cerebral artery strokes depends on several factors. The most essential factors in determining prognosis are the size of the stroke, whether the patient received thrombolytic therapy and/or thrombectomy, and access to rehabilitation following the stroke. Explaining the prognosis after a stroke to the patients and their families can be challenging, particularly in the acute setting. It can take from weeks up to a year to reach a new baseline level of function. Patients who suffered smaller cortical strokes typically recover rapidly within a few weeks and then begin to level out over a few months. However, for larger strokes, it can be challenging to give a prognosis in even the first three months because the process of recovery varies so drastically between individuals. Mental status by day four usually can give the prognosis of the patient's mental status moving forward, but activities of daily living may take up to six months to establish a new baseline. Of note, physical therapy is as important in older patients as it is in younger patients in improving function.

In the case of severe MCA strokes, in which patients often battle cerebral edema and alteration of consciousness, mortality is frequently dependent upon whether life-saving measures are taken. Many patients qualify for tracheostomy and percutaneous gastrostomy tube placement, which increases the length of hospital stay and also increases the risk of infection. However, if they do not receive these interventions, their life expectancy is markedly decreased due to the inability to protect their airway or consume nutrients. In these patients, the prognosis is grim at best, the likelihood of recovery is very low, and their length of time of survival depends on whether or not these interventions are performed.