Arches of the foot are important structural adaptations for function. Various functions of the arches of the foot are mentioned below.

**Functions of Arches of the Foot**

- Help in proportional body weight distribution to weight-bearing area.

- Act as a segmented lever. Which helps in forwarding propulsion of the body in walking, running, and jumping.

- Act as a shock absorber in stepping & jumping movements.

- Act as springs board.

- Adapt the foot on an uneven surface.

- Protect plantar vessels and nerves.

- The arched foot is dynamic and pliable.

- When the foot is on the ground, the arches flatten somewhat. When the foot is off the ground, arches restore their contour.

**Classification of the Arches of the Foot**

- Longitudinal arch

- Medial longitudinal arch
- Lateral longitudinal arch

- Transverse arch

- Anterior transverse arch
- Posterior transverse arch

The formation of arches of the foot is compared with the stone bridge having two ends, pillars, a summit, and a keystone; and their support mechanism is also compared with the same as in the stone bridge, e.g., intersegmental ties (staples), tie-beams, and slings. (See figure)

**Medial Longitudinal Arch**

- Bones forming medial longitudinal arch includes the following:

- Medial part of the calcaneum
- Talus
- Navicular
- Three cuneiforms (lateral, intermediate, and medial)
- First, second and third metatarsals.

- Characteristics of the medial longitudinal arch

- It is higher and represents a big arc of a small circle
- Having more bones and more joints, so more mobile.
- Have the property of resiliency and shock absorber.

- Two ends of the medial longitudinal arch

- Anterior end

- Heads of first, second, and third metatarsals
- Phalanges do not take part in the formation of the arch.


- Posterior end

- Medial tubercle of calcaneum

- Pillars of the medial longitudinal arch

- 
              
- Anterior pillar

- It is long and weak.
- Formed by the talus, navicular, three cuneiforms, first, second and third metatarsals


              
              
- Posterior pillar

- It is short & strong.
- It is formed by the medial half of the calcaneum.

- The Summit of the medial longitudinal arch

- It lies at a higher level than the lateral arch.
- It lies at the level of the superior trochlear articular surface of the talus.

- The main joint of the medial longitudinal arch

- Talocalcaneonavicular joint.

- The most vulnerable part of the medial longitudinal arch

- Head of the talus, which acts as a keystone.

**Factors Maintaining the Medial Longitudinal Arch**

- **Shape of bone**
- Wedge-shaped bone, their edge forms plantar surface
- Head of the talus act as a keystone.

- **Intersegmental ties (staples)**
- Plantar ligaments & spring ligaments; are further supported by slips of the tibialis posterior tendon.

- **Tie-beams**
- Plantar aponeurosis
- Abductor hallucis
- Medial part of flexor digitorum brevis
- Medial part of flexor digitorum longus
- Tendon of flexor hallucis longus.

- **Suspending factors**
- **Sling action**
- Tibialis anterior and superficial fibres of deltoid ligament. 


- **Sustentacular action**
- Tendon and its slips of insertion of tibialis posterior.


- Sling formed by the tibialis anterior and peroneus longus together pulls the foot upwards.

- **In standing position:**Plantar ligaments and plantar aponeurosis provide support.

- **During locomotion:**Muscles become an active part of the maintenance of arches.

- The plantar aponeurosis act as a “windlass mechanism” to maintain the arch of the foot.

- Failure of arch support depends on the duration of stress and not on the severity of stress foot bears.

**Lateral Longitudinal Arch**

- Bones forming the lateral longitudinal arch include the following:

- Lateral part of the calcaneum
- Cuboid
- Fourth and fifth metatarsals.

- Characteristics of the lateral longitudinal arch are as follows:

- It represents the small arc of the big circle.
- It has fewer bones and fewer joints, so less mobile.
- Have a property of rigidity.
- It is built to transmit weight and thrust to the ground

- Two ends of the lateral longitudinal arch:

- **Anterior end**
- Heads of the fourth and fifth metatarsals


- **Posterior end**
- Lateral tubercle of calcaneum.

- Pillars of the lateral longitudinal arch:

- Anterior pillar

- Long and weak
- It is formed by the cuboid, fourth and fifth metatarsals.


- Posterior pillar

- Short and strong
- Formed by the lateral half of calcaneum

- Summit of the lateral longitudinal arch

- It lies at a lower level than the medial arch at the articular facet on the superior surface of the calcaneum at the level of the subtalar joint.
- A cuboid is the keystone of the lateral longitudinal arch.

- The main joint of the lateral longitudinal arch

- Calcaneo-cuboid joint

- The most vulnerable part of the lateral longitudinal arch

- Calcaneo-cuboid joint

**Factors Maintaining the Lateral Longitudinal Arch**

- **Shape of bone**
- Calcanean angle of the cuboid, which maintains the upward tilt of the long axis of the calcaneum

- **Intersegmental ties (staples)**
- Long plantar ligament
- Short plantar ligament
- Dorsal metatarsocuboid ligament
- Dorsal calcaneocuboid ligament

- **Tie-beams**
- Plantar aponeurosis
- Abductor digiti minimi
- Lateral part of flexor digitorum brevis
- Lateral part of flexor digitorum longus
- Tendon of flexor digiti minimi brevis.

- **Suspending factors**
- **Sling action act from above**
- Tendon of peroneus brevis and tendon of peroneus tertius.


- **Sustentacular action from below**
- Tendon of peroneus longus.


- Sling formed by the tibialis anterior and peroneus longus together pulls the foot upwards.

**Summary of Longitudinal Arches of the Foot**

**Transverse Arches of the Foot**

For modulating the elasticity and rigidity of the foot, the midfoot plays an important role. Transverse arch act as a stiff spring lever that stores the energies and will be utilized during the propulsion of the foot. The transverse arch modulates the biomechanics of the longitudinal arch according to the need.

During the stance phase, three points that touch the ground are the head of the first and fifth metatarsals, and the heel or calcaneum suggests that the foot is elevated at the second to fourth metatarsals indicating a transverse arch.

Transverse arches of the foot are of two types, anterior and posterior transverse arches.

**Anterior Transverse Arch**

- It is a complete arch because both ends touch the ground.

- Formed by the head of the first to fifth metatarsals.

**Posterior Transverse Arch**

- Only the lateral end touches the ground, making it an incomplete arch.

- It only forms a “half dome.” This arch completes by a similar half dome of the opposite side arch.

- It is formed by the base of the metatarsals, tarsals, and metatarsals.

**Factors Maintaining the Transverse Arc**

- **Shape of bone**
- Wedge-shaped 3 cuneiforms and base of middle three metatarsals

- **Intersegmental ties**
- Deep transverse ligament and intrinsic plantar ligament
- Dorsal interossei and adductor hallucis

- **Tie-beams**
- Tendon of peroneus longus and tendon of tibialis posterior

- **Suspending factors**
- Peroneus tertius, peroneus brevis, and tibialis anterior.

**Summary of the Transverse Arches of the Foot**

Carpopedal unit is a complementary concept to the common longitudinal division of the foot (lateral and medial longitudinal arch) or transverse division of the foot (forefoot, midfoot, hindfoot). The carpopedal unit is formed by the forefoot, midfoot, and calcaneus, bounded to each other by the spring ligament, bifurcate ligament, and calcaneocuboid ligament.