Overall, most patients have a satisfactory outcome in treating heavy menstrual bleeding. In choosing a technique, both first and second generation are found to have equal efficacy in outcomes. At 12 months after a nonresectoscopic endometrial ablation, 82% to 97% of patients showed decreased menstrual bleeding, and 85% to 98% of patients were satisfied with their outcome.

**Compared to oral therapy:**A meta-analysis included 12 randomized controlled trials of oral therapy versus surgical options for heavy menstrual bleeding. The results found that for those placed on oral therapy, 58% of women had surgery within two years. In comparing oral therapy to endometrial ablation, endometrial ablation was more effective in controlling heavy menstrual bleeding (at four months: RR 2.66 (95% CI 1.94 to 3.64); NNT = 2 (95% CI 2 to 3), one study).

**Compared to Levonorgestrel intrauterine device (IUD):**efficacy in decreased heavy menstrual bleeding were similar for those who received medical management compared to nonresectocopic endometrial ablation at two years.

**Compared to Hysterectomy:**Treatment with hysterectomy offers advantages such as amenorrhea and definitive management for heavy menstrual bleeding. Disadvantages of hysterectomy include increased hospitalization, complications, and recovery. A large Cochran review showed that repeat surgery due to treatment failure was more likely after endometrial ablation than after hysterectomy at one, two, three, and four years of follow-up.