The abdominal skin island is designed as an ellipse, similar to an abdominoplasty incision. A low, transverse incision and a supraumbilical, transverse incision complete the ellipse. Dissection proceeds superficial to the external oblique fascia from lateral to medial until the lateral row of deep inferior epigastric perforators is encountered. At this point, the fascia is incised lateral to the perforator row. The skin and subcutaneous tissue are then similarly elevated from the contralateral side, crossing the midline until the medial row of perforators is identified. The medial fascia is incised at this level. Depending on which variety of free TRAM (MS-0 to 3 differing amounts of muscle are taken with the flap).  The rectus muscle gets divided at the superior and inferior edge of the skin incision. The DIEA is then dissected to its origin off the iliac. After preparing the recipient site, the vessel is clipped and divided.

The internal mammary artery and vein are the preferred recipient vessels for autologous breast reconstruction. The most common access point for the vessels is between the third and fourth ribs, which can be spared or partially removed to expose the vessels.

The flap is harvested from the abdomen and placed into the chest.  Standard microsurgical anastomosis of the vein and artery are performed, and the flap is inset and shaped into a breast mound.  Many varieties of inset are possible depending on the mastectomy defect and surgeon preference.

Breast reconstruction patients often require additional revision procedures to recreate symmetry and appropriate shape. Frequently performed procedures include fat grafting and contralateral mastopexy.

Patients who receive immediate reconstruction may require adjuvant radiation. While there is an increased risk of flap fibrosis, there is no increased risk of wound complications, fat necrosis, or infection.