Anorectal malformations constitute a full spectrum of abnormalities with the need for lifelong follow-up even after a successful repair. These anomalies must be detected early, preferably in the delivery room. Early involvement of neonatologists and pediatric surgeons is vital for treatment planning and timely intervention. Complex repair may need multiple specialists and teams (pediatric surgery, urology, gynecology) working at the same time, operating as a cohesive interprofessional team. Nursing care with experienced neonatal specialty nurses is vital before and after surgery, and they should report any findings or concerns to the clinician managing the case. Parents need to understand the disorder and available treatment options. Because ARMs may occur in patients with VACTERL complex, a thorough workup of the infant is necessary before any surgery. If a temporary colostomy is required, the stoma nurse should educate the parents on its management and its duration. The frequent anal dilatations and progressive perineal skin maceration do take a toll on the patient and the family. Nurses should regularly check the perineum for fecal soilage and keep it clean. Finally, imperforate anus also creates parental anxiety, and a mental health nurse consult may be a strong recommendation.

Care coordination and parent education are a significant determinant of long term outcome after discharge; this is where an interprofessional team, as outlined above, must continue to communicate and manage the patient, potentially for life. Each discipline must share and have access to the same findings and data for the patient to perform their duties and achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]