an interprofessional approach is necessary for the care of an amputee. Performing an amputation is a stressful period for most patients. If the procedure is elective, a mental health nurse should consult with the patient. Also, a prosthetic professional should consult with the patient to explain the different prosthetics and when the patient will get fitted with the appliance. After surgery, a wound care nurse must follow the patient to ensure that there is complete healing before fitting any prosthetic device. Other nursing actions and duties are detailed further in the following sections. Pharmacists will provide support for glycemic control in patients with diabetes, pain control, and overall medication reconciliation, reporting any issues to the rest of the interprofessional team.

Providers caring for this patient population should include social workers, nursing staff, pharmacists, physical therapists, occupational therapists, prosthetists, psychologists, and multispecialty physicians all working in close coordination to provide the best outcome. Every clinician is responsible for ensuring that the patient still can function in society. The social worker must ensure that the home is suitable and that the patient has adequate resources and support services.

Care of an amputee should be individualized based on the patients' overall health status. Clear communication with the patient and their families regarding their treatment course and expectations must be established in the pre-operative setting to facilitate post-operative care and improve the patient-physician relationship.

Only through a thorough interprofessional team effort, involving physicians, surgeons, mental health professional, physical and occupational therapists, specialized nursing, and pharmacists, extending across many months, can patients receiving a lower extremity amputation achieve optimal results and maintain an adequate quality of life. [Level V]