AR results from mal-coaptation of the aortic leaflets due to abnormalities of the aortic leaflets, their supporting structures such as the aortic root and annulus, or both.

**Primary Valve Disease**

Common causes include calcific aortic valve disease, which is usually associated with aortic stenosis (AS) but can be associated with some degree of AR; infective endocarditis, which alters the anatomy of the leaflets; tear or laceration in the ascending aorta which leads to prolapse of the aortic cusp due to loss of commissural support. Congenitally bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) may cause AR due to incomplete closure or prolapse of the valve, although AS is a more common complication of BAV. Congenital AR due to unicommissural and quadricuspid valves, or rupture of a fenestrated valve are less common. Prolapse of an aortic cusp occurs in some patients with ventricular septal defect (VSD). Rheumatic disease results in fibrous infiltration of AV cusps leading to retraction that prevents proper opening during systole and closure during diastole. The associated fusion of the commissures may lead to combined AS and AR. Rheumatic aortic valve disease is often associated with rheumatic mitral valve disease. Myxomatous degeneration of the aortic valve can also lead to progressive AR. Membranous subaortic stenosis may lead to thickening and scarring of the AV leaflets resulting in secondary AR. AR is also reported to be a complication of percutaneous aortic balloon valvotomy and transcatheter aortic valve replacements.

**Primary Aortic Root Disease**

Aortic annular dilation leads to the separation of the AV leaflets leading to AR. Degenerative changes in the aortic root disease may be caused by age-related changes, cystic medial necrosis often associated with Marfan syndrome, or osteogenesis imperfecta. A number of inflammatory disorders are associated with aortic root dilation such as ankylosing spondylitis, Behcet syndrome, psoriatic arthritis, arthritis associated with reactive arthritis, ulcerative colitis, relapsing polychondritis, and giant cell arteritis. Severe, chronic systemic hypertension may dilate the aortic annulus and lead to progressive AR. Retrograde dissection of the aorta can involve and disrupt the aortic annulus causing AR.