The diagnosis of PAS-2  is often delayed, and this can sometimes cause significant complications. Usually, these patients present with isolated endocrine dysfunction and later develop other endocrine and non-endocrine diseases.

Manuela Dittmar et al. followed 151 out of 360 PAS-2  patients for 13 years and found that autoimmune thyroid disease was most prevalent in 99 patients (65.6%), and out of these, 50 patients (33.1%) were found to have Graves' disease, and 49 patients (32.5%) had Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. T1DM was found in 92 patients (60.9%), and Addison disease was found in 28 patients (18.5%). T1DM  occurred early in life with a mean age 27.5 years while other diseases manifested around age 36.5 to 40 years. The coexistence of T1DM  and thyroid disease was most common while the coexistence of Addison and thyroid disease was less common.

PAS-2 patients may present with vague symptoms of weight loss, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, generalized weakness, anorexia, abdominal pain, diarrhea, polyuria, and polydipsia. Common signs in these patients may include mucosal and cutaneous hyperpigmentation low blood glucose levels and orthostatic hypotension if Addison disease is the diagnosis or polyuria and polydipsia with hyperglycemia if T1DM is present. Hypothyroidism can present with bradycardia, and delayed tendon reflexes.

Patients with Addison disease may present with shock-like features including hypotension, tachycardia, and altered mental status suggestive of adrenal crisis.

There is a 2.5-fold increase risk of adrenal crisis in patients who have Addison disease due to the autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome.