Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic immune-mediated disorder comprised of Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis. Ulcerative colitis affects the large intestines, whereas Crohn disease may affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). IBD is a multisystem condition that predominantly affects the gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, ocular, and cutaneous systems. The complications that arise outside the intestinal inflammation of IBD are known as extraintestinal manifestations (EIMs) of IBD. Regularly, these manifestations result in significant morbidity in IBD patients, even more so than the intestinal disease itself. EIMs present in 5% to 50% of all IBD patients.

The severity and occurrence of EIMs and their correlation with intestinal-IBD activity vary. Most EIMs are directly associated with an ongoing intestinal flare. This includes aphthous ulcers, pauciarticular arthritis, erythema nodosum (EN), and episcleritis. Other EIMs like ankylosing spondylitis(AS) and uveitis are independent of intestinal disease activity.

**Musculoskeletal Manifestations**

Musculoskeletal manifestations are the most common IBD EIMs (arising in about 40% of IBD patients).

**Cutaneous Manifestations**

Cutaneous manifestations of IBD occur in up to 15% of IBD patients.

Severe disease is uncommon with IBD and should prompt investigation for infectious causes of EN. Pyoderma gangrenosum is a relatively rare manifestation seen in 0.4% to 2% of IBD patients.

**Ocular Manifestations**

About 2% to 5% of patients with IBD present with ocular manifestations, making eyes the third most common extraintestinal tissue apart from joints and skin affected by IBD. The most common ocular manifestations include episcleritis, scleritis, and uveitis. Episcleritis presents with sensations of ocular burning, irritation, pain, and redness. Episcleritis should be differentiated from scleritis clinically as the latter is a serious condition that presents with severe ocular pain and tenderness. In severe cases, scleritis may present with visual impairment that requires urgent referral to the ophthalmologist to avoid permanent vision loss. Less severe cases benefit from topical steroid therapy, and IBD treatment as episcleritis and scleritis correlate with intestinal disease activity. In comparison, uveitis may precede IBD diagnosis and occurs independently of intestinal-IBD activity. It presents as ocular pain, photophobia, blurred vision, and headache. Slit-lamp examination reveals the presence of peri-limbic edema and inflammatory changes in the anterior chamber. Like scleritis, uveitis requires prompt treatment with topical or systemic corticosteroids to prevent complications like vision loss and evaluation by an ophthalmologist.

**Hepatobiliary Manifestations**

IBD results in hepatobiliary manifestations in about 50% of patients during their illness.

PSC results in inflammation and fibrosis of the intra- and extrahepatic biliary tract. It presents with RUQ pain, fever, fatigue, jaundice, itching, and weight loss. Liver function tests reveal a cholestatic pattern with magnetic resonance cholangiography revealing the presence of multiple segmental bile duct strictures and dilatations resulting in the classic ‘beads-on-a-string’ appearance. Advanced disease inevitably leads to cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and hepatic failure. PSC progresses independent of intestinal-IBD activity, and hence IBD treatment does not improve the condition. Treatment of PSC includes ursodeoxycholic acid, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with dilatation of bile ducts, or hepatic transplantation. In patients with Crohn disease, severe ileitis or ileal resection results in bile salt malabsorption that contributes to gallstone formation.

**Other Manifestations**

Urological manifestations of IBD include nephrolithiasis with possible urinary outflow obstruction. Nephrolithiasis is most commonly seen in patients with Crohn disease due to ileal malabsorption/ileal resection. The resulting fat malabsorption in the gut predisposes to calcium oxalate kidney stone formation. Dehydration due to diarrheal episodes in IBD patients further exacerbates renal stone formation. Patients with IBD are at an increased risk of developing thromboembolic disorders. These disorders occur independent of the intestinal disease activity and result from the IBD-related chronic systemic inflammation that leads to atherosclerosis.

Most common disorders include ischemic heart disease, stroke, deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism. The presence of any of the signs and symptoms of these conditions requires prompt management to prevent mortality. IBD also predisposes to metabolic bone disorders resulting in low bone mass in up to 14 to 42% of affected patients. The etiology for bone loss is multifactorial. It may be contributed primarily by the IBD pathogenesis or secondary to poor calcium absorption or side effects of IBD treatment resulting in low bone mass and fractures. IBD has also been associated with interstitial pneumonia and interstitial nephritis. However, the exact prevalence of these EIMs is unknown.