Parasitic diseases constitute a large number of the 17 neglected tropical diseases identified by the World Health Organization (WHO). These diseases are of global importance as they affect over 1 billion people, including those who are very poor, cause debilitating disability, and often stigmatized. Enhancing healthcare outcomes for patients suffering from these diseases is multifaceted. Mass drug administration is key in the management of diseases such as onchocerciasis, lymphatic filariasis, and schistosomiasis. Community-directed treatment is recommended for the mass administration of drugs. Therefore, an interprofessional team approach consisting of the pharmacist needs to be aware that to attain better outcomes, the implementation of long term community programs is necessary for endemic regions.

Newer and safer drugs are necessary for the management of Chagas disease, leishmaniasis, and trypanosomiasis.

Antiparasitic drug therapy is usually a response to exotic and/or rare diseases. The clinician (MD, DO, NP, or PA) needs to be aware of the possible presenting signs and symptoms, and also perform a thorough history of travel that covers endemic areas for these diseases. Nursing staff will also have responsibility for taking this type of patient history and will document if present, as well as providing appropriate monitoring once therapy has started. The pharmacist will verify the clinician has chosen the suitable agent, verify dosing, and provide counsel to patients. Nurses and pharmacists must report any concerns encountered to the prescriber for corrective action.

An infectious disease specialist is almost mandatory in these cases. Coordination between the clinicians, nursing, and pharmacy is crucial, since many of the drugs used are uncommon, and dosing and potential interactions are critical. In the same vein, nursing must be made aware of the possible adverse effects from medication therapy, and report at the first sign of these appearing to the rest of the interprofessional healthcare team; this will permit the prescribing clinician to alter dosing or therapeutic agents, again in tandem with consult from the pharmacy. Only through this type of interprofessional collaboration can the healthcare team drive positive outcomes for patients with these infections. [Level V]