The cornerstone to good outcomes for patients with acute ICH (i.e., those in a clinically good prognostic category) is often the rapid diagnosis and treatment. For this to occur, various staff members in the chain of healthcare professionals tending to the patient have an important function, both in recognizing their individual roles and communicating with their colleagues to offer the best clinical care. This is the very essence of interprofessional teamwork in healthcare.

To begin with, many patients are first attended to by friends and family who have personal knowledge about a patients’ medical and drug history and well as their wishes regarding aggressive medical treatment, which can be pertinent in helping doctors make decisions later in their healthcare journey. Paramedics are often the first responders to acutely unwell patients with ICH. Their ability to gain an eye-witness account, medical and drug history is crucial (especially when the patient has a decreased GCS). While being transferred to the local emergency department, the paramedic team must be able to stabilize a patient and handover any important information they collected to the nursing team and doctors in the hospital.

The nursing team is often in charge of obtaining the patients' vital signs and observations once admitted, and rapid recognition of an unsafe airway, respiratory or circulatory failure is important so the appropriate medical teams can get involved to treat the immediate threats to the patient’s life. The doctors must have the ability to gain a history from either the patient, family, or first-responder team and make a rapid plan for investigations. The radiology team (both radiologists and radiographers) has an important role in performing appropriate imaging in a time-critical manner, which is crucial to the diagnosis.

Once a diagnosis of ICH is made, the neurology and neurosurgery team works together with the family and patient to make an informed plan about what the most appropriate management should and will be. If a patient is for conservative management, intensive care nurses and doctors are responsible for providing aggressive medical management under the guidance of the stroke physicians. If a decision is made for surgery, then there is a need for the neurosurgeons and intensivists to work together to allow the patient to have the best possible outcome.

Lastly, those fortunate patients who do well will most frequently require large amounts of support from the occupational therapists, speech and language therapist, and physiotherapy team to help to rehabilitate the patient to their maximum potential, thereby improving outcomes

‘The Guidelines for the Management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage’ from the American stroke association was published following thorough peer review in 2015 and includes results from phase 3 trials. The guidelines aim to provide healthcare professionals with succinct advice concerning the recognition and management of ICH.