Currently, there is no available treatment that has proven to be efficacious or delay the progression of cystic fibrosis-associated liver disease. Best practice guidelines for the prevention and management of advanced liver disease in CF are lacking.

Portal hypertension is a relatively common complication in patients with end-stage liver disease, and its diagnosis and management are very crucial. Patients with cirrhosis should be assessed for portal hypertension with an abdominal exam to check for splenomegaly and ascites, ultrasound examination with Doppler velocity, and biochemical tests showing platelet counts of <150,000 units x 10/mL.****An alternative measure is the surgical placement of a portosystemic (PS) shunt and should be reserved for refractory cases only as it causes the risk of development of worsening hepatic encephalopathy and acute liver failure.

Ascites, if demonstrated on physical examination and or imaging, is considered to be a poor prognostic sign. Management includes sodium and fluid restrictive diet and initiation of diuretics. Referral for liver transplant evaluation should be considered.

The role of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in CFLD is controversial, with multiple clinical trials showing conflicting results. UDCA prescribed at 20 to 30 mg/kg body weight/day has shown to improve biochemical parameters, but there is no strong evidence that the administration of UDCA alters the natural course of CFLD.

Liver transplantation (LT) confers a substantial survival advantage in patients with CFLD, but the clinical criteria and timing of liver transplantation in CFLD are not well established.<50%) and declining quality of life linked to advanced liver disease.