Abnormalities of primary hemostasis and platelet activation may arise due to qualitative or quantitative defects of platelets. Clinically these disorders may result in mucosal bleeding or skin bleeding, presenting as petechiae, purpura, or ecchymoses. Abnormal laboratory studies may include prolonged bleeding time or decreased platelet count.

Bernard-Soulier syndrome and Glanzmann thrombasthenia are two examples of autosomal recessive qualitative platelet disorders. As described above, platelets are first recruited to a site of damage by vWF and bind to this glycoprotein using GPIb receptors. In Bernard-Soulier syndrome, there is a genetic deficiency of the GPIb receptor, resulting in impaired platelet adhesion to vWF. If a ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation assay were performed in a patient with such a deficiency, there would be hypoactive adhesion as ristocetin activates vWF binding to platelet’s GP1b receptor. Glanzmann thrombasthenia is a hereditary disorder that impairs platelet aggregation due to a genetic deficiency of the GPIIb/IIIa receptor. On such a patient’s blood smear, one may expect to see an increase in isolated platelets as platelets are unable to clump together. Blood smear in patients affected by Bernard-Soulier syndrome may show large platelets.

The GPIIb/IIIa receptor may also be a target for destruction in immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). In this condition, IgG autoantibodies are produced by plasma cells in the spleen and target the GPIIb/IIIa receptor on platelets, which the body wrongly recognizes as an antigen. These antibodies then act as signals for the macrophages of the spleen to consume the “tagged” platelets. For this reason, a common finding is splenomegaly. ITP is the most common cause of thrombocytopenia, a decrease in platelet count, in children and adults, and commonly follows a viral illness. Usually, it is self-limited and resolves within weeks, but steroid treatment has been used as initial therapy. Children tend to respond well, but adults tend to relapse. When there is symptomatic bleeding or if there is a concern for intracranial bleeding, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) administration is used to raise the platelet count. However, this is short-lived as the splenic macrophages consume platelets indiscriminately. Therefore, splenectomy is done in refractory cases, as it eliminates the sources of IgG and removes the site of destruction.

Though not a disorder of platelets, von Willebrand disease directly prevents proper platelet adhesion to the subendothelial matrix of injured vessels, thereby increasing the bleeding time, as seen in other platelet disorders. The typical subtype of this condition is an autosomal dominant deficiency of vWF and is the most commonly inherited bleeding disorder. As a result of dysfunctional aggregation, patients present with skin and mucosal bleeding, and ristocetin cofactor assay testing is abnormal. Additional laboratory results may show increase partial thromboplastin time (PTT) since vWF also serves as a carrier protein for factor VIII, essential to the extrinsic coagulation pathway. Treatment for von Willebrand disease includes administration of desmopressin, an antidiuretic hormone analog, which increases the release of vWF stored in the Weibel-Palade bodies of vessel endothelium.