Corticosteroids are hormone mediators produced by the cortex of adrenal glands that further categorize into glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and androgenic sex hormones. They are used in a plethora of conditions, commonly called steroid-responsive disorders and dermatoses. Corticosteroids constitute a double-edged sword - significant benefit with a low incidence of adverse effects can be expected if used in proper dosage and for a limited duration; however, wrong dose and/or duration and unmindful withdrawal after prolonged administration can have catastrophic effects. Corticosteroids are used across all medical specialties. This activity reviews the must-know properties of this group of drugs, their broad indications and contraindications, ways of administration, adverse event profile, practical aspects of the pharmacokinetics of different molecules, monitoring essentials, approach to maximize the benefit and minimize adverse effects, and clinically relevant drug-interactions pertinent for all specialists whether used in isolation or administered by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Review the anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative, and immunosuppressive actions of corticosteroids.
- Summarize the monitoring required for corticosteroid therapy.
- Describe the possible adverse effects of corticosteroid therapy.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care to patients requiring corticosteroids.