When a patient is suspected of having toxic or nutritional optic neuropathy, a prompt referral to an ophthalmologist is recommended. [Level V] All patients presenting with a bilateral progressive symmetric visual loss should be investigated for the presence of maculopathies, which can usually be excluded by performing intravenous fluorescence angiography and multifocal ERG. Hereditary optic neuropathies such as dominant optic atrophy and Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy can also present similarly to toxic or nutritional optic neuropathies; thus, the genetic tests to exclude these conditions should be performed in all patients suspected of having toxic/nutritional optic neuropathies.

In a toxic optic neuropathy due to medication, there should be communication with the prescribing physician to discontinue the offending agent. In any toxic or nutritional optic neuropathy, the patient's primary care provider should be notified to initiate the correct treatment. Other healthcare providers that may be involved include nursing, social work, radiology, neurology, psychiatry, addiction medicine, gastroenterology, rheumatology, cardiology, and internal medicine.

Depending on a patient's clinical presentation and when demyelination, compression, infiltration, and ischemia are suspected to be the causes of visual loss, an MRI of the brain and orbits with contrast administration, targeted serological testing, and occasionally, lumbar puncture should be performed. The outcomes after optic neuropathy depend on the cause. While most drug and nutritionally induced optic neuropathy can reverse when the offending agent is discontinued, some degree of vision loss may persist in a few patients.