Ursodeoxycholic acid acts on the liver through various complex and complementary mechanisms, including alterations in the bile acid pool, serving as a cytoprotectant, immunomodulating substance, and choleretic. Furthermore, UDCA markedly decreases biliary cholesterol saturation by inhibiting the absorption of cholesterol in the intestine and its secretion into bile, demonstrated by reduced cholesterol fraction of biliary lipids.

The cytoprotective effect of UDCA is attributable to its ability to protect hepatocytes and cholangiocytes from bile acid-induced damage. Bile acids stimulate the formation of reactive oxygen species, which induce inflammatory processes and cholecystitis.

Therapeutic concentrations of ursodeoxycholic acid can shift the concentration of bile acids from hydrophobicity to hydrophilicity.

The choleretic effect of UDCA is attributable to its ability to induce the secretion of bile acids. This effect is comparable to endogenous bile acids; however, without the potential toxicity, which makes it useful in treating cholestatic disorders. In fact, prior studies have shown that in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis and primary sclerosing cholangitis, UDCA therapy improved the excretion rates and transit time of bile acid analogs.

UDCA has also been shown to have an immunomodulating effect on hepatocytes. In rats with extrahepatic obstruction caused by bile duct ligation,  researchers observed an increased hepatic expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigens. Similarly, patients with cholestasis resulting from primary biliary cirrhosis have the same aberrant expression of MHC class I antigens on hepatocytes and bile duct cells. Expression of these antigens could lead to immune-mediated destruction by activated lymphocytes, causing hepatic injury. UDCA has been shown to reduce the expression of class I antigens in several cholestatic liver disorders.