Under aseptic precaution and occasionally with mild sedation, the desired target nerve is first identified via ultrasound, nerve stimulation, or fluoroscopy. A local anesthetic may be infiltrated at the skin. Then, the needle is advanced until it is near the target nerve, which is again confirmed via the modalities above of ultrasound, nerve stimulation, or fluoroscopy, often with contrast administration. If the nerve stimulation approach is performed, advancement of the needle and current reduction are continued until the desired motor response is achieved with a current of 0.2 to 0.5 mA at 0.1-millisecond stimulus duration. Once a proper motor response is obtained with a current of 0.2 to 0.5 mA from the nerve stimulator, the needle should be in the correct position. After a preliminary aspiration, a diagnostic block with a local anesthetic may be used to confirm the correct position of the needle. The prepared phenol solution may then be injected. Because phenol has immediate local anesthetic effects, injection is typically painless. Other immediate effects include the abolition of contractions and a reduction in the degree of spasticity. Cardiovascular monitoring during and after the procedure with resuscitative backup is important in preventing and treating adverse outcomes. Due to its immediate selective effect on smaller nerve fibers, phenol has an immediate local anesthetic effect. Thus, it is crucial to remember that the therapeutic effect from phenol neurolysis cannot be evaluated until after 24 to 48 hours after resolution of its local anesthetic effect, and often the neurolytic effect may not be clinically evident for 3 to 7 days.