**Part-time or Full-time Wear**

Dispensing lenses part-time or full-time depends on the type and magnitude of ametropia being managed. Generally, users are advised to use their lenses properly and consistently. Individuals with smaller amounts of ametropias sometimes wear their spectacle corrections less frequently without any symptoms; however, the reverse is the case for those with significant amounts of ametropias.

First-time wearers may undergo an "adjustment phase" that may last multiple days while acclimatizing to their new spectacles, especially for prescription glasses with cylindrical corrections.

Multi-morbidity results in poor resolution of symptoms even after spectacle correction.

Dhirar et al. conducted a meta-analysis of four major databases looking at the compliance of myopic children to spectacle use.

Common reasons for poor compliance included damaged/misplaced lenses, parents' disapproval, peer pressure, and cases in which the child frequently forgot or lost their lenses. Patients have been observed to rotate their heads upon putting on a pair of spectacles to compensate for an off-axis cylindrical error. Hence spectacle dispensing is not complete until the patient gives satisfactory feedback after using the lenses for a while.

**Aniseikonia**

Aniseikonia is a condition where unequal retinal images form due to differences in the refractive states of both eyes.

**Fechner Paradox**

Fechner's paradox is an apparent improvement in visual conditions under monocular viewing compared to binocular viewing.