Gastroparesis (gastric stasis) is derived from Greek words gastro/gaster or stomach, and paresis or partial paralysis. It is a clinical condition resulting from delayed gastric emptying in the absence of mechanical obstruction and is associated with upper gastrointestinal symptoms. Most common symptoms include nausea, vomiting, early satiety, postprandial fullness, upper abdominal pain, bloating, and weight loss. These symptoms can be severely disabling and can adversely impact the quality of life in patients suffering from this disorder. Several etiologies can lead to this clinical entity; the most common of these are idiopathic, diabetic and postsurgical. Pathophysiology of gastroparesis is poorly understood, but important mechanisms associated are the loss of interstitial cells of Cajal and inability to express neuronal nitric oxide synthase. Gastric emptying scintigraphy (gold standard), 13C-octanoate breath testing, and a wireless motility capsule are the diagnostic tests used to diagnose this condition. Management of gastroparesis includes initial restoration of the nutritional state, optimizing glycemic control, symptom relief and improvement in gastric emptying. Medical management includes the use of prokinetic agents such as metoclopramide, erythromycin, and anti-emetic agents. Endoscopic and surgical methods are used for refractory cases. Intrapyloric botulinum injection, gastric electrical stimulation, venting gastrostomy, feeding jejunostomy, pyloroplasty, partial gastrectomy and most recently endoscopic techniques such gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy (G-POEM) are being utilized for relieving symptoms.