Turcot syndrome can arise from mutations in the MMR genes (type I, associated with HNPCC) or the APC genes (type II, associated with FAP). Mutations of either gene can result in colorectal cancer and brain tumors; most commonly, glioblastomas and medulloblastomas. Glioblastomas are associated with MMR gene mutations, specifically, in the hMLH1 DNA mismatch repair gene. Medulloblastomas are associated with APC gene mutations.

A general summary of the pathological process is that tumor suppressor gene deletion leads normal colonic mucosa to transform into invasive carcinoma. Normal mucosa develops into polyps, then the polyps continue to develop into invasive cancer. There are several different types of polyps including non-neoplastic hamartomas, the hyperplastic proliferation of the mucosa, and adenomatous polyps. Colorectal cancers generally arise from adenomatous polyps. It is adenomatous polyps that develop in type I and type II of Turcot syndrome. Homozygous MMR or APC gene mutations further the progression of the disease. These mutations manifest as tumors existing beyond the colon, namely brain tumors in TS.

In contrast to the single allelic loss of the APC gene which results in FAP, Turcot syndrome which results in colorectal cancer and brain tumors seems to require a biallelic loss of the APC gene and in the MMR genes. Cancer develops either by the loss of tumor suppressor genes, the activation of oncogenes, or both. The APC gene is a tumor suppressor gene. When it is missing, it contributes to a lack of regulation in cell division. Hence, in FAP, there is an uncontrolled development of adenomatous colonic polyps that eventually turn invasive. These polyps found in TS2 can turn invasive by 20, and by 40 years of age, most of these patients will have developed cancer if the colon is not removed.

The APC gene mutation starts via KRAS proto-oncogene point mutations. This leads to hypomethylation of DNA which leads to proto-oncogene activation. Then there is a loss of the APC alleles, which is a tumor suppressor gene. The APC gene is found on the long arm of chromosome 5. There has also been mention of the loss of the DCC gene on chromosomes 18q and 17p. The specific MMR genes which undergo mutation are the MLH1 and MSH2 genes, and occasionally hPMS2.

The medulloblastomas associated with TS2 come from neural stem cell precursors containing the homozygous APC mutation in the cerebellum.MMR gene mutations.