Coronary artery disease is a major healthcare and economic burden in the United States. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) comprises a spectrum of hemodynamically significant coronary artery disease that most commonly arises from plaque rupture and/or erosion, leaving the lipid-rich plaque core exposed to the circulation. This leads to a cascade of events, including activation of platelets and the coagulation cascade, which can cause acute thrombotic occlusions. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) remains the preferred modality for the treatment of ACS

Percutaneous balloon angioplasty was first proposed in the late 1970s as an alternative to coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) for the treatment of coronary artery disease.

**Coronary Artery Stent Anatomical Characteristics**

The key anatomical components of a coronary artery stent are platform, polymer coating, and released drug. The stent platform provides radial strength, flexibility, and radio-opacity. The stent polymer acts as a stable reservoir and modulates the release of drugs. The third component is the actual drug compound, which has an antiproliferative characteristic to inhibit smooth muscle proliferation. Over time, there have been several advancements in coronary artery stents in each anatomical character described above. Newer stent platforms are made of either cobalt-chromium or platinum-chromium, whereas early generation stents were made of stainless steel. This has allowed manufacturers to drastically reduce strut thickness and improve deliverability. New generation stent design also has a better mechanical performance profile, which has enhanced clinical outcomes. In addition to the reduction of stent strut thickness, the development of polymer coating technology has allowed for a more controlled release of the antiproliferative agent as well as reduced long-term stent strut thickness. A polymer coating is either hydrophobic or hydrophilic, as well as bioabsorbable. Newer stents have a combination of these characteristics that enhance drug-eluting properties. The third component of DES is the actual antiproliferative drug, which historically has been either sirolimus or paclitaxel. Some studies have shown sirolimus and other similar agents to be superior compared to paclitaxel in reducing neointimal inhibition as well as stent restenosis, but the risk of thrombosis and myocardial infarction (MI0 were the same.

**Percutaneous Coronary Intervention**

**Equipment**

Intersocietal accreditation commission is a non-profit organization that accredits facilities that perform interventional cardiovascular procedures such as the following:

- Single or biplane cine angiography system

- U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved catheters, wires, stents, balloons, and embolic protection devices.

- Motorized radiolucent procedure table

- Ultrasound imaging equipment

- Hemodynamic monitoring equipment

Additional cardiac catheterization lab equipment details are out of the scope of this article.

**Personnel**

- Interventional cardiologist

- Cardiovascular nursing specialist

- Cardiovascular or radiology trained technologist

- Advanced practice provider (physician assistant or cardiac nurse practitioner)

- Ancillary staff includes clinical pharmacists, technical assistants

- Anesthesia personnel are sometimes required

**Brief Overview of the Procedure**

After the patient is prepared for the procedure, continuous vital signs monitor will occur as well as intravenous fluid administration and appropriate anticoagulation. Depending on the preferred access, multiple anatomical sites will be cleaned and sterilized. Initially, diagnostic angiography will be performed, and once a significant lesion is identified, the procedure will proceed to intervention if indicated. The intervention will involve the use of a guiding catheter, coronary wire, and a balloon angioplasty catheter to pre-treat the lesion. After angioplasty, the interventionalist will decide if a coronary stent is indicated. A more detailed description of this technique is out of the scope of this article.