In general, hospital discharge instructions are often misunderstood by patients, and patients with limited English proficiency tend to misinterpret this information to a greater extent. This had proven true for follow-up and medication information, even when language interpretation was provided for the patient. Therefore, in an attempt to minimize misunderstandings during hospital discharge, instructions should be printed in the patient’s proficient language, as well as a detailed explanation from an interpreter.

In-hospital professional interpreters have decreased the use of hospital assessments, including but not limited to laboratory tests, imaging, and medications. In-house interpreters are also the most cost-prohibitive mode to provide medical interpretation because it involves hiring a full-time employee. Another source of medical interpretation needs to be purchased and readily available when the hospital interpreter is not present or is not fluent in a respective language.

Physicians and nurses with limited interpretation skills continue to utilize ad hoc interpreters or other nearby people with poor language skills for important conversations, including patient consent and medicine administration. The patient's family members and guests should be used sparingly for ad hoc medical interpretation due to the reasons mentioned above.

The use of video interpretation can decrease the use of laboratory tests, radiology, EKG, ECHO, and hospital admissions. These savings can not offset the cost of providing in-house professional interpretation at most institutions.

Physicians and medical staff should be trained regarding the use of available medical interpretation services. Despite its obvious necessity, tele-interpreter services are underutilized in many situations due to lack of knowledge regarding availability, the misunderstanding regarding the length of time for use, difficulty training a rotating workforce, and the different procedures for activation of services at different times of the day.

Despite all of this information, language barriers persist for many patients seeking medical care.