The management of patients with BWS entails a qualified lead health-care provider to oversee the coordination for the care of the patient, following a holistic approach. Once a diagnosis of BWS is made or even suspected, anticipatory medical management is required, as well as a comprehensive plan that includes standard supportive medical and surgical care, as necessary. Given the high heterogenicity and the variable degree of the features when present, treatment indications should be customized for each specific patient.

- **Prenatal management**: in suspected or confirmed cases, it is important to anticipate possible fetal or maternal complications (maternal pre-eclampsia, congenital anomalies, macrosomia-related complications, postnatal hypoglycemia), and provide adequate care. Delivery should be planned to occur in an institution with a neonatal intensive care unit.

- **Management of hypoglycemia**: glucose monitoring should be performed for the first 48 hours of life. If hypoglycemia is detected, the newborn should be transferred to a neonatal intensive care unit for management as per general guidelines. If no hypoglycemia is detected, fasting tests, including glucose, insulin, and ketones, are recommended at 48 hours of life and prior to nursery discharge. Severe persistent hyperinsulinism warrants further investigation.

- **Management of growth anomalies**: growth should be routinely monitored using growth charts specifically modified for BWS patients. Interventions for possible tall stature could be considered. Lateralized overgrowth should be monitored clinically, at least once a year. If a leg-length discrepancy is encountered, referral to a pediatric orthopedic surgeon is warranted; on the contrary, an arm-length discrepancy is generally monitored clinically with no indication for surgical correction.

- **Management of macroglossia**: feeding problems require the involvement of feeding specialists and dietitians. For suspected airway obstruction, careful evaluation, including sleep studies and consultations to pulmonologist and ear, nose, and throat specialists, are needed. Tongue-reduction surgery is indicated if there are macroglossia-related complications such as feeding difficulties, persistent drooling, speech difficulties, dental malocclusion, and appearance-related psychosocial problems, usually performed after the age of 1 year, or earlier in cases of severe airway obstruction.

- **Management of abdominal wall defects**: there are no additional specific recommendations than the general guidelines for these conditions.

- **Management of cardiac anomalies**: a baseline clinical cardiovascular examination is necessary at diagnosis. If anomalies are detected or suspected, referral to a cardiologist specialist for assessment and echocardiography is required. Annual evaluation and electrocardiogram are recommended for patients with a known molecular aberration involving the IC2 region.

- **Management of renal complications**: clinical and ultrasonographic evaluation for nephrological anomalies is needed at diagnosis and at the time of adult transition. If anomalies are detected, referral to a nephrologist and urologist is necessary. Nephrocalcinosis and renal stones should also be monitored along with abdominal surveillance for tumor screening.

- **Management and monitoring of embryonal tumors**: BWS is a recognized cancer predisposition syndrome, with an estimated tumor risk of 8 to 10% in the first decade of life, with the highest incidence during the first 2 years of life. Different tumor screening protocols have been proposed with common goals of early detection, reducing morbidity, and increasing survival. The protocol of tumor surveillance used in the USA includes the performance of abdominal ultrasound and serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) at diagnosis, then every 3 months until age 4 years. Thereafter, only ultrasound screening should be continued every 3 to 4 months until the age of 7 years. Abdominal ultrasound screening covers the most common associated tumors, including Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and adrenal carcinoma. AFP is specifically used for monitoring hepatoblastoma; however, it has been involved in recent controversies due to the presence of higher levels of this marker in BWS infants which obscure its interpretation, and the implications of repeated venipuncture. Even though certain molecular defects have more predisposition to certain types of cancer, it is recommended to apply the protocol to all BWS patients regardless of the molecular subtype.

- **Management of neurological features**: cognitive development is usually normal, but monitoring by a pediatrician is recommended, especially if perinatal complications (prematurity, birth trauma, neonatal hypoglycemia) or chromosomal anomalies are present.

- **Monitoring of late-onset complications**: a comprehensive evaluation at age 16 to 18 years is recommended to detect any complication that would require follow-up by adult health-care services. Genetic counseling should be offered for family-planning advice.

- **Psychological and counseling aspects**: at the time of diagnosis, families should be offered contact information of BWS support groups. Psychological evaluation and support, specialist counseling, and family support services should be included as part of the plan of care.