Complement components constitute approximately 15% of the globulin protein fraction in the plasma, and their combined concentration can be as high as 3 mg/ml. Also, several regulatory components of the system exist on the cell membranes, so the term complement, therefore, now embraces glycoproteins distributed among the blood plasma and cell membranes. There are seven functional components of the complement cascade. They are as follows

- **Initiator complement components**: As the name suggests, they are the initiator of their respective complement cascades. These proteins do this by attaching to their activating ligands. These ligands are present in a soluble or membrane-bound state. The ligands then get activated to do their respective biological activities by undergoing conformational changes. C1q complex, mannose-binding lectin (MBL), and ficolins are such initiators.

- **Enzymatic mediators:**This component of the complement cascade activates the other members of the complement cascade by their enzymatic activity. They do this either by cleaving or doing conformational changes by binding to these macromolecules. The C3 and C5 convertases are such enzymatic mediators of the complement cascades.

- **Components binding to membrane or opsonins**: The enzymatic mediators cleave the complement proteins into two components. One is the larger component named with the suffix “b” and the smaller one with the suffix “a.” Like C3b and C4b are the larger subcomponents of C3 and C4, which act as opsonins. They bind to the microbial cell surface receptors for them and enhance phagocytosis. One exception is for the C2 component.

- **Inflammatory mediators**:
            The smaller fragment of the complement cascade proteins formed after undergoing activation has a designation with the suffix “a.” Some enhance the local blood supply by binding with endothelial cells of the small blood vessels. They act as inflammatory mediators. They are also known as anaphylatoxins, as their consequences can be destructive in excess.

- **Membrane attack complex**:
            This protein complex is made up of complement components C5b, C6, C7, and many copies of C9. It is responsible for punching holes into the cell membrane and lysing the microorganism.

- 
**Complement receptor proteins:**
            They are present on the cell surfaces and bind to the complement proteins; this leads to signal-specific cell functions.

- **Regulatory complement component**:
            They are the protective proteins that prevent the complement proteins from overactivity. Examples are factor H and factor I.