Knowledge of normal conotruncal septum formation facilitates understanding of D-TGA development. In the fifth week of gestation, opposing pairs of ridges form in the truncus arteriosus. These ridges are termed the right superior truncus swelling and the left inferior truncus swelling. The right superior truncus swelling grows distally and to the left while the left inferior truncus swelling grows distally and to the right. The result is twisting of the swellings around each other and the foreshadowing of the anatomically normal spiral septum.

Simultaneously, swellings in the dorsal and ventral walls of the conus cordis appear and grow toward each other and distally. Eventually, these swellings fuse with each other, as well as the truncus septum, thus dividing the conus cordis into anterolateral (right ventricular outflow tract) and posteromedial (left ventricular outflow tract) portions.

Equally important to septal formation, is the migration of neural crest cells through pharyngeal arches three, four, and six, and to the heart. There, they contribute to endocardial cushion formation in the truncus arteriosus and conus cordis, as well as lengthening of the outflow tracts. Any insult to the migration of neural crest cells can cause tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus, and TGA. It is not uncommon to see cardiac and craniofacial defects in the same individual since neural crest cells also contribute to craniofacial development.

Transposition of the great arteries occurs when the aorticopulmonary septum fails to spiral. This can be due to defects in the maturation of the right superior truncus swelling and the left inferior truncus swelling, fusion of the conus swellings with the aorticopulmonary septum, or adversities in neural crest development or migration.

The pathological defects in D-TGA cause a detrimental change in cardiac physiology. Due to the existence of two parallel circuits, deoxygenated blood continues to circulate systemically, and oxygenated blood continually flows through the pulmonary circuit. Parallel channels are incompatible with life unless mixing between deoxygenated and oxygenated blood occurs. Mixing can occur via an atrial or ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, or through collateral bronchopulmonary circulation. Interventional cardiologists may also perform a balloon atrial septostomy (BAS) to facilitate mixing between the atria.

Several common cardiac anomalies that can occur in patients with D-TGA can include:

- Ventriculoseptal defects

- Left ventricular outflow tract obstruction

- Mitral and tricuspid valve abnormalities

- Coronary artery variations

A lesser known form of TGA is levo-TGA (L-TGA). In this case, the left ventricle is positioned to the right of the right ventricle. Mainly, the ventricles are on opposite sides of the heart. The pulmonary trunk and aorta arise in their anatomically correct orientations, however, since the ventricles are reversed, the aorta is fused with the right ventricle, and the pulmonary trunk is combined with the left ventricle. The resultant flow of blood in a patient with L-TGA is as follows: Deoxygenated blood enters the anatomically correct right atrium, passes through the mitral valve into the left ventricle, and is pumped into the pulmonary trunk to the lungs. From the lungs, the oxygenated blood enters the left atrium, passes through the tricuspid valve, and into the right ventricle where blood is then pumped into the aorta. Since the flow of blood in patients with L-TGA passes through the normal systemic and pulmonary circuits, L-TGA is sometimes termed anatomically correct TGA.