The valve opening and closing are mainly due to the pressure changes across it. The normal anatomy of the pulmonary valve is such that it can open only in the direction of blood flow, which is from the ventricle to the pulmonary artery. Normal pulmonary artery pressure is 15 to 28 mmHg during systole and 5 to 16 mmHg during diastole. Right ventricular (RV) pressures range from 15 to 28 mmHg during systole and 0 to 8 mmHg during diastole. During systole, the ventricular pressure increases to higher than the pulmonary artery (PA) pressure resulting in the opening of the valve and causing the blood flow from the ventricle to the pulmonary artery. Towards the end of the systole and the beginning of diastole, after most of the blood from the ventricle empties into the pulmonary artery, the valves close because of higher pressure inside the pulmonary artery, which pushes the valve leaflets to a closed position preventing any leak into the ventricle. If the valve is defective or if the pressure in the pulmonary artery is very high, there could be a backward leak of blood from the pulmonary artery into the right ventricle, causing pulmonary regurgitation.

PR demonstrates an increase in both preload and afterload. The reverse pressure gradient from the pulmonary artery to the right ventricle (RV), which is the driver of the PR, progressively decreases throughout the diastole and accounts for the decrescendo nature of the diastolic murmur. With pulmonary regurgitation, the end-diastolic volume of the right ventricle remains higher than normal. As the disease progresses, the right ventricular diastolic pressure and cavity size increase due to the backflow. The forward cardiac output (CO) remains preserved during the early stages of the disease but may not normally increase with exercise and declines over time. A reduced RV ejection fraction may be an early indicator of hemodynamic compromise. There is a significant enlargement of the RV and right atrium (RA) in advanced stages with marked elevation of the jugular venous pressure. As the diastolic pressure in the right ventricle increases with the progression of the disease, the murmur becomes shorter in duration.

Drugs that act through serotonergic pathways like fenfluramine or dopaminergic pathways like pergolide, cabergoline act through 5HT2B receptors causing proliferation of valve endothelium, causing valvulopathy and PR similar to carcinoid disease.