# Continuing Education Activity

Tympanocentesis is a very important minor surgical procedure in the diagnostic arsenal and management of otitis media (OM) and a host of other ear conditions. It is a relatively old procedure that has found increased use in recent years. However, its widespread utilization is a challenging concept for some clinicians. With the advent of widespread antibiotics, many clinicians will empirically treat OM rather than aspirate middle ear fluid. Additionally, younger clinicians may not be as well-versed in the technique., This activity reviews and evaluates the use of tympanocentesis in both diagnostic and therapeutic capacities among various clinicians with a focus on the pediatricians, otolaryngologist, and family physicians.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications of tympanocentesis.
- Describe the various equipment, personnel, preparation, and technique in regards to tympanocentesis is also covered in detail.
- Review the potential complications and their clinical significance with tympanocentesis.
- Explain the interprofessional team strategies for improving care and communication to advance tympanocentesis and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

With the invention of penicillin by British scientist Alexander Fleming in the 1920s and the subsequent dawn of the antibiotic era, the human body defense system gained a powerful ally in fighting infectious diseases, which were once the leading cause of death globally. However, with the introduction of antibiotics came a reduction in the utilization of interventions and treatment modalities, which were previously used routinely in the management of various infectious diseases. One such intervention is tympanocentesis, which is a minor surgical procedure that involves the puncturing of the tympanic membrane (eardrum) with a small gauge needle for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes.

Tympanocentesis was first described in 1768, and it has been utilized in the management of ear infections and other ear diseases ever since. Otitis media (OM) is a principal cause of visits to pediatricians and family physicians; otitis media itself refers to an inflammation within the middle ear, and the common subtypes are:

- Acute otitis media (AOM)

- Adhesive otitis media

- Otitis media with effusion

- Chronic suppurative OM

In current medical practice, tympanocentesis has been advocated for by several guidelines in the treatment of OM unresponsive to traditional antibiotic therapy and also for the treatment of other otological disorders such as:

- Retraction of the tympanic membrane

- Meniere disease

- Sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL)

# Anatomy and Physiology

The human ear has a dual function of hearing and maintaining balance, and it is broadly divided into three parts: The outer ear, comprised of the auricle (pinna) and the external auditory canal, the middle ear, and the inner ear (cochlea). For this topic, the focus is on the middle ear.

The Middle Ear: The middle ear is contained within the aerated middle ear cavity of the petrous aspect of the temporal bone. It functions as a transmitting medium for acoustic sounds collected from the external ear via the pinna and tympanic membrane (TM) to the ossicles, and then to the fluid-filled inner ear structures and finally to the eighth cranial nerve.

The middle ear contains the following structures:

- The ossicles (the malleus, the incus, and the stapes)

- Muscles: the stapedius and the tensor tympani muscles

- Chorda tympani nerve

- The tympanic nerve plexus

The middle ear embryology is complex, and the details are beyond the reach of this article, but a brief overview is included. The ossicles of the middle ear originate from neural crest cells of the 1st and 2nd arch mesenchyme while the tympanic cavity itself originates from the 1st pharyngeal pouch and it maintains an embryologic connection to the nasopharynx via the Eustachian tube. The mesodermal layer of the 1st and 2nd arches gives rise to the muscles of the middle ear (stapedius and tensor tympani). The tympanic cavity is also made up of 2 parts, the tympanic cavity proper, and the epitympanic recess. Both are in continuity with the air cells of the mastoid bone.

Tympanic Membrane:

The tympanic membrane (TM) is an oval-shaped, thin, semitransparent membrane. It measures approximately 1 cm in diameter in adults and forms a separation between the external acoustic meatus and the middle ear cavity. The tympanic membrane is divided into two main parts: the pars flaccida (Shrapnell membrane - located in the posterior superior portion of the eardrum above the malleolar folds. The chorda tympani lies on the internal surface of the TM in this area) and the pars tensa (the remainder of the eardrum, comprised of three layers - external squamous, middle fibrous, and internal mucosal. This is the portion of the TM connected to the malleolus surrounding the umbo that participates most in sound transmission). The manubrium of the malleus bone is connected to the middle portion of the TM, allowing direct transmission of acoustic vibrations of the tympanic membrane to the subsequent ossicles. Needle placement in tympanocentesis is through the pars tensa, ideally in the anterior inferior or posterior inferior quadrant of the membrane. The posterior superior quadrant should not be instrumented as damage to the underlying ossicles (incus and stapes) can occur.

Physiology:

Chronic negative pressure, such as that due to Eustachian tube dysfunction, can lead to transudate fluid accumulating in the middle ear space. As the TM is solid, the only means of equalization of middle ear pressure with environmental pressure is via the Eustachian tube. The presence of such a fluid collection will dampen the TM and lead to hearing loss, but also provides a nidus for infection as microorganisms can colonize this space via the Eustachian tube. If such fluid persists for long periods, the aqueous component will be gradually resorbed by the middle ear mucosa, but the mucoid proteins will remain, yielding a sticky-textured fluid that is unlikely to resolve without manual removal. This is sometimes termed "glue ear." There is also indirect communication between the middle ear and the inner ear via the round window (and to a lesser extent, the oval window, which is occupied by the stapes footplate). This allows osmotic transmission of inflammatory and other molecules to and from these two spaces. One theory as to the development of SSNHL is such transmission of viral reactive particles from the middle ear space during an upper respiratory infection to the inner ear, damaging the cochlear nerve fibers.

# Indications

Tympanocentesis is a minor surgical procedure with dual indications: diagnosis (allowing culture and sensitivity analysis of the aspirate) and treatment (physical removal of the fluid to improve hearing)

Therapeutic indications for tympanocentesis:

- Otalgia Relief: Pain is one of the classic manifestations of several otologic disorders. Otitis media is, by definition an inflammatory middle disease and can present with pain in addition to other findings. Patients, especially those of the pediatric population, with severe, severe otalgia arising from AOM (acute otitis media), can be managed acutely with tympanocentesis while awaiting results from a concurrent antibiotic treatment.

- Therapeutic Administration of Pharmacological Drugs: The administration of intratympanic medications such as antibiotics, corticosteroids, antifungals, and topical analgesic agents for the management of otological disorders such as Meniere disease and sensorineural hearing loss is facilitated greatly by tympanocentesis. This is most often employed for SSNHL and Meniere disease, where intra-tympanic glucocorticoid instillation is a routine part of treatment in many centers.

Diagnostic Indications for Tympanocentesis:

- Acute Otitis Media in an Immunocompromised Patient: The accurate diagnosis of acute otitis media in an immunocompromised host and its effective management can be challenging. Such patients may not respond clinically in predicted ways, and tympanocentesis offers the clinician the ability to perform a microbiologic culture and analysis of the ear aspirate to provide culture-directed therapy.

- Unresolved Acute Otitis Media: In patients with an episode of AOM that is unresponsive to 2 standard courses of antibiotics regimen or those with recurrent bouts of AOM, a diagnostic tympanocentesis may be warranted for the identification of pathogens and antimicrobial susceptibility before the selection of a third line antimicrobial agent.

- Acute Otitis Media in Neonates: AOM in neonates or infants that recently completed their admission period at the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) can be a challenging one to clinicians, especially pediatricians. Tympanocentesis may be helpful in making a diagnosis of AOM versus sterile ME fluid in neonates in such patients with fever of an unknown origin. These categories of patients have been found to have AOM not caused by the usual pathogens at a higher rate than the general population.

- The Management of Tympanic Membrane Retraction: While tympanocentesis by itself is not a management modality for patients with retracted tympanic membranes, tympanocentesis can help the clinician to determine if the insertion of a ventilation tube will help to elevate the retracted tympanic membranes (TM) in this cohort of patients. This is especially true in clinical situations where pneumatic otoscopy is unavailable. Air can be gently instilled into the middle ear space to determine the clinical and hearing response.

# Contraindications

There are a few contraindications to performing tympanocentesis, and they are as follows:

- Uncooperative patient: Tympanocentesis is a relatively safe procedure; however, absolute patient cooperation is required to achieve its purpose, either diagnostic or therapeutic.

- A patient with an intact tympanostomy tube.

- An intratympanic tumor: Patients with intratympanic tumors such as globus tympanicum, facial neuromas, and meningiomas should not have tympanocentesis performed on them.

- Acute otitis externa: This is a relative contraindication for tympanocentesis.

- Vascular Abnormalities: Patients with vascular abnormalities such as a known anomaly of the jugular bulb should not have tympanocentesis.

- Suboptimal visibility of the important landmarks and the tympanic membrane is also a contr indication for tympanocentesis.

# Equipment

An array of equipment and tools is required to perform tympanocentesis successfully; they include:

- A Jobson Horne probe

- Otologic microscope

- Topical anesthesia (4% lidocaine can be instilled into the EAC; alternatively micro-cotton balls can be created and soaked in phenol or 4% cocaine solutions to anesthetize the precise tympanocentesis site)

- A 1cc to 3cc aspirating syringe

- Sterile culture swabs and culture media

- A 3 inch 20 or 21 Gauge spinal needle with a tympanocentesis aspirator

- Appropriate procedural chair and procedural restraint board as needed

- Examination speculum with varying sizes

- A functional vacuum pump or wall suction

- A wax spoon or curette

- Other types of equipment such as tissue wicks, cotton balls, 3% hydrogen peroxide, iontophoresis devices, and electrodes may also be needed

# Personnel

Tympanocentesis is generally performed by otolaryngologists, pediatricians, and family physicians, and it is mostly done in an office setting under the use of local topical anesthetic agents. Adequate help is required by the procedural assistant to facilitate a successful procedure.

# Preparation

Procedural education and informed consent:

Just like every other surgical procedure, patients that have been evaluated and found to fit the criteria for tympanocentesis should have the procedure explained to them in detail and should have the benefits, risks, and other possible alternative therapy options explained to them clearly. Once this is achieved, informed written consent should be documented on the patient's chart.

- Antibiotics: Unlike some minor surgical procedures, preoperative antibiotics are not required before performing tympanocentesis.

- Anesthesia: Tympanocentesis can either be performed under topical and local or general anesthesia. The use of general anesthesia requires the availability of more trained personnel, and it is usually reserved for patients that might be uncooperative such as children. Topical agents such as lidocaine, prilocaine, and phenol are used in more cooperative patients and are associated with faster recovery time, reduced bleeding tendencies due to the vasoconstrictive properties of these agents and overall a reduced procedural cost. The use of newer non-invasive techniques such as Iontophoresis and the application of the EMLA cream (eutectic administration of local anesthesia) can also be utilized. Oral pain relief in patients during the procedure can be achieved with acetaminophen and codeine. While more sedating agents such as midazolam require further expertise help for an anesthesiologist and also typically requires a standard operating room setting.

- Positioning: The standard positioning for a patient scheduled to undergo tympanocentesis is supine or semi-reclined (beach-chair) position, with the patient's head, turned away from the operator to allow for adequate visualization of the tympanic membrane with the appropriately sized ear speculum.

# Technique or Treatment

To facilitate a successful procedure with the desirable result, the following steps should be taken:

- Ensure that the patient is positioned in the standard fashion as described.

- Adequate and optimal visibility is important; this sometimes involves removing any wax within the ear canal and subsequent insertion of the biggest aural speculum comfortable into the ear to facilitate optimal visualization of the tympanic membrane.

- Administer the required anesthetic agent. The clinician needs to remember that topical anesthetic agents have bacteriostatic properties; thus, the removal of the excess anesthetic solution before a culture is required.

- Connect the 3 cc syringe to the 20 or 21 gauge spinal needles, aspirate 1cc of air, and make a 45-degree bend on the spinal needle to ensure adequate visualization past the needle while it is in the external ear.

- With great care, advance the needle to the anesthetized portion of the tympanic membrane.

- When you arrive at the tympanic membrane, advance the needle 2 mm through the inferior aspect of the tympanic membrane with the maximum bulge, only placing the needle into the anterior inferior or posterior inferior quadrants.

- Aspirate the fluid gently from the middle ear with the tip of the needle.

- For patients requiring an intratympanic administration of medication, a secondary perforation should be made on the tympanic membrane, the so-called borehole, which serves to relieve pressure while the medication is been injected to avoid barotrauma to the round window. Alternatively, a pressure-equalization tube (grommet) can be placed for patients requiring intratympanic medication.

- Once the procedural purpose is achieved, retract the needle and speculum from the patient’s ear with care.

- The ear canal is subsequently irrigated with a 3% solution of hydrogen peroxide and a tissue wick to absorb extra fluid in the EAC.

- The aspirated fluid is then sent for appropriate laboratory pathogen analysis and sensitivity.

# Complications

Tympanocentesis is a relatively safe procedure; however, potential complications include:

- Bleeding: This is usually minimal, and hemostasis is easily and quickly achieved. Any question of a high-riding jugular bulb is a contraindication to this procedure.

- Pain: Even with the use of topical anesthetic agents, the medial aspect of the tympanic membrane can still retain some sensitivity and thus causing the patient to experience some pain.

- Chronic perforation of the tympanic membrane (TM), damage to other intricate middle ear structures such as the ossicles, facial nerve can also occur, however, the chances are very low when tympanocentesis is carefully performed, as it is a needle-hole only.

- Ossicular damage: This is avoided by not instrumenting the posterior superior quadrant of the TM where the ossicles lie.

# Clinical Significance

Episodes of acute otitis media may be over-diagnosed, and antibiotics prescribed for otherwise sterile middle ear effusions. Such overdiagnosis increases the administration of antibiotics, increasing the likelihood of antibiotic resistance in the community.

A comparative study done involving pediatricians from Greece, Italy, South Africa, and the USA showed pediatricians often confuse otitis media with elusion (OME) for acute otitis media (AOM). Another study, carried out by Pichichero and Poole, to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of tympanocentesis skills in a conference including both pediatricians and otolaryngologists showed that 50% of pediatricians correctly diagnosed otitis media (AOM) vs. otitis media with effusion (OME) while 73% of otolaryngologists did the same. However, the use of tympanocentesis was at 83% for pediatricians and 89% for the otolaryngologists, reflecting the cultural and practical preferences of the respondents' countries of origin.

In a survey carried out among Canadian pediatricians and family physicians, only 4% of those that participated in the study have been trained to perform tympanocentesis, and none of them currently perform it. The study also shows that of those that were trained, a good number of them graduated medical school before 1970, thus indicating that they might have had post-grad training abroad or the procedure was much more common in times back, thus necessitating training.

Steinbach et al. showed that few pediatric and family medicine residency training programs across America and Canada included tympanocentesis training in their curriculum. Current practice patterns in the west often favor empiric treatment of AOM with antibiotics and treatment of OME with watchful waiting (unless the patient is in the language-development years, where treatment with PE tubes/grommets is common). Tympanocentesis is a valuable skill for the clinician who is practicing in an environment where antibiotic compliance/stewardship and patient follow-up are not easy, and it can direct or avoid antibiotic treatment to provide relief and curb resistance patterns by avoiding over-prescription. In any clinical environment, it behooves the clinician to know this technique to address their most difficult and refractory patients, or to treat patients with SSNHL.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Tympanocentesis can be a challenging concept for some clinicians, especially as the advent of antibiotics has made the procedure less common as before and so they may be uncomfortable in performing it. However, this procedure does have a place in our modern medical practices, and familiarity with it can provide the astute clinician with an additional tool in their armamentarium to treat challenging patients.

Tympanocentesis is generally performed by pediatricians, otolaryngologists, and family physicians, according to their expertise and skills. Once mastered, the procedure is easily performed and is a relatively safe, simple, and very effective procedure with a very low complication rate and also few contraindications. Studies have shown that the tympanocentesis skills of the otolaryngologist are superior to those of the pediatricians and the family physicians, a cordial interprofessional relationship among these healthcare professionals would lead to the best patient outcome.

Currently, tympanocentesis is ardently advocated for by pediatric infectious disease experts when managing refractory otitis media. Also, the role of tympanocentesis is well-established as a method of intratympanic medication administration for many conditions.