Clindamycin can be administered into the body by multiple routes. It is available topically as a foam, gel, lotion, or solution for the treatment of acne vulgaris. A thin film needs to be applied twice a day. For the treatment of bacterial vaginosis, it is available in cream and suppository for intravaginal administration. Systemic infections can be treated orally with a capsule (75 mg, 150 mg, 300 mg) or in solution (75 mg/5 mL). It is also available as an intramuscular injection (9 g/60 mL, 300 mg/2 mL, 600 mg/4 mL, 900 mg/6 mL). Intravenous formulations are available as follows: clindamycin phosphate (300 mg/2 mL, 600 mg/4 mL, 900 mg/6 mL), and clindamycin phosphate in D5W or NaCl (300 mg/50 mL, 600 mg/50 mL, 900 mg/50 mL).

To minimize esophageal ulceration, administer orally with a full glass of water. The absorption of clindamycin flavored granules is not adversely affected by co-administration with food. When administered intramuscularly, the sites must require rotation with no dose exceeding 600 mg in a single injection. Clindamycin is administered by intravenous (IV) intermittent infusion over at least 10 to 60 minutes at a maximum rate of 30 mg/minutes. The final concentration of the IV solution should not exceed 18 mg/mL. Pediatric dosing for neonates is 15 to 20 mg/kg per day, given IM/IV divided over 6 to 8 hours. Infants, children, and adolescents are treated with 8 to 40 mg/kg per day orally divided over 3 to 4 doses. For IM/IV administration, 20 to 40 mg/kg per day can be given over 3 to 4 doses.