The well-functioning bicuspid aortic valve requires periodic outpatient follow-up.  Families should be advised that the bicuspid aortic valve predictably will degenerate during one's lifetime. So far there is no medical intervention that can slow the progression of the bicuspid aortic valve into aortic stenosis or aortic regurgitation.

All first-degree relatives of bicuspid aortic valve patients with aortopathy should be screened. Otherwise, there are no such recommendations to screen all family members.

Bicuspid aortic valve with ascending aorta diameter of 4 cm needs periodic surveillance through echocardiography (if not visualized by it then aortic magnetic resonance angiography or CT angiography). If the size is over 4.5 cm, then annually echocardiography recommended by American Heart Association.

Surgical intervention indications in a pediatric population;

- Peak-to-peak gradients over 50 mm Hg with EKG changes (ST- or T-wave changes) at rest or with exercise or who are interested in taking part in athletics

- Asymptomatic children with peak-to-peak gradients greater than 60 mm Hg

Gold standard surgical intervention in the pediatric population is valvuloplasty.

In the bicuspid aortic valve population age greater than 18 years the indications of aortic valve replacement are the same as a tricuspid aortic valve but the bicuspid aortic valve population receiving aortic valve replacement is much younger so the decision of mechanical or bioprosthetic is a little challenging. Thirty percent of bicuspid aortic valve patients need aortic sinuses or ascending aorta surgery along with aortic valve replacement.