Confirmation of the diagnosis of penile cancer and assessment of depth of invasion, the presence of vascular invasion, and histological grade of the lesion by microscopic examination of a biopsy specimen are mandatory before initiation of therapy. SCC accounts for 95% of penile cancer and can be characterized and subclassified by microscopic histologic features. Subtypes include usual type SCC (45% to 65%), papillary carcinoma (2% to 15%), warty condylomatous tumors (7% to 10%), basaloid carcinoma (4% to 10%), verrucous carcinoma (3% to 7%) and sarcomatoid (spindle cell) carcinoma (1% to 6%). Usual type SCC demonstrates keratinization, epithelial pearl formation and various degrees of mitotic activity. Invasive lesions infiltrate the basement membrane and surrounding structures. SCCs have been classically graded using Broder classification which defines the level of differentiation based on keratinization, nuclear pleomorphism, number of mitoses and other features. Low-grade lesions (grade 1 and 2) constitute 70% to 80% of reported cases at diagnosis. These are well-differentiated lesions that show cords of atypical squamous cells that project downward from a hyperkeratotic epidermis. The high-grade disease has been associated with regional nodal metastasis in numerous studies. Vascular invasion by tumor cells has significant prognostic importance, and it is essential that the pathologist comment on the presence or absence of vascular invasion in the surgical specimen. Perineural invasion is also a strong predictor of LN metastasis.