**COMPLEX I**

The first complex (complex I) in the ETC is referred to as NADH dehydrogenase, for its role in oxidizing NADH to NAD+. This complex has enzymatic activity that allows the transfer of an electron pair from NADH to ubiquinone (Q). An electron pair from NADH is first shuttled into NADH dehydrogenase by flavin mononucleotide (derived from riboflavin, or vitamin B2), an accompanying prosthetic group. Within the complex, the electron pair is transferred sequentially from one iron-sulfur cluster (Fe-S) to another, to reach ubiquinone eventually. Ubiquinone is then reduced to ubiquinol and travels to complex II. As the electrons pass from NADH to ubiquinone, energy is released and utilized by the complex to pump 4 H+ ions into the intermembrane space. The products of the enzymatic reaction include **NAD+**,**Ubiquinol**(reduced form of Co Q10), and**4 H+ ions**in the intermembrane space.

**COMPLEX II**

The second complex (complex II) is referred to as succinate dehydrogenase, for its role in the oxidation of succinate to fumarate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA). Note that this enzyme is involved in both the ETC and the TCA. It is also the point of electron transfer for FADH2. This enzyme transfers electrons from FADH2 to a ubiquinone molecule. This relatively small complex contains iron-sulfur clusters and a bound cofactor, flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Both structures shuttle electrons from FADH2 to ubiquinone. However, not enough energy gets released in this process, and thus no H+ ions are pumped into the intermembrane space from this complex. Since FADH2 bypasses complex I and enters complex II directly, it does not contribute to the proton gradient as much as NADH does, which explains why there is a higher yield of ATP generated from NADH (about **2.5**ATP molecules) as compared to FADH2 (about**1.5**ATP molecules)

- Electrons from complex I and II are shuttled by ubiquinone (in the form of ubiquinol) to complex III.

**COMPLEX III**

The third complex (complex III) is referred to as Cytochrome c reductase, for its role in reducing cytochrome c. This complex consists of several molecules, including cytochrome B and many iron-sulfur clusters, all of which are involved in the shuttling of electrons to cytochrome c. The enzymatic action of complex III involves the transfer of electrons from ubiquinol to cytochrome c and subsequent pumping of 4 H+ ions into the intermembrane space. Although ubiquinol can deliver two electrons, cytochrome c can only accept one electron. Thus, Cytochrome c reductase exists in a dimeric form to accommodate two cytochrome c molecules. The process of cytochrome c reduction via complex III is the Q cycle.

**COMPLEX IV**

The fourth complex (complex IV) is referred to as Cytochrome c oxidase, for its role in the oxidation of cytochrome c. This highly complicated molecule consists of multiple heme groups, cofactors, and subunits. Metal ions in the heme groups (copper and iron) sequester an oxygen atom within the complex. The enzymatic action of complex IV permits the transfer of electrons from cytochrome c molecules to the oxygen atom, which functions as the last electron acceptor. During the reduction of oxygen, two H+ ions are extracted from the matrix and transferred to the reduced oxygen atom, thus forming water (H2O). Simultaneously, the complex pumps 4 H+ ions into the intermembrane space.

- It is important to note that the stepwise passing of electrons from one complex to the next is also driven by the stepwise increase in electronegativity of each complex.

**COMPLEX V**

This enzyme’s multi-subunit structure allows for the conversion of potential energy to mechanical and chemical energy, as the F1 subunit rotates (like a turbine) with the force of protons attempting to re-enter the matrix.

The fifth complex (complex V) is referred to as **ATP synthase**, for its role in the synthesis of ATP using the proton motive force. ATP synthase consists of numerous protein subunits, including F0 and F1. The F0 portion is hydrophobic, rooted in the phospholipid bilayer, and contains a channel for H+ ions to pass through to the F1 portion. The hydrophilic F1 portion (shaped like a stick attached to a cylinder) is the main catalytic site. It consists of a ring of rotating alpha and beta subunits surrounding a gamma subunit. H+ ions travel from the F0 portion to the F1 portion and, in turn, force the rotation of the F1 portion, which catalyzes the binding of ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) to produce ATP. This process is thebinding-change phenomenon.