The vasculature within the region of the supraclavicular triangle is complex, but critical to understand with regards to generating a differential diagnosis for pathology in the region. The largest artery within the fossa is the subclavian, which is divided into three distinct segments by the anterior scalene muscle. The third segment, or the portion of the subclavian artery that runs distally to the anterior scalene muscle, is the portion within the supraclavicular fossa. Additionally, the transverse cervical and suprascapular arteries (branches of the subclavian) course through the fossa after branching from the first portion of the subclavian artery. Venous structures in the supraclavicular fossa include the external and internal jugular veins as well as the corresponding structures for the aforementioned arterial structures (subclavian, suprascapular, and transverse cervical veins). Of note, the fascia of the omohyoid muscle within the region separates the superficial suprascapular vein from the deep suprascapular artery.

The supraclavicular fossa houses differing lymphatic structures that vary by laterality. On the left, the principal structure is the thoracic duct which collects lymph from the majority of the body before emptying into the origin of the brachiocephalic vein. On the right, the primary lymphatic structure is the right lymphatic duct, which is responsible for draining lymph from the right thorax, right upper extremity, and right portion of the head and neck into either the subclavian vein or right internal jugular vein. Of note, there are many lymph nodes within the supraclavicular fossa, the exact locations of which are highly involved and beyond the scope of this text. Using the standardized classification of lymph nodes by levels within the neck, any lymph nodes within the supraclavicular fossa would be a designation of Level V lymph nodes. Alternatively, if classified by region, these nodes would be classified as inferior deep cervical lymph nodes.