An area of active debate and research lies in the optimal prehospital strategy to transport stroke patients to the most appropriate stroke certified center. Timely transport and strategic coordinated treatment from lower to higher levels of definitive stroke centers can decrease tPA and mechanical thrombectomy times. A patient determined to have a stroke by Emergency Medical Services (EMS) is 15 minutes from the closest ASRH or PSC, and 30 minutes from TSC/CSC faces a dilemma, where should they go to first to obtain care? Should the patient go to a lower stroke center to receive rapid tPA ASRH/PSC for timely IV tPA or should the patient bypass the ASRH/PSC to the more distant TSC/CSC for possible mechanical thrombectomy? Currently, 2 basic routing strategies exist. They are known as "drip 'n ship" and "mothership."

**The Drip 'n Ship Strategy**

"Drip 'n ship" refers to the strategy of transporting the patient to the nearest stroke center to initiate IV tPA before transfer to a TSC/CSC for mechanical thrombectomy if advanced imaging reveals LVO amenable to intervention. This strategy minimizes delay to IV tPA administration at the risk of delaying time to possible mechanical thrombectomy.

**The mothership or bypass Strategy**

“Mothership” refers to the strategy of bypassing closer ASRHs/PSC stroke centers to go directly to a TSC or CSC for possible mechanical thrombectomy. This strategy minimizes delay to mechanical thrombectomy at the expense of delaying IV tPA. Only patients suffering AIS due to LVO would be eligible for mechanical thrombectomy and thus the bypass strategy is more reasonable if EMS can recognize LVO in the field before the hospital destination decision accurately. Numerous stroke scales are currently employed for EMS detection of possible LVO including the Los Angeles Motor Scale (LAMS),

**Strategy Algorithm**

The 2018 AHA/ASA guidelines state, "It remains unknown whether it would be beneficial for emergency medical services to bypass a closer IV tPA-capable hospital for a thrombectomy-capable hospital." The AHA/ASA has proposed an EMS triage algorithm that recommends patients with suspected LVO and last known normal within 6 hours be transported directly to the nearest TSC/CSC as long as the bypass does not add more than 15 minutes to transport and does not preclude the use of IV tPA. Research investigating patient outcomes and assessment tools along with consideration of regional resources will likely guide future recommendations.

Other issues of concern include the training of emergency department and hospital-based healthcare providers to appreciate and understand the rapidly evolving stroke recommendations. Providers previously may have only evaluated an AIS patient for IV tPA eligibility. However, providers now must obtain advanced multimodal neurovascular imaging to identify possible LVO and transfer the appropriately triaged patient to a TSC/CSC certified stroke center for mechanical thrombectomy.