**Structure**

The lymph capillaries are very fine vessels that form a massive network throughout the body. They begin as blind sacs in the spaces between the cells and carry the leaked tissue fluid along with the cell debris. The lymph passes through lymph nodes where it gets filtered of foreign particles like bacteria and virus and finally returns to the bloodstream.  The lymph nodes are almost kidney-shaped, covered by a fibrous capsule that dips down deeper into the tissue in the form of trabeculae. The substance within will be mainly by vast aggregation of lymphocytes in the form of follicles, macrophages, and surrounded by the reticular network. Its concave part is the hilum where an artery, a vein, few nerves, and one efferent vessel are visible. Lymph vessels that carry lymph towards lymph nodes are afferent vessels, are 4 to 5 in number, and they open on the convex surface of the lymph node.

The larger lymphatics contain smooth muscle cells within their walls, and this contributes to the pump-like action that helps in the movement of lymph. Lymph vessels appear beaded because of numerous valves within their wall. These valves prevent backflow. The largest ducts, such as the thoracic and right lymphatic ducts, demonstrate a muscle layer with longitudinal and circular layers that are poorly distinguished.

In the abdomen, they have an extensive network of vessels, which all finally drain into a large sack called cisterna chyle. Usually, they are so thin that they can be seen only by a microscope, except the largest one, the thoracic duct and right lymphatic duct by which the lymph finally reaches the bloodstream.

**Lymphatic Drainage Functions**

- It provides an immune response by producing T and B lymphocytes.

- It helps to trap foreign microorganisms for ultimate ingestion.

- It carries large proteins to the bloodstream since the blood capillaries do not allow for the absorption of these large molecules.

- It maintains the blood volume by bringing the leaked tissue fluid back into circulation.

- It also eliminates the cell debris from the damaged tissue by filtering and phagocytosis by the lymph nodes.

- It is one of the pathways used by cancer cells to metastasize to other parts of the body.