There are no specific clinical or radiological findings to mycoplasma pneumonia that can differentiate it from other causes of atypical pneumonia. However, patients tend to have a more gradual onset of disease, more multisystem involvement, and a normal white blood cell (WBC) count. Patients usually present in an outpatient setting, and microbial diagnosis is not usually performed for outpatients with community-acquired pneumonia since empiric treatment is usually successful. When available, PCR can be done rapidly and is the test of choice. Testing for cold agglutinins can sometimes support a clinical diagnosis when a rapid diagnosis must be made. M. pneumoniae lacks a cell wall and is fastidious; therefore, gram stain and cultures are not useful for the diagnosis of these organisms.

Hemolysis is found in most patients with pneumonia and causes a positive Coomb's test and an elevated reticulocyte count. Cold agglutinin titers are elevated in more than 50% of patients with mycoplasma disease. However, this is not specific to Mycoplasma infections and can be found in patients with viral pneumonia or infectious mononucleosis due to EBV or CMV. WBC count is normal in 75% to 90% of cases. The most common chest x-ray findings are a reticulonodular pattern or patchy areas of consolidation; these can be unilateral or bilateral and are more prominent in the lower lobes.

Eosinophil cationic protein has been found to be elevated in patients with mycoplasma infection and asthma. It is believed that this protein damages the epithelium in the airways and induces hypersensitivity of the bronchial smooth muscle. However, more studies are required before its use as a diagnostic marker becomes universal.