Congenital nephrotic syndrome of the Finnish type can be diagnosed prenatally by elevated maternal serum alfa fetoprotein, MSAFP (>2.5 MoM) at the second trimester of pregnancy.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) may be normal in the beginning but typically increases during the first month. Free thyroxine (T4) is low.

Blood biochemistry: blood count, levels of sodium, chloride, magnesium, protein, albumin,  creatinine, urea, cholesterol, fasting triglycerides, and glucose.

Other factors included in the evaluation include:

- Serum IgG level. Serum levels of  phosphate, ionized calcium, 25(OH) vitamin D3, alkaline phosphatase, and PTH

- Serum urea and creatinine levels are variable. Renal function is often normal for the first months.

- The serum analysis demonstrates hypoalbuminemia (<2.5 mg/dL and low thyroid hormone level.

- The urinalysis demonstrates proteinuria (>2000 mg/L), hematuria, and leukocyturia with a negative urine culture.

- Ultrasound scanning shows kidneys of normal size or larger, and the renal cortex is hyperechogenic.

- Cardiac ultrasound (effusions and left ventricular mass)

Kidney biopsy demonstrates microcystic dilatation of proximal tubules, increased mesangial hypercellularity, and a mild increase in the mesangial matrix in light microscopy. Electron microscopy demonstrates the effacement of podocyte foot processes.

The modality of choice for precise Congenital nephrotic syndrome of the Finnish type diagnosis is the genetic analysis by detection of mutations in NPHS1.