**Adverse Effects**

- Gingival hyperplasia

- Constipation

- Peripheral edema

- Hypotension

- Fatigue

- Dyspepsia

**Precautions**

- May cause first-degree AV block; higher degrees of AV block could occur in patients with sick sinus syndrome - consider a dosage reduction or discontinue verapamil therapy.

- It is considered contraindicated in patients with wide complex tachycardias unless it can be proven to be supraventricular in origin; severe hypotension could occur upon administration.

- Avoid use in patients with heart failure, particularly heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction, due to a higher risk than benefit in using calcium channel blockers overall.

- Use with caution in patients with HCM with outflow tract obstruction, including those:

- With high gradients
- Advanced heart failure
- Sinus bradycardia
- Verapamil should not be used in those with HCM and systemic hypotension or severe difficulty breathing at rest.

**Pregnancy**

- Verapamil can cross the placenta.

- Pregnancy Category C

- Use during pregnancy may cause adverse effects on the fetus(e.g., bradycardia, heart block, hypotension)

-  Women with HCM controlled with verapamil before pregnancy may continue therapy, but it is recommended to monitor the fetus for slow heart rate, low blood pressure, and heart block.

-  It may be used intravenously for the acute treatment of SVT in pregnant women when adenosine or beta-blockers are ineffective or contraindicated. Verapamil may also be used for the ongoing management of SVT in highly symptomatic patients; the recommendation is for the lowest effective dose; avoid use during the first trimester if possible.

- If treatment for hypertension during pregnancy is needed, it is recommended to change to an alternative agent. (ACOG 2013)

**Breast-Feeding**

Although verapamil is present in breast milk, the relative infant dose of verapamil is less than or equal to 1% of the weight-adjusted maternal dose, which is below the required RID limit of less than 10 %.

- The authors of several case reports calculated the RID of verapamil following maternal use of verapamil 80 to 120 mg three times daily in women less than or equal to 3 months postpartum. Adverse events were not observed in breastfed infants.