# Continuing Education Activity

Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US) is a category of cervical epithelial cell abnormalities described by the Bethesda system for reporting cervical cytology. It refers to abnormal cytologic changes that are suggestive of the squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL) but are qualitatively and quantitatively less than those of a definitive SIL diagnosis. Based on the patient's age and the estimated risk of possible underlying neoplastic lesions, an ASC-US report requires further follow-up by doing repeat cytology and HPV tests to guide the management of potential precancerous/cancerous cervical lesions. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of ASC-US and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in this process.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the term "ASC-US" and identify its etiology.
- Describe the diagnostic workup tests used to evaluate a patient with a cervical cytology report of ASC-US.
- Outline the management of a patient with a cervical cytology report of ASC-US, based on the most recent practice guidelines.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to ensure a thorough evaluation and management of a patient with a cervical cytology report of ASC-US.

# Introduction

Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US) is a term used to report a category of cervical epithelial cell abnormalities described by the Bethesda system for reporting cervical cytology. It refers to abnormal cytologic changes that are suggestive of the squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL) but are qualitatively and quantitatively less than those of a definitive SIL diagnosis.

About a decade ago, cervical cancer was the third most common cancer in women worldwide, and it was ranked as the first most common cancer in women in 42 low-resourced countries.

In developed countries such as United States, United Kingdom, and Canada, widespread availability and access to cervical cancer screening have led to a significant reduction in both incidence and mortality from cervical cancer.

Though it has been previously theorized that alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency may be a genetic predisposition, this is not yet confirmed.

Women that have ever been sexually active are at risk of developing cervical cancer; however, there are women with a greater risk profile than others. Risk factors commonly associated with the development of cervical cancer include younger age at sexual debut, multiple concurrent sexual partners, chronic intense smoking, HIV infection, and persistent infection with high-risk HPV. Though the Pap test dates back to the late 1940s, it has not been fully adopted and utilized in resource-limited settings for several reasons, including high cost and delay in getting results. Very low rates of Pap smear have been reported in resource-limited countries, including Jamaica at 15% and Nicaragua at 20% national coverage. In some Asian and African countries, Pap testing rates are even lower, or it does not even exist, compared to Jamaica.

Visual inspection of the ectocervix is the new way of screening, with immediate results and successful treatment of most of the identified precancerous lesions.

# Etiology

Cervical cancer is not a sexually transmitted infection, but it develops from precursor lesions (CIN) that are predisposed by a persistent infection with a common sexually transmitted pathogen, the HPV. There are over 200 species of human papillomavirus. Researchers have identified 13 hrHPV viral strains that cause human cancers, of which HPV 16 and HPV 18 cause about 70 percent of cervical cancers, and more so in HIV-infected women.

Other studies have demonstrated a high prevalence of hrHPV in patients with ASC-US; one study in Brazil analyzed 1,340 liquid-based cytology specimens and found out that 64% of ASC-US specimens harbored hrHPV.

# Epidemiology

Cervical precancer lesions are slow-growing and are commonest between the ages of 35 and 45 years but can be seen more frequently in HIV-positive women between the ages of 25 and 35. With the persistence of hrHPV infection over the years or decades, actual cancer peaks after the age of 50 years.

The histological classification known as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or CIN is a three-tier grading of CIN that corresponds to the number of layers of epithelial cells affected by atypia.

ASC-US is a common diagnostic category considered to be a difficult and grey zone diagnosis between negative and a confirmed SIL.

# Pathophysiology

Atypical squamous cells that are related to an underlying SIL are associated with HPV infection. Following the initial acquisition of hrHPV, there is an inflammatory response that resolves after a short time. The chronic cases progress to more severe persistent infection associated with nuclear and cytoplasmic changes. In the presence of hrHPV 16 and 18, the viral genes E6 and E7 are thought to encode viral proteins in the infected squamous cells that promote the degradation of tumor suppressor gene proteins p53 and Rb respectively, resulting in malignant transformation.

# Histopathology

ASC-US is a cytopathology term that implies cervical epithelial cell abnormalities described by the Bethesda system for reporting cervical cytology. It refers to abnormal cytologic changes that are suggestive of SIL but are qualitatively and quantitatively less than those of a definitive SIL diagnosis.

# History and Physical

ASC-US is not a clinical diagnosis. A woman receiving an ASC-US report from Pap test is most often asymptomatic and is most likely identified through a population-based screening. Alternatively, she may present with bloody, offensive, and or watery vaginal discharge, lower backache, or signs of urinary tract infection and be diagnosed opportunistically.

Considering that a late diagnosis or advanced invasive cervical cancer has no remedy, it is important to consider the risk factors that predispose women to develop this cancer and use that as a guide to determine the screening status of women in their care.

# Evaluation

Cervical cancer screening in women between the age of 21 and 65 years is supported by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), American Cancer Society (ACS), U.S Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Triage testing involves cytology with Pap test or LBC, visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA) plus colposcopy, HPV DNA, or any combination as recommended in the setting where one works.

Initially, a bimanual and speculum vaginal examination is done. Either Pap test is done alone or together with hrHPV DNA assay, or VIA is done alone or in combination with hrHPV DNA, or hrHPV DNA is done alone (primary HPV testing).

Visual inspection with acetic acid involves the application of 3% to 5% dilutes acetic acid for one minute on the ectocervix.

# Treatment / Management

The variable progression following the diagnosis of ASC-US poses a management challenge. There is a possibility of overtreatment, and at the same time, also the risk of progression to higher grade precancerous lesions or even invasive cancer with conservative treatment, especially if close follow-up is not carried out.

The diagnosis of ASC-US begins to gain clinical significance when it is associated with a positive hrHPV diagnosis. Both reflex HPV DNA testing and co-testing have reported a high incidence of hrHPV in ASC-US specimens.

An initial ASC-US may warrant no further management except to repeat Pap cytology alone or do an acetic acid-guided visual inspection (VIA) with colposcopy or in combination with HPV genotyping (DNA or mRNA) where feasible.

The American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP) has recently published (in April 2020) the 2019 ASCCP risk-based management guidelines for abnormal cervical cancer screening tests and cancer precursors. One of the essential changes from prior management guidelines is that patient's risk of CIN3+, determined by current test results and past history (including unknown history), has become a key factor on which recommendations of colposcopy, treatment, or surveillance are based.

In patients younger than 25 years with LSIL, ASC-US HPV-positive, or ASC-US without HPV testing, repeat cytology at 1 year is preferred, and if the result is NILM/ASC-US/LSIL, another repeat cytology is needed in 1 year, after that if the result is negative, then routine age-based screening is resumed. If HPV testing was first done for a patient with ASC-US, and the test was negative, there would be no need for the repeat cytology described above, and routine age-based screening could be directly resumed. Colposcopy is indicated if the first one-year repeat cytology shows HSIL/ASC-H/AGC/AIS, and also when the second one-year repeat cytology shows ASC-US or more severe lesions.

As per the new 2019 ASCCP guidelines, practitioners should start using CIN3+ risk estimates (based on HPV testing/co-testing and past history) when a patient reaches the age of 25 years. Previously (before the recent guidelines update), patients aged 25 years and older with ASCUS have two management options, one option is to do HPV testing (preferred), and if the test is positive, colposcopy is indicated, while patients with negative HPV test will have repeat cytology in three years. The second option is to repeat the cytology in one year, and if an abnormality is detected, then colposcopy is indicated. If the one-year repeat cytology is negative, then the patient can return to routine age-based screening. But per the new guidelines, a colposcopy can be deferred for certain patients if they have only minor screening abnormalities indicating HPV infection, provided that the risk of having CIN3+ is low. For example, a patient who tested HPV positive with low-grade cytologic abnormalities (LSIL/ASC-US), and has a past history of documented negative screening HPV test or co-test, can now be managed by repeating HPV testing or co-testing at 1 year. Practitioners can start managing their patients based on these new 2019 ASCCP guidelines using the tables of Egemen et al. or by using an app or website that will be designed and made available at the ASCCP website.

SIL treatment options include ablation methods such as cryotherapy or thermocoagulation, while HSIL (CIN 2+) is best treated by large loop excision of the transformation zone/loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LLETZ/LEEP) or laser or cold knife conization in cases of adenocarcinoma in-situ (AIS).

Apart from surgical interventions, certain pharmacological approaches have been employed under various randomized controlled trials (RCTs), with some showing promising outcomes at phase II.

# Differential Diagnosis

ASC-US could represent different pathologies NILM, LSIL/CIN 1, HSIL/CIN 2+, or even early invasive cervical carcinoma. On the other hand, ASC-US could be just a cytologic mimic caused by inflammation (cervicitis), air drying, atrophy with degeneration, and other artifacts. True differentiation is best achieved with HPV DNA testing, colposcopy, and biopsy, particularly in persistent ASC-US.

# Prognosis

In the presence of quality triage studies, most ASC-US diagnoses have a good prognosis.

# Complications

Complications of ASC-US may arise from inadequate follow-up or the lack of it, or they may result from treatment in general. An ASC-US diagnosis may completely return to normal on repeat Pap test, but generally, an ASC-US diagnosis that is not followed up may worsen to HSIL/CIN 2+ or invasive cancer in underserved populations with limited or no access to comprehensive screening services.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Patients treated with cryotherapy and LLETZ/LEEP are usually managed as day cases and are given mild oral analgesics such as ibuprofen. They are usually instructed to avoid sex for 4 to 6 weeks and to use condoms where abstinence fails. Patients are also advised not to insert tampons and not to douche. Those who develop malodorous discharge and or persistent vaginal discharge beyond 14 days are asked to return to the physician for reevaluation and treatment. Where signs of postoperative infection exist, endocervical or high vaginal swabs can be sent for culture, and the woman treated empirically with doxycycline 100 mg orally two times daily for seven days and metronidazole 400 mg orally three times a day for seven days.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Full-blown advanced cervical cancer, whether in HIV-positive or negative women, has 100 percent mortality. All women should be made aware of the importance of regular screening and the availability of the HPV vaccine. Patients with nonspecific cervical abnormalities like ASC-US must be educated and closely monitored, so they do not fall through the cracks and later appear with invasive cervical cancer. Weigh the costs of screening for hrHPV and treating invasive cancer with attendant grave consequences on human lives and families; versus prevention. We should choose prevention over cure because it is a less expensive choice. Combined prevention and lifestyle modification, including delay in sexual debut, reduction of sexual partners, consistent and correct use of condoms, male circumcision, and smoking cessation, would go a long way to reduce precancer and cancer.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- The coverage for cervical cancer screening in most resource-limited settings is still below 35 percent of the population.

- Women can be screened and followed up for cervical pre-malignant diseases, usually by Pap test, and also by VIA with colposcopy, HPV DNA, and biopsy.

- It is possible to do at least one cervical cancer screening method in any country in the world where cervical screening programs are not available. In 1949, Papanicolaou and Traut began doing simple cytology, and today we have evolved to the more sophisticated molecular DNA testing for HPV. There should be no excuse for not doing cervical cancer screening.

- Prioritizing and integrating cervical cancer screening in the daily management of women in primary healthcare facilities would go a long way to reducing new cases of cancer and possible elimination of deaths from invasive cervical cancer.

- ASC-US diagnosis is an abnormal finding that requires a further evaluation from 6 months after the initial result but not later than 12 months.

- An ASC-US diagnosis may mean NILM or true precancer and hence poses a management challenge, which needs to be addressed by triaging with molecular testing and histology.

- VIA (visual inspection with acetic acid), together with same-day treatment, has been shown to reduce the incidence of invasive cervical cancers.

- All patients with HIV must be prioritized to have a visual inspection with acetic acid. This is a simple and cheap procedure delivered as a screening and treating procedure or single visit approach.

- Large-scale HPV vaccination before the onset of sexual activity may hold the key to the elimination of cervical cancer.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Most women who would receive an ASC-US diagnosis are asymptomatic. Healthcare workers at primary care facilities, maternities, general outpatient departments, gynecology, and sexually transmitted infection (STI) clinics, need to be proactive, engage women, create awareness, and screen all sexually active women for cervical precancer. Healthcare professionals need to understand the interplay of culture, behavior, and socioeconomic status and their relationship to cervical cancer incidence.