Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin) is a synthetic analog of vasopressin, aka antidiuretic hormone created in 1977 used in the treatment of a wide variety of medical conditions to include nocturnal polyuria, hemophilia A, diabetes insipidus, Willebrand disease, uremic bleeding, as well as many off label uses such as an adjunct with hypertonic saline to prevent rapid sodium correction, intracranial hemorrhage associated with varying antiplatelet agents, and trauma resuscitation with active hemorrhage.

Nocturnal polyuria is a commonly encountered condition seen almost exclusively in the pediatric population, which is responsive to both oral and intranasal desmopressin. Desmopressin is also available to adults who awaken more than two times a night to void.

Hemophilia A is an X-linked autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the deficiency or absence of the clotting factor VIII.

Diabetes insipidus (DI) classically presents with polyuria and polydipsia and can be secondary to multiple other conditions.

Uremic platelet dysfunction encompasses multiple pathways and impairments involving uremia, ultimately resulting in platelet dysfunction. While still largely undefined, the most commonly accepted pathogenesis involves platelet dysfunction secondary to impaired platelet adhesiveness and decreased platelet aggregation, as well as abnormal platelet endothelial interaction. Factors that actively contribute to platelet dysfunction in uremic patients include uremic toxins, anemia, and nitric oxide production.

Uremic platelet dysfunction occurs for several reasons, including circulating uremic toxins, platelet aggregation inhibition by increased nitric oxide production, and anemia resulting in turbulent rather than a laminar flow of blood products.

Von Willebrand disease results from a deficiency in von Willebrand factor. This factor is essential in forming the initial platelet plug as a response to subendothelial tissue exposure.

In a limited number of studies of patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage, some have demonstrated enough evidence to consider utilizing a single intravenous dose of desmopressin in patients with intracranial hemorrhage pending neurosurgical intervention.

In a select number of patients suffering from severe hyponatremia with a serum sodium less than 120 mEq/L, studies have demonstrated benefit when utilizing intravenous 3 percent saline while simultaneously initiating desmopressin to prevent rapid correction; decreasing the risk of developing osmotic demyelination syndrome.

Desmopressin has also been utilized in trauma resuscitation and post-surgically to receive hemostasis. Several animal studies have demonstrated that desmopressin is useful in treating severe coagulopathy in injured or post-surgical patients.