There are several conditions in which scopolamine use requires caution or its effects monitored more frequently.

There are reports of scopolamine worsening psychosis. Reports also exist of acute toxic psychosis, agitation, speech disorder, hallucinations, paranoia, and delusions.

Use caution in using scopolamine for patients with myasthenia gravis. Myasthenia gravis is caused by a lack of proper nerve impulse transmission due to antibodies to acetylcholine receptors, resulting in muscle fatigue. Although myasthenia gravis primarily affects skeletal muscle, the use of anticholinergic agents, like scopolamine, causes unpredictable results.

There has been some concern about the use of scopolamine in patients with a seizure history. The speculated reason is that scopolamine might lower seizure threshold potential. However, further examination of medical records showed this not to be true. This false claim was primarily attributable to the coding of reported cases as "dizziness, rule out seizures." Patients in these cases did not experience an actual seizure or had it before the application of scopolamine.

Patients should also discontinue using a scopolamine patch before MRI. One of the four layers contains metal and can burn the skin during MRI imaging.

Due to scopolamine's anticholinergic properties, its use can decrease gastrointestinal motility and cause urinary retention.

Scopolamine use also merits caution in special populations. Children, pregnant or lactating mothers, patients with hepatic or renal impairment, and the elderly should be monitored earlier for more severe side effects.

There is no formal laboratory testing of scopolamine levels currently available.