Although antibiotics are the centerpiece of mastoiditis treatment, antibiotics alone have shown to result in an 8.5% complication rate. Additional measures, including myringotomy, tympanostomy tube placement, and mastoidectomy may be indicated depending on the severity of the infection. The majority of patients with acute mastoiditis are admitted to the hospital.

Uncomplicated patients with no significant medical history have had successful treatment as an outpatient with daily IV ceftriaxone with low complication rates—uncomplicated acute mastoiditis qualifies as patients with no significant past medical history and minimal physical examination findings. The patient case becomes complicated if the patient develops a large post auricular lesion, imaging studies showing bone erosion, high fevers, or neurological signs. Uncomplicated inpatient cases are manageable with IV antibiotics, high dose IV steroids, and myringotomy with placement of tympanostomy tube.

Serial physical examinations are necessary as the patient clinical status can deteriorate quickly. If mastoiditis does not improve in 48 hours, mastoidectomy is indicated. IV antibiotic of choice for patients without chronic otitis media is IV vancomycin alone to cover for the most common pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae. Other common pathogens include Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Haemophilus influenza.

In patients with a chronic history of ear infections, an anti-pseudomonal agent is added to vancomycin. In a multicenter study, Streptococcus pyogenes correlated with the highest rate of complications at presentation, with n nearly 50% of cases, and Staphylococcus aureus correlated with the highest rate of complications during hospitalization.