Cardiac surgery requires a lot of sophisticated equipment. For diagnostic purpose, pulmonary artery catheter, thermodilution techniques, pulse contour analysis, ultrasound, among others can be used to assess cardiac performance and disease. Critical issues related to cardiac output, volume responsiveness, and tissue oxygenation should be addressed.

Equipment for treatment includes pacemakers, assist devices, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), and CPB. The application of CPB started in the 1930s when Gibbon used an external pump circuit to maintain life in Boston. The development was interrupted due to early drawbacks. Since then, modifications have been made. Dogliotti presented a partial heart and lung machine with 1 liter per minute flow in 1951. Hypothermic technique reducing metabolic demand and injury to the heart was first used by Lewis in 1952 when closing an atrial septal defect. Lillehei came up with the idea of cross circulation. He temporarily replaced one dog's circulation by sharing it with another dogs circulation. A broader application was possible with the mechanical heart-lung machine by Kirklin who made modifications to the IBM Gibbon machine, which increased the number of survivors. The use of CPB allows for venting the heart and clearing the operating area.

However, CPB comes with side effects. Exposure to the circuit elicits a systemic inflammatory response.

Use of CPB and assist devices requires frequent coagulation tests. Together with cases of postoperative hemorrhage, usual coagulation diagnostic such as international normalized ratio (INR) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) and more detailed laboratory assessment, for example, rotational thrombelastography, activated clotting time (ACT) or certain coagulation factors (antithrombin III, fibrinogen, factor VII) may be necessary.

Veno-venous ECMO includes an oxygenator and thus supports the respiratory system in adding oxygen and removing carbon dioxide. Veno-arterial ECMO not only allows for oxygenation and decarboxylation but also replaces cardiac output partially. Cannulation for VA-ECMO is either placed centrally in the ascending aorta at sternotomy producing antegrade flow or peripherally with cannulas placed in the external iliac artery and vein. ECMO can be used as a bridge to recovery, bridge to bridge and bridge to transplant modality.

The use of intra-aortic balloon pump has decreased since studies could not show any benefit in mortality. Initial physiologic consideration was improved diastolic coronary perfusion of the coronaries and pull effect during systole via counterpulsation of a balloon placed in the descending thoracic aorta.

In valve replacement, decision making on which prosthetic heart valve to use is necessary. Mechanical heart valves offer higher resistance to structural valve degeneration (SVD) but require lifelong anticoagulation. Mechanical heart valves are recommended for younger patients. Bioprosthetic heart valves either from porcine or pericardial tissue do not require anticoagulation but may suffer from earlier SVD and reoperation.