Endometriomas are most commonly thought to be caused when the seeding of ectopic endometrial tissue occurs, most often on the ovary, bleeds, causing a hematoma. This typically occurs with the natural menstrual cycle of a woman because the ectopic endometrial tissue is still hormonally active. Therefore, this tissue will naturally shed with the withdrawal of progesterone after the breakdown of the corpus luteum.

When discussing the etiology of endometriomas, it is always appropriate to mention the etiology of endometriosis as well, since this is the foreshadowing condition of an endometrioma. However, the etiology of endometriosis is a controversial discussion in the medical community. The oldest and most widely accepted theory for developing endometriosis is retrograde menstruation. This theory suggests that endometriosis develops from the endometrial tissue traveling in a retrograde manner through the fallopian tubes and into the pelvis during a woman’s natural menstrual cycle. This tissue then travels and seeds in different areas, creating the endometriosis lesions. Some of these lesions may seed in an ovary and begin the process of forming an endometrioma, as discussed above.

This theory of retrograde menstruation likely contributes to the development of endometriosis. However, most people in the medical community feel that it is more of a multifactorial development. For instance, it is difficult to believe this theory in women with distant endometriosis lesions or pre-pubescent females with endometriosis. Therefore, other theories that have been suggested include the theory of metaplasia. This theory suggests that extrauterine cells undergo metaplasia and transdifferentiate into endometrial cells. Another prominent theory is that viable endometrial cells get seeded via the hematogenous and lymphatic spread. No one theory has been fully proven, and it is likely a combination of these theories mentioned above.