Pain at the end of life is most commonly associated with the pathology causing the disease and ultimately leading to death. Based on acuity, pain can be acute or chronic. Acute pain is usually associated with an intervention like surgical interventions, repositioning, or suctioning that may be performed as a palliative measure. Chronic pain is usually a complex interplay between several organ systems. Examples of chronic pain include headaches, joint pain due to arthritis, pain due to skin breaks, decubitus ulcers, etc. Based on the pain fibers' location, the pain can be classified as somatic, visceral, or neuropathic. Each of these classifications leads to a specific character of pain, and this helps guide therapy.

Somatic pain originated from pain receptors in the skin and musculoskeletal tissues and is usually deep and aching in character. Common sources can include the joints, bones, infections like abscesses, and skin breaks. As the name suggests, Visceral pain involves the stimulation of pain receptors of the visceral organs and is generally described as a “squeezing” or “cramping” kind of pain. Palpation of the involved viscera can lead to an aggravation of the intensity of the pain. On the other hand, neuropathic pain is usually described as a sharp pain that is “burning” or like an "electric shock."

Anxiety and depression frequently accompany pain, and addressing this is pivotal to alleviating “total pain.” The anxiety caused by organic causes includes a feeling of impending doom in patients with respiratory diseases causing hypoxia and dyspnea, cardiac diseases, electrolyte imbalances, dehydration, and infection leading to sepsis. Medications like nebulization treatments, corticosteroids (Dosage and rapid tapering) anti-emetics like metoclopramide can cause a feeling of anxiety. Failure to address pre-existing anxiety can lead to significant distress at the end of life.

Apart from physical noxious stimuli, other factors that can affect individuals at the end of life, as elucidated by the concept of total pain, include emotional discomfort, interpersonal conflicts, and the nonacceptance of one’s own death. The emotional discomfort and interpersonal conflicts go hand in hand in causing suffering at the end of life. Financial instability, marital discord, conflicts with family members, and an inability to get one’s affairs in order before death are common causes of total pain. Nonacceptance of the end of one’s life can result from shock, anger at the prospect of impending death. Counseling and spiritual care can help address these issues and aid in pain management at the end of life.