Tissue preparation for immunohistochemistry requires surgically resecting the thyroid lesions. The preparation of thyroid samples includes fixation using 10% zinc formalin, after which the tissue requires embedding in paraffin. The embedding protocols vary according to the substrate, whether the protocol uses a chromogenic or fluorescent substrate. Paraffin embedding provides an option for the long-term preservation of tissues. The tissues must not be left to fix for more than 24 hours because over fixation could cause mask the antigen. If necessary, tissues can get transferred to alcohol following fixation before the embedding process. Contrarily, the tissues can be frozen instead of fixing. Snap freezing is usually done to detect post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation, nitration, etc. Tissue freezing can be done by immersing tissues in liquid nitrogen or isopentane or by snap freezing in dry ice. Frozen tissue sections require alcohol fixing. This process avoids the need to retrieve epitopes that get masked by the formaldehyde/ formalin fixing method.

Next, the embedded sections get cut using a microtome.  Usually, 4mm thick sections provide accurate staining with hematoxylin and eosin for routine histological examination. For immunohistochemical staining, separate areas are used and stained with selected markers. Immunostaining requires precise experimental conditions to generate a strong and specific immunohistochemical staining for each antigen of interest.

For Immunocytochemical staining, the thyroid cells from the lesion or fine-needle aspiration specimens are transferred and attached to a solid support, usually a microscope slide or coverslip. The use of pre-coated coverslip with poly-L-lysine and/or an extracellular matrix protein such as laminin, fibronectin, or collagen enhances the attachment of thyroid tissue cells. Air-dried smear preparation is with a Romanovsky stain. Wetfixed smears are usually prepared with a modified Papanicolaou stain and used to observe nuclear detail. MayGrünwald-Giemsa is a staining procedure also used in thyroid cytologic preparations.