Osteoarthritis: The progressive erosion of joint cartilage. This is the most common form of arthritis and often affects the spine. Advanced osteoarthritis may lead to hyperextension of the cervical spine and compression of spinal nerves causing pain.

Osteoporosis: Demineralization of the bones. Current U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) guidelines recommend screening for osteoporosis in all women aged 65 and older as well as younger women with increased risk factors (assess using the (Fracture Risk Assessment Tool - FRAX). Severe osteoporosis increases the risk of developing a vertebral compression fracture.

Seronegative spondyloarthropathies: A disease of the vertebral column that is typically associated with lack of the serum markers ANA and rheumatoid arthritis and has an increased incidence of HLA-B27. Conditions include ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and spondylitis associated with inflammatory bowel disease.

Spinal cord injury: Trauma to the vertebral column may lead to spinal cord damage with serious consequences such as paraplegia.

Spinal disc herniation: The intervertebral discs act as shock absorbers for load-bearing and relaxing. Over time, or with injury, the discs may tear at the periphery along the annulus fibrosus leading to herniation of the internal nucleus pulposus. This can cause symptoms of pain, numbness, weakness, and decreased reflexes.

Spinal stenosis: Narrowing of the central spinal canal that can cause symptoms of numbness, weakness, or pain in the upper or lower extremities. This condition may be secondary to osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, Paget disease of the bone, or trauma. Symptoms classically improve with bending forward.

Spondylolisthesis: Complete dislocation with anterior displacement of one vertebra on another. This may increase pressure on spinal nerves, leading to pain in the nerve’s distribution.

Tuberculous spondylitis: Also known as Pott disease. This is osteomyelitis of the vertebral bodies along with intervertebral discitis caused by advanced tuberculosis. Symptoms may include weakness of the lower limbs, kyphosis, back pain, fever, and weight loss.