# Introduction

The central nervous system is made up of grey matter and white matter. However, grey matter plays the most significant part in allowing humans to function normally daily.

# Structure and Function

The highest concentration of neuronal cells is in the cerebellum, which has more than the rest of the brain combined.

# Embryology

Grey matter forms early in development from the ectoderm. The ectoderm continues to divide into specific cells until the entire central nervous system, both the brain and the spinal cord, has formed. Throughout development, the volume of grey matter increases until around the age of 8.

# Nerves

The anterior grey column is important for all motor movements. The anterior portion of the grey matter connects to the brain through the pyramidal tract, which originates in the cerebral cortex.

The last section of grey matter in the spine is known as the lateral grey column. This lateral grey column is found in the middle of the grey matter of the spinal cord and extends out to the sides from the base of the spine. The lateral grey column is responsible for regulating the autonomic nervous system through its role in activating the sympathetic nervous system.

# Clinical Significance

Many issues may affect the grey matter found in the brain and the spinal cord. One of the most prevalent medical problems occurs when plaque begins to build up in areas of grey matter within the brain. These areas, known as senile plaques, take up space that was once grey matter, leading to a decrease of higher functioning. As amyloid beta continues to buildup in the grey matter, cognitive function further decreases, which causes the patient to lose memory, a condition known as Alzheimer disease.

# Other Issues

Trauma may also play a role in creating issues that stem from the grey matter.  Since the neuronal cells of the grey matter are constantly working, they require a high supply of oxygen to function efficiently.  Therefore when the grey matter does not have access to oxygen, the cells will begin to die, leading to possible irreversible brain damage and loss of function.  Additionally, under blunt force trauma situations, the grey matter may become damaged due to an intracerebral hemorrhage, which can lead to apoptosis of the grey matter cells.