There are many muscles in the hand. The muscles in the deepest layer are between the metacarpal bones are responsible for either abduction or adduction of the fingers. The motion of abduction is created from the four dorsal interosseous muscles while adduction results from three palmar interosseous muscles. The ulnar nerve is responsible for the innervation of these interosseous muscles. Furthermore, the motion of the thumb and the little finger can separate into the actions of the thenar and hypothenar muscles. The thenar muscles are responsible for three key movements of the thumb: oppose (bring the thumb and touch the little finger), abduction, and flexion of the thumb. The opponens pollicis muscle produces the opposing movement, and the abductor pollicis brevis will abduct the thumb; both of these muscles receive innervation from the median nerve. Thumb flexion results from the action of the flexor pollicis brevis. The median nerve will innervate the majority of the flexor pollicis brevis, but the ulnar nerve will innervate the deep head of the flexor pollicis brevis.

As for the hypothenar muscles, the ulnar nerve will be responsible for the movements in this compartment. The motions are abduction, opposition, and flexion of the little finger. The muscle that performs abduction is the abductor digiti minimi, flexion is by the flexor digiti minimi, and oppose is by opponens digiti minimi.

The ulnar nerve and median nerve will also split the innervation for the motion of flexion at the metacarpal phalange joint. The muscle that produces this motion is the lumbricals, and there are four lumbrical muscles. The median nerve will innervate the first and second lumbrical muscles while the ulnar nerve will innervate the third and fourth lumbrical muscles.

The cause of the hand and wrist flexion or extension as a whole is a function of the attachment of the muscle tendons from the forearm and not the actual hand muscles themselves.