Pars plana vitrectomy is one of the most commonly performed surgeries in ophthalmology. The last couple of decades have seen tremendous refinements in instrumentation and surgical techniques. One of the most important developments is the introduction of various vitreous substitutes.

An ideal vitreous substitute should have all the structural and functional qualities of the physiological vitreous. It should be biologically and chemically inert, optically transparent, biocompatible, elastic, durable, non-biodegradable. Hydrophilic, water-insoluble, have similar viscoelastic proprieties and refractive index, provide adequate support to the intraocular tissues, allow diffusion of ions and electrolytes, injectable through a small syringe, easily manipulable during surgery, and easily removable. However, an ideal vitreous substitute has not yet been developed despite the ongoing intensive research.

The vitreous substitutes can be classified based on their function or molecular status.

They can be categorized based on their surgical or functional application:

a) To replace the vitreous during the surgery: saline, ringer lactate, and balanced salt solution (BSS);

b) To assist during the surgery as a surgical tool (third hand of the retinal surgeon): perfluorocarbon liquids (PFCL);

c) To provide postoperative tamponade: air, sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), perfluoroethane (C2F6), perfluoropropane (C3F8), and silicone oil (SO).

According to their molecular status, they can be classified as:

a) Gas-based: air, xe109-+non, SF6, and C3F8;

b) Liquid-based: They can be sub-categorized according to their chemical structure as i) saline, BSS, ringer lactate; ii) PFCL: perfluoro-octane, perfluoro-decane, perfluoroperhydrophenanthrene, octa-fluoro propane; iii) SO; and iv) Semifluorinated alkane (SFA).

These vitreous substitutes have multiple indications depending upon their properties. We will restrict our discussion to the most commonly used substitutes.

**Gas-based vitreous substitutes:**

Air was first used in 1911 by Ohm to repair retinal detachment.

**i)****Vitrectomy for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD):**This is the most common indication for intraocular gas injection. Fluid-air Exchange (FAE or FAX) is done to flatten the retina after relieving all the traction around the retinal breaks. The inability to settle the retina under air indicates the presence of residual traction. In this situation, the fluid must be re-infused in the vitreous cavity, and the residual tractions must be relieved.

Air or gas can also be used as a postoperative tamponading agent depending upon the required duration of tamponade. The most commonly used gases are non-expansile SF6 (18%) and C3F8 (14%). The Silicone Study found that C3F8 was as effective as SO and better than SF6 in reattaching the retina with proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) grade C3. Both C3F8 and SO had similar visual outcomes and complication rates.

**ii) Pneumatic retinopexy for RRD:**It was first introduced by Lincoff in the 1980s and later popularized by Hilton and Grizzard. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved SF6 (five times heavier than air) and C3F8 (six times heavier than air) for pneumatic retinopexy in 1993. It can be performed in eyes with superior RRD, complete posterior vitreous detachment, retinal break(s) within 1 to 2 clock hours, and no inferior retinal breaks/ areas of thinning.

**iii) Scleral buckle (SB) for RRD:**Air or gas is not usually used in SB. However, they can be used as a "salvage" procedure in case of persistent subretinal fluid (SRF) underneath the break or fish mouthing of the break. The use of air has also been described in the case of bullous RRD, which can be operated using theDACE sequence, i.e., drainage (D), intravitreal air injection, cryotherapy to the retinal breaks (C), and episcleral explant (E).

**iv) Macular hole (MH) surgery: In MH surgeries, gas**is regularly used as a postoperative tamponade. Two theories explain the mechanism by which gas tamponade facilitates MH closure. The "waterproofing" theory advocates that the gas bubble helps in hole closure by keeping the macula dry.floatation force" theory suggests that the bubble helps in displacing the SRF away from the macula as it exerts an upward force due to its buoyancy. Conventionally, non-expansile gas is used. However, recent studies have shown that 2 ml pure expansile SF6 and even air can be successfully used as a tamponading agent.

**v) Subretinal hemorrhage:**Expansile gas can pneumatically displace the subretinal blood in conditions like polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy, retinal macroaneurysm, choroidal neovascularization, and trauma. The volume used is 0.3 mL C3F8 and 0.5 mL SF6.

**vi) Enhance visualization during vitrectomy:**The area of visualization is enhanced after FAE. This makes removal of peripheral vitreous (dry vitrectomy), peripheral retinal laser, and detection of peripheral intraocular foreign body (IOFB) easy.

**PFCL (perfluorocarbon liquids):**

It was initially designed as a blood substitute as it has a high oxygen-carrying capacity. While Haidt et al. first examined its use as a vitreous substitute, Chang pioneered its use as an intraoperative tool. Due to a similar refractive index, surgical maneuvers can be performed easily. Its current indications include:

**i) Stabilize the detached retina:**Owing to its higher specific gravity, it helps immobilize the detached retina by pushing the SRF anteriorly and then into the vitreous cavity through the retinal breaks. This helps avoid drainage retinotomy and makes vitreous base dissection easy. The peripheral retinal break may be lasered under PFCL as the visibility is good.

**ii) Tackle PVR changes:**It makes the dissection of membranes easier, which can be started from the posterior pole (instead of anterior to posterior), thus reducing the risk of iatrogenic tears.

**iii) Giant retinal tear (GRT):**Before introducing PFCL, RRD associated with GRT was extremely difficult to treat. The surgery was done on the Stryker table (described by Peyman) and required the patient to be rolled into a prone position to unfold the retina. However, PFCL injection allows easy repositioning of the folded flap in the supine position. In cases with PVR, PFCL-SO exchange may be needed to prevent the slippage and detachment of the peripheral retina upon removal of the PFCL.

**iv) Diabetic retinopathy:**Dissection of the pre-retinal membrane becomes easier as it stabilizes the retina. Also, it enhances the intra-operative view in case of bleeding as it is immiscible with blood and saline.

**v) Ocular trauma:**It is useful in the removal of the incarcerated retina as well as metallic and non-metallic IOFB. It may protect the macula from a possible slippage of metallic foreign body from the forceps or magnet on the macula during surgery.

**vi) Dislocated crystalline lens/ intraocular lens (IOL):**It can also be used to float the lens/ IOL to the mid-vitreous cavity. The dislocated IOL can either be removed from the anterior approach or repositioned in the sulcus/ re-fixated in the sclera. The crystalline lens can be emulsified using ultrasound energy, while PFCL provides a "cushion" to the vital structures like the macula, optic disc, and major vessels. It is essential to understand that the upper surface of the PFCL bubble tends to become convex-shaped. Hence, the crystalline lens or IOL tends to slip to the periphery and get entangled inside the residual vitreous or may even cause retinal breaks. This makes adequate vitreous removal necessary before attempting this maneuver.

**vii) Suprachoroidal hemorrhage:**Similar to SRF, this blood also gets pushed anteriorly, and then this suprachoroidal hemorrhage can easily be removed from anterior sclerotomies.

**viii) Short- or medium-term postoperative tamponade**: SO and gas are lighter than water and leave an empty space in the inferior vitreous cavity. This space serves as a cavity for the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells to migrate and proliferate, leading to anterior PVR and redetachment of the retina. PFCL can be used as a short- or medium-term postoperative tamponade in complex RDs like those associated with GRT, choroidal detachment, advanced PVR changes, trauma, etc. It prevents inferior compartmentalization, thus minimizing the risk of PVR development.

**ix) Internal limiting membrane (ILM) peeling:**It serves as a surgical third hand and helps in ILM peeling during the surgery, especially in eyes with RRD and advanced diabetes. Also, ILM gets easily stained under PFCL.

**x) Induction of PVD (posterior vitreous detachment):**It can be used to induce PVD using the "Perfluoro-n-octane-assisted mega Weiss-ring technique," which is especially useful in pediatric eyes.

**Silicone Oil (SO)**:

It was first used in treating RD in a non-vitrectomised eye by Paul Cibis.

**i) Complicated****RRD:**The role of SO in RRD was established by the Silicone Study.

**ii) Severe PDR (proliferative diabetic retinopathy):**It ensures a rapid visual recovery, allows easy postoperative fundus visualization, and reduces the incidence of postoperative vitreous hemorrhage and neovascular glaucoma (prevents migration of vascular proliferative factors). It must be remembered that SO should not be injected until complete hemostasis has been achieved and most of the preretinal blood has been aspirated. This reduces the risk of postoperative proliferative changes.

**iii) Endophthalmitis**: It is useful in eyes with endophthalmitis as it possesses antimicrobial activity.

**The Foldable capsular vitreous body (FCVB)**has been developed in China for severe retinal detachments that can not be treated with available vitreous tamponades. FCVB is composed of a capsule that may be filled with SO, a tube, and a valve. FCVB is made of medical-grade biocompatible polymer. It is thought to support 360 degrees of the retina, and it also separates the SO from the retina. Postoperative positioning is not necessary with FCVB. It may potentially prevent complications of SO, including emulsification and displacement.