The human face possesses over two dozen individual muscles on each side - upwards of 30, depending on how they are counted. The facial muscles are striated muscles that link the skin of the face to the bone of the skull to perform important functions for daily life, including mastication and expression of emotion. While the individual movements these muscles produce are varied and diverse, it may be helpful to categorize them into two rough groups: the muscles of facial expression, also known as the mimetic muscles, and the muscles of mastication. The muscles of facial expression are innervated by the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII), and the muscles of mastication are innervated by the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V3).

Despite different innervations and functions, the facial muscles, by and large, act in synchrony. For example, during chewing, the orbicularis oris and buccinator muscles act to retain the food inside the mouth while the masseter and temporalis muscles move the mandible to chew the food. If anteroposterior or lateral and medial adjustment of the mandible is required, the pterygoid muscles provide that movement. The facial and mandibular nerves also both control muscles that participate in neither facial expression nor mastication; however, dysfunction of either of these nerves can be debilitating, as few other motor nerves control so many individual muscles that are so critical to the human experience. When facial and trigeminal nerve function is impaired, patients may suffer massive quality of life sequelae and have great difficulty remaining comfortable as members of society.