Alprazolam is available as a regular release and orally disintegrating tablets in strengths of 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 2 mg tablets, while extended-release tablets are available in strengths of 0.5 mg, 1 mg, 2 mg, and 3 mg. Alprazolam is also available as an oral solution in strengths of 0.5 mg/5 mL and 1 mg/10 mL. Administration of alprazolam may be without regard to food. Take with food if the patient experiences an upset stomach. The orally disintegrating tablets must remain in their original packaging and must not be put in a pillbox. The extended-release tablets are not to be chewed, crushed, or split but instead swallowed whole. Alprazolam is a controlled substance with the C-IV designation.

**Treatment of Anxiety Disorders**

Oral dosage forms (immediate-release tablets, orally disintegrating tablets, and solution):

Adult Dosage

- 0.25 mg to 0.5 mg three times a day

- Dosage increases should occur at intervals of 3 to 4 days with increments of no more than 1 mg per day.

- Maximum dose: 4 mg/day

Geriatric Dosage

- 0.25 mg two or three times a day.

**Treatment of Panic Disorders**

Oral Dosage form (extended-release tablets):

Adult Dosage

- 0.5 to 1 mg once a day

- Maintenance dose: 3 to 6 mg orally per day

- Maximum dose: 10 mg/day

Geriatric Dosage

- 0.5 mg orally once a day

Oral Dosage forms (immediate-release tablets, orally disintegrating tablets, solution):

Adult Dosage

- 0.5 mg three times a day

- Maximum dose: 10 mg/day

Geriatric Dosage

- 0.25 mg two or three times a day

**Pediatric Considerations**

The safety and effectiveness of alprazolam are not being established in pediatric patients.

**Hepatic Impairment Dose Adjustments**

Oral dosage forms (immediate-release tablets/orally disintegrating tablets): 0.25 mg orally two or three times daily

Oral dosage forms (extended-release tablets): 0.5 mg orally once a day

**Debilitating Disease Dose Adjustments**

Oral dosage forms (immediate-release tablets/orally disintegrating tablets): 0.25 mg orally two or three times daily

Oral dosage forms (extended-release tablets): 0.5 mg orally once a day

**Dose Reduction**

As a result of the danger of withdrawal, avoid abrupt discontinuation of treatment. The dosage should be gradually reduced in all patients when discontinuing therapy or decreasing the daily dosage. The suggested method is that the daily dosage reduction is not more than 0.5 mg every three days, and some patients may require an even slower dosage reduction. In patients with long-term chronic alprazolam use, one should switch to a longer-acting benzodiazepine such as clonazepam or diazepam and titrate down gradually; this results in fewer withdrawal side effects.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

Alprazolam is categorized as pregnancy category D medicine. A pregnancy exposure registry is established to monitor pregnancy outcomes in women exposed to alprazolam when pregnant. Clinicians are encouraged to register their patients by calling the National Pregnancy Registry for Psychiatric Medications.

Maternal exposure to alprazolam in the later trimester of pregnancy may result in sedation (lethargy, respiratory depression, hypotonia) and withdrawal symptoms (irritability, hyperreflexia, restlessness, tremors, feeding difficulties, and inconsolable crying, and) in the neonate. As benzodiazepines can cross the placenta, clinicians should observe newborns for signs/symptoms of sedation, respiratory depression, feeding problems, and neonatal withdrawal syndrome and manage them appropriately. Available data of published observational studies of pregnant women exposed to alprazolam have not related alprazolam-associated risk of miscarriage, major congenital disabilities, or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Limited reports from published literature show the presence of alprazolam in human breast milk. Sedation and withdrawal symptoms are reported in breastfed neonates/infants exposed to alprazolam via breastmilk. The effects of alprazolam on milk production and lactation are unknown. Since there is a potential for serious adverse reactions for breastfed neonates and infants, lactating women are advised against breastfeeding if treated with alprazolam.