ATTR-CM typically presents with clinical signs and symptoms of progressive congestive heart failure. In addition, they often have cardiac arrhythmia and conduction system disease, which may occur years before the development of heart failure.

hATTR can have a variable presentation. It can present as primary cardiomyopathy or primary autonomic or peripheral neuropathy. Not uncommonly, it can present mixed clinical features of both cardiomyopathy and neuropathy.

**Congestive Heart Failure**

ATTR-CM should be suspected in old patients with recurrent HF exacerbations irrespective of their ejection fraction status. Often they will have fatigue, poor exercise tolerance, shortness of breath with the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II to IV. In addition, it is seen that they have significant right ventricular involvement, causing peripheral congestive symptoms like elevated jugular venous pressure, lower extremity edema, hepatic congestion, and ascites. Often at advanced stages, cardiorenal syndrome ensues. Interestingly, these patients often develop intolerance to beta-blockers and angiotensin convertase enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) which they might have tolerated previously.

**Cardiac Arrhythmias**

Atrial fibrillation is the most common cardiac arrhythmia seen in ATTR-CM. It is present in 40 to 60% of patients at the time of diagnosis. Eventually, all patients develop atrial fibrillation during the disease. When present, it is usually of persistent type.

**Conduction System Disease**

Deposition of TTR amyloid in interstitial space disrupts the normal conduction system of the heart. Patients may present with varying degrees of heart block due to the involvement of atrioventricular (AV) nodal and infra AV nodal conduction. Due to associated conduction system disease, atrial fibrillation usually presents with a slow or controlled ventricular response. Patients will give a history of lightheadedness, presyncope, and unexplained falls. Elevated jugular venous distension with cannon A wave can be seen when the patient is in complete heart block due to AV dissociation. Eventually, one out of every three patients with wATTR-CM patients ends up requiring permanent pacemaker (PPM) implantation.

**Extracardiac Manifestations**

Extracardiac TTR amyloid deposition can cause nerve entrapment in close spaces. Bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) and lumbar spinal stenosis are commonly seen with the ATTR disease process.

Clinical suspicion for ATTR-CM should be heightened, especially when cardiac and extracardiac findings are seen simultaneously.