**Heparin after an Acute Ischemic Stroke**

TOAST (Trial of ORG 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment) trial [1998] showed no favorable 3-months outcomes with the use of heparinoids after an acute ischemic stroke.

**TPA (tissue Plasminogen activator or alteplase) after an acute ischemic stroke**

NINDS (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke- tPA/tissue plasminogen activator/alteplase) trial [1995] reported significantly improved outcomes with the use of tPA within 3 hours of acute ischemic stroke onset, despite the increased risk of symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage.

**Thrombectomy in LVO**

- The DAWN (Clinical Mismatch in the Triage of Wake Up and Late Presenting Strokes Undergoing Neurointervention With Trevo) trial [2018] showed that in patients with acute ischemic stroke with LVO who received medical management (MM) only versus medical management plus mechanical thrombectomy (MM+MT), with the onset of symptoms between 6 and 24 hours and having a mismatch between infarct core and clinical signs and symptoms, the 90 disability was lower in thrombectomy group as compared to patients receiving standard of care treatment.

- DEFUSE-3 (Endovascular Therapy Following Imaging Evaluation for Ischemic Stroke 3) trial [2018] showed that in patients with acute ischemic stroke (MCA or ICA LVO), with MR perfusion mismatch ratio of greater than 1.8 and infarct volume of less than 70 mL; who received either medical management (MM) alone or medical management plus mechanical thrombectomy (MM+MT), within the 6-16 hours of symptoms onset, the 90 disability was lower in thrombectomy group as compared to patients receiving standard of care treatment.

- BEST (Endovascular treatment vs. standard medical treatment for vertebrobasilar artery occlusion) and BASICS (Basilar Artery International Cooperation Study) failed to demonstrate significant benefits of endovascular therapy within 6 or 8 hours after stroke symptom onset.

- BAOCHE (Basilar Artery Occlusion Chinese Endovascular) trial (NCT02737189) tries to identify the usefulness of BAO mechanical thrombectomy in a more extended window from the last known well (6–24 hours).

**Carotid Endarterectomy (CEA) for Atherosclerotic LVO**

- NASCET (North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy (CEA) Trial Collaborators) trial [1991] showed the benefit of CEA in preventing ischemic strokes in patients with over 70% carotid artery stenosis after TIA and small strokes.

- CREST (Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy (CEA) Versus Stenting (CAS) Trial) trial [2016] is a huge trial. After a long-term 10-year follow-up showed no net outcome difference between the two procedures except in patients over 70 years old, CAS might have more bleeding and procedural complications.

**Aspirin+Clopidogrel (dual antiplatelets) Appeared to be Superior to Aspirin Alone in Preventing Strokes after TIA/Small Ischemic Strokes**

- The CHANCE (Clopidogrel in High-risk Patients With Acute Non-disabling Cerebrovascular Events) trial [2013] is also a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial  (including 5170 subjects) that compared aspirin monotherapy versus aspirin/clopidogrel in 114 centers across China. The bottom line suggests that in patients with acute TIA or small ischemic stroke, starting dual antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel load 300 mg then 75 mg/d, aspirin 75 to 300mg/d and placebo group with no other thrombolytics for 30 days) after the symptom onset decreases 90-day stroke risk at the cost of a slightly increased bleeding risk as compared to aspirin monotherapy.

- The POINT (Platelet-Oriented Inhibition in New TIA and Minor Ischemic Stroke) trial [2018] is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial (including 4881 subjects) that compared aspirin monotherapy versus aspirin/clopidogrel in 269 centers in North America, Europe, Australia, and New Zealand. The bottom line suggests that in patients with acute TIA or small ischemic stroke, starting dual antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel load 600 mg then 75 mg/d, aspirin 75 to 325mg/d, and placebo group with no other thrombolytics for 30 days) after the symptom onset decreases 90-day stroke risk at the cost of a slightly increased bleeding risk as compared to aspirin monotherapy.

- Summary of POINT and CHANCE trials: In the POINT trial, the duration of treatment was longer (90 versus 30 days), and the clopidogrel dose was higher (600 versus 300), but it is unclear if this was the reason for the slightly higher bleeding rates in POINT trial. Although pooled analysis shows that after comparing these two trials, the benefit of dual-antiplatelet therapy appeared limited to 21 days after an ischemic stroke.

- The ASCEND (A Study of Cardiovascular Events iN Diabetes) trial [2018] showed that the use of aspirin for primary prevention therapy reduces the risk of serious vascular events in patients with well-controlled diabetes (A1c<8; 50% of patients).

**Intracranial Arterial Stenosis**

SAMMPRIS (Stenting versus aggressive medical therapy for intracranial arterial stenosis) trial [2011] for intracranial arterial stenosis comparing the roles of addressive medical management (MM) with percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stenting (PTAS) to prevent recurrent stroke. It reports that MM (i.e., dual antiplatelets for 90 days and aspirin after that) is superior to intracranial stenting in reducing ischemic stroke risk.

**Lacunar Strokes (Small Vessel Disease)**

SPS 3 (Secondary Prevention of Small Subcortical Strokes) trial [2012] reported that among patients with lacunar strokes use of starting dual antiplatelet therapy (Aspirin and Plavix) is not associated with significant stroke risk-reduction but instead showed an increased risk of bleeding and mortality as compared to aspirin alone. Hence, dual antiplatelet therapy is not indicated after lacunar strokes.

**Afib (Atrial Fibrillation)**

- EMBRACE (30-Day Cardiac Event Monitor Belt for Recording Atrial Fibrillation After a Cerebral Ischemic Event) trial [2014] recommends 30-day cardiac monitoring to increase the yield of AFib detection and subsequent goal-directed anticoagulation treatment to prevent recurrent strokes by risk factor modification.

- CRYSTAL AF (Study of Continuous Cardiac Monitoring to Assess Atrial Fibrillation After Cryptogenic Stroke) trial [2014] for AFib detection using prolonged cardiac monitoring for 6 to 12 months using an insertable cardiac monitor was proved superior in identifying atrial fibrillation in patients after the admission of stroke.

**Cryptogenic Strokes and Atrial Cardiopathy**

- ARCADIA (AtRial Cardiopathy and Antithrombotic Drugs In prevention After cryptogenic stroke) trial [2019] is currently enrolling patients with cryptogenic strokes based on atrial cardiopathy on echocardiogram, NTpBNP, and EKG V1 findings.

**Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO) Closure**

- RESPECT (Randomized Evaluation of Recurrent Stroke Comparing PFO Closure to Established Current Standard of Care Treatment) trial [2017] showed that the combined PFO closure and antiplatelet therapy are superior to medical management (antiplatelets) alone in preventing recurrent ischemic strokes.

- CLOSE (Patent Foramen Ovale Closure or Anticoagulants Versus Antiplatelet Therapy to Prevent Stroke Recurrence) trial [2017] reports that combined large PFO closure and antiplatelet therapy is superior to medical management (antiplatelets) alone to prevent recurrent ischemic strokes but with an increased risk of atrial fibrillation after PFO closure.

**Hyperlipidemia and Hypertriglyceridemia**

- SPARCL (Lipitor In The Prevention Of Stroke, For Patients Who Have Had A Previous Stroke) trial [2006] for high-dose statin use in patients with TIA or ischemic stroke showed significant stroke risk-reduction with the use of high dose (81mg) atorvastatin by treating and preventing atherosclerosis.

- REDUCE-IT (Reduction of Cardiovascular Events With EPA - Intervention Trial) [2019] trial reports a reduction in stroke risk in patients who received Icosapent Ethyl (highly purified eicosapentaenoic acid ethyl ester) twice daily (toral 4 g/Day)with hypertriglyceridemia despite being on high-dose statin therapy.

**Post-stroke depression, motor recovery, and the role of SSRI**

FLAME (Fluoxetine on Motor Rehabilitation After Ischemic Stroke) trial [2011] showed improved motor recovery in patients with hemiplegia and hemiparesis with the use of fluoxetine.

**Endovascular Treatment in Ischemic Stroke (ETIS)**

Safety, outcome, and quality of endovascular therapy for stroke due to acute BAO under either conscious sedation/local anesthesia or general anesthesia have been found to be similar.