Practicing physicians should be on the alert for new technologies and treatment modalities. Unfortunately, it takes time for new methods to be translated from evidence into practice. Some researchers, in fact, have estimated this to take an average of 17 years.

Immune-based antimicrobial molecules include antimicrobial peptides and passive immunotherapy through monoclonal antibodies. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are catatonic polypeptide molecules.  They can be found naturally in a wide range of cell types. They are also able to be synthetically produced. They disrupt microbial cell membranes and microorganism metabolism. AMPs are an effective treatment in patients with drug-resistant infections and can be targeted against viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites.

Other advanced antimicrobial agents include metallic elements. Copper salts have shown excellent antibacterial activity against burn pathogens. Gallium compounds have also been shown to have antimicrobial activity and promise in treating Acinetobacter and Staphylococcus wound infections.

Some investigators are proposing the ultraviolet radiation of wounds as a potential treatment. They speculate that the toxicity to pathogens is higher than that to the host cell and suggests that there may be benefits and wound healing.

Stem cell therapy is perhaps the ' Holy Grail' of therapy with the theoretical ability to regenerate cartilage, cardiovascular tissue, and even neurologic structures. While these therapies may be realized in the future, stem cells certainly have shown promise in treating burn wounds. Stem cells have been shown to improve wound healing and accelerate the reepithelialization of wounds using adipose-derived stem cells in a burn model.

Many of the above-mentioned technologies have yet to be fully developed or proven as therapy. It is, however, important for the practicing clinician to be aware of potential solutions to the difficult problems that facial burns present. The closer clinicians watch emerging trends, the more likely it is that practice will not lag seventeen years behind the discovery.