**Surgical Technique**

Patients are typically placed supine on the operative table; a general or spinal anesthetic is administered. A systematic review performed by Johnson et al. found no statistically significant differences between the two, including mortality, surgical duration, or nerve palsy.

The sequence of steps during knee arthroplasty will be dependent on the technique selected by the operative surgeon. These techniques include:

**1) Measured Resection**

- Traditionally, it was associated with cruciate-retaining implants; however, it can also be used for PS implants.

- Most surgeons desire a neutral mechanical axis, and the femur is cut in 5 to 7 degrees of valgus with approximately 9 to 10 mm of bony resection distally. The tibia is cut perpendicularly to the tibial axis. Typically an intramedullary guide is utilized on the femur, and an extramedullary guide is utilized on the tibia. The anatomic slope of the tibial plateau is restored if a CR implant is to be used. Should be a neutral tibial plateau cut if a PS implant is being used due to the risk for the CAM jump phenomenon with an increased tibial slope.

- Anatomic landmarks are used to reference a neutral femoral implant rotation. 

- Transepicondylar axis (TEA): Connects lateral condyle prominence to sulcus of the medial epicondyle. Implants placed parallel to this will provide a rectangular flexion gap and result in improved patellofemoral tracking, femorotibial kinematics, and coronal stability.
- Whiteside line (AP axis of the femur): Starts at the center of the trochlear sulcus and ends posteriorly at the midpoint of the intercondylar notch and typically is perpendicular to TEA. 
- Posterior condylar axis (PCA): Goes based upon a line connecting posterior condyles; in most cases, externally rotating the posterior condylar axis by 3 degrees will create a line parallel to the TEA. This, however, can be very deceiving in patients with a valgus knee and hypoplastic lateral femoral condyle and can lead to malrotation of the implant.

- Osteophytes should be removed before any bone cuts.

- The pitfall of the technique is that it is difficult to perform soft-tissue releases after performing bony cuts. Ligament releases after bony cuts can affect the flexion/extension gaps and lead to poor balancing. Changing ligament tension in extension will affect the flexion gap and vice versa.

- There is an increased incidence of femoral condylar liftoff in this technique compared to gap balancing.

**2) Gap Balancing**

- Traditionally associated with PS implants, but can be used for CR as well.

- Before any bony cuts or soft tissue release, the removal of all osteophytes is necessary; this is particularly important in gap balancing because removing osteophytes after balancing will change the ligamentous tension and will affect flexion/extension gaps.

- Typically a proximal tibial cut is performed then lamina spreaders are placed on medial and lateral sides to assess tension on both sides in extension. Structures are released until a neutral alignment, and symmetric extension gap are achieved.

- The same steps are then performed with the knee at 90 degrees of flexion. A rectangular flexion gap equal to the extension gap is desired, the posterior femoral condyle cuts are then performed.

- Joint line elevation is a potential pitfall of this technique and can lead to abnormal contact forces on the patellofemoral joint as well as mid-flexion instability.

**3) Hybrid Technique**

- The hybrid technique is a blend of the two techniques described above.

Patellar maltracking is one of the most common complications encountered in knee arthroplasty. Iatrogenic causes of the complication can be avoided by:

- Lateralizing femoral and tibial implants

- Avoiding internal rotation of the femoral and tibial prosthesis

- Avoiding overstuffing or under-sizing patellar component

- Medializing patellar component

A uniform strategy for wound closure does not exist, and many studies have found different materials to be superior. Typically a heavy polyethylene terephthalate suture or barbed suture is used for arthrotomy closure. Followed by absorbable suture or barbed suture is used for the deep and superficial dermis. Skin closure can be either a running non-braided absorbable suture with either cyanoacrylate tissue glue/butterfly bandages or staples. Silver-lined dressings can be used and should be maintained for several days without being removed until drainage has stopped. For complex revisions or high-risk patients, incisional wound vacs or negative pressure dressings are also an option.