Epithelial cells have a structural polarity that causes three distinct regions or domains (apical, basal, and lateral). The apical domain faces the lumen of an organ or the external environment. This region often contains a structure that affects the cells' function, like microvilli, cilia, and stereocilia. Microvilli are finger-like projections with a core of cross-linked actin filaments attached to the terminal web parallel to the apical surface. Cilia are motile projections of the cell surface comprised of two central microtubules encompassed by nine microtubule doublets. Lastly, stereocilia are finger-like projections supported by actin filaments.

The basal domain is connected to the basal lamina by hemidesmosomes, which combine with intermediate filaments. The basal lamina separates connective tissue from the epithelium. The lateral domain connects neighboring cells and allows for communication between cells. There are a variety of junctional complexes that connect adjacent cells. Desmosomes anchor/adhere junctions that tightly join cells by integrating with the cytoskeletal structures. Tight junctions are occluding junctions that regulate the movement of fluid and solutes. Gap junctions are communicating junctions found throughout the lateral domain, creating channels that allow small molecules and ions to pass between adjacent cells.

Epithelial cells are organized according to their shape and number of layers. Simple epithelial cells contain one layer, whereas stratified cells contain two or more layers. Pseudostratified epithelial cells contain only one layer of cells, but the cells are of different sizes, so cells appear to be stratified or layered. Regarding the shape of epithelial cells, there are three main shapes, squamous, cuboidal, and columnar. Squamous cells are flat sheet-like cells, cuboidal cells are cube-like with an equal width, height, and depth, and columnar cells are taller than they are wide, making them rectangular.