General management of acute myocarditis is mainly supportive. The steps of management include the following.

- **Heart failure management**: The overall management of HF encompasses drugs used for managing heart failure due to any cause. The main medications used include beta-blockers, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAAS) inhibitors, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA), sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT-2 inhibitors), and diuretics. Heart failure (HF) management depends on the severity and hemodynamic status. In patients with acute heart failure, beta-blockers are withheld. Depending on volume status, diuretics are given. In hemodynamically stable patients and left ventricle dysfunction, early initiation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone inhibitor is recommended. As the hemodynamic and clinical status allows, a beta-blocker is started. In severe cases, mechanical support devices such as an intra-aortic pump or left ventricular assist devices can also be used.

- **Arrhythmia management**: Acute myocarditis can be complicated by ventricular or atrial arrhythmias or heart block. For patients with hemodynamically stable tachyarrhythmia and the absence of signs of peripheral hypoperfusion, initiation of a beta-blocker is recommended. Amiodarone and dofetilide may also be used for sustained ventricular arrhythmias. If indicated, heart block is managed with a temporary pacemaker and a permanent pacemaker. An implantable cardioverter defibrillator is indicated in the chronic stage, as per standard recommendations, once the acute illness has settled.

- **Other agents:**Immunosuppressive therapy has not shown clinical benefit and, therefore, should not be used routinely except in patients with underlying systemic autoimmune or granulomatous inflammatory diseases. Although viral etiology is the most identified cause, the efficacy of antiviral therapy is unknown, and routine antiviral treatment is not recommended. Non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents should be avoided in the acute setting as they may impair the healing of the myocardium. Anticoagulation is indicated in patients with evidence of atrial or ventricular thrombus or atrial fibrillation, as per standard recommendations.

- **Exercise limitation**: In acute myocarditis, activity restriction is recommended. Patients should not participate in competitive sports for at least three to six months after acute myocarditis.

- **Alcohol restriction**: Alcohol intake should be restricted to one drink per day (14 to 15 grams).