Serum phosphate levels depend upon dietary intake, mobilization of phosphate from bone, and renal excretion of the phosphate. Levels of phosphate are tightly regulated since hyperphosphatemia, as seen in chronic kidney disease, is associated with significant cardiovascular morbidity, while hypophosphatemia can lead to rickets and osteomalacia. There are three regulatory hormones which are responsible for the phosphate homeostasis.

- Vitamin D in its active form calcitriol, also known as 1,25-dihydroxycholecalieferol

- Parathyroid hormone

- FGF-23 in association with its membrane-bound protein klotho

In the gastrointestinal tract, most of the dietary phosphate is absorbed in the jejunum. At the subcellular levels, this absorption occurs through two pathways

1-Paracellular, Na+ independent pathway

2-Transcellular, Na+ dependent pathway via sodium phosphate cotransporter (NaPi-IIb)

In the gut, 1-25 dihydroxy vitamin D increases phosphate absorption increasing the expression of sodium phosphate cotransporter ( NaPi-IIb). Conversely, FGF-23, which is released from osteoblasts and osteocytes of the bone in response to increased serum phosphate levels, causes decreased intestinal phosphate absorption by inhibiting the synthesis of the active form of vitamin D.

In the kidneys, nearly all of the plasma phosphate is filtered. The main site of phosphate reabsorption in kidneys is the proximal convoluted tubule. At the subcellular level, this reabsorption occurs through 3 different transport proteins. Most of the reabsorption occurs through Sodium phosphate cotransporters NaPi- IIa, and NaPi-IIc while some of it occurs through PiT-2 transporter.

In the kidneys, PTH released from the parathyroid gland in response to high serum phosphate levels, exerts its phosphaturic effect by causing internalization of  NaPi-IIa and NaPi-IIC cotransporters. FGF-23 inhibits proximal tubular reabsorption of phosphate by inhibiting the expression of NaPi-IIa at the translational level.

Note that  PTH has dual effects in phosphate homeostasis as it also increases GI phosphate absorption indirectly by increasing activation of vitamin D, but contrary to that, FGF-23 decreases serum phosphate level by inhibiting its GI absorption and increasing its renal excretion.