The exact mechanism for developing an encephalocele has not been identified, but several theories had been proposed. One of the most accepted theories for the origin is a problem with the separation of the surface ectoderm from the neuroectoderm after the closure of the neural folds.

Problems with the mesoderm have also been suggested.

Anterior encephalocele development occurs from abnormal development of the foramen cecum. A diverticulum of dura usually projects anteriorly between the developing nasal and frontal bones at the fonticulus frontalis/foramen cecum. Later in embryogenesis, the diverticulum regresses, and the bone closes. However, if it does not regress, the brain can herniate through the bone defect and form an encephalocele.

The bone defect occurs anterior to the cribriform plate. Nasofrontal encephaloceles result from herniation through the foramen cecum and the fonticulus frontalis and projects along the nasal bridge between the nasofrontal sutures into the glabella. Nasoethmoidal encephaloceles occur when there is herniation through the foramen cecum into the prenasal space and nasal cavity under the nasal bones and above the nasal septum. Naso-orbital encephaloceles occur along the medial orbit wall at the level of the frontal process of the maxilla and the ethmoid-lacrimal bone junction.

Basal encephaloceles occur through the cribriform plate, ethmoid, or sphenoid sinuses and are usually occult. Transethmoidal encephaloceles result from herniation through the cribriform plate, sphenoethmoidal result from herniation through ethmoid and sphenoid bone, transsphenoidal result from herniation through the craniopharyngeal canal, and sphenomaxillary result from herniation through the superior and inferior orbital fissure.

Associated anomalies depend on the location of the encephalocele.