Monoamine oxidase is widely distributed throughout the body. As a result, its inhibition can result in diverse pharmacological effects. Most of these unwanted effects are mild to moderate and may be controlled via dose adjustments; however, some more severe adverse events can occur. It is infrequent that the prescriber must discontinue phenelzine.

Although phenelzine's primary intended therapeutic action in treating depression is to block the enzymatic breakdown of serotonin via MAO inhibition, this enzymatic inhibition can also exert effects on GABA and melatonin receptors and potentiate insomnia. MAO inhibition also prevents the breakdown of norepinephrine, potentially affecting vascular smooth muscle. A profound decrease in blood pressure leading to orthostatic hypotension may also occur in patients taking phenelzine. Constipation, dry mouth, change in weight, anorgasmia/impotence, nausea, and weight gain are well-known side effects of this drug.

Phenelzine may also cause drowsiness or dizziness; thus, the clinician should exercise caution in using this drug for patients who operate machinery or drive frequently. Patients diagnosed with asthma must use discretion due to the drug's effect on sympathetic neurotransmission.

Rare but potentially serious reactions include but are not limited to:

- Hypertensive crisis (almost always from tyramine interaction -  see Contraindications)

- Intracranial hemorrhage (associated with severe hypertensive crisis)

- Serotonin syndrome (with or without other serotonergic agents)

- Exacerbation of psychosis or depression

- Toxic delerium

- Hepatic necrosis

- Lupus-like syndrome

- Suicidality

- Seizures

- Ataxia

- Withdrawal symptoms if discontinued abruptly

There is also research linking phenelzine to vitamin B6 deficiency; supplementation may be necessary.