# Continuing Education Activity

Isolated calcaneofibular ligament (CFL) injuries are rare. CFL injuries are often described in the lateral ankle compartment, specifically associated with the anterior talofibular ligaments (ATFL); however, the CFL injuries have unique characteristics which can impact long term function, such as mobility and strength. This activity describes the evaluation and management of calcaneofibular ligament injury and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in managing care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of calcaneofibular ligament injuries.
- Explain the typical presentation of calcaneofibular ligament injury.
- Outline the management options available for calcaneofibular ligament injury.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance calcaneofibular ligament injury care and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Ankle sprains are a common reason for presentation to the emergency department, accounting for approximately 7% to 10% of visits and up to 40% of all sports injuries.

# Etiology

Sports activities account for a large percentage of lateral ankle injuries. Specifically, indoor and court sports sustain the highest risk for an ankle injury.

# Epidemiology

Isolated CFL injuries are rare as reported incidences are commonly classified under lateral ligament injuries. Thirty thousand ankle sprains occur each day, accounting for 25% to 40% of sports injuries. The lateral ligament compartment is involved in 85% of ankle injuries, with a daily incidence of one in 10,000.

# Pathophysiology

The CFL measures approximately 20 mm long with a diameter of 6 to 8 mm, originating at the anterior lateral malleolus and attaching to the posterior lateral tubercle of the calcaneus.

# History and Physical

History and physical examination are important in triaging injuries for proper interventions. Patients may endorse cracking sound, swelling, redness, pain, and cessation of activities. As such, physical examination should focus on inspection, palpation, and special maneuvers such as anterior drawer test, and talar tilt test.

# Evaluation

Patients with positive findings on the Ottawa ankle test should be referred for X-ray of the ankle.  It is important to note that the prevalence of ankle fractures occur in less than 15% of cases.

Following physical examination, lateral ankle injury is classified into three grades:

- Grade I injuries are due to the stretching of the ligament.

- Grade II is a moderate sprain.

- Grade III involves severe sprain full ligament lesions.

The increased grade indicates the severity of the injury, and as such, each grade assists clinicians with appropriate treatment, prognosis, and anticipated complications.

# Treatment / Management

Conservative management is often effective in treating CFL injuries. The progression of healing following initial injury has three distinct phases: inflammatory (1 to 10 days), proliferative (4 to 8 weeks), and remodeling phase (up to one year).

During the initial inflammatory response, RICE (rest, ice, compression, and elevation) is implemented in the first 4 to 5 days. Immobilization with cast or boots can be applied in the first week to reduce swelling and pain, after which, brace or taping can be provided for a return to activity.

Most lateral ankle injuries are managed non-operatively, while surgical interventions are allocated to patients with chronic instability.

# Differential Diagnosis

CFL injury often involves the ATFL, and as such, isolated ATFL should be considered on the differential. Importantly, other differentials to consider are osteochondral injury, fibularis tendon injury, ankle fractures, Achilles rupture, and tendon dislocation. Lastly, injuries of the subtalar joint should be considered as CFL injuries can involve this joint.

# Prognosis

Return to play or work is an important discussion at the time of diagnosis, given that 25% of patients are expected to miss school or work.

# Complications

Lateral ankle injuries are not a sentinel event but have long term sequelae. Reinjury of the lateral compartment is a common occurrence in low-grade ankle sprains.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Rehabilitation with early mobilization consisting of daily exercise programs is beneficial in functional recovery and mobilization.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Calcaneofibular ligament injuries are rarely discussed as isolated cases in the literature. As such, much of our understanding is derived from lateral ankle injuries. The physical examination can assist clinicians in triaging patients for further evaluation and imaging modalities. Patients should be educated on the expected length of recovery and prognosis of the injury. Much more, patients should be advised to rehab their ankles as a premature return to activity appropriately may aggravate CFL injury. Weight-bearing status should be implemented base on individual cases with varying grades of injury.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interdisciplinary efforts are essential to optimize care. Patients should be educated on disease progression and recovery stages. The recovery process occurs in three distinct phases, which can help guide intervention. Physical therapy, along with home exercise programs, may help promote functional recovery, and if warranted, surgical consultation for individualized cases can be pursued.