**Radiographic Investigations**

Plain chest x-ray: Pleural effusion can easily be detected by conventional radiographic. The consistency of these pleural-based densities suggests pleural fluid loculation.

Chest ultrasound: Ultrasonography helps identify free or loculated pleural effusions and helps with thoracentesis guidance.

Chest computed tomography (CT): For empyema or loculated effusion in adults, a CT scan with intravenous contrast is helpful. Radiographic contrast enhances the visualization of the pleural surfaces and helps identify pleural fluid loculations. Empyema is suggested by the presence of a split pleura sign in which there is a thickening of the visceral and parietal pleura with significant separation of the pleural surfaces. CT helps in detecting underlying parenchymal abnormalities.

**Thoracentesis**

A diagnostic thoracentesis is needed for the management guidance of parapneumonic pleural effusion. In general, a parapneumonic effusion should be sampled if It is a free-flowing and layers greater than 10-mm on a lateral decubitus film. Radiological guidance of thoracentesis by ultrasound or chest computed tomography (CT) in some cases is helpful especially when the effusion is loculated.

- Microbiologic analysis: Gram stain with cultures and sensitivity (aerobic and anaerobic)

- 
Pleural fluid total and differential cell count

- Biochemical analysis: Total protein, lactate dehydrogenase, glucose) and  pH

- Pleural fluid biomarkers: Novel biomarkers of infection (e.g., C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, STREM-1) have been evaluated to help distinguish complicated parapneumonic pleural effusions from uncomplicated parapneumonic pleural effusions, but there is no proven superiority to traditional pleural biochemistries.

More appropriate investigations should be performed to exclude other causes of pleural effusion when indicated.