# Introduction

The ethmoid bone is an unpaired cranial bone that is a significant component of the upper nasal cavity and the nasal septum. The ethmoid bone also constitutes the medial orbit wall.

# Structure and Function

The ethmoid bone is a small bone with a cuboidal structure that forms the lateral boundaries of the orbit, the anterior cranial fossa superiorly, and the nasal cavities inferiorly.

The ethmoid bone is situated in the paranasal sinuses and hosts the ethmoid air cells, which are responsible for olfactory sensation, humidification, phonation, and ventilation. It also influences drainage from the frontal and maxillary sinuses via the osteomeatal complex.

# Embryology

The ethmoid bones develop primarily through endochondral ossification. The ethmoid bone starts to form at about 25 to 28 weeks of gestation.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The sphenopalatine artery and the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries supply blood to the nasal septum. These blood vessels have anastomoses with each other, which provide additional blood supply.

# Nerves

The ethmoidal cells, which are present in the ethmoid bone, are innervated by the anterior and posterior ethmoidal branches of the nasociliary nerve.

The ethmoid bone and ethmoid sinuses are associated with some cranial nerves. The olfactory nerve, which forms the first cranial nerve, arises from the caudal surface of the olfactory bulb and crosses the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone to reach the nasal cavity.

# Muscles

Since the ethmoid bone forms part of the orbit, it is associated with seven extraocular muscles. All but the inferior oblique arise from the orbital apex. The inferior oblique arises from the orbit floor near the orbital rim while the rectus muscles arise from the annulus of Zinn. All of the extraocular muscles have an insertion to the globe apart from the levator palpebrae superioris, which expands to form the levator aponeurosis.

# Physiologic Variants

Of all the paranasal sinuses, the ethmoid sinus is the most complex and most variable. The roof of the ethmoid bone labyrinth consists of the fovea ethmoidalis, and the olfactory fossae are grooves on the cribriform plate within the ethmoid bone.

The depth of the cribriform plate has also shown to be different in various ethnic groups. For instance, Meloni et al. found that the cribriform plate has an average depth of 5.9 mm among Italian subjects.

The uncinate process, which is the sickle-shaped portion of the ethmoid bone, also has multiple variations among different patients. Its superior attachment has three major variants

- The uncinate process could extend laterally to the lamina papyracea or ethmoid bulla to generate a nook at the end of the infundibulum; this is the most common variation found in patients.

- The uncinate process could extend medially to the lateral region of the middle turbinate, with the frontal recess going into the infundibulum.

- The uncinate process could extend medially and superiorly to the base of the skull, with the frontal recess going into the infundibulum.

# Surgical Considerations

Knowledge of the anatomic structures and variations of the ethmoid bone and paranasal sinuses is critical for avoiding complications during endoscopic sinus surgery.

# Clinical Significance

The ethmoid bone is important in the structural formation of the skull and has a protective role in the human body. The cribriform plate allows the olfactory nerve to pass through from the nasal chamber into the skull. Pneumatized ethmoid air cells ensure structural stability, resist fractures within the medial wall of the orbit, and protect the eyeball during trauma.

Ethmoid fractures may result in delayed complications even years after trauma; however, such cases are relatively rare. These complications include meningitis, recurrence of cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea, and delayed cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea onset. A previous study found that patients with these complications often have large ethmoid bone defects and often have normal radiological assessments after trauma. With successful surgical repair, these patients were well after follow-up.

Patients with inflammation of the ethmoid bone may have osteitis of the ethmoid bone and chronic rhinosinusitis. Chronic rhinosinusitis occurs when the nasal and paranasal sinus mucosa becomes inflamed for longer than three months without complete symptom resolution, and functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) is the treatment for this condition.