PAF primary role is to mediate intercellular interactions. A variety of cells synthesize it, and it binds to the extracellular receptors of other cells, activating them and causing a change in their phenotypes. There are also intracellular receptors of PAF that are yet to be rigorously characterized.

Intercellular signaling by PAF is best understood in vascular and inflammatory systems. However, PAF also transmits information intercellularly in CNS, endocrine, GI, and other organs. There is tight control over the PAF intercellular-signaling system through several regulatory mechanisms. Some of these mechanisms include controlling synthetic pathways, biologic availability of PAF through spatial regulation of display, expression of PAF receptor on specific cells, desensitization of the receptor, and rapid degradation of PAF by PAF acetylhydrolases found both intracellularly and extracellularly. These mechanisms have evolved to precisely control PAF biologic activities. Therefore, dysregulation or unregulated intercellular signaling can be a mechanism of disease.

PAF has a well-understood role in mediating cell-cell interaction in acute and chronic inflammation in all organs. Endothelial cells and several classes of leukocytes are involved in inflammation. PAF can mediate its effects by acting over short distances in a paracrine fashion or circulating in the blood in an endocrine fashion. It has a short half-life because of Lp-PLA2 activity in the blood, limiting its endocrine mode of action. Acute inflammation experimental models have shown that most of the PAF signaling occurs in a juxtacrine fashion. PAF on the surface of one cell binds to the PAF receptor on the second cell and activates it.

Activation of endothelial cells by histamine or thrombin causes them to express PAF on their surface.

Activation of PAF receptors on monocytes leads to increased secretion of monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP-1) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha). PAF receptor is a G-protein coupled receptor that translates nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kB), a transcriptional factor, into the nucleus required for expression of MCP-1, TNF-alpha, and other immediate-early genes.