Caspofungin acetate is the first antifungal medication of the echinocandins class to receive marketing approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Its introduction was in 2001, approved for use in adults and pediatric patients (3 months of age and older).

The FDA-approved indications include:

- Febrile neutropenia:****It is defined as a fever over 101 F (or 38 C) for 1 hour, with either an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of less than or equal to 500 cells/microliter or alternately, an ANC of below or equal to 1000 cells/microliter with a projected nadir of under or equal to 500 cells/microliter. According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), empiric antifungal therapy is their recommendation for high-risk patients with persistent febrile neutropenia despite broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. These antifungals include caspofungin, among others.

- Invasive candidiasis: In a double-blind, randomized trial that compared the efficacy of caspofungin with amphotericin B in patients with invasive endocarditis, the more favorable outcome occurred in 73.4% of caspofungin recipients as opposed to 61.7% of amphotericin B recipients.C. glabrata or C. krusei or the patient’s candidemia was refractory to treatment with an azole agent.

- Candida infections: candidemia, intra-abdominal abscesses, peritonitis, and pleural space infections

- Esophageal candidiasis: Several studies have found caspofungin to have a favorable treatment response comparable to fluconazole.

- Invasive aspergillosis: Caspofungin has FDA approval to treat invasive aspergillosis in patients who are refractory to or intolerant of voriconazole, the primary antifungal agent.

The non-FDA approved indications are:

- Candida
spp. osteomyelitis or infectious arthritis

- Oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush)

- Candida spp. cardiovascular system infections such as endocarditis and suppurative thrombophlebitis

- Candidiasis prophylaxis and aspergillosis prophylaxis in high-risk patients