The individual placing the tube should put on nonsterile gloves and lubricate the tip of the tube. A common error when placing the tube is to direct the tube in an upward direction as it enters the nares; this will cause the tube to push against the top of the sinus cavity and cause increased discomfort. The tip should instead be directed parallel to the floor, directly toward the back of the patient's throat. At this time, the patient can be given a cup of water with a straw in it to sip from to help ease the passage of the tube. The tube should be advanced with firm, constant pressure while the patient is sipping. If there is a great deal of difficulty in passing the tube, a helpful maneuver is to withdraw the tube and attempt again after a short break in the contralateral nares as the tube may have become coiled in the oropharynx or nasal sinus. In intubated patients, the use of reverse Sellick's maneuver (pulling the thyroid cartilage up rather than pushing it down during intubation) and freezing the NG tube may help facilitate placement of the tube.

Once the tube has been advanced to the estimated necessary length correct location is often made obvious by aspirating out a large amount of gastric contents. Pushing 50 cc of air through the tube using a large syringe while auscultating the stomach with a stethoscope is a commonly described maneuver to determine the location of the tube, but it is of questionable efficacy.

The removal of an NG tube is usually a simple procedure. However, the tube should not be forcefully removed as it can become knotted.