Surgical management of epispadias is challenging and requires technical expertise. The surgery aims to reconstruct the genitalia and urethra, providing optimal functional and cosmetic outcomes. At present, surgeons across the world have adopted either of the two following approaches.

Modified Cantwell-Ransley repair:****The initial procedure of mobilizing the urethral plate followed by tubularization and ventral movement between the corpora was described by Cantwell. Ransley changed the procedure to include mobilization of the urethral plate with separation of the corporal bodies, leaving the distal portion of the plate attached to the glans. Lateral glans wings are developed. A reverse-MAGPI (meatal advancement and granuloplasty) procedure is performed on the distal urethra. Cavernostomies are required to correct persistent chordee. The corporal bodies are medially rotated and reapproximated.

Complete penile disassembly technique (Mitchell and Bagli):****The technique is based on the special anatomy in epispadias. According to the surgeons who first described it, the blood supply of the hemiglans is based on the dorsal complex on the lateral surface of the corpora. The corpora receive their blood supply from the central artery, and the urethral plate receives its supply from the proximal urethra. Therefore, the urethral plate can be completely lifted from the corpora and hemiglans, and both the corporal bodies can be separated from each other. This complete penile disassembly confers better reconstruction. Another advantage is that the dissection extends right to the bladder neck; therefore, a bladder neck repair (BNR) can be added in the same sitting.

**Female Epispadias**

Perineal approach: Although female epispadias is very rare, a few words must be mentioned about the reconstruction in females. The repair of epispadias in females follows similar surgical principles as in males. The urethra and bladder neck are mobilized along with the vagina. During mobilization of the urethra and bladder neck, the division of the intersymphyseal bands is crucial to ensure the completeness of the postero-lateral dissection. The exposure of the pelvic floor muscle complex marks the completion of posterior dissection. The mobilized urethra is then tubularized over a self-retaining catheter. The neourethra and the vagina are shifted posteriorly. The pubic bones are reapproximated and may require osteotomies for this. However, this is not universally performed by all surgeons. Subsequently, clitoroplasty and labioplasty are performed.

Traditional staged approach: Due to the patulous bladder neck, the traditional approach for the management of female epispadias is urethroplasty, followed by bladder neck reconfiguration. Favorable continence results have been depicted when epispadias repair and bladder neck reconfiguration are performed successively at 12-18 months and 5-6 years of age respectively.