The indications for renal replacement in the acute setting often include those usually indicated for dialysis in acute renal failure, such as volume overload, electrolyte disturbances including hyperkalemia, acidosis, and complications of uremia. The distinction comes in deciding on the method of renal replacement. The most common indication to choose CRRT is in hemodynamically unstable patients, and it is often employed in the intensive care unit. With a slower rate of fluid removal, CRRT theoretically causes less hypotension than IHD. Its second advantage for these patients is that they often require a large volume of fluid administration, including medications and parenteral nutrition, and CRRT can prevent an overloaded state. In fact, net fluid removal over 48 hours is greater than in an IHD session. Another reason to choose CRRT is for patients requiring dialysis who have an acute brain injury.

The use of CRRT in these patients can help prevent worsening cerebral edema. IHD may worsen cerebral edema in two ways. The rapid fluid removal will lower mean arterial pressure and cause compensatory cerebral vasodilation. Rapid urea removal will cause fluid to shift from brain cells into the intracellular space

The following is a list of indications to carry out CRRT in a patient:

- Volume overload

- Metabolic acidosis

- Electrolyte abnormalities

- Hyperkalemia

- Hyponatremia

- Drug and toxin removal

- Hyperphosphatemia

- Uremia

- Encephalopathy

- Pericarditis

- Persistent/progressive acute kidney injury