The goals of the management of CAPs are immediate hemodynamic stabilization and sealing the site of perforation to prevent dire consequences. Although there are no universally accepted treatment protocols, the following are the suggested treatment approaches:

**I. General approaches:**

Adequate blood pressure support is needed. Intraaortic balloon pump may be necessary. Antiplatelets and anticoagulants need to be discontinued. Protamine infusion may be required to counteract the effect of anticoagulation. Platelet transfusion can be of some benefit, especially in those patients who have received GP-IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists. Urgent pericardiocentesis in the setting of cardiac tamponade can be life-saving. Low pressure prolonged proximal balloon inflation should take place immediately after the CAP has occurred during coronary angiography. This process is necessary to assess the severity of CAP, prevent further blood leakage, and to gain time until determining a definitive plan.

**II. Specific approaches:**

CAPs with Ellis type I and II are conservatively managed, with most cases underwent management with prolonged balloon inflation alone.

A more severe type of CAPs (type III) treatment is via the following approaches.

- **Covered Stents (CS):**The stents, initially used to treat in-stent stenosis, are used to seal the site of perforation and prevent leakage of blood. These are commonly used for proximal larger perforations. Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) covered stents are widely used. Several other types of CS are also available. A study comparing the outcomes with the use of PTFE vs. polyurethane CS showed no significant differences in procedural success or major adverse cardiovascular events but showed a decrease in the rates of pericardial effusions and cardiac arrest in patients when using PTFE covered stents.

- **Coils:**These are made of metallic agents like stainless steel or platinum with wired structures made of PTFE or synthetic wool, which have thrombogenic properties and delivery is through guide wires or microcatheter.

- **Microspheres:**These are spherical, hydrophilic, and non-absorbable particles that are delivered through microcatheters to and cause precise sealing of perforations.

- **Others:**Autologous blood clots suspended in contrast and saline can cause adequate sealing of CAP.

- **Surgery:**A cardiac surgeon needs to have involvement if cardiac tamponade is not feasible or if a pericardiocentesis does not yield appropriate results.