The most common method of diagnosis of R. akari infections in clinical practice is to detect a four-fold rise in the convalescent titers of complement fixation or indirect fluorescent antibodies using spotted fever group antigens, as Rickettsia akari is linked genetically to the SFG of Rickettsiae. These tests are available through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). R. akari does not produce Weil-Felix agglutinins. Like other members of the genus Rickettsia, R. akari are not evident on blood smears and do not stain with most conventional stains. There are no rapid tests to diagnose rickettsial infections, including R. akari infection.

Immunohistochemical stains of the skin biopsy from the eschar can be used, but these tests cannot identify the rickettsial organisms to the species level. Additionally, these tests are labor-intensive and require a high level of expertise.

There is a real-time, multiplex, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique that can accurately identify R. akari in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded skin biopsy specimens and distinguish it from R. rickettsii and Rickettsia parkeri. Swabs of the eschar can suffice as the clinical specimen for these molecular techniques. Eschar specimens are more likely to yield R. akari organisms or antigens where they are abundantly present when compared to fluid from vesiculopapular lesions.

R. akari can be cultured in a Vero cell system inoculated with the blood or eschar specimen. The cytopathic effect occurs very late in the Vero cell system; therefore, the plates should be kept for several weeks. This method of diagnosis does not help make treatment decisions in real-time. However, rickettsial isolation in culture is unnecessary, laborious, and hazardous to laboratory personnel, as rickettsial infection can be transmitted by inhalation and contact with skin abrasions. Rickettsia, when attached to respiratory mucosa, can directly penetrate the host cell membrane and access the cytoplasm by inducing self-phagocytosis.