After obtaining a comprehensive history and physical exam, the most important test to determine structural involvement and subsequent management is a non-contrast computed tomography scan (CT) of the head and facial bones. Various windows are available through CT imaging (osseous, soft tissue, heme windows), which make the evaluation of these and related injuries rapid and reliable. If CT is available and performed, there is no evidence showing any additional benefit from plain film radiographs. Angiography can be considered if the physician is concerned about possible vascular injury. Ultrasound has the ability to detect fractures with the use of the linear probe in a superficial mode; however, this should be viewed as an adjunct to the previously mentioned modalities.

Currently, there is no general consensus on the classification of frontal sinus fractures.

In 1997, Gonty et al. classified frontal sinus fractures into the following categories. A retrospective review of 158 patients by Gerbino et al. was performed using Gonty’s classification system and reported the percentage of patients with each type of fracture.

- Anterior table involvement only (61.4%)

- Anterior and posterior table involvement (33%)

- Posterior table involvement only (0.6%)

- “Through and through,” which are defined as comminuted with the involvement of the orbit, ethmoids, and nasal base (2.5%)

- Fractures involving nasofrontal duct (2.5%)

In 2014, Torre et al. presented a classification and treatment schema that is based on maximal metric dislocation and involvement of surrounding structures (nasolacrimal system, orbit, CSF leak, or surrounding bone fracture). In their study of 164 patients, they classified fracture patterns into four types with Type A being most common (38.4%) followed by type D (25%), type B (22.6%), and type C (14%).

- Type A: No displacement

- 
              
-  Observation

- Type B: 0 to 2 mm displacement

- 
              
- No concomitant injury - observation
              
              
- Concomitant injury - surgical repair

- Type C: 2 to 5 mm displacement

- 
              
- No concomitant injury - observation
              
              
- Concomitant injury - surgical repair

- Type D: greater than 5 mm displacement

- 
              
- Surgical repair