The development of cardiac remodeling and hypertrophy is complex, with genetic and non-genetic components. The most critical pathophysiological changes leading to cardiomegaly include dilated hypertrophy, fibrosis, and contractile malfunction. Contractile dysfunction and abnormal myocardial remodeling can lead to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or dilated cardiomyopathy. Mechanical stretching, circulating neurohormones, and oxidative stress are significant stimuli for the signal transduction of inflammatory cytokines and MAP kinase in cardiomyocytes. Signal transduction leads to changes in structural proteins and proteins that regulate excitation-contraction. Dilated cardiomyopathy mutations result in a reduced force of the sarcomere contraction and a reduction in sarcomere content. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutations result in a molecular phenotype of hyperdynamic contractility, poor relaxation, and increased energy consumption.

Pathophysiological mechanisms can vary with the underlying cause of cardiomyopathy. For instance, in diabetic cardiomyopathy, fatty acid metabolism is enhanced, glucose oxidation is suppressed, and intracellular signaling is modified, causing impairment in multiple steps of inefficient energy production, excitation-contraction coupling, and increased potential for ischemia/reperfusion injury. In alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy, cell death due to apoptosis ultimately leads to changes in various aspects of myocyte function.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy is associated with genetic alterations, angiogenic imbalance, oxidative stress, and the production of a prolactin fragment.