The complications of CABG include stroke, wound infection, graft failure, renal failure, postoperative atrial fibrillation, and death.  The stroke rate of CABG has been reported at 1% to 2% depending on the characteristics of the patient and their risk factors for stroke including advanced age, prior stroke, aortic atherosclerosis, peripheral arterial disease, perioperative atrial fibrillation, and diabetes.

Sternal wound infection rates are about 1% and are dependent on risk factors such as obesity, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and prolonged duration of surgery.

Saphenous vein graft (SVG) failure is most common within 30 days of operation and is dependent on several factors including vein size and excessive length, distal runoff and slow flow, and hypercoagulability and thrombosis. Rates of SVG failure up to 25% have been seen with repeat angiography after CABG.

Postoperative renal dysfunction rates after CABG range from 2% to 3%, with 1% requiring dialysis. Risk factors are multifactorial but include preoperative renal disease, advanced age, diabetes, type of surgery, LV dysfunction, and shock. No medications have been definitively shown to reduce the rates of CABG-induced renal dysfunction, but there may be an advantage of off-pump CABG over on-pump CABG.

Atrial fibrillation within the first 5 days after CABG is relatively common with rates of 20% to 50% and is associated with increased morbidity with a higher risk of embolic stroke postoperatively as well as increased mortality. Preoperative treatment with beta-blockers and possibly amiodarone has been shown to be the most effective way to reduce the incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation.

The risk of perioperative death after CABG is dependent on co-morbidities, the urgency of the surgery, and the case-volume of the center where the operation takes place, ranging from 1% to 2%.