The most commonly encountered differential diagnosis in the infant with megalocornea is infantile glaucoma. On examination, the child with megalocornea will likely have many of the features previously described in this article, most distinguishingly, normal intraocular pressures, a positive family history, and an intact Descemet’s membrane. On the other hand, patients with congenital glaucoma characteristically have elevated intraocular pressures and breaks in Descemet’s membrane and may present with corneal edema. Additionally, features of primary megalocornea such as pigment dispersion and iris transillumination will be absent in patients with infantile glaucoma.

Other syndromes, diseases, or conditions associated with megalocornea are summarized below.

- Neuhäuser syndrome, also known as megalocornea-mental retardation (MMR) syndrome, may present with intellectual disability, seizures, hypotonia, and characteristic facial features.

- Frank-Ter Haar syndrome is an additional condition that affects the eyes, heart, and bones. This autosomal recessive condition is commonly associated with skeletal, facial, and various congenital heart defects.

- Buphthalmus, or enlargement of the entire eyeball, may also present with megalocornea. It can be differentiated by the presence of glaucoma and the lack of family history.

- Crouzon syndrome is the premature closure of a cranial suture leading to cranial morphologic defects. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and may present with proptosis and shallow orbits.

- Marfan syndrome, a connective tissue disorder, is the result of a mutation in fibrillin and has been reportedly associated with megalocornea.

- Albinism, in some cases, has been associated with megalocornea in addition to other comorbidities.

- Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome (also called cranio-cerebello-cardiac dysplasia and 3C syndrome) manifests with various ocular, cardiac, and craniofacial anomalies. Megalocornea has been reported as the most common ocular manifestation.

- Wolfram-like syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease that presents with ocular atrophy, diabetes mellitus, and progressive congenital hearing loss. Various ocular concerns, including megalocornea, are associated.

- Lamellar ichthyosis is generally recognized as a cutaneous disorder, but associated megalocornea has been reported.

- Osteogenesis imperfecta, a collagen-based connective tissue disease, is classically associated with ‘brittle’ bones and may have blue sclera. Megalocornea has been associated in one case.