The IOM identifies medical errors as a leading cause of death and injury.

Patients and their families face the most critical and severe consequences of medical errors. Therefore, identifying system processes that lead to medical errors and implementing corrective measures is the primary goal in treating this problem. An RCA and response can help identify system-based measures that can minimize the risk of adverse events and improve clinical outcomes.

**Types of Medical Errors**

It is essential to recognize that medical errors constitute diverse events. The "error" is not always a human miscalculation or miscommunication, as outlined by the cases above. Some errors are inherent to clinical situations, such as patient falls in hospital settings and healthcare-associated infections. The commonly recognized "types" of medical errors are outlined below.

- Medication error is widely accepted as the most common and preventable cause of patient injury.

- Another common medical error is a diagnostic error with failure to correctly identify the cause of the clinical condition promptly.

- In hospitalized patients, wound infections, pressure ulcers, falls, healthcare-associated infections, and technical complications constitute another group of preventable medical errors.

- The most common systems-error is failure to disseminate drug knowledge and patient information. This, in essence, is a communication failure, whether with the patient or other providers.

- Failure to employ indicated tests is another medical error that can lead to diagnostic delays or errors.

- Similarly, using outdated tests or treatments or failing to respond to the results of tests or monitoring also constitutes a type of medical error.

- Treatment errors include errors during the performance of a test or procedure and inappropriate treatment.

When applying root cause analysis for medical error prevention, it is essential to consider several patient-related factors and underlying issues that may hinder or impede the ability to generate an efficacious root cause analysis. Awareness of particular safety hazards for specific patient demographics and groups can often help mitigate common medical errors and encourage patients to take responsibility for their safety.

Elderly patients represent such a group as various common medical illnesses may result from age-related changes within this group. Elderly patients tend to be prone to falls due to their age-related changes in vision or cardiovascular problems. This patient group also tends to be prone to balance issues and muscle weakness over time, leading to ambulatory dysfunction. Having fall-prevention protocols in place, identifying potential high-risk areas within the home, and mitigating them through safety measures can improve patient safety and outcomes.

Reducing diagnostic errors requires a more comprehensive approach. Common conditions misdiagnosed yearly include cancer, coronary artery disease, and surgical complications.New England Journal of Medicine article, "trigger tools" are essential in reducing this type of medical error.

Another important realization clinicians should be aware of is using an interpreter to aid in effective communication. A skilled medical interpreter may be crucial in effectively communicating instructions and information to the patient. Physicians need to utilize an unbiased and neutral medical interpreter, as family members may often be biased in communication.

Communication deficits among medical staff members are another essential root cause of medical errors that can be mitigated through standardized protocols.