Intestinal atresia may be suspected in-utero with suspicious prenatal ultrasound findings, and in a neonate, obstructive symptoms such as abdominal distension, bilious emesis are usually the presenting symptoms.

Prenatal detection of jejunoileal atresia (JIA) on ultrasound, based on the evidence of intestinal obstruction, has been documented in some series, with the rate of detection ranging from 29% to 50%.

Postnatally, JIA presents with signs and symptoms of intestinal obstruction such as abdominal distension, emesis, and in some cases, delayed passage of meconium. Normal appearing meconium may be seen, but most often, light-colored plugs are passed from the rectum. As seen in type IIIb, blood may be seen in the rectum in cases of distal bowel ischemic.

Radiographic examination of the abdomen with plain abdominal X-ray using swallowed air as a contrast is a useful diagnostic tool. For proximal JIA, there are presences of a few dilated proximal bowel with no distal gas. Intraperitoneal calcification can be seen in prenatal bowel perforation or meconium peritonitis. Malrotation is ruled out using an upper gastrointestinal series contrast study. A contrast enema is used to reveal the atypical appearance of the colon, as may be seen in meconium ileus or Hirschsprung disease. If the contrast passes into the dilated loop of the bowel, then atresia is ruled out. Other studies such as an echocardiogram, renal ultrasound, rectal biopsy, and cystic fibrosis screening may be used to evaluate patients for associated congenital anomalies such as cardiac malformation, renal anomalies, Hirschsprung disease, and cystic fibrosis.