The treatment has varied historically from 3 days to 6 weeks. There are excellent cure rates with "mini-dose therapy," which involves three days of treatment. E. coli resistance to common antimicrobials varies in different areas of the country, and if the resistance rate is greater than 50%, choose another drug.

Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole for three days is good mini-dose therapy, but resistance rates are high in many areas. It should not be used if local resistance is >20%. First-generation cephalosporins are good choices for mini-dose therapy. Nitrofurantoin is a good choice for uncomplicated UTIs, but it is bacteriostatic, not bacteriocidal, and must be used for 5 to 7 days. Fluoroquinolones have high resistance but are a favorite of urologists because of high tissue penetration levels, especially in the prostate. For this reason, fluoroquinolones are not preferred except for complicated infections and those involving the prostate. Recent precautions from the FDA about fluoroquinolone side effects should be heeded.

Recently, the FDA approved fosfomycin as a single-dose therapy for uncomplicated UTIs caused by E coli. Adjunctive therapy with phenazopyridine for several days may help provide additional symptom relief.

Even without treatment, most UTIs will spontaneously resolve in about 20% of women, especially if increased hydration is used. The likelihood that a healthy nonpregnant female will develop acute pyelonephritis is very small.

Asymptomatic bacteriuria is quite common and requires no treatment, except in pregnant women, those who are immunosuppressed, have had a transplant, or recently underwent a urological surgical procedure.

Management of recurrent urinary tract infections typically involves optimizing personal hygiene, using vitamin C as a urinary acidifier, taking extra precautions after sexual contact, and using prophylactic antibiotics or antiseptics such as nitrofurantoin and methenamine.

For relapsing infections (where the organism is identical), a careful examination should be done looking for a source such as a poorly emptying diverticulum or an infected stone.

Treatment of "Recurrent Urinary Tract Infections" and "Complicated Urinary Tract Infections" are covered elsewhere in our companion article.