Acarbose is FDA approved for treating adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus as an adjunct to diet only or diet and exercise, depending on the patient's health status.

Based on the combined data of six placebo-controlled trials in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus using acarbose as monotherapy, researchers noted the following changes from baseline glycosylated hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1c) by dose:

- Acarbose, 25 mg three times daily, decreased by 0.44

- Acarbose, 50 mg three times daily, decreased  by 0.77

- Acarbose, 100 mg three times daily, decreased by 0.74

- Acarbose, 200 mg three times daily, decreased by 0.86

- Acarbose, 300 mg three times daily, decreased by 1.00

Although the acarbose 300 mg three times daily regimen is superior to lower doses at lowering hemoglobin A1c, the approved maximum daily dose of acarbose is 100 mg three times daily. There is no statistically significant difference in hemoglobin A1c lowering between the 50 mg three times daily regimen, 100 mg three times daily regimen, and the 200 mg three times daily regimen.

Acarbose is not FDA approved for treating type 1 diabetes mellitus; however, studies have evaluated its safety and efficacy in this patient population. In a study of 121 patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus, acarbose 50 mg three times daily for two weeks, followed by 100 mg three times daily, was found to reduce 2-hour postprandial glucose significantly. There were no differences between the placebo group and the acarbose group in hemoglobin A1c lowering or episodes of hypoglycemia.

In two subsequent, single-center, placebo-controlled studies, 40 patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus were given metformin for six months after acarbose replaced metformin. The research demonstrated acarbose significantly decreased the 2-hour postprandial blood glucose concentration compared to baseline. Compared to metformin therapy, the acarbose therapy group showed a statistically significant decrease in low-density lipoprotein (calculated), triglycerides, and total cholesterol. Acarbose use also led to a statistically significant reduction in regular insulin use.

Acarbose is not FDA-approved for the treatment of prediabetes. Acarbose has also undergone evaluation as a potential pharmacologic option for preventing the progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes mellitus. In a study of patients with impaired glucose tolerance tests, participants were randomized to acarbose 100 mg three times daily or placebo three times daily. Thirty-two percent of the acarbose group developed type 2 diabetes mellitus compared to 42% in the placebo group, resulting in a statistically significant hazard ratio of 0.75.

The effect of acarbose on weight loss has also been a target of research. In an analysis of post-marketing data of 67,682 patients, the data revealed acarbose to decrease body weight significantly, independent of baseline body weight. It also was found to significantly reduce fasting plasma glucose, postprandial glucose, hemoglobin A1c, and postprandial glucose concentrations.

Li J. et al. found that diabetes mellitus patients who took metformin and acarbose alone or in combination therapy were more likely to survive hospitalization from COVID-19.