Tetanus is due to infection from the bacterium, Clostridium tetani, which is found in soil, dust, or animal feces. It is a gram-positive, spore-forming, obligate anaerobic bacillus. This bacteria and its spores are found worldwide, however, it is more frequently found in hot and wet climates where the soil is rich with organic matter.

C. tetani may enter the human body through wound puncture, laceration, skin breaks, or inoculation with an infected syringe or insect bites. The most common source of infection is a wound that is often trivial and may go unnoticed, such as a minor laceration from wood or metal splinters or thorns. High-risk populations include those that have not been vaccinated, intravenous drug users, and those who are immunosuppressed. Other causes of infection have been documented through surgical procedures, intramuscular injections, open fractures, dental infections, and dog bites.

Tetanus spores are durable and can survive for prolonged periods in certain environments. The source of infection, in most cases, is a wound, usually from a minor injury. A very common cause of tetanus is a lack of immunization. Even those who are vaccinated lose immunity with advancing age.

Tetanus can also develop as a consequence of chronic conditions such as abscesses and gangrene. Furthermore, burn patients and patients undergoing surgery can also acquire the infection.

Tetanus usually occurs in persons who are not immunized, partially immunized, or fully immunized but lack adequate booster doses.

The risk factors for neonatal tetanus include the following:

- Unvaccinated mother

- Home delivery

- Septic cutting of the umbilical cord

- Neonatal tetanus in a previous child

- Infectious substances applied to the umbilical stump, such as animal dung, mud, or other such material