Hypersensitivity reaction, such as anaphylaxis and angioedema, is an absolute contraindication, universal to all lipid-lowering drugs.

Contraindications to statins include use by patients with active hepatic disease or unexplained persistent elevations in aminotransferase levels. Statins are contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding as cholesterol is essential for fetal and infant synthesis of steroids and cell membrane development, although some recent studies question this.

Ezetimibe is contraindicated in patients using an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (statin) in patients with active liver disease or otherwise unexplained elevated serum transaminase values. Ezetimibe alone is not contraindicated in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. Contraindications to ezetimibe include patients who are pregnant and breastfeeding when used in patients already on statins.

Fibrates are contraindicated in those patients with active liver disease, including primary biliary cirrhosis and unexplained, persistent liver function abnormality; severe renal impairment, and/or end-stage renal disease (ESRD), including patients receiving dialysis; preexisting gallbladder disease; and breastfeeding.

Nicotinic acid is contraindicated in active hepatic disease or significant persistent elevations of hepatic transaminases. These effects will be amplified when used with statins, fibrates, etc. They are also contraindicated in patients with active peptic ulcers and arterial hemorrhage.

Bile acid sequestrants are contraindicated in cases of severe hypertriglyceridemia and complete biliary obstruction. Bile acid sequestrants do not get absorbed into the bloodstream, making them safe for use by patients who are unable to use other lipid-lowering medications because of liver problems.

PCSK9 inhibitors do not cause muscle toxicity or an elevation in hepatic enzymes.