There is currently no vaccine to prevent Western Equine encephalitis, but there are clinical trials underway by the United States (US) Army Medical Research and Material Command. Nor is there any effective antiviral therapy, so care is largely supportive and centered around the management of complications. Patients with encephalitis may require mechanical ventilation and management of increased intracranial pressure. Seizures are common with neuroinvasive disease and may require anticonvulsants. Patients with seizures are more likely to develop a lifetime seizure disorder.

Since there is no effective treatment or vaccine, prevention is critical.  This is best accomplished by avoiding mosquito bites entirely. Even very short periods of outdoor exposure can result in bites, so proper protective clothing should be worn. These protective measures include long sleeves, long pants, socks, and closed-toe shoes. Pant legs can be tucked into socks to prevent bites to exposed ankles. Transmission is common during the warmer months, and mosquitoes may bite through very thin clothing, so treating clothing with repellents containing permethrin, DEET, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or other EPA-registered insect repellants will reduce this risk.  Permethrin should not be applied directly to the skin but, when applied to clothing, provides protection even after the clothing is washed. Transmission is most frequent when mosquitoes feed, between dawn and dusk, so outdoor activities during this period should be avoided. Travelers should sleep in air-conditioned spaces or use mosquito nets or screens to prevent bites during sleep. Standing water is a breeding ground for mosquitoes, so flower pots, buckets, and other containers should be drained. Children’s wading pools should be emptied and stored on their sides, and tire swings should have holes drilled into the bottom to allow trapped water to drain.