Gastrointestinal bleeding is divided into the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract (GIT) bleeding based on whether the bleeding originates from above or below the ligament of Treitz (suspensory ligament of the duodenum). Rectal bleeding is mainly caused by pathology from the lower GI tract, which includes the small intestine beyond the duodenum, the colon, rectum, or anal canal.

- Colon cancer: The proliferating cancer cells form pathological vasculature to supply themselves for growth. This pathologic vasculature is extremely friable, which may lead to rectal bleeding, especially as cancer progresses. Although it is not a major contributor to the overall incidence of rectal bleeding, representing only approximately 3.4% of the cases, it is one of the more serious causes that should be ruled out, especially in older patients.

- Inflammatory bowel disease: Chronic inflammation in the digestive tract, such as in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, may present with rectal bleeding. This is often associated with diarrhea and abdominal pain.

- Diverticular diseases: Diverticula are small pouches in the wall of the colon, which usually occur at weak points where the vasa recta penetrate the muscular layer. Over time, the blood vessels in the wall of these pouches become friable, making them susceptible to rupture, which can cause bleeding.

- Hemorrhoids**:**Hemorrhoids are cushions of tissues found in the submucosa of the anal canal. They are found in the left lateral, right anterior, and right posterior positions. They are comprised of submucosal vessels and muscle fibers arising from the internal sphincter and the conjoined longitudinal muscle. It is a weakness in the muscle fibers that make the hemorrhoids symptomatic. The terminal branches of the superior hemorrhoidal artery are the primary blood supply, whereas the superior, middle, and inferior hemorrhoidal veins are responsible for the venous outflow. Hemorrhoids are further classified into internal (above the dentate line), external (below the dentate line), and mixed (both above and below the dentate line). Internal hemorrhoids cause 'painless bleeding.'

- Anal fissures: a tear in the epithelial lining of the anal canal, which commonly occurs with constipation and the passage of hard stools (posterior anal fissures) or with childbirth (anterior anal fissures). It is associated with painful defecation with blood-streaked stools.

- Infections: Sexually transmitted infections (STI) and enteric pathogens can cause rectal bleeding. N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis (including LGV serovars), HSV, and T. pallidum are the most common STI pathogens. Escherichia coli and Clostridium difficile are two of the more common infections that cause acute hemorrhagic colitis

Upper GIT bleeding:****Upper GI bleeding can present with black tarry stools. As the blood passes through the GIT, gastric and duodenal secretions convert hemoglobin into acid hematin giving the stool its dark reddish-brown color. Hematochezia may result from upper GI bleeding if the bleeding is of large enough volume that the gastric and intestinal secretions are not sufficient to convert hemoglobin into acid hematin. Blood also acts as a cathartic, decreasing intestinal transit time and providing less time for the enzyme reaction to take place. If a patient is experiencing hematemesis associated with hematochezia, this would further suggest that the source of the bleed is coming from the upper GI tract, especially if these symptoms are associated with hemodynamic instability or shock. Examples of upper GI bleedings that may cause hematochezia include a Mallory Weiss tear, bleeding esophageal varices, or a perforated gastroduodenal artery. It's worth mentioning that in patients with insufficient secretion of gastric HCl, as in achlorhydria, an upper GI bleed may present with hematochezia as well.****General causes of bleeding: When evaluating an individual for GI bleeding, it is also important to consider other underlying factors that may be contributing to the acute presentation. This includes bleeding diatheses such as vitamin K deficiency, hemophilia, thrombocytopenia, or anti-coagulant toxicity.