**Treatment and Prophylaxis**

The treatment goal is to stop the progression of the disease and complications and require a multidisciplinary approach. The principle of management is mainly underlying cause correction, Portal hypertension management, and specific treatments for individual disease. A brief outline regarding treatment for various CLD and related complications is given below. For more comprehensive details, please see individual topics in the Statpearls glossary.

**General Management**

Patients with chronic liver disease mostly present with one of the complications.

Esophageal varices - Varices related bleeding are one of the deadly complications, and the treatment includes aggressive fluid resuscitation, vasopressors (octreotide, terlipressin), and endoscopy. Endoscopic band ligation and injection sclerotherapy are the usual modalities to treat variceal bleed in an emergency. In some patients, early transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) can increase the survival rate. Propranolol is used for primary and secondary prophylaxis for esophageal varices. Diuretics (furosemide, spironolactone) and sodium restriction are essential treatment options for ascites. For tense ascites, therapeutic paracentesis is done. Albumin infusion can also be considered. Initially, broad-spectrum antibiotics are the treatment of choice for SBP and then specific antibiotics after culture.

Hepatic encephalopathy - The basic principle of treatment is to address the precipitating factors. Patients with hepatic encephalopathy usually improve with precipitating cause correction along with rifaximin and lactulose.

Hepatorenal syndrome - HRS based on severity divided into two categories. HRS 1 is more severe compared to HRS 2 (less severe). The primary goal is to correct underlying cause correction to reverse acute kidney injury. Treatment modalities depend on the severity and location of the patient. Treatment modalities include norepinephrine or terlipressin with albumin infusion or midodrine, octreotide with albumin infusion. TIPS procedure in some patients can help and liver transplantation the only definite treatment in the patient who fails to respond to all other treatments.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) - Treatment is based on the Barcelona clinic liver cancer staging system in the management of HCC:

- Initial stage (single HCC lesion): Resection and ablation.

- Intermediate stage: Transarterial chemoembolization and radio-embolization.

- Metastatic disease: Sorafenib

**Specific Treatment**

**Viral Hepatitis**

- Continuous viral suppression with nucleoside and nucleotide analogs

- Direct-acting antivirals achieving HCV eradication

- Interferon-alpha

**Alcoholic liver disease:**Alcohol abstinence

**Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease:**Treatment of metabolic syndrome components

**Autoimmune hepatitis:**Corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive drugs

**Hereditary hemochromatosis:**Phlebotomy, iron-chelators

**Copper overload (Wilson disease):**Copper chelators

**Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency:**Transplant

**Drugs and toxins:**Identify and stop the factor

**Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC):**Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)

**Primary sclerosing cholangitis**: Transplant

**Budd-Chiari syndrome:**Anticoagulation, thrombolysis or angioplasty with or without stenting, TIPS, or liver transplant