In general, patients suffering from partial seizures of unknown etiology or of structural origin should be treated with antiepileptic drugs.

Focal seizures caused by non–neurological pathologies like infections and electrolyte imbalance are managed by treating the underlying etiology. It is important to know if the seizure fits into a particular type of epilepsy or epilepsy syndrome in order to decide the treatment and determine prognosis.

**Medications**

Appropriate seizure medication is chosen based on the type of seizure, side effect profile of the medication, the age of the patient, use of other medications, and co-morbid medical conditions. Carbamazepine and lamotrigine are the first-line antiepileptic drugs (AED) for simple partial seizures. Alternative first-line drugs include valproate, oxcarbazepine, and levetiracetam. One of these medications should be considered if the other two are not tolerated or can not be used. If the first AED is ineffective or not tolerated, then another AED of these five drugs should be considered. If the second AED is also not effective, then adjunctive therapy is added. Adjunctive therapy for focal seizures includes carbamazepine, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, sodium valproate, gabapentin, topiramate, and clobazam. If adjunctive therapy is also not effective or not tolerated, then referral to a tertiary epilepsy center should be considered, where other AED may be tried.

**Ketogenic Diet**

AEDs can control seizures in about two-thirds of epilepsy patients. The ketogenic diet can help control seizures in some children. It is a specialized high fat, low carb, and controlled protein diet, that should be considered in children with intractable seizures when at least two AEDs have been ineffective.

**Vagus Nerve Stimulation**

Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) involves an electric stimulator inside the body that connects to the left vagus nerve in the neck. It helps to calm down the irregular electrical activity in the brain. It can reduce the frequency, severity, and length of seizures. VNS therapy should be considered in patients whose seizures are not controlled with AEDs and are not candidates for surgery. Antiepileptic effects of VNS therapy may take up to two years, and AED should always be used along with it. If VNS therapy is effective, it may be possible to reduce the medications slowly.

**Surgery**

Surgery should be considered for refractory seizures where a specific area of the brain is responsible for causing seizures. Surgery involves removing or separating the specific area of the brain causing seizures.