Iron deficiency is recognized as the most prevalent nutritional deficit in the world.   The amount of transferrin in the blood indicates the amount of iron in the body.  High transferrin signifies low iron, which means there is less iron bound to transferrin, allowing for a high circulation of non-bound iron transferrin in the body, revealing a possible iron deficiency anemia. The liver increases the production of transferrin as a form of homeostasis to enable transferrin to bind to iron and transport it to the cells. Upregulation of transferrin receptors occurs in iron deficiency anemia

In anemia of chronic disease, there is a decreased transferrin level.

Causes of low transferrin

- Liver damage leading to reduced production of transferrin

- Kidney insult or injury leads to loss of transferrin in urine.

- Infection

- Malignancy

- Atransferrinemia: A genetic mutation resulting in the absence of transferrin, which leads to hemosiderosis in the heart and liver, which can lead to heart and liver failure. This condition is treated by plasma infusion.

Low transferrin in plasma indicates iron overload, which means the binding site of transferrin is highly saturated with iron.  Iron overload suggests hemochromatosis, which will lead to the deposition of iron on tissues.

Other associations with transferrin and its receptors include,

- Diminishing tumor cells when the receptor is used to attract antibodies

- High transferrin saturation increased the risk of cardiovascular mortality if patients have high transferrin saturation (>55%) and LDL levels