A quantum dot assay to measure cystine concentration has been described.  It uses a complicated hydrothermal method with several benefits compared to conventional chemical means, including high sensitivity, stability, rapid results, low cost, and the ability to reliably measure cystine even in the presence of chemicals and compounds that would otherwise interfere.

Urinary dipsticks or chemically treated test paper to check urine pH are readily available at nominal cost at most pharmacies or online. These products change color when dipped in urine, based on the urinary pH. This can then be matched to a color guide on the bottle or dispenser, corresponding to a particular pH level. Unfortunately, most urinary home pH products do not have a very clear color differentiation between a pH of 6 and 8. Another problem is that pH paper and many urinary dipsticks do not include specific gravity, which is a test for urine concentration and hydration status. The typical recommendation is for a product for patients with a relatively limited pH range (usually 4.5 to 9) which makes it visually easier to read the correct pH level. A specific dipstick for kidney stone formers and cystinuria patients to use at home that has an optimized pH range and includes a specific gravity reading is under development. It would be ideal for urinary pH and hydration monitoring in uric acid and cystine stone-forming patients on alkalinization and fluid therapy.

About 25% of cystine stone formers will have non-cystine chemical components in their stones. For this reason, complete stone chemical composition analyses and 24-hour urine tests for nephrolithiasis risk factors are recommended for optimal stone prophylaxis.

Some high protein dietary supplements have enough cystine and methionine (a cystine precursor) to increase cystine stone formation.

Selenium, at a dosage of 200 mg/day for six weeks, was shown in a 2018 double-blinded study to significantly reduce cystine crystal volume, but this finding has not yet been confirmed by other investigators.

Alpha-lipoic acid has been shown to increase urinary cystine solubility in mice. It also has prevented cystine stones in 2 human patients.

A vasopressin receptor antagonist (tolvaptan) has been shown to prevent the growth of cystine stones in animal models by drastically increasing urinary volume.

A combination of potassium citrate and potassium bicarbonate is being evaluated for efficacy and safety in cystine stone-forming children.

Besides bucillamine, other new cystine binding agents or crystal growth inhibitors are under evaluation. For example, L-cystine dimethyl esters (L-CDME) and L-cystine methyl esters (L-CME) have shown promising results with good therapeutic effects at relatively low concentrations, which suggest better tolerability and fewer side effects than similar agents.

Stem cell transplants have shown positive activity in reducing cystinuria in the mouse model, and a human phase 1 and 2 study is currently underway (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03897361).

Experimentally, real-time in situ atomic force microscopy has suggested that L-cystine dimethyl ester (L-CDME) and L-cystine methyl ester (L-CME) can dramatically reduce the growth rate of cystine stones and crystals. They interfere with specific receptor sites on crystal surfaces that block cystine molecule binding.

Crystal growth inhibitors may be the next new wave of prophylactic treatments for cystine stone patients. L-cystine bismorpholide and L-cystine bis(N'-methylpiperazide) appear to be the most potent potential cystine crystalization inhibitors, but they have not yet been tested in any published clinical trials.

A recombinant human enzyme (ACN00107) that can degrade cysteine and cystine and reduce urinary cystine levels while inhibiting cystine stone formation has been shown to be effective in mice and is awaiting human trials.

Chaperone therapy, where various agents are used to correct protein and enzymatic misfolding, is a new approach to various heritable diseases. Since several mutations result in protein misfolding in cystinuria, chaperone therapy is a potentially promising new treatment for cystinuric patients in the future.

**Treatment Summary**

**Initial or First-Line Therapy**

- Reduce dietary methionine (animal protein).

- Lower the dietary salt intake.

- Increase fluid intake sufficient to generate 3,000 ml of urine daily.

- Start alkalinization therapy with the goal of raising and maintaining the urinary pH up to 7.5, if possible.

- Routine patient self-monitoring of pH and specific gravity is recommended, along with appropriate adjustments in therapy.

- Potassium citrate is the preferred alkalinizing medication, but sodium bicarbonate may also be used.

- Liquid forms of urinary alkalinizers are more quickly absorbed than tablets. They are more appropriate for patients with rapid intestinal transit times, irritable bowel syndrome, chronic diarrhea, or post gastric bypass surgery.

- Use low potassium urinary antacid treatments in patients requiring high doses of alkalinizing therapy, develop hyperkalemia or have renal failure.

- Acetazolamide can be effective in raising urinary pH, but its use is discouraged except in carefully selected patients.

- Avoid routine urinary alkalinization beyond pH 7.5 to minimize calcium phosphate precipitation, although this may help attempt cystine stone dissolution.

- Cystine concentration should be <250 mg/L, and the urine pH should be maintained optimally at 7.5 but should be at least 7. If this cannot be achieved and maintained, additional second-line (thiol) therapy should be used.

- Routine laboratory testing should include a quantitative 24-hour total urinary cystine, serum potassium, and a cystine supersaturation ratio as well as the total daily urine volume and pH.

**Second-Line Therapy**

- Thiol-based treatment should use tiopronin, which is currently the preferred agent.

- "Cystine Capacity" testing should be used for monitoring treatment efficacy for patients on thiol therapy.

**Optional Therapies**

- Alpha-lipoic acid is readily available, well-tolerated, safe, and might be of real value based on very good results in limited studies.

- Selenium is cheap and easy to administer, but its role is unproven and untested except for a single study showing a benefit.

- Bucillamine might be a better, more effective, and less toxic thiol drug for cystinuria, but it remains mostly untested for this indication. Availability is also an issue.