With a few exceptions, RTKs bind growth factors that regulate cell differentiation, proliferation, survival, metabolism, and migration.  The biologic outcomes of these cellular events are essential not only in intrauterine development (see “Development” section), but in adult tissue function and homeostasis as well. For example, VEGFR/VEGF mediated angiogenesis allows for wound healing, Trk/BDNF remains necessary for neuronal survival, and c-KIT/SCF continues to stimulate spermatogenesis. Most RTK-ligand combinations have a plethora of functions in various tissues, and researchers continually discover additional roles. A small number of significant RTK functions from subfamilies not previously mentioned appear below.

Axl (Gas6 and Protein S/ProS) – two receptors of the Axl subfamily, Axl and Mer, act to dampen the innate immune system by inhibiting TLR-induced cytokine production in dendritic cells. They also promote phagocytic uptake of apoptotic cells.

Ins (insulin and insulin growth factor-1/IGF-1) – InsR/insulin binding regulates glucose homeostasis, stimulating glucose uptake, glycogenesis, and lipogenesis in cells throughout the body.  IGF1R/IGF-1 binding promotes symmetric growth in all tissues.

MuSK (agrin) – Skeletal muscle and functions express musk in the formation of the neuromuscular junction by clustering acetylcholine receptors and promoting the transcription of genes encoding synaptic proteins.

PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor/PDGF) – PDGF receptors are present on fibroblasts, ECs, and smooth muscle cells. They facilitate wound healing by stimulating vascular remodeling, smooth muscle cell migration, and fibroblast-induced collagen synthesis.