Electricity is a very common source of energy used to power many of the devices we use every day. However, a significant risk exists, should electricity and electrical devices be mishandled that can lead to significant injury or death. The risk is exceptionally high in the workplace due to the industrial-grade electrical generators that are commonly used for power. Outside of the workplace, risks are still present with everyday electrical sources like power outlets. At just 120 V, a standard power outlet can produce a strong enough current to inflict significant damage and even induce deadly arrhythmias.

The workup of a patient with recent electric exposure will involve extensive teamwork between healthcare professionals for acute stabilization and long-term recovery from the shock. The initial EMS team must stabilize the patient, begin initial life support, and transport them to the hospital. Once at the hospital, the emergency department team of emergency medicine physicians, physician assistants, and nurses must evaluate the patient and begin the workup, including labs and imaging.

The trauma surgery and anesthesia teams should be quickly consulted should surgical intervention be necessary. Given an electrical burn is likely, the burn team should also be consulted. High voltage shocks may involve the bone, so an orthopedic surgery consult may also be necessary. Cardiology should also be consulted for cardiac monitoring. Pharmacy interventions will be necessary and should stabilize the patient and reduce further injury or secondary complications. After the acute stabilization, the rehabilitation team of physiatry, physical therapy, and occupational therapy will all play essential roles in returning the patient to normal functioning or helping them adapt to their new normal. Social work should also be involved to negate the risks that led to this shock.

The dangers of electricity are undeniable as it is clear this is a significant source of mortality worldwide in professional work, the home, and the outside environment. Given the risks associated with electricity, performing trials associated with exposure would be unethical. Nonetheless, evidence shows that electricity is among the most common causes of workplace injury and therefore must be addressed and respected by both employers and employees.

Reducing electrical shock risks in the healthcare setting involves carrying out standard safety protocols and ensuring the working environment is free of electrical risks. In procedural rooms, this may include using an electrical parameters monitoring system, formulation of procedures for electrical faults and fires, and standard inspection of devices for both safety and performance.

Practicing safety techniques is a commonly used strategy by industry and the healthcare system to ensure training competency is maintained longitudinally. Specific to electrical safety, simulation of real-life cases proved to be an effective way of developing and strengthening electrical safety competency.

Electrical safety is an essential aspect of overall workplace safety that aims to reduce the injuries and deaths associated with electrical shock. Strict adherence to OSHA standards is critical to maintaining the safety of all employees in the workplace.