**Receptors Sending Information to the Somatosensory Cortex**

The somatosensory nervous system begins with the input from peripheral receptors that eventually translate into meaningful representations in the brain. At the receptor level, various stimuli cause the sensory receptors to release receptor potentials that meet a sufficient threshold to travel to the central nervous system as action potentials. At the level of the specialized sensory receptor, the amplitude of the stimulus recognized by a receptor must reach a threshold before being communicated to the central nervous system (CNS) via interneurons and spinal tracts. The increase in amplitude is due to sodium channels that open in response to the specific stimulus. These specialized receptors communicate specific modalities of sensation such as touch, pain, vibration, temperature, and proprioception. When communicated beyond the level of the receptor, the action potential carries the signal via specific bundles of nerves carrying the same modality to the spinal cord within interneurons. When a sensory receptor receives a strong impulse, this translates to a higher amplitude at the level of the receptor potential then subsequently a higher frequency of action potentials via the nerves receiving information from these receptors given that threshold was attained. Another principle of sensory neuroscience to consider include the phenomena of adaptation. Different receptor types will experience different degrees of adaptation and extinction. Quickly-adapting receptors (phasic) tend to adjust more quickly and send signals more frequently with changes in intensity, such as during onset and offset of the stimulus. Phasic receptors are more important in vestibular senses, which tend to respond to changes in our body position for balance. In contrast, slowly-adapting (tonic) receptors tend to experience slower adaptation that allows continued signaling of an active stimulus of unwavering intensity. An important example of this would be the sensation of proprioception, which requires the body to maintain information about its current position in space.

**Pathway to the Somatosensory Cortex**

The sensation throughout the surface of the skin is arranged in discrete segments that correlate to levels of the spinal cord. These segments are referred to as dermatomes. There is often an overlap of sensation between dermatomes, but certain points on the body may not exhibit these overlaps. By identifying the points specific to dermatomes, physicians can use these points in a neurological physical exam to identify the location of a spinal cord lesion or nerve root compression. The first-order neuron cell body is in the dorsal root ganglion.

Each pathway to the somatosensory cortex follows a three-ordered neuronal series from the sensory receptor in the periphery to the primary somatosensory cortex of the brain.

The dorsal root ganglion fibers enter the dorsal column of the spinal cord via the dorsal nerve roots and continue upward within the spinal cord white matter of the dorsal column. The fasciculus cuneatus is more lateral and carries information from T6 and above, and the fasciculus gracilis carries information from below T6. Together they travel up the dorsal tract and reach the nucleus cuneatus and gracilis, respectively. At the level of the lower medulla, they cross the midline and continue along the medial lemniscus to the VPL of the thalamus, which is the third-order neuron in the pathway. From the thalamus, the fibers move through the internal capsule to reach the primary somatosensory cortex. This tract is thus called the dorsal column medial lemniscus pathway (DCML) and carries information to the primary sensory cortex from the contralateral side of the body. The A-beta nerve fibers tend to carry the modalities of touch and pressure to the central nervous system and are myelinated fibers.

The sensory ascending tract would be the anterolateral spinothalamic tract (STT). This tract originates from receptors within the same dermatomal distribution, but the secondary neuron differs. In the spinothalamic tract, which carries information about pain, temperature, and crude touch, the secondary neuron is the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The fibers from this neuron cross the anterior white commissure of the spinal cord and proceed anterolaterally to the VPL of the thalamus, finally terminating in the primary somatosensory cortex as well. Pain impulses t in specific fibers. These include A-delta pain fibers and C fibers. A-delta pain fibers tend to carry fast pain as they are myelinated, while C fibers tend to carry slow pain and are unmyelinated.