# Continuing Education Activity

Ramsay Hunt syndrome, also known as herpes zoster oticus, is a late complication of varicella-zoster virus infection that results in inflammation of the geniculate ganglion of cranial nerve VII. Ramsay Hunt is a clinical diagnosis and classically is described as a triad of ipsilateral facial paralysis, otalgia, and vesicles near the ear and auditory canal. Diagnosis is often missed or delayed, which can lead to an increased incidence of long-term complications. The condition is self-limiting, but treatment is targeted at decreasing the total duration of the illness as well as providing analgesia and preventing the complications that can occur. This activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in the diagnosis and treatment of Ramsay Hunt syndrome.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the clinical signs and symptoms of Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
- Review the evaluation of patients with suspected Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
- Outline the management options available for Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve patient outcomes for Ramsay Hunt syndrome.

# Introduction

Ramsay Hunt syndrome, also known as herpes zoster oticus or geniculate ganglion herpes zoster, is a late complication of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection, resulting in inflammation of the geniculate ganglion of cranial nerve VII.

Although the classic triad of Ramsay Hunt syndrome is ipsilateral facial paralysis, otalgia, and a vesicular rash, there is significant variability in clinical presentation, with some patients demonstrating facial paralysis before the rash or, sometimes, no rash at all.

# Etiology

The causative agent in Ramsay Hunt syndrome is the varicella-zoster virus, a member of the human herpesvirus family. More specifically, it is part of the alphaherpesvirinae subfamily, along with herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 (HHV-1 and HHV-2). VZV is a double-stranded DNA virus, more technically known as human alphaherpesvirus 3 (HHV-3).

# Epidemiology

Ramsay Hunt syndrome affects both immunocompetent and immunocompromised patients and has an incidence of about 5 per 100,000 people per year; in contrast, the incidence of Bell palsy is much higher, at about 15-30 per 100,000 people per year.

# Pathophysiology

Initial infection with the varicella-zoster virus causes a disseminated vesicular rash with fever, known as chickenpox. During the acute phase of this infection, the virus is spread by respiratory droplets. After the viremia and exanthem have resolved, the virus can remain dormant in cranial nerves and dorsal root ganglia. During times of physiological stress or immunocompromise, reactivation of the virus within the distribution of the nerve in which it has been dormant can occur. In Ramsay Hunt syndrome, the virus lays dormant within the geniculate ganglion and primarily reactivates along the facial nerve, although other cranial nerves may be involved.

According to Coulson et al., the initial presenting symptom is typically pain in the ipsilateral ear (55% of patients), with facial paralysis and vesicles appearing within 2 to 3 days. In 23% of patients, facial paralysis is the presenting symptom, and in only 2%, vesicles appear first. While 86% of their patients reported that the rash occurred only on the auricle, 7% only had vesicles in the oral cavity, and 8% had them in both locations.

The proximity of the facial nerve to the vestibulocochlear nerve can result in hearing loss, tinnitus, and vertigo. Sensorineural hearing loss was present in 43% of patients in Coulson's series, imbalance or vertigo in 51%, and tinnitus in 20%.

The facial paralysis resulting from Ramsay Hunt syndrome has a worse prognosis than that seen in Bell's palsy, with only 70% regaining normal or near-normal facial function compared with over 90% in Bell's palsy.

When patients fail to recover premorbid function, synkinesis is a common sequela, in which aberrant reinnervation connects axons with neuromuscular junctions differently from the ones to which they were connected prior to the inflammation. Severe neuritis and resultant swelling of the facial nerve against the bony Fallopian canal that encases it within the temporal bone causes direct, physical neuronal injury.

# Histopathology

Microscopic evaluation with the Tzanck smear technique can be performed on the fluid obtained from the vesicles. This should reveal multinucleated giant cells using a Giemsa stain, methylene blue, or Wright's stain. The sensitivity of the test is low, but it has a high specificity when pre-test clinical suspicion is high. Distinguishing between herpes simplex, varicella-zoster, and cytomegalovirus infections can be challenging because they are all herpesviruses; the Tzanck smear is also used to identify pemphigus vulgaris, leprosy, and leishmaniasis.

# History and Physical

Ramsay Hunt patients typically present with the classic triad of ipsilateral facial paralysis, otalgia, and painful vesicles on the auricle; however, patients who present early in the course of the disease may only have pain without facial paralysis or a rash. Notably, the characteristic rash correlates to the areas innervated by the facial nerve; on the auricle, this includes the conchal bowl, anti-helix, and postauricular sulcus, but the rash can involve the auditory canal, scalp, cheek, tongue, or palate.

Although the presence of rash is variable, the majority of Ramsay Hunt patients report pre-herpetic, or pre-eruptive, otalgia. This is most frequently described as severe, of a sharp or stabbing quality, may awaken the patient from sleep, and persists for multiple days.

Generally, the most apparent feature on physical examination will be unilateral hemifacial palsy, which will be complete in close to 50% of patients.

The third pass of the facial examination should repeat the same movements as the second pass, but the examiner should look for involuntary movements in other areas of the affected hemiface. These synkinetic movements, commonly seen as twitching of the mouth during eye closure or winking during a smile, indicate aberrant regeneration and do not typically appear until 4-6 months after the onset of the paralysis; they are more common in patients with more severe initial paralysis.

Patients with lagophthalmos should have their Bell's phenomenon evaluated, as this is an important corneal protection mechanism. The Bell's phenomenon is the upward rotation of the globe when the eyelids close; it is often lost as patients age. Patients who complain of eye pain or a foreign body sensation should undergo a slit-lamp examination to assess for corneal abrasions or exposure keratopathy, which are very common in cases of facial paralysis. Assessment of corneal sensation is also important because even though corneal anesthesia is rare in Ramsay Hunt syndrome, patients will be predisposed to ocular injury if the eye does not close properly and foreign bodies cannot be felt. Patients with hearing or balance complaints should undergo audiometry and potentially vestibular testing, and patients who note hoarseness or dysphagia should undergo fiberoptic laryngoscopy to evaluate the vocal cords. All patients should receive a thorough cranial nerve examination and inspection of the oral cavity, scalp, external ears, and auditory canals to look for a vesicular eruption. The nose and eyes are not typically involved with vesicles in Ramsay Hunt syndrome, but this can be seen in other forms of zoster. Vesicles near the tip of the nose, Hutchinson's sign, can be associated with ocular lesions.

# Evaluation

Ramsay Hunt syndrome is a clinical diagnosis, as laboratory testing to confirm the presence of VZV is often impractical and lacks sensitivity.

When available, electrodiagnostic testing such as electroneuronography (ENoG) and electromyography (EMG) may provide useful prognostic information by quantifying the extent of nerve damage more precisely than is possible with a physical examination alone, predominantly in the case of House-Brackmann grade VI paralysis.

# Treatment / Management

Herpes zoster is generally self-limiting in nature. Therefore, the main goals of treatment are to decrease the incidence of late complications, including spastic facial paralysis and postherpetic neuralgia. Multiple studies have shown a significant decrease in long-term complications with the use of oral antivirals and steroids.

High-dose corticosteroids, either oral or intravenous, should be co-administered with antiviral treatment. There is no overall consensus regarding the total duration of steroid treatment, which can vary from 4 to 37 days, but steroids should be prescribed at a high dose.

Notably, the clinician should have an appropriate and comprehensive patient-specific discussion before prescribing high-dose corticosteroids. Common side effects include mood changes such as depression or irritability, insomnia, gastritis, gastroesophageal reflux, increased blood pressure, and hyperglycemia.

Symptomatic management is also critical, particularly for two aspects of Ramsay Hunt syndrome: pain and corneal exposure. Analgesia is often needed with zoster; a multimodal approach with acetaminophen, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and long-acting opioids can all be used. If steroids are prescribed, concomitant NSAID use should generally be avoided to mitigate the risk of enteropathy, ulcer formation, and subsequent gastrointestinal bleeding. Tricyclic antidepressants and gabapentin are useful for the treatment of neuropathic pain and postherpetic neuralgia. Meclizine and benzodiazepines can be effective for managing acute vertigo as well. Artificial tears throughout the day and ocular lubricant ointment at night are helpful for the prevention of exposure keratopathy, and patients with frank lagophthalmos should be instructed in how to stretch the eyelid and how to tape the eye closed at night in such a way as to avoid scratching the cornea in the process (see videos). Patients with multiple comorbidities, such as diabetes, old age, hypertension, and immunocompromise, may take longer to recover than most, and they may benefit from the placement of an upper eyelid weight to aid eye closure and prevent exposure keratopathy during the recovery period.

Further surgical intervention in Ramsay Hunt patients in the acute setting is controversial. Generally, surgical decompression is considered to be beneficial in Bell's palsy patients if electrodiagnostic testing shows >90% degeneration of the facial nerve without the presence of voluntary motor potentials, the affected side is completely paralyzed, and if surgery is performed within 14 days from paralysis onset.

In the long term, the management of synkinesis can be accomplished with both conservative and surgical approaches.

# Differential Diagnosis

Not many clinical entities produce both a facial rash and paralysis, but other common causes of localized facial rashes include herpes simplex virus outbreaks, Staphylococcal impetigo, and contact dermatitis that may arise from topical agents like neomycin or exposure to an irritant such as poison ivy. Acute facial paralysis is most commonly caused by Bell's palsy, which presents similarly to zoster sine herpete, but other non-traumatic etiologies include Lyme disease, benign skull base tumors, extratemporal malignancies, autoimmune conditions, otologic disease, other viral infections, neurosyphilis, and stroke.

# Prognosis

All patients recover from Ramsay Hunt syndrome; the question is, "to what degree?" Overall, the most consistent prognostic indicator in Ramsay Hunt syndrome is the presenting severity of facial paralysis. Patients who present with House-Brackmann grade III paralysis tend to recover to normal function; patients with House-Brackmann grade IV or V paralysis are more likely to recover to grade II function, and patients with House-Brackmann grade VI function at presentation are more likely to recover to grade III function.

Other factors that have been associated with non-recovery include age over 50 years old, a greater degree of axonal damage on electrodiagnostic testing, involvement of multiple cranial neuropathies, the presence of oropharyngeal lesions, and diabetes.

# Complications

Other than the presenting symptoms of pain, rash, facial paralysis, dysgeusia, hearing loss, tinnitus, vertigo, hoarseness, dysarthria, and others mentioned above, short-term complications of Ramsay Hunt syndrome include corneal abrasion and exposure keratopathy, depression and social anxiety, and transmission of chickenpox to unvaccinated or immunocompromised close contacts. While long-term flaccid paralysis is unlikely, the development of synkinesis is very common. Other long-term complications include postherpetic neuralgia, scarring from the vesicles, and persistent depression and/or social anxiety due to loss of facial function.

# Consultations

While Ramsay Hunt syndrome is ideally managed pharmacologically by a primary care provider, specialist consultation with a physician with acute facial paralysis experience may be valuable. An otolaryngologist or facial plastic surgeon may be more familiar with the treatment of Ramsay Hunt syndrome than a general practitioner and likely has easier access to audiometry and flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy. A neurologist is also helpful in evaluating cranial neuropathies, assisting with electrodiagnostic testing for patients with complete hemifacial paralysis, and may help treat chronic neuralgia. An ophthalmologist can evaluate the health of the cornea with slit lamp examination and fluorescein dye, and both the ophthalmologist and the otolaryngologist should be capable of placing an eyelid weight, if necessary. An internist or endocrinologist may be required to manage blood glucose levels or hypertension during prolonged high-dose steroid administration. Lastly, some patients will require consultation with a behavioral health specialist to assist with managing mood symptoms and anxiety that stem from facial dysfunction.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

When discussing Ramsay Hunt syndrome with patients, it is essential to emphasize that everyone gets better, but not everyone gets all the way better. Explaining that "not all the way better" may involve synkinesis and/or postherpetic neuralgia is critical. Perhaps even more crucial is impressing upon patients the importance of corneal protection during the period of flaccid paralysis because the temporary nature of the facial palsy does not preclude the possibility of sustaining a permanent ocular injury during that interval. Accordingly, the application of artificial tears throughout the day and ocular lubricant ointment at night, and the use of eyelid stretching and taping can mean the difference between a satisfactory long-term outcome and an unsatisfactory one. It is also important for patients with active vesicles to avoid contact with unvaccinated and immunocompromised individuals, as they can spread the varicella-zoster virus from their lesions. Lastly, administering the shingles vaccine likely prevents Ramsay Hunt syndrome as well, but the vaccine is not 100% effective. It is also important to remember that while most patients will not develop chickenpox or zoster more than once, it has been reported, particularly in immunocompromised individuals.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Ramsay Hunt syndrome affects patients in a myriad of ways, with pain, paralysis, cochleovestibular symptoms, and behavioral health concerns all occurring commonly in the acute period. While most patients do recover the majority of their premorbid function when managed appropriately, long-term pain, facial dysfunction, scarring, and behavioral health concerns may all persist. For this reason, optimal patient outcomes occur when healthcare teams include members with expertise across a broad range of specialties. In the short term, primary care, otolaryngology, neurology, ophthalmology, and psychology/psychiatry are often required. In the long-term, facial plastic surgery or otolaryngology, pain management, ophthalmology, speech or physical therapy, and psychology/psychiatry may be needed. Patients who develop synkinesis may require regular visits over the course of many years with a physician or nurse who can administer botulinum toxin injections; it is critical to surround these patients with an experienced interprofessional team early on in the treatment process in order to provide the care and support they need to maximize their quality of life outcomes.[Level 1]