Abrasions are classified into three types that include linear or scratch abrasions, grazed or brush abrasions, and patterned abrasions.

**Linear or Scratch Abrasions**

Linear abrasions are caused by tangential forces resulting in denuding of the epidermis. Linear abrasions are the simplest of injuries and tend to heal by primary intention, without any sequelae. Linear abrasions have significant medicolegal importance, especially when seen over the neck, inner thighs, and genitalia. Linear or semicircular injuries are classically seen as a result of nail scratches, and their presence on the inner aspect of thighs and around female genitalia may indicate resistance in cases of sexual assault. Likewise, nail scratch abrasions on the neck may be suggestive of strangulation.

**Grazed or Brush Abrasions**

Grazed abrasions are usually multiple in presentation and result from friction against a broad, rough surface. These are most commonly seen in cases of road traffic accidents as well as in sports falls. Grazed abrasions are caused by the dragging of the body against a rough surface, resulting in the scrapping of the epidermis. The depth of grazed injuries varies depending on the irregularity of the surface, as well as the speed of the body. Extensive, grazed abrasions are sometimes referred to as "brush burns."

**Patterned Abrasion**

Patterned abrasions are a result of perpendicular force on the epidermis, resulting in an impression of the offending item. Patterned abrasions can be further sub-classified as pressure abrasion and impact abrasion, depending on the duration of contact with the offending object. Pressure abrasions result from prolonged compression of the epidermis. The force required to produce a pressure abrasion is minimal. For example, the use of rough material for hanging produces a ligature mark that is an imprint of the material used.