The treatment plan of duodenal ulcers is developed initially based on the degree of disease noted at the time of diagnosis. Patients who present with complications, including perforation or bleeding, may require surgical intervention. However, the majority of patients are treated with antisecretory agents to help reduce the amount of acid exposure to the ulcerated region and, in turn, provide symptomatic relief and promote healing. For patients who present with a history of heavy NSAID use, the first step is to advise patients to avoid NSAID use as this is not only a possible etiology but also a cause of worsening symptoms. Smoking and alcohol cessation is also encouraged, as these may also exacerbate symptoms.

Antisecretory agents include H2 receptor antagonists as well as proton pump inhibitors. The duration of therapy varies highly depending on the presenting symptoms, level of compliance suspected, as well as the risk of recurrence. The majority of patients, however, do not require long-term antisecretory therapy following H. pylori treatment, upon confirmation of eradication and if they remain asymptomatic. Patients diagnosed with H. pylori must receive triple therapy (two antibiotics and a proton pump inhibitors), and elimination must be confirmed.H. pylori was associated with significantly lower rates of both gastric and duodenal ulcers. Patients with complications at the time of presentation will need to follow postoperative recommendations made by their general surgeon. They will likely require treatment for more extended periods (8 to 12 weeks) or until confirmed ulcer resolution by repeat endoscopy. From a surgical standpoint, patients may require laparoscopic repair for perforated ulcers or bleeding ulcers that are not responsive to endoscopic intervention.