Congenital myotonic dystrophy is caused by the repeat expansion of trinucleotide "CTG" (cytosine-thymine-guanine) in the 3'-untranslated region of the myotonia dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) gene located on chromosome 19q 13.3. Myotonic dystrophy type 2 is caused by a CCTG expansion in intron 1 of the ZNF9 (e zinc finger protein 9) gene. Parallels between these mutations indicate that microsatellite expansions in RNA can be pathogenic and cause the multisystemic features of DM1 and DM2.

The severity of the disease is correlated with allele size (number of repeats) with <30 repeats in an average healthy person to >11,000 repeats in the affected person; however, mild cases were reported with long expansions.

Two important terms are used in the description of autosomal dominant diseases, i.e., penetrance, and anticipation. Penetrance refers to the percentage of the individuals showing signs of the disease, from the mildest to the most severe phenotype. If all individuals who have a disease genotype exhibit the disease phenotype, then the disease is said to be 'fully penetrant' or to have a penetrance of 100%. Anticipation refers to the increased disease severity and decreased age of onset in successive generations.

In DM1, all clinical phenotypes except premutation exhibit full penetrance and anticipation.

Full penetrance alleles of more than 50 are associated with disease manifestations. In CMD, repeats are usually more than 1000, compared to less than 37 in normal individuals, and 38-49 in premutation allele patients (asymptomatic). Offspring of premutation patients can inherit longer repeats, increasing the risk of disease and decreasing the age of onset in the next generations (anticipation). Contrary to the classic (adult), the maternal transmission is up to ~90% of cases, and only 9-12% are paternal. The mechanism is not yet well understood; however, maternal and intrauterine environment are considered contributing factors.