The gram-negative bacterial cell membrane is composed of an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The outer membrane is exposed to the outside environment, while the inner membrane envelops the cytoplasm. Contrary to the usual biological membrane, the gram-negative bacterial membrane does not have a phospholipid bilayer but an asymmetric bilayer with LPS on the outside and phospholipid on the inside.E.coli, Pseudomonas, etc., LPS is exposed to the cell surface, while in the capsulated strains such as Klebsiella pneumonia, Haemophilus influenza, etc., LPS is present below the capsular layer.

Of the three components, lipid A is the most bioactive component of LPS and a potent part of the endotoxin response generated by a molecule. Thus, LPS can be used for the early detection of infection since it induces an innate immune response, specifically through Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Even when the immune system causes lysis of the bacterial cells, lipid A containing fragments of the membrane released in the circulation cause fever, diarrhea, and in adverse circumstances, lead to septic (endotoxic) shock. Though lipid A moiety is a very conserved part of the LPS, the structure differs among different strains, species, and subspecies of bacteria.

In contrast to lipid A, O-antigens are the most variable part of the LPS molecule that imparts antigenic specificity to the molecule. The size or the composition of the O-antigen can reliably indicate the virulence potential of a bacterial strain. Modifications in the O-antigen plausibly play an essential role in the infection process. It mainly imparts the potential to induce attachment, colonization of the host, and the ability to circumvent host defense mechanisms.

Interestingly, canonical Lipid A, such as from non-invading E.coli, are speculated to be agonistic, while less conical lipid A, such as P. gingivalis, may activate a different signal (such as TLR4 instead of TLR2 and the strictly cylindrical lipid A, as Rhodobacter sphaeroides, tend to be antagonistic to TLRs. Hence, more pathogenic bacteria have evolved their lipid A moiety to evade host immune attacks.