Pure-tone evaluations are performed in sound-treated rooms to eliminate ambient noise while obtaining hearing thresholds for both air-conducted and bone-conducted sounds. Air conduction tones are presented through inserted earphones or over-the-ear headphones. Bone conduction thresholds are obtained via an oscillating transducer placed on the mastoid process. Most commonly, tones at the frequency being tested are presented at decreasing intensity levels (in 5 or 10 dB steps) until becoming inaudible and then are again presented at increasing intensity until becoming audible again, a procedure known as the Hughson-Westlake method.

Pure tone thresholds are then plotted on an audiogram, displaying the quietest sound at a given frequency that a patient is able to discern at least 50% of the time, measured in decibels Hearing Level (dB HL). Hearing Level is a scale based upon normative data for human hearing thresholds, devised such that 0 dB is the loudness at which most people can perceive a sound 50% of the time; individuals that can hear better than average may, therefore, have hearing thresholds that are lower than 0 dB. Some level of variability across the population is expected, and hearing thresholds up to 25 dB are considered normal. Variability is also expected when testing the same patient, due to differences in audiometry equipment, examiner, and patient factors; for this reason, a change in the hearing threshold of 5 dB is thought to be within the standard error of these measurements.

A typical audiogram measures thresholds at frequencies within a range slightly broader than that of human speech, including 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 6000, and 8000 Hz. The primary speech frequencies fall between 500 and 4000 Hz, although normal human hearing ranges from ~20 Hz to ~20,000 Hz.

If there is a substantial difference in hearing between ears, masking may be utilized. Masking is a frequently employed technique in which noise is introduced into the non-tested ear in order to prevent a tone being presented to the tested ear from being perceived in the non-tested ear, which might otherwise result in the patient indicating that they had heard the tone despite it being in the wrong ear. In practice, masking is applied for air conduction when there is a significant hearing threshold difference between ears (~40 dB for headphones and ~65 dB for insert earphones), as signals that are loud enough to overcome the interaural attenuation provided by the skull (the difference in loudness perceived between the ears when a sound is presented on one side of the head) will be transmitted to the contralateral side and may be heard by the non-tested ear if it hears substantially better than the tested ear.

After collecting hearing data from the patient, pure tone thresholds at each frequency are displayed on an audiogram to facilitate interpretation. The X-axis represents the frequency of sound in hertz, and the Y-axis represents the (inverted) intensity of sound in decibels Hearing Level. The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) sets forth guidelines for the standardization of audiogram symbols.

**ASHA Standard Audiogram Symbols**

The following table shows the standard audiogram symbols.

Air conduction in the left ear

When color is available, red indicates sounds detected by the right ear, and blue indicates sounds detected by the left ear; the <> and [] symbols that indicate left and right ear thresholds were chosen to vaguely resemble a patient's ears facing the interpreter of the audiogram.

**Speech Audiometry**

In addition to pure tone audiometry, speech audiometry is usually conducted as part of a comprehensive audiological evaluation. Two types of speech audiometry are usually performed: speech awareness or detection threshold (SAT or SDT) testing and speech reception threshold (SRT) testing. They provide different information, and therefore are both employed in most cases. The SAT is very similar to pure tone testing, except that the tones are replaced by words and the patient merely has to indicate when a word is heard. SRT involves the presentation of two-syllable words with equal emphasis on both syllables, and the patient is required to repeat the word correctly. This type of word is known as a "spondee," and examples include "racecar," "baseball," and "toothbrush." The SAT is usually within 10-15 dB of the SRT, and if it is not, a cause for the discrepancy should be sought. Likewise, the PTA and SRT should fall within 6-12 dB of each other. Beyond SAT and SRT, additional word recognition or speech discrimination testing may be performed, in which monosyllabic words are presented at 25-40 dB above the SRT, and the patient is asked to repeat the words. A normal score is 80% or greater; if the score decreases as the loudness of the words increases, the phenomenon is known as "rollover," which is indicative of retrocochlear pathology, such as a vestibular schwannoma.