Several issues of concern may arise during the course of antepartum care. While serious medical conditions pose a risk and concern to prenatal management (discussed in other articles), most areas of concern in day-to-day pregnancy issues also comprise a significant amount of patient complaints. Therefore, recognition of these concerns and timely intervention is an essential contributor to adequate antepartum care.

**Nausea and Vomiting**

Nausea and vomiting are among the most common complaints of pregnant patients within the first trimester of pregnancy, and is thought to be multifactorial and more directly caused by rapidly increasing level of pregnancy-related hormones such as beta HCG, estrogen, progesterone, placental growth hormone, leptin, and several others. Patients may experience varying degrees of nausea or vomiting throughout the antepartum course. Severe cases may require hospitalization and workup for more serious causes, such as hyperemesis gravidarum, identified by severe dehydration, accompanied by acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities. Patients typically state symptoms present prominently after the first missed menstrual cycle and may continue up to 16 weeks of gestation and up to 22 weeks gestation in rare cases. Symptoms are typically perceived to be more severe during early waking hours. Patients experiencing these issues may receive relief from several different interventions. First, patients may attempt to portion smaller, more frequent meals, ginger into their diets, or supplement medications. Patients may require Vitamin B6 supplementation with Doxylamine or antiemetics such as H1-receptor antagonists.

**Musculoskeletal Back Pain**

Patients during the antepartum course may also have significant complaints of back and lower lumbar pain, most commonly in the third trimester of pregnancy and caused by the increasing size of the gravid uterus and alignment distortion. This is typically worsened by walking significant distances, intense bending forward, or lifting moderately weighted objects. Severe cases of back pain may warrant orthopedic evaluation. Management of back pain includes rest, heating pads, back braces, and analgesics.

**Weight Gain**

Weight gain during pregnancy should be discussed with patients and assessed based on pre-pregnancy BMI and individual risk factors, with an increased focus on obesity. Obesity’s association with fetal macrosomia, gestational diabetes, gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, rate of cesarean sections, and other pregnancy complications requires early intervention and counseling of patients beginning in early antepartum care. Pre-pregnancy BMI categories allow for stratification of the total weight gain throughout pregnancy recommendation for underweight patients (BMI <18.5) to be a 28 to 40 lb (12.7 18.1 kg) to total weight gain, normal weight (BMI: 18.5 to 24.9) to be a 25 to 35 lb (11.3 to 15.9 kg) total weight gain, overweight (BMI: 25.0 to 29.9) to be a 15 to 25 lb (6.8 to 11.3 kg) total weight gain, and obese (BMI great or equal to 30.0) to be an 11 to 20 lb (5 to 9 kg) total weight gain. The emphasis during antepartum care and weight gain is currently focused on the obese population, given the significantly increased risk for gestational diabetes, macrosomia, gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, and cesarean delivery, and other antepartum and intrapartum complications.

**Smoking, Alcohol, and Illicit Drugs Use**

Although the overall prevalence of cigarette smoking during pregnancy has decreased significantly throughout the United States, there continues to be a prevalence of twelve to thirteen percent of women who endorse cigarette use during the antepartum period. These patients typically tend to be younger in age, have completed fewer years of education, and are of lower socioeconomic status. During the antepartum course, it is essential to identify patients who endorse smoking, counsel patients extensively regarding risk factors associated with cigarette use during pregnancy, and implement a quitting plan with the identification of foreseeable roadblocks and obstacles to doing so. Cigarette smoke is fetotoxic due to the vasoactive effects leading to its substances leading to a marked reduction in oxygen levels. Effects of decreased oxygen levels may lead to cardiac anomalies, gastroschisis, hydrocephaly, microcephaly, omphalocele, cleft lip, and palate, or limb anomalies. These effects are noted to be dose-dependent. Risks associated with cigarette smoke use and exposure in the antepartum period also include spontaneous abortions, fetal growth reduction, preterm delivery, and placental abnormalities, like placental abruption or placenta previa.

Like tobacco, alcohol use during pregnancy, while decreasing in prevalence, is still prevalent amongst eight to thirty percent of pregnancies in the United States. Alcohol exposure in-utero has been established as the leading cause of non-genetically linked mental retardation, along with a constellation of presenting defects that together are referred to as Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. These include notable central nervous system abnormalities (neurologic, functional, and structural dysfunction), growth restriction, notable dysmorphic facial features (short palpebral fissures, smooth philtrum, and thinned vermilion border), and other anomalies (cardiac, skeletal, renal, auditory, ophthalmologic, etc.). While the dose-effect correlation between alcohol use in pregnancy and fetal defects is unknown, several studies show an increased risk among those exposed to excessive binge-drinking behavior.

Illicit drug use during pregnancy is also of major concern to both maternal and fetal outcomes. With exposure rates as high as ten percent, assessing patients using recreational drugs must be completed in all pregnant patients. The use of drugs poses a unique risk when considering outcomes and fetal effects, given the multiple variables typically associated with those using drugs. These include younger patient populations, low socioeconomic status, polysubstance abuse, mental health issues, infectious diseases, and other social issues, which may complicate the picture of diagnosis and management. The greatest risk of illicit drug use in pregnancy also lies with the toxic and teratogenic effects of additives and impurities found in several street drugs. Effects of recreational drug use include, but are not limited to, fetal growth restriction, facial defects, cardiovascular, renal, and urinary abnormalities, behavioral abnormalities, and complications of fetal withdrawal (i.e., seizures, central nervous system defects).

**Work & Employment**

With more than half of pregnant women working from conception until delivery, employment during the antepartum course is another common area of concern for patients. According to the Family and Medical Leave Act, pregnant employees must be granted at least twelve weeks of unpaid leave from employment for delivery and newborn care. As per the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, pregnant women may continue employment until labor begins in the absence of obstetric complications.

Despite these recommendations, some work may increase the risk of complications to pregnant patients, including employment that requires strenuous heavy lifting and long work hours. These demanding conditions may place additional stress on the patient as well as the pregnancy course, leading to complications such as gestational hypertension with an increased risk of the development of preeclampsia, preterm premature rupture of membranes, preterm labor and delivery, and fetal growth restrictions. It is acceptable to counsel patients with significant obstetric histories of these complications on the added risk of strenuous workplaces on the antepartum course.

**Exercise**

With the emphasis on promoting healthy lifestyles during antepartum care, patients may have specific concerns regarding exercise safety during pregnancy. The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends that after thorough clinical evaluation and with no contraindications, pregnant women should be encouraged to participate in regular, moderate-intensity physical activity in regular, moderate-intensity physical activity for at least thirty minutes or greater per day. Relative contraindications are noted as follows: heavy smoking, poorly controlled disorders such as seizure disorder, hyperthyroidism, Type 1 diabetes, or hypertension, extreme weights including morbid obesity or underweight, intrauterine growth restriction, chronic bronchitis, unevaluated maternal cardiac arrhythmia, history of severely sedentary lifestyle, symptomatic or severe anemia, or heavy smoking.

Absolute contraindications as as follows: incompetent cervix or cerclage, multifetal gestation pregnancy with risk of preterm labor, persistent second or third trimester vaginal bleeding, preterm labor during in the pregnancy, placenta previa present after 26 weeks of gestation, rupture of membranes, preeclampsia or pregnancy-induced hypertension, significant heart disease, or restrictive lung disease. Specific physical activities and intensity of those activities should be reviewed. Those activities in which the risk of trauma to the abdomen or falls are increased should be discouraged.

**Travel**

The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology states that pregnant women may safely travel until 36 weeks of gestation provided there are no complications. Modern, adequately pressurized aircraft pose no harm to pregnant patients or fetuses. Patients are advised to ambulate every hour while on long flights to prevent thromboembolism and wear seat belts throughout the flight. Seat belt safety in regards to automobile travel should be discussed with all pregnant patients during antepartum care. Specifically, correct placement of seatbelts via three-point restraints where the shoulder portion of the strap should be firmly positioned between the breasts and bottom portion should safely be positioning under the abdomen and across the upper portion of the thigh. Both should be positioned across the body tightly, and airbags should always be present in vehicles and utilized in the event of a high-impact accident.