Porphyria cutanea tarda is one of the many porphyrias that result due to an abnormal enzyme in the heme biosynthesis pathway. Patients present with a blistering skin manifestation and notably lack any neurovisceral symptoms. It is essential to consider a urinalysis, stool analysis, and blood tests to establish the diagnosis. Along with this, a detailed account to uncover all susceptibility factors should be a priority as the avoidance of these factors is a vital aspect of the patient's management.

Although an internist or a hematologist would generally handle this case, it is important to note the involvement of all other specialties in the diagnosis and management of this patient. The primary care physician or internist who might see the patient first should take a detailed personal and family history before they refer the patient to a dermatologist or a hematologist. The dermatologist plays a vital role in identifying this as a blistering skin condition, which would help narrow down the differentials. A skin biopsy is not necessary for diagnosis but may be done. If it is done, the role of the pathologist comes into play to view the specimen and give more clues that point to the diagnosis. The evaluation and management will be centered on the hematologist.

Laboratory investigations are required such as urine, fecal, and blood samples are usually sent for the measurement of porphyrin levels. This would typically establish the diagnosis, although porphyrin fractionation is needed to differentiate between porphyrias that present similarly biochemically. The management is centered on weekly or bi-weekly phlebotomies and hydroxychloroquine. Phlebotomists are, therefore, also an essential part of the treatment team. The nurse monitors the blood pressure of the patient at every visit and is part of the core team to educate the patient and families. Complications involving the liver can arise, which would require consultations with a hepatologist or gastroenterologist. Counselors are integral to help patients avoid or cease any habits that might be a trigger for the manifestation of this disease like smoking, alcohol, etc. Since PCT might have a familial component, the opinion and consultation with a genetic counselor may also be required.

To improve patient care and provide the best line of management for these patients, an interprofessional collaboration between different specialties is highly recommended.