Many human diseases result from changes in protein sequence caused by mutations that alter the correct readout of genetic information from gene to a functional protein. Defects in the protein synthetic machinery also cause a small but growing number of human diseases.  Examples of such pathologies follow.

**Sickle Cell Anemia**

Human hemoglobin contains two alpha and two beta chains to create a heterotetramer. In Sickle Cell Anemia, the sixth codon of the beta chain contains a missense mutation, in which glutamic acid, a charged amino acid, is replaced with valine, a neutral amino acid. This single amino acid difference affects the tertiary and quaternary structures of hemoglobin such that it distorts the biconcave shape of erythrocytes into sickle shapes in certain conditions.

**Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy**

Like many X-linked diseases, DMD primarily affects males at an early age. It is characterized clinically by muscle weakness, calf pseudohypertrophy, and the Gower sign in a child. One of the pathophysiologic origins of this disease is the formation of a premature stop codon in an early exon of the dystrophin gene, which leads to a truncated dystrophin protein which compromises the integrity of the sarcomere and contractile function of the muscle.

**Diamond-Blackfan Anemia**

While many human diseases result from mutations in the coding sequences of genes that affect protein production, Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is one of a growing number of conditions resulting from defects in the protein synthetic machinery. DBA is caused by autosomal dominant mutations in genes encoding proteins of either the 40S or 60S ribosomal subunit.  While the exact mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of DBA are currently unknown, it seems likely that changes in cellular proteomes (the protein composition of a cell) resulting from suboptimal numbers of ribosomes contribute in part to the clinical features of the disease. These clinical features include a deficit in red blood cell production, small size, and a heterogeneous number of congenital anomalies.