The two classic clinical manifestations of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome are mucocutaneous pigment macules and hamartomatous GI polyps. The average age of diagnosis is 23; the first presentation is often from bowel obstruction due to intussusception from the hamartomatous polyps in the GI tract.

Pigmented mucocutaneous dark blue, brown, to black macules are present in over 95% of individuals with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Most commonly distributed on the lips, perioral areas, buccal mucosa, eyes, nostrils, fingertips, palms, soles, and perianal areas. The macules are rarely present at birth but appear in childhood, usually before the age of 5, with oral pigmentation being the first to appear during the first year of life. The macules may fade during puberty and adulthood, except for those on the buccal mucosa, which remain into adulthood. No malignant transformation is associated with the melanocytic macules.

Benign hamartomatous polyps with low malignancy risk develop within the first decade of life and are found anywhere along the GI tract, most commonly the jejunum and extraintestinal sites, including but not limited to the bronchus, renal pelvis, and urinary bladder.

Complications of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome include intussusception or obstruction of the GI lumen by the polyps. This may result in abdominal pain or ulceration of the bowels. Up to 69% of patients experience intussusception of the small intestine, with the first event occurring between the ages of 6 and 18 years. GI polyps can also cause chronic bleeding leading to anemia.