Many HIV medicines have adverse effects that may require supportive treatment, monitoring, and adjustment of the HIV regimen.

Nevirapine-induced Hepatotoxicity: Therapy with nevirapine is associated with significant transaminase elevations in 4% to 20% of patients and symptomatic elevations in 1% to 5% of patients. Among the more than 20 antiretroviral agents, nevirapine is perhaps the most common cause of serious, clinically apparent acute liver injury. The clinically apparent liver injury due to nevirapine is as high as 1%, with fatalities ensuing in approximately 0.1% of treated patients. The onset of injury is within the first 6 to 8 weeks of therapy. The presenting symptoms are typically abdominal pain and fatigue, followed by fever, rash, and jaundice. Most patients have a cholestatic hepatic injury pattern, but hepatocellular injury is also observed in severe cases.

Nevirapine hepatotoxicity can be severe and fatal, and cases requiring emergency liver transplantation have been described. Nevirapine should be promptly discontinued if serum aminotransferase levels rise about ten times ULN, persistently above five times ULN or if associated with bilirubin elevations or hepatitis.

Long-term tenofovir is associated with nephrotoxicity and Fanconi syndrome and should be avoided in patients with pre-existing renal impairment. Zidovudine-associated myelosuppression manifests with neutropenia and anemia, and its overdose has been described in neonates receiving HIV prophylaxis. Overdoses of efavirenz presents with neuropsychiatric manifestations. Protease inhibitors have been associated with insulin resistance, type II DM, and lipodystrophy. Mitochondrial toxicity associated with using NRTI leads to myopathy, liver failure, and lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis is fatal if not recognized. In patients with lactic acidosis, NRTIs must be immediately stopped, and clinicians should immediately administer supportive care.