# Introduction

Medical simulation is an effective method to teach high-risk procedural skills, identify latent safety threats in healthcare, improve patient safety, and develop teamwork and communication skills.

The rapid expansion of simulation fellowships has led to a lack of standardization in the fellowship curriculum.

# Function

Medical simulation fellowships serve to train graduates to be effective experts in simulation.

# Issues of Concern

Medical simulation fellowships, likely due to their unaccredited nature and rapid expansion as a specialty, lack standardization of core curricular content.

Medical simulation fellowship graduates, when surveyed, also report varied experiences.

# Curriculum Development

Medical simulation fellowship trainees have common characteristics.  The majority of fellows are physicians who have completed residency training, most commonly in emergency medicine, anesthesiology, or general surgery.

Surveys of medical simulation fellowship program directors have illuminated core curricular objectives and common themes for fellow education. The majority of program directors agreed that fellowship objectives should include medical simulation curriculum development, research and scholarly activity, simulation operations including organization, execution, assessment of simulation activities, principles of debriefing, simulation methodology, educational theory, and administration, including leadership and advocacy.

A consensus project by Frallicciardi et al. utilized emergency medicine simulation experts and sought to define core content for emergency medicine simulation fellowships, which may apply to non-emergency medicine fellowships as well.

# Continuing Education

Continuing education of simulation-fellowship trained faculty remains a critical aspect in the specialty of medical simulation. There are several opportunities for faculty development in medical simulation, including educational courses, workshops, and national and international conferences.

# Clinical Significance

Medical simulation and simulation-based education continue to be at the forefront of medical training and patient safety efforts.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patient safety in healthcare is an area of increasing attention worldwide.