There are over 200 documented disorders of connective tissue.

A rare yet interesting inherited connective tissue disorder is osteogenesis imperfecta, also known as brittle bone disease. It results from an autosomal dominant mutation leading to defective type I collagen synthesis and impaired bone matrix formation. It can present as recurrent fractures (notably long bones or ribs) with minimal trauma in children, which often gets mistaken as child abuse. Some other manifestations include blue sclerae, progressive hearing loss, and brittle, opalescent teeth.

One fascinating area of research that can make a significant impact in the field of orthopedics is the concept of tissue engineering. Biomedical engineers and orthopedic surgeons are working together to create novel strategies to repair and regenerate damaged tissues. For example, there is research being done at the University of Pennsylvania using animal meniscus as a model system to study an engineered implantable platform that would serve for wound healing. The meniscus, being composed of dense connective tissue, is generally too dense to allow stem cells to move to the site of injury and start the repair process. Researchers at Penn have developed a microscopic scaffold that is laced with an enzyme to loosen the matrix in addition to growth factors that attract stem cells. When the researchers placed this microscopic scaffold in damaged meniscus tissue from a cow, the matrix loosened and allowed for bone stem cells to travel to the scaffold and start the repair process. The next phase of research intends to look at large animal models and, eventually, human trials.

Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) is essential for activating the enzyme prolyl hydroxylase, which promotes the hydroxylation step in the formation of the hydroxyproline, an integral constituent of the collagen. Without ascorbic acid, the collagen fibers formed virtually in all tissues of the body are defective and weak. Therefore this vitamin is important for the growth and the strength of the fibers in subcutaneous tissue, cartilage, bone, and teeth. Particularly deficiency of the ascorbic acid for about 20-30 weeks can cause scurvy. One of the most important effects of scurvy is the failure of wounds to heal.