Severe congenital myotonic dystrophy (CDM) will require intensive care mainly for feeding and respiratory support. Gastric/jejunum feeding tube, tracheostomy for mechanical ventilation, and splinting of talipes is occasionally commenced. Genetic counseling and end of life counseling are essential.

Thereafter, a multidisciplinary team approach is critical for symptom management, surveillance, and family support. The following recommendations are acquired from Consensus-based care recommendations for congenital and childhood-onset myotonic dystrophy type 1 published in 2019,

Neurology: disclosure of diagnosis should address five items: diagnosis, prognosis, recurrence risk, treatment plan, and family/community support. Patients should be followed by an experienced multidisciplinary team in the neuromuscular clinic. Routine surveillance every 3 to 4 months for infants less than 12 months, and 4 to 6 months in toddlers of more than 12 months. Allied health teams include nurses, physical and occupational therapists, speech and language therapists, social workers, and genetic counselors. Focusing on the financial burden and psychosocial aspects is vital. Referral to ophthalmology and other services, as discussed below, is recommended.

Respiratory: the primary goal is to monitor respiratory function, decrease secretions, and manage assisted ventilation. There is often an improvement in respiratory strength over time, and consideration for tracheostomy should be careful. Maintenance pulmonary therapy includes cough assist, breathe staking, etc. Pulmonary function testing includes vital capacity (<40% predict nocturnal hypoventilation), spirometry (>20% difference between sitting and supine vital capacity indicates diaphragmatic weakness and is a predictor of nocturnal hypoventilation). Other tests include peak cough flow, polysomnography, and blood gases. Pneumococcal and influenza vaccines are recommended, and palivizumab against RSV for children under two years of age.

Cardiology: arrhythmias, myopathies, and structural cardiac diseases can present with lethargy, dyspnea, pallor, palpitations, and syncope. Twice yearly assessment is required with closer follow-ups in symptomatic patients.

Gastroenterology: serial monitoring of nutrition and growth, feeding, GI motility (GERD, dysmotility, constipation), and oral care is recommended. Feeding tubes with or without Nissen fundoplication, laxatives, antacids, proton pump inhibitors, antiemetics, and probiotics are advisable to consider.

Malocclusion, teeth crowding, caries, and gingival hyperplasia (prolonged NPO) should prompt an orthodontist evaluation.

Orthopedics and Rehabilitation: conservative or surgical interventions are required to manage joint contractures, scoliosis, foot, and spine deformities. Bracing, serial splinting and assisting devices to include walkers, orthotics, scooters, and wheelchairs, might be required to facilitate standing/walking/sitting. Yearly evaluation is recommended, more frequent in younger children to assess motor development and function. Physical activity is essential as children will experience progressive improvements of proximal muscle strength.

Pain Management: Patients with CMD are prone to developing contractures and can lead to painful spasms and joint pain. Adequate management of pain is important to achieve a good quality of life.

Surgical Care: pre-anesthesia assessment, prolonged postoperative monitoring, and combined procedures under single sedation are recommended as children at higher risk for complications. Avoidance of specific agents, including inhaled sedation (halothane), IV sedation (thiopentone), muscle relaxants (succinylcholine, vecuronium), neostigmine, and some chemotherapy, is essential. Propofol-induced pain can induce myotonia.

Psychiatry: Patients with CMD with their disability are prone to develop depression and anxiety and must have a psychiatry/psychologist referral as part of multidisciplinary care.

**Surveillance:**

- Every six months: dentistry assessment

- Every year: ECG, 24-hour Holter, pulmonary function test, fasting glucose/HBA1C

- Every two years: ophthalmologic exam