As mentioned before, inflammatory states can play a determinant factor in CYP expression. Diseases of the liver, such as cirrhosis, can lead to fibrotic scarring causing damage to hepatocytes and decreased metabolic capacity. The clinical effects of cirrhosis can be further related to CYP enzymes. Due to its role in steroidogenesis and metabolism, some of the hormonal effects seen in cirrhotics, such as gynecomastia and spider angiomas, can be related to an aberrant change in CYP activity.

Due to the presence of CYP enzymes in intestinal wall tissue, diseases of the small and large bowels can affect CYP enzymes as well. While the brush-border enzymes and other parts of the intestines play a limited role in the metabolism of drugs and other xenobiotics, their role in drug absorption is their most significant contributing feature. This activity can play a factor in altering the oral bioavailability of drugs, rendering some treatments ineffective or greater than expected, and creating greater responsibility on the clinician's part to dose the medication to provide therapeutic benefit appropriately. Grapefruit juice is an example of a natural compound that affects drug metabolism at the site of the intestinal wall in small amounts. Absorbed by the small intestine, a natural flavonoid found in grapefruits known as naringin acts locally to inhibit CYP3A4 enterocytes, potentially lead to greater plasma concentrations of 3A4-mediated drugs.

Infections, both widespread systemic issues and organ-specific conditions, have been shown to decrease CYP expression as well, through cytokine-mediated downregulation.