Thoracic outlet syndrome has two main classifications of treatment; conservative management or surgical intervention. It is common practice, and most physicians recommend, to attempt conservative management initially, except for patients with severe compression causing debilitating symptoms.

Conservative management consists of lifestyle modifications, physical therapy (PT), and rehabilitation. Lifestyle modifications are crucial to treat and prevent future relapses. Postural correction is a common adjustment that can relieve patients’ symptoms. The way the patient sleeps also warrants attention, as they must avoid sleeping in overhead arm positions. If the patient uses repetitive motions at the workplace, preventative splints and pads are an option to provide support to relieve pressure.

Physical therapy is a mainstay as first-line treatment for patients suffering from TOS. For many patients, the cause of the condition is muscular imbalance. Physical therapy aims to strengthen the muscles around the thoracic outlet to relieve pressure on the impaired structures. Published studies have shown positive outcomes for patients who use this therapy to manage and alleviate their symptoms.

In more severe cases of TOS, structural damage, or significant complications can occur, such as upper extremity DVTs or damage to blood vessels from compression.

Surgical intervention is a controversial method of treatment. In patients with a severe compromise of the vasculature of atrophy of intrinsic muscles of the hand, surgery is the recommended approach. However, without credible and substantial evidence that TOS is the culprit, surgery is not recommended. Due to the nonspecific and vague nature of the symptoms, the majority of cases do not have this evidence. Physicians widely recommend against surgical intervention due to the imprecise diagnostic evidence and potential for complications from surgery. A study found the success rate of lower plexus surgical intervention being 75% while upper plexus was 50%. Another study demonstrated patients with nonspecific neurogenic TOS following surgical intervention reported work disability one year after surgery at 60% and 72.5% at 4.8 years.