A person experiencing tonic-clonic seizures should be rolled over to the recovery position to decrease the risk of asphyxiation and aspiration. Most generalized tonic-clonic seizures resolve spontaneously, and antiseizure medications are not usually required. Patients presenting with seizures are recommended to have intravenous access, in case of prolonged seizures. Metabolic and infectious etiologies should be investigated and treated. Seizures lasting more than 5 minutes or recurrent seizures without return to baseline consciousness meets the definition of status epilepticus. During the first 5 minutes of seizure(stabilization Phase), several interventions are necessary: maintenance of airway, breathing, and circulation; neurological examination, initiation of EEG monitoring if available; maintenance of normoglycemia; procurement of IV access; and completion of necessary laboratory work-up (electrolytes, hematology, toxicology screen, anticonvulsant levels if appropriate). Patients who are critically ill with ongoing seizures should have antiseizure medication administered intravenously to achieve therapeutic plasma levels. A benzodiazepine (intramuscular midazolam, intravenous lorazepam, intravenous diazepam, intranasal midazolam, or rectal diazepam) is the initial therapy of choice. If seizures continue for more than 20 minutes, second-line therapy should be initiated. There is no evidence-based preferred second-line therapy, but one of these three antiepileptic drugs- intravenous fosphenytoin, valproic acid, or levetiracetam, can be given as a single bolus dose.

The decision to start chronic, prophylactic antiseizure medications is individualized based on numerous factors, including the chance of event being a seizure, confirmation of seizure based on history and physical examination, patient stability, and risk of recurrent seizures. Curative epilepsy surgery is an option for patients with focal onset seizures that are refractory to medical therapy but usually not a consideration for generalized seizures.