**Diagnosis**

Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction clinically manifests as pulmonary hypertension. To properly diagnose pulmonary hypertension, clinical criteria must be met in the absence of a primary cause, and the degree of pulmonary hypertension must be determined. Early detection is paramount for long-term morbidity and mortality. The initial process typically begins with an ECG and echocardiogram, followed by pulmonary function tests and cardiac catheterization. Right heart pathology such as hypertrophy should be expected in chronic cases.

**Nonsurgical Treatment**

Therapy is catered to the patient's individual profile. Pharmaceutical regimens are not always indicated for patients; however, anticoagulation is recommended for all diagnoses of idiopathic pulmonary hypertension if there are no contraindications. If pharmacological therapy is indicated, agents such as phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, prostacyclin analogs, endothelin receptor antagonists, and cyclic GMP agonists can be utilized. If pulmonary vasoconstriction is refractory to pharmacological therapy or if the severity of the disease is extreme, surgery may be a treatment option. Patients with obstructive sleep apnea should be screened for pulmonary hypertension, and likewise, pulmonary hypertensive patients should be evaluated for sleep apnea due to the association of both diseases. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) may treat OSA and concurrent pulmonary hypertension to a lesser degree.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical options include atrial septostomy, which relieves right heart pressures via a right to left atrial shunt. Lung transplantation may be explored in severe cases.