Blood and lymph derive from mesoderm and are considered connective tissues.

In addition to the nutritive functions, blood also provides a way of linking to different organs which can communicate with each other through hormones and chemical mediators, guaranteeing the integration of the functions of the organism. The vehicle of immune cells and platelets can reach places where their presence is necessary; for example, areas of inflammation, of antibodies and proteins of the clotting system, and of the numerous transport proteins such as lipoproteins, transferrin, ceruloplasmin, and albumin to which the water-insoluble compounds that circulate in blood are attached.

Blood is connective tissue. It consists of cells and cell fragments in suspension in an extracellular matrix of complex composition. The unusual characteristic of blood is that the extracellular matrix is a liquid, which means that blood is fluid connective tissue. There are two different components in blood that can be separated by centrifugation: (1) a fluid matrix called plasma and (2) corpuscles, which are cells or cell fragments.

Corpuscles are erythrocytes, platelets, and leukocytes. Only leukocytes are complete cells; erythrocytes are anucleate cells, and platelets are cell fragments. Erythrocytes are present in larger quantities than the other elements, which is why they influence the value of the hematocrit much more than leukocytes or platelets, which make up around 1% of the total volume. Like the other elements, Erythrocytes are generated by pluripotent stem cells located in the bone marrow, particularly in ribs, sternum, pelvis, and vertebrae.

There are different kinds of leukocytes. Granulocytes are characterized by the presence of big granules in the cytoplasm. They are visible in the optical microscope after coloring and are divided into neutrophils (with an affinity to neutral coloring), eosinophils (color with acid coloring), basophils (with an affinity to basic coloring). Lymphocytes, which include lymphocytes T, lymphocytes B, and natural killer cells, participate in specific defense: firstly, they recognize a pathogen, target it, and then attack it. The targeted answer implies almost always the production of proteins circulating in the blood, called antibodies. Monocytes are the biggest leukocytes, characterized by a big, horseshoe-shaped nucleus.

**The Lymphatic System**

The lymphatic system effectively removes the excess of interstitial fluids, solutes, and various cells and guides them towards the bloodstream, maintaining the volume of plasma and interstitial fluids in constant balance. The lymphatic system originates from the interstitial tissue called “initial lymphatics,” small capillaries delimited by discontinuous endothelium and basement membrane and low resistance to the flow of fluids and substances (hydrophiles molecules, cells, viruses, and bacteria). They attach to the external surface of the cells through collagen fibrils (collagen type VII). This collagen allows the transmission of mechanical forces towards the lumen of the lymphatic vessel; there is an autonomous contraction in some vessels, thanks to filaments similar to actin. These initial lymphatics become wider, creating collecting ducts that consist of collagen, smooth muscle cells, and elastic fibers. According to recent data, lymphatic vessels have their tone and, probably, their intrinsic contraction autonomy with a high ability of sensibility to flow variation (sensory functions). They are surrounded by nerves of the autonomous system, mainly sympathetic fibers, which could act to better coordinate the lymphatic transport. Lymphatic vessels adapt and change their elastic capacity, improving or worsening the function of lymphatic transport.

There are primary valves formed by the cytoplasmic extent of the adjacent endothelial cells linked by close connections. The valves of these cells protrude towards the inside; this way, what goes in cannot go out. Finally, the intraluminal valves (weaker) are two sheets attached to the opposite sides of the lymphatic vessel and connected to zonules (perimeter junction involving a band that surrounds the cell). Lymph flows due to external mechanical compressions, for example, the one caused by muscle contraction and to its intrinsic contraction abilities.

The lymphatic system is subject to aging, losing its elasticity and creating “aneurysms” over time, or decreasing the number of blood vessels or lymphangions (the lymphatic functional unit). Recent evidence reveals that lymphatic vessels are supported by a nervous system of vagal cholinergic type and sympathetic type, able to modulate the contraction (peristalsis, also helped by the breathing and pulsation of arteries) of vessels endowed with contractile fibers (with an actin-like protein). These thin nerves reach the external layer of the lymphatic vessel and then reach the deepest endothelial layer; this nerve network deteriorates in older people. The presence of both the parasympathetic and sympathetic systems is probably as tension or vessel tone modulators and as a sensor of the vessel's contractile layer.

**The Dural System**

The dural system has a lymphatic system called the glymphatic system. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is drained through the venous system and the lymphatic system.

Dural lymphatic vessels place themselves side by side to the veins and arteries of the brain; more specifically, they come out of the skull, following the reverse path of the pterygopalatine artery and a branch of the internal carotid, and travel through external vein paths to the skull and through cranial nerves that come out of the skull.

Lymphatic vessels follow vein paths of the cribriform plate towards the nasal mucosa, following ways exiting the CSF. The lymphatic system absorbs the interstitial liquid and the CSF from the subarachnoid space and transports it outside of the skull, more specifically, from the base, up to the cervical spine. This mechanism is stronger during sleep.