The mesenteric venous thrombosis treatment objectives are to prevent bowel infarction and avoid recurrent thrombosis in the future. Previously, the initial treatment method was surgery, such as intravenous thrombectomy with thrombolysis. However, more contemporary approaches mainly involve anticoagulation therapy, and adequate follow-up, which are less invasive and have improved patient outcomes. Heparin should be administered as soon as the diagnosis of mesenteric venous thrombosis is established. Once the patient improves, invasive procedures are no longer necessary, and warfarin therapy is introduced. Patients with known reversible conditions complete anticoagulation for approximately 6 months. Patients with prothrombotic states with unknown etiology continue lifelong anticoagulation.

For acute mesenteric venous thrombosis, management includes pain control, bowel rest, and fluid and electrolyte replacement. Red blood cell transfusion may be required for gastrointestinal bleeding. In addition, broad-spectrum antibiotics for gram-negative and anaerobic organisms should be given to patients with septic thrombophlebitis of the mesenteric vein or superimposed sepsis due to bacterial translocation from bowel infarction.

If intestinal infarction is impending or peritoneal signs are present, urgent surgical consultation is warranted. The standard surgical intervention includes exploratory laparotomy with possible bowel resection with or without immediate re-establishment of bowel continuity, depending on the amount of peritoneal contamination and the patient's hemodynamic stability. Second look laparotomy may be required before final abdominal wall closure to assess bowel for continued ischemia further. Efforts are made to conserve as much bowel as possible. Patients at risk for bowel infarction without peritonitis can be treated with interventional radiology. This can include vasodilator therapy with papaverine infusion with or without thrombolytics if the mesenteric vein is not obstructed fully. Those properly treated tend to have a good prognosis in the long term.