Preventing transmission of L. monocytogenes involves avoiding foods commonly contaminated with L. monocytogenes and proper hand-washing technique.

Initial presentation of the patient requires analysis of their hemodynamic status and resuscitating as needed.

If meningitis is suspected, consider doing the following:

- Blood cultures

- Lumbar puncture

- Antibiotics

- CT scan of the head, non-contrast

The antibiotic treatment of choice is intravenous (IV) ampicillin or penicillin G. An alternative treatment is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole if the patient has a penicillin allergy.L. monocytogenes is inherently resistant to all cephalosporin antibiotics.

Since other causes of meningitis include gram-positive organisms such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and gram-negative organisms such as Neisseria meningitidis, Ceftriaxone is added as a treatment regimen. Gentamicin is utilized to mostly cover for gram-negative etiologies of meningitis such as Escherichia coli in the infant population. Finally, Vancomycin is added for Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus coverage.

For broad coverage of bacterial meningitis in populations susceptible to L. monocytogenes, consider the following regimens:

- Less than one month old: Ampicillin plus gentamicin

- Adults with depressed cellular immunity or older than 50 years old: Vancomycin plus ceftriaxone plus ampicillin

For prevention of L. monocytogenes in the general population, the FDA has also approved a variety of different food additives including bacteriophage (Listeria Phage P100) sprays. The spray contains a bacteriophage virus that can eliminate L. monocytogenes. The spray would be primarily utilized on deli meats and cheeses.