The study published by Zarowitz BJ showed pharmacist intervention twice a year identifying and managing high-risk drugs in patients decreased polypharmacy. The pharmacist also provided education about drug safety to the physicians and patients and ways to deprescribe medications. The first intervention led to a 67% reduction in polypharmacy, followed by 39% after the second intervention.

Deprescribing is the systematic approach to identify and discontinue medications in which potential harm outweighs the benefit and medications with unclear benefit. The goal is mainly to reduce the adverse consequences of polypharmacy. This is achieved by multidisciplinary team collaboration and addressing the patient's current needs and goals of care. It is imperative to take a thorough history, including the complete list of medications, and compare it with the current medical issues. Patients should be asked open-ended questions about prescription drugs, including over-the-counter and other home herbal remedies.

The proper indication of each medication and eligibility for deprescribing needs to be assessed based on risk and benefit, ADE, lack of benefit, or no indications, and patient or caregiver goals as deprescription methods vary depending on the patient's goals. Prescribers should correctly state the indications of medical therapy for each medication. The medications with the highest risk should be deprescribed first. The patient or caregiver should be given clear instructions about the deprescribed medication, and short interval follow-ups should be arranged. Dose reduction or medication discontinuation should be made only one medication at a time to assess drug-related issues accurately. Close monitoring and tapering are required as some drugs cause withdrawal symptoms.

Deprescribing protocol should be adopted in few scenarios.

- New symptoms due to ADE

- Presence of terminal illness, dementia, or extreme frail with complete dependence for all care

- High-risk medications

- Preventative medications with no clear-cut benefit

The study done by Laursen J et al. identified a lack of communication among health care workers and specialists, the challenge in handling polypharmacy as the barriers in withdrawing the unnecessary medications.

Inter-physician or inter-health professional communication and effective communication with patients or caregivers should formulate the definitive plan for deprescribing methodology. The study published by Zarowitz has mentioned a more rational approach to drug discontinuation, which includes screening for modifiable risk factors like multiple prescribers, multiple pharmacies, monitor for drug response, and identify the high-risk medication. Inappropriate medications discontinuation can also lead to disease exacerbation and hospital admissions.

Drug discontinuation to improve the quality of life should not be at the expense of making stable chronic conditions unstable. Deprescribing medications will take a considerable amount of time, and multiple changes should not be made at a single point as this can create confusion in this population age group. The main strategy to reduce polypharmacy is to continue revisiting the patient’s medication regimen in consideration of the clinical status and care goals. The potential risk of each medication should be evaluated, and benefits should be assessed as observed in clinical trials of people treated with a drug and compared with controls.