One limitation of Ranson criteria is that other scoring systems are superior in either sensitivity or specificity; in a 2016 meta-analysis, a Ranson score greater than 2 had a median sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 67.4%, respectively. In this same meta-analysis, other scoring systems had better sensitivity or specificity. For example, APACHE-II score greater than 7 had a 100% median sensitivity, while the BISAP score of greater than 2 had 87.6% median specificity. Another meta-analysis of acute pancreatitis severity scores showed that a Ranson score of greater than 2 has a sensitivity of 86.6% and specificity of 87.2%. Ranson et al. also showed a Ranson score greater than 2 had a sensitivity of 84.2% and a specificity of 89.8%.

The second limitation is that the score and severity of acute pancreatitis cannot be determined until 48 hours have passed since admission. This limits its utility in time-sensitive situations like the emergency department. Also, there are 11 parameters, which makes it difficult to use conveniently. Other scoring systems like APACHE-II can be applied at any time and is the scoring system used in critical care. The Bedside Index of Severity in Acute Pancreatitis (BISAP) is another scoring system that can be used at any time and is utilized by emergency medicine physicians.

The third limitation is that the study group in Ranson et al. consisted of an age range of approximately 30 to 75 years old. As a result, Ranson criteria cannot be used for a pediatric or adolescent population. This was studied in Lautz et al., which showed that Ranson criteria had a sensitivity of 51.8% and a negative predictive value of 83.2%.

A study conducted in a high altitude area also found that the use of the current Ranson criteria for the prediction of the outcome of acute pancreatitis may not be valid in their setting of high altitude as their modified score reduced the problem of false warning by Ranson score from 38% to only 15.9%.