MGD is seen as a mild disease by many ophthalmologists and is often overlooked in the early stages. MGD, if ignored and not treated correctly in the early stages, can lead to severe symptoms of evaporative dry eyes. Another common complication associated with MGD can be inflammation of the eyelids. This further predisposes to bacterial infection leading to increased redness of eyelid margins and unsatisfactory tear film quality. Demodex infestation is another complication in untreated MGD cases.

This may cause further severe inflammation and mechanical damage to the meibomian glands. In advanced cases, corneal keratinization may begin, which can be progressive and challenging to reverse with topical medications. There can be dilatation of acini, leading to atrophy of meibomian gland ducts and the glands themselves over time. After this stage, it is challenging to restore the normal functioning of the meibomian glands.

A particular word of caution is needed in MGD patients planned for cataract surgery or any other intraocular procedure. Studies have proven that patients with MGD who undergo cataract surgery are at increased risk of persistent dry eyes and meibomian gland dropouts. These patients are also at risk of penetration of infection from the periocular surfaces if an intraocular procedure is performed. It is of utmost importance for an ophthalmologist to do a detailed examination of the eyelids or associated dry eyes while examining a patient with a cataract to avoid severe complications like endophthalmitis.

Topical antibiotic ointment with lid hygiene might be sufficient to prevent grave complications like endophthalmitis in patients with MGD. Additional complications resulting from prolonged corticosteroids like elevated intraocular pressures or cataracts should also be considered. Patients should be shifted to alternative regimens and closely followed up to prevent further complications.