The first outbreak of Marburg virus disease (MVD) occurred in August 1967 in Marburg and Frankfurt, Germany, and Belgrade, Yugoslavia.Cercopithecus aethiops) imported from Uganda. 31 cases were observed to develop severe disease, 7 of which died (23% case fatality rate). Because most cases occurred in Marburg, the virus was named after that city. During the 1967 outbreak, a possible sexual transmission was suspected during the convalescence phase, as a virus antigen was detected in the patient's semen.

The following case was eight years later, when an Australian traveler who had hitchhiked through Zimbabwe was hospitalized in St. Johannesburg, South Africa, infected two other people, and died.

The genomic analysis likely discovered only a single introduction of the virus into the population at risk and subsequent human-to-human transmission with no identified source of infection. According to the CDC, other countries reporting outbreaks of Marburg disease include Guinea, Kenya, and Serbia.

The animal reservoir of MVD is the Egyptian fruit bat (Rousettus aegyptiacus), which demonstrates little to no clinical disease.

It is unclear whether the Egyptian fruit bat is the only exclusive reservoir for MARV or if other bat species could also perpetuate the virus. The virus spreads from animal hosts, either from bats or another intermediate host such as non-human primates to humans, but the exact route and specific fluid involved is unknown. The transmission through person-to-person contact can occur through blood or other infected bodily fluids (e.g., saliva, sweat, urine, stool, breast milk, etc.).