**Chiasmal Syndrome**

"Chiasmal syndrome" is an umbrella term for signs and symptoms associated with chiasmal pathology of any etiology. Causes of chiasmal compression include:

- Pituitary macroadenoma (most common)

- Craniopharyngioma

- Meningioma

- Optic nerve glioma

- Pilocytic astrocytoma

- Anterior communicating artery aneurysm

- Internal carotid artery aneurysm

Clinical findings often overlap despite differing pathological mechanisms. Blurred vision is the most common presenting symptom, followed by peripheral visual field loss. Other findings may include optic disc changes, headache, relative afferent pupillary defect, and reduced color vision.

Standard automated perimetry (SAP) can be used to detect visual field defects that result from lesions in the optic chiasm. Research has found SAP to be more accurate in earlier detection of lesions than Goldmann visual field testing.

- Bitemporal hemianopsia - bilateral temporal visual field loss that respects the vertical midline. Results from compression of decussating nasal fibers within the chiasm. The “textbook” appearance of this defect is a complete temporal scotoma that is perfectly symmetric between both eyes. Clinically, compressive lesions vary in location and often involve other adjacent axons and/or do not affect all nasal axons. Therefore, bitemporal hemianopsia should not be ruled out even if some of the temporal hemifield is spared or if the defect crosses the vertical midline.

- Junctional scotoma -central scotoma in one eye and temporal field defect (usually superior) in the contralateral eye. Results from compression of the chiasm and ipsilateral pre-chiasmal optic nerve. Most often caused by lateral chiasmal compression secondary to meningioma.

**Pituitary Adenoma**

Pituitary adenomas are tumors of the pituitary gland, an endocrine organ responsible for the secretion of hormones that regulate growth and the reproductive system. They are generally considered benign but may enlarge over time. Tumors are classified as microadenomas (<10 mm in size) or macroadenomas (>10 mm in size). Larger lesions are more likely to disrupt proximal structures, particularly the optic chiasm superiorly, causing compression of nerve fibers and corresponding visual field loss. Lesions less than 20 mm in size are unlikely to cause visual impairment.

Over time, slow tumor growth eventually causes compression of the entire chiasm and corresponding bitemporal visual field loss. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the preferred method of imaging pituitary tumors, determining lesion characteristics, and predicting surgical outcomes. Treatment failure to relieve chiasmal compression is highly likely in large lesions (>40 mm in size) and fibrotic lesions. Conversely, tumors with cystic/necrotic and hemorrhagic components are associated with high success rates of chiasmal decompression.

**Optic Nerve Glioma**

Glial cells are non-neuronal support cells that provide physical and metabolic support to neurons and play a crucial role in maintaining proper homeostatic balance. They are found within the central nervous system, including the optic nerve. Oligodendrocytes are the primary glial cells in the optic pathway and act to support axons of RGCs as they travel toward the visual cortex. Malignant glial cell tumors (gliomas) of the optic pathway are common in the pediatric population (3 to 5% of all pediatric brain tumors) and are even more common in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (6.6 to 20%). Chiasmal gliomas may result in visual field loss (possibly bitemporal hemianopsia), nystagmus, and decreased visual acuity. Chiasmal tumor location poses are uniquely challenging to treat – anatomical proximity to the hypothalamus increases the risk of inadvertent damage and severe complications. Surgery is generally reserved for cases with a high risk of severe vision loss. Other treatment options include chemotherapy, corticosteroids, and radiation.

**Ocular Albinism/Oculocutaneous Albinism**

Ocular albinism is an X-linked inherited condition resulting from a mutation of the GPR143 gene responsible for the maturation of the protein melanin.

Rather than receiving an equal distribution of visual information in both eyes, each brain hemisphere receives abnormal high visual input from the contralateral eye.

**Achiasmia**

Although its name suggests the complete absence of the optic chiasm, achiasmia describes a congenital reduction in the number of decussating fibers within the optic chiasm. The complete absence of the optic chiasm is more appropriately termed chiasmal aplasia. The pathogenesis of achiasmia is thought to result from abnormalities in the biochemical molecules responsible for axonal guidance during development (see Embryology section). Clinical findings include reduced visual acuity, stereopsis, and seesaw nystagmus; visual fields and optic nerve appearance are normal.

**Non-Decussating Retinal Fugal Fibre Syndrome (NDRFFS)**

A congenital condition resulting from the isolated absence of decussating chiasmal fibers. It is characterized by combined horizontal and see-saw nystagmus and abnormal asymmetry in monocular VEP (similar to achiasmia).