Penile pearly papules are flesh-colored or white, dome-shaped or filiform papules. Their size ranges from 1 mm to 4 mm. Pearly penile papules are arranged in rows around the corona of the glans penis, mainly on its dorsal aspect. There can be one row or many rows. The papules may encircle the entire glans and even have ectopic locations on the penile shaft.

The differential diagnosis includes genital warts, molluscum contagiosum, lichen nitidus, and sebaceous hyperplasia of the penis.

Genital warts are viral tumors induced by human papillomavirus. However, no viral particles are found in pearly penile papules. Nevertheless, the coexistence of both conditions may be observed, and genital warts might be seen in about 1% of males with pearly penile papules.

Molluscum contagiosum may be located on the penis as a sexually transmitted infection. However, these lesions have a larger size and are umbilicated in their center. They rarely have an exclusive location on the corona of the glans.

Lichen nitidus may be limited to the genital area. It manifests as small translucent papules which may involve the glans. However, lichen nitidus lesions are smaller and are usually not limited to the corona of the glans.

Sebaceous hyperplasia is usually seen on the face, but rare cases of penile location were reported. Lesions usually occur on the ventral aspect of the penile shaft and are white to yellow papules.

In the case of diagnostic difficulty, dermoscopy and histopathology are helpful tools.

On dermoscopic examination, penile pearly papules are arranged according to a grape-like or a cobblestone pattern. They exhibit a white or pink color, with central comma-like, hairpin, or dotted vessels. Such a vascular pattern is not specific, as it may be observed in genital warts. However, pearly penile papules, unlike genital warts, do not show desquamation which manifests as an irregular reflection.

Histopathologically, pearly penile papules share the same features as angiofibroma. Microscopic examination shows an acanthotic epidermis, with elongated rete ridges, overlying dilated vessels located in the papillary dermis. There is usually a dermal proliferation of stellate fibroblasts and a marked concentric fibrosis.