# Continuing Education Activity

Brachytherapy is a procedure to treat and manage cancers. It acts by placing sources containing radioactive isotopes that emit radiation for a specified distance. It can be used as monotherapy or in conjunction with other cancer management. Brachytherapy can be delivered by several means, including intraluminal, intracavitary, and multi-catheter interstitial (MIB). Sources that are permanently or temporarily implanted within the tumor are labeled as interstitial brachytherapy, while sources placed near the tumor are considered plesiotherapy. Brachytherapy is different from other forms of radiation therapy because it allows for administering higher doses of radiation, minimizing insult to surrounding organs. This activity outlines the role and treatment considerations of brachytherapy in managing patients who are undergoing cancer treatment.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of brachytherapy medical conditions and emergencies.
- Review the appropriate evaluation for the use of brachytherapy.
- Outline the management options for brachytherapy.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance brachytherapy and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Brachytherapy (BT) is a radiotherapy technique where radioactive devices are inserted near tumors to safely deliver high doses of radiation to eliminate and shrink tumors. Brachy- means short distance in Greek. It was first used in 1901 by Alexandre Danlos and Paul Bloch, who received a radioactive sample from Marie Sklodowska Curie and her husband, Pierre. Danlos and Bloch were attempting to treat lupus. In 1903, Margareth A. Cleaves first used brachytherapy to treat cervical cancer. Since these initial brachytherapy procedures, this technique has changed the treatment approach for breast, cervical, and prostate cancer. Brachytherapy is different from other forms of radiation therapy because it allows for administering higher doses of radiation, minimizing insult to surrounding organs.

# Function

**Function**

Brachytherapy can be delivered by several means, including intraluminal, intracavitary, and multi-catheter interstitial (MIB). Sources that are permanently or temporarily implanted within the tumor are labeled as interstitial brachytherapy, while sources placed near the tumor are considered plesiotherapy.

**Equipment**

Depending on the type of implantation performed, certain types of delivery equipment will be required. After-loading technology made it easier and safer to deliver radioactive isotopes without exposing the staff to excessive amounts of radiation. Manual after-loaders are typically used in low-dose-rate brachytherapy with low-energy radioisotopes. The most well-known is the Mick ® Applicator, used for interstitial permanent seed implantation for prostate brachytherapy. It allows for the precise placement of loose seeds into the prostate.

Remote afterloading is commonly used for high-dose-rate brachytherapy with high-energy radioisotopes. A remote afterloader consists of a shielded safe where the high-activity radioactive source resides. They require a dedicated shielded room with audio/visual surveillance. The source is connected to a super elastic nickel-titanium wire that allows it to negotiate curved pathways without getting stuck. The wire is attached to a stepper motor which allows the source to allow the source to be advanced by a fixed distance and predefined dwell times with an accuracy of 1 mm. The source can travel at a maximum speed of 50 cm/second and dwell for as little as 0.1 seconds. The afterloader also contains several indexed channels that can accommodate multiple transfer tubes to the applicator. The source can exit any channel as the control console dictates outside the room. This allows the staff to deliver treatment without incurring high dose rate exposure. It has widespread use in brachytherapy-capable departments and can be used for several disease sites. Remote afterloading has resulted in a substantial reduction of staff radiation exposure.

**Applicators**

Applicators are designed to house the radioactive isotope during treatment. They can be engineered for specific clinical scenarios or custom-made. Below is a list of applicators that may be utilized, but it is by no means exhaustive.

**Vaginal Cylinder**

One of the simplest applicators is the vaginal cylinder used for uterine cancer or post-operative patients with cervical cancer. It is essentially a long tube with varying diameters based on the patient's anatomy. It has a channel in the central part of the tube, allowing for the introduction of a radioactive seed from an HDR afterloader to be used. There are also multichannel cylinders that allow for more sculpting of the dose.

**Tandem and Ring/Ovoid**

Other radiation applicators include the tandem and ring or tandem and ovoid, which are used in intact cervical cancer cases. The tandem is inserted in the cervical canal and uterus while the ovoid or ring surrounds the fornices. Radiation can be delivered using high or low dose rates.

**"Y"-Applicator**

The Rotte-Y-applicator consists of two divergent catheters inserted into the uterine cavity. It is most often used in the treatment of medically inoperable endometrial cancer.

**Valencia Applicator**

Valencia applicators are used in the treatment of skin cancers. They are composed of tungsten shielding and a flattening filter. They are placed over the skin tumor with a margin. It allows for a high dose rate of superficial radiation to be delivered.

**Breast Brachytherapy Applicators**

The most widely used intracavitary breast brachytherapy applicators include the single-channel Mammosite® and multichannel Strut Adjusted Volume Implant (SAVI ®). These allow for accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) in select patients with early-stage breast cancer. They allow for a high dose distribution around the surgical cavity with a margin with rapid dose falloff in the surrounding breast.

**Plaque and Sheet Applicators**

Plaque brachytherapy is typically utilized in the context of ocular malignancy. These are typically low-dose rate delivery and are sutured to the eye under anesthesia. The two most commonly used plaques are Iodine-125 and Ruthenium-106. The I-125 plaques consist of a backing made of inert metal such as gold, with I-125 seeds placed onto the wall of the plaque. Ruthenium-106 plaques are made in various sizes, with the Ru-106 electrodeposited onto a concave silver backing. The plaques are usually kept in place for several days, and the patient must remain in relative isolation for that time.

Using prefabricated radioactive sheets for low-dose-rate brachytherapy is a relatively new development. Before this, low-dose-rate meshes were used, but spacing and orientation made it difficult to maintain dose homogeneity.

**Interstitial Needle Templates**

Interstitial catheter placement can be performed alone or with the use of a template. They can be used in a wide range of clinical scenarios. This involves the placement of needles directly into the tumor, which allows for direct radiation delivery. The needles act as channels for accommodating the radioactive isotope, which dwells in the catheter for a pre-specified amount of time. Clinical applications include but are not limited to prostate cancer, penile cancer, sarcomas, gynecologic malignancies, nasal cavity tumors, oral cavity tumors, and urethral cancer. Syed-Neblett template is used for interstitial placement of catheters in gynecological malignancies. It consists of a rectangular template with regularly spaced openings and a central obturator that allows for the accommodation of a cylinder.

**Dosing**

The dosing used in brachytherapy varies based on the type of tumor being treated, radioisotope, dose rate (LDR or HDR), number of treatments planned if using HDR, and timing (adjuvant or definitive). Please consult individual disease articles for more details.

**Dose Rate**

Brachytherapy is typically described by the rate at which the dose is delivered. Three categories have been established to categorize brachytherapy. These include High-dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy delivered at >12 Gy/hour, Pulsed dose rate (PDR) delivered at 10-30 minute intervals at a rate of 0.5-1.0 Gy/hour, Medium dose rate (MDR) offered at 2-12 Gy/hour, and Low dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy delivered at 0.4-2.0 Gy/hour. The advantages and disadvantages of LDR and HDR systems are listed in the table below.

**Low Dose Rate**

**High Dose Rate**

**Advantages**

**Disadvantages**

**Advantages**

**Disadvantages**

Single Treatment

Higher radiation exposure to staff

Lower radiation exposure to staff

More maintenance required

No source exchanges needed

The total dose delivered over hours to days

No need to order isotopes for each treatment

Source exchanges needed regularly

No shielding required



Radiation exposure to public

Fractionated treatments possible

Shielding required

Lower costs

Cannot adjust plan once delivered

Can adjust plan between fractions

Higher costs

**Isotopes**

Several radioactive isotopes may be used for brachytherapy. These isotopes are artificially manufactured using a nuclear reactor. A table of the most commonly used radioisotopes is listed in the table below. Iridium-192 is the most commonly utilized radioisotope for HDR brachytherapy. The LDR isotopes tend to have lower energy, decay by electron capture, and have far lower dose rates. A list of common radioisotopes used is listed in the table below.

**Isotope**

**Decay Mode**

**Mean Photon Energy (KeV)**

**Half-Life (Days)**

**Use**

Iridium-192

β emission (96%)

Electron Capture (4%)

380

74

HDR

Iodine-125

Electron Capture

28

60

LDR

Palladium-103

Electron Capture

21

17

LDR

Cesium-131

Electron Capture

29

10

LDR

When using LDR brachytherapy that requires permanent implantation of loose radioactive seeds, the number of seeds must be estimated pre-operatively. This is most commonly performed for prostate cancer, but other LDR techniques, such as eye plaque brachytherapy, require it as well. Nomograms such as the Memorial dimension averaging method, as well as several others, have been used in the treatment of prostate cancer. In general, there is an inverse relationship between the dose rate and prostate volume.

**Image Guided Brachytherapy and Treatment Planning Systems**

With the advent of advanced computing technology, more precise dosimetry became possible with CT, MRI, or even ultrasound-based brachytherapy planning. These advances are most evident in treating breast, cervical, and prostate cancer. Computational methods have significantly changed brachytherapy planning as it allows for 3-dimensional target definition, dwell weight optimization, and generation of isodose calculation. Unlike the older systems, which used idealized geometries and heuristics, CT-based planning allows for the evaluation of dose distribution in real-time in the patient using the actual implant geometry. Despite these advances, several assumptions derived from previous systems, such as 1 cm uniform spacing, uniform loading, and implanting at the boundary of the tumor, persist.

MRI-guided brachytherapy has established a foothold in the treatment of cervical cancer.

The use of ultrasound in the practice of brachytherapy for planning and directing needle placement is widespread. It is more cost-effective and does not result in additional radiation exposure compared to CT. Additionally, it is far less time-consuming than an MRI. Trans-rectal ultrasound-guided prostate brachytherapy is considered the standard imaging modality.

Before the widespread use of computerized brachytherapy planning and remote afterloading, the planning process relied on the use of several empirical systems. These were devised in an era when radium-226 was the dominant radioisotope. The most well-known systems are the Manchester system, the Quimby system, and the Paris system.

The Manchester system was devised in the 1930s by Herbert Parker and Rolston Paterson. The system's rules were designed to ensure dose homogeneity within the target by preferentially concentrating the radioactivity in the periphery of the implant. The ideal ratio of the periphery to core radioactivity varies with implant area (2:1 <25 cm, 1:1 25-100 cm, 1:2 >100 cm) with interstitial needles spaced 1 cm apart. The system is utilized for planar and volume implants. The amount of radioactivity required for the implant is dictated by the area of the planar implant or the volume. If the rules of the Manchester system are followed closely, then no more than a +/-10% deviation from the prescribed dose within the target area or volume can be expected.

The Quimby system was devised around the same time as the Manchester system. In contrast to the Manchester system, it uses equal-intensity implants distributed uniformly throughout the implant. Its origins and rules are not clearly defined, but the dose is specified 3-5mm from the periphery of the implant, with central doses 25-30% hotter than the prescription dose. Implants are spaced 1 to 2 cm apart. They can be used for planar and volume implants. The required radioactivity for the specified dose is ascertained by consulting a Quimby table expressed in milligram-hours to deliver a specified dose of 1000 cGy, and a multiplier determines the cumulative activity required. Generally, these implants tend to have a far higher central dose than the Manchester system.

In the 1960s, the Paris system was devised with the introduction of new iridium-192-based afterloading techniques and the phasing out of radium implants. This system requires the target's thickness, length, and width to be specified. The spacing is dictated by the thickness of the implant and the number of sources by the cross-sectional area. The linear density of the implant must be uniform. The prescription dose is 85% of the basal dose. The basal dose is calculated by averaging the minimum dose between adjacent equidistant sources in the transverse plane. Originally, the Paris system was only meant to address single and double-plane implants. As a result, the maximum thickness that can be treated with this system is 2.5 cm. Modifications to the Paris system are required for large-volume implants, but this is beyond the scope of the article.

**Radiobiology of Brachytherapy**

Brachytherapy's advantages over conventional external beam treatments include the highly conformal, high dose rate treatment with short overall treatment times. Ionizing radiation functions by inducing single and double-strand DNA damage leading to cell death by apoptosis or mitotic catastrophe, with the most sensitive period being the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. In classical radiobiology, the tumor response to radiation is based on reoxygenation, repair, redistribution, and repopulation, dubbed "The Four Rs." The speed of these processes and the rate of dose delivery (LDR vs. HDR) dictate the range over which they occur and their relative importance. Repopulation is generally irrelevant if the treatment time is very short. Sublethal damage repair is more relevant at low dose rates as the rate of repair may be closer to the rate of DNA damage accumulation in contrast to high dose rates where the damage rate far exceeds the cell's ability to repair the DNA damage. Reoxygenation and redistribution play a small role in LDR brachytherapy and are thought to increase cell sensitivity to radiation.

The biological effects of brachytherapy can be modeled using a modified linear quadratic model (LQ model), which relates cell survival to dose. Due to the differences in dose rate, sublethal damage repair plays a more significant role in LDR than in HDR brachytherapy. LDR brachytherapy dose rates are in the range of 0.4-2 Gy/hr, and the delivery is continuous compared to HDR brachytherapy, where delivery occurs over several minutes and has a time gap of hours to days between fractions. For LDR techniques, a G function is introduced, with a value ranging from 0-1, which accounts for damage repair and reduces cell sensitivity to radiation. The G function depends on the rate of DNA repair, irradiation time, and half-time for repair. For HDR treatments, the value of G is set to 1. Some LQ models may also take into account reoxygenation and redistribution, which can increase the sensitivity to radiation.

Despite the theoretical radiobiological differences between HDR and LDR, the two treatment approaches have demonstrated comparable clinical outcomes regarding tumor control and toxicity.

# Issues of Concern

Brachytherapy is an invasive procedure. Outcomes are dependent on the skill of the provider.

Like other radiotherapy modalities, there is caution with radiating essential organs near tumor sites. If a source becomes dislodged from the patient, the team must notify the surrounding staff and place it into a lead container.

Patients require counseling that smoking can increase the prevalence of radiation side effects. Smoking can also decrease the efficacy of brachytherapy and other cancer treatments. Post brachytherapy treatment, there is an increased risk for bone fractures, including the pelvis. Patients, especially women, should be regularly assessed with bone density screening.

# Clinical Significance

**Management of Malignancies**

There are multiple clinical scenarios in which brachytherapy can be utilized. It can be used as definitive therapy alone or in conjunction with external beam radiotherapy. Several treatment guidelines exist, but the American Brachytherapy Society Guidelines provide a comprehensive overview of treatment indications, technical requirements, and current evidence for the most common disease sites.

**Gynecological Brachytherapy**

**Cervical Cancer**

Brachytherapy in cervical cancer is an essential part of treatment. It is typically delivered as a boost with external beam radiotherapy and would be appropriate for patients with Stage IB3-IVA disease. However, brachytherapy alone may be considered for very early-stage disease in patients unable to undergo surgery. It is typically delivered using HDR, and there are several applicators that can be used depending on the clinical scenario. These include tandem and ring, tandem and ovoid, cylinder with tandem, and Syed-Neblett template. When used as a boost, the typical dosing assumes that the patient has already or will receive 45 Gy to the pelvis. Fractionation schemes include 7 Gy x 4, 6 Gy x 5, 5.5 Gy x 5, and 5 Gy x 6.

Treatment planning is typically CT based, although MRI planning may also be performed as it offers superior soft tissue delineation.

**Uterine Cancer**

Vaginal cylinder brachytherapy has established itself as a mainstay of adjuvant treatment in patients with endometrial cancer. Adjuvant treatment of high and intermediate-risk endometrial cancer with radiotherapy has been extensively studied over several decades. Initial trials with whole pelvic radiotherapy were found to reduce the risk of local recurrence in the pelvis by approximately 10%.

The vaginal cylinder applicator is typically a single channel with various predetermined lengths and diameters (range 2.0-4.0 cm).

Several dose fractionation schemes can be utilized. In the adjuvant setting, the most common schemes are 7 Gy x 3 prescribed to 5 mm depth or 6 Gy x 5 to the vaginal surface. If it is used with external beam treatments, then 6 Gy x 3 or 6 Gy x 2 prescribed to the surface can be used. Although HDR is the most common, LDR can be employed as well and is typically delivered at 100 cGy/hour to the vaginal surface.

Medically inoperable endometrial cancer is another challenging area that may also benefit from brachytherapy. The Rotte-“Y” applicator is a two-channel applicator placed along the wall of the uterus and can be used in conjunction with external beam radiotherapy. Radiation delivery is usually performed with HDR to a dose of 20 Gy in 5 fractions when used with external beam radiation and 35 Gy in five fractions when used alone.

**Breast**

Accelerated partial breast radiation (APBI) allows for a shorter course of treatment with excellent rates of local control in patients with early-stage breast cancer compared to conventional external beam radiotherapy. Mammosite® and SAVI®. These applicators are implanted after the breast-conserving surgery and placed in the surgical cavity. APBI using brachytherapy delivers a dose of 34 Gy in ten fractions given twice a day 6 hours apart. Local control rates are around 4.6% at ten years, comparable to external beam methods.

The ASTRO consensus guidelines provide detailed selection criteria for appropriate APBI candidates.

**Genitourinary Cancers**

**Prostate Brachytherapy**

Prostate brachytherapy features prominently in the treatment of prostate cancer. It may be used as monotherapy in low and favorable intermediate-risk prostate cancer or as a boost when combined with external beam radiotherapy in high-risk disease. In addition, some centers have used brachytherapy for salvage therapy in recurrent cases. LDR and HDR modalities have both been utilized with excellent outcomes. Contraindications to prostate brachytherapy include distant metastasis, unacceptable operative risk, large prostate urethral defects, ataxia telangiectasia, absence of rectum, and limited life expectancy.

The procedure requires the placement in interstitial needles into the prostate using a transperineal approach under trans-rectal ultrasound guidance (TRUS). Ultrasound imaging serves not only as a guide for needle placement but also as a means of treatment planning. This technique is used for both LDR and HDR brachytherapy. LDR typically uses a Mick applicator ® which is used to manually load loose radioactive seeds in the prostate or preloaded needles with seeds attached to a ribbon. HDR uses a remote after loader in a shielded room to protect staff from higher levels of radiation exposure.

Dosing varies depending on the dose delivery technique. When using HDR, monotherapy doses include but are not limited to 9.5 Gy x 4 and 12-13.5 x 2.

As monotherapy, the biochemical control rates range from 85 to 97% at five years for low and intermediate-risk prostate cancer.

Treatment-related toxicity includes urethritis, urinary retention, erectile dysfunction, prolonged use of an indwelling catheter, and rectal urgency. Some of these symptoms will lessen with time, but certain side effects such as erectile dysfunction may persist. Late toxicity such as rectal fistulas and urinary incontinence are extremely rare.

**Penile Cancer**

Penile cancer represents 1% of all male malignancies with squamous cell carcinoma being the most common histology. Surgical techniques typically consist of a partial or total penectomy with or without an inguinal lymph node dissection. Penile preservation techniques are preferred due to the adverse psychological impact of a penectomy. The implant is typically an interstitial implant. Indications include T1-T3 tumor without penile shaft involvement and <4c m in size. It may also be employed post-operatively if there are positive margins. This can be accomplished with PDR or LDR to a total dose of 60 Gy. The 5-year penile preservation rate was 86% with an overall survival rate of 78%.

**Urethral Cancer**

Brachytherapy can be used to treat males and females with urethral cancer. Multiple techniques have been described in the literature, including interstitial implants, intracavitary, and intraluminal. The dose can be delivered with LDR to 60-70Gy over a 3-5 day period or as a boost 20-25Gy with an external beam. Seven-year overall survival was found to be 41%.

**Ocular Cancers**

**Ocular Melanoma**

Vision-sparing treatments in the setting of ocular malignancies were studied extensively with the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS). The COMS “Medium trial” (height 2.5 - 10.0 mm and diameter <=16 mm), which randomized patients that received enucleation or episcleral plaque brachytherapy to a dose of 85 Gy with I-125 demonstrated no statistical difference in overall survival (59% vs. 57%) or distant metastasis (17% vs. 21%).

**Retinoblastoma**

Plaque brachytherapy may also be used in retinoblastoma treatment, typically as a secondary option after failure of systemic therapy or other focal therapies.

Treatment complications include cataract formation, iritis, uveitis, retinal detachment, optic neuropathy, retinal hemorrhage, scleral necrosis, intraocular vasculopathy, painful eye, and dry eye.

**Central Nervous System Cancers**

Recurrent gliomas are particularly challenging to treat as therapeutic options are limited, and the prognosis is generally poor. There are several brachytherapy options that have emerged in the last two decades to allow for additional radiation to be given for surgically operable recurrent gliomas. The GliaSite ® system is an inflatable catheter that can be inserted into a resection cavity and inflated with a solution of I-125 or Cs-131 allowed to dwell in the cavity over several days.

GammaTile ® is a more recent development in brachytherapy. It is a permanent Cs-131 implant embedded in a resorbable collagen matrix that can be placed within a surgical cavity.

**Head and Neck Cancers**

**Recurrent Nasopharyngeal cancers**

Nasopharyngeal cancers are typically treated with radiotherapy +/- chemotherapy. Local recurrence rates range from 3 to 7% at five years.****When they recur, the patient may require salvage surgery which can be extensive and morbid. In some cases, the tumor may not be adequately accessible for resection, and other techniques may be needed. Since the majority of these patients would have received radical radiotherapy previously, re-irradiation would need to be exceptionally conformal to minimize doses to normal structures, which likely received doses close to their tolerances. The Rotterdam Applicator, developed in the mid-nineties, is to be used with an HDR afterloader system and placed into the nasopharynx via the nasal cavity.

**Oral Cavity Cancers**

Brachytherapy has been used in the oral cavity as both a boost and a monotherapy. External beam is limited by the dose delivered to the mandible, and brachytherapy can allow for a more conformal dose. Implants are typically performed freehand with interstitial needles placed under anesthesia. The most common sites are oral tongue, lip, and floor-of-mouth tumors. It can be delivered using LDR or HDR. LDR dosing is typically given as monotherapy to 60-70 Gy or 20-35 Gy as a boost after 50 Gy of external beam radiotherapy.

**Sarcoma**

Brachytherapy for sarcoma treatment is typically utilized in the post-operative setting. Interstitial free needle implants are placed in the surgical bed at the time of resection. Brachytherapy in this setting carries the advantage of being able to deliver higher doses than with an external beam and can shorten treatment times. Both LDR and HDR have been used in this setting. Indications include positive margins, close margins, and local recurrence.

**Skin Cancers**

Superficial brachytherapy is one of several treatment modalities available to treat non-melanoma skin cancers in patients that refuse or are unable to undergo surgical removal. Generally, this is utilized for relatively small tumors (T1-T2) on the face or areas that would require extensive surgery to remove. Several radiation delivery devices have been introduced for superficial radiotherapy including electron beam radiation, superficial X-rays, orthovoltage x-rays, and HDR brachytherapy. For brachytherapy, there are several applicators available, including Valencia applicators, Leipzig applicators, and Freiberg flaps that can deliver superficial radiation. Custom applicators may be made as well. More recently, HDR electronic brachytherapy has emerged that allows for HDR treatments to be delivered without the need for dedicated treatment vaults, shielding, or for radioactive isotopes. Electronic brachytherapy can treat lesions up to 5mm in thickness. However, long-term data on the efficacy of electronic surface brachytherapy is lacking.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional communication is especially crucial for brachytherapy. Identifying tumors and planning the best route for administration and duration of administration requires the cooperation of many interprofessional teams. Radiologists can assist with using MRI imaging to map and locate 3-dimensional regions for the tumor.

Nurses in oncology services are essential patient advocates.