Several treatment options have been proposed for thumb sucking. Treatment options can range from counseling to the patient and parent, using different mouth appliances, implementing behavior-modification techniques such as advice and incentives for changing behavior, and applying a nasty tasting substance to the children's thumbs myofunctional therapy or combinations of these treatments. A Cochrane review done in 2015 showed that using an orthodontic brace or a psychological intervention (such as the use of positive or negative reinforcement) or both was more likely to lead to cessation of the habit than no treatment.

There are several options available with orthodontic appliances, including palatal cribs, spurs, palatal bars, hay rakes, and cage-type appliances.

Nonsurgical and non-orthodontic interventions that have been studied for treatment in cases of an anterior open bite originated from thumb sucking include orofacial myofunctional therapy and stomahesive wafers. Orofacial myofunctional therapy involves a set of exercises that reeducate muscles involved in swallowing, speech, and resting posture. A study done by Huang et al. included patients from 4 to 12 years who presented with dental habits utilized stomahesive wafers as therapy: these were placed on the incisive papilla to guide the tongue to rest in that position.

With the technology arising, there are new interventions proposed. Krishnappa et al. published a case of an 8-year-old male with a persistent thumb sucking habit. They used a device with an alarm activated when the child placed the finger into the mouth. The alarm was placed in a wristwatch, making it attractive to the child to wear. The child was followed for 15 months and was found to have a decreased frequency of thumb sucking and discontinued the habit totally by 5 months. He was instructed to continue wearing the device for six more months to avoid relapse.