The evaluation and diagnosis of trisomy 18 begin in the antenatal period. Maternal serum screening can show low levels of alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin, and unconjugated estriol.

Post-natally, phenotypic variation, and clinical presentation will guide the evaluation. Diagnostic imaging studies, such as ultrasonography, can be used to assess for intracranial, cardiac (echocardiogram), intraabdominal, and renal abnormalities; but circumstances will dictate the study of choice.

Lastly, though typically a clinical diagnosis, karyotyping and microarray testing can confirm trisomy and more detailed information about mosaicism, respectively.

**Health Surveillance Guidelines for Edwards Syndrome**

- The growth of the child with Edwards syndrome should be assessed in each visit and plotted on the specific growth charts.

- Sucking or swallowing problems with a radiographic swallow study can be helpful if needed to consider the ability of the child to protect the airway.

- Cognitive and motor development should be assessed in each visit, and referral to early intervention if needed is recommended.

- Ophthalmologist referral is needed at birth to rule out eye malformation and later in childhood to look for refractive errors and photophobia. Audiologist referral is needed at birth to rule out sensorineural hearing loss.

- A complete neurologic exam is made in each visit to look for hypertonia or hypotonia, seizures, and optimal referral to a neurologist is recommended.

- Echocardiogram at birth to look for congenital heart disease and pulmonary hypertension.

- Abdominal ultrasound is recommended at birth to rule out renal malformations and every six months till adolescence to look for neoplasms like Wilms tumor or hepatoblastoma.

- Orthopedic examination in every visit to look for joint contractures or scoliosis.

- Pulmonologist referral and a sleep study are recommended if obstructive or central apnea is encountered.

- Gastroenterologist and nutritionist referral are made if need of enteral nutrition or issues with Gastroesophageal reflux is faced.