Intravenous augmentation via the infusion of pooled human alpha-1 antitrypsin, which is an alpha-1 proteinase inhibitor. This therapy is the most direct and efficient means of elevating AAT levels in the plasma and the lung interstitium.

The American Thoracic Society suggests weekly augmentation therapy with human pooled AAT for individuals who have plasma levels of AAT less than 11 micromols/L and established airflow obstruction, defined as an FEV1 less than 80% predicted. On the other hand, the Canadian Thoracic Society suggests keeping AAT augmentation therapy for AAT-deficient patients (AAT level less than 11 micromols/L) with an FEV1 of 25% to 80% predicted who have quit smoking and are on optimal medical therapy.

The selection criteria for augmentation therapy include:

- High-risk phenotype

- Plasma AAT level below 11 micromols/L

- Airflow obstruction by spirometry (e.g., FEV1 less than 80% of predicted)

- Likely compliance with the protocol

- Age equal to or greater than 18 years

- Nonsmoker or ex-smoker.

Augmentation therapy is not recommended for patients with heterozygous phenotypes, whose plasma AAT level exceeds 11 micromols/L.

Side effects associated with intravenous AAT infusion are uncommon, and no long-term reactions have been noted. Some side effects can occur, including:

- Low-grade fever and mild flu-like symptoms are usually self-limited.

- Anaphylaxis with IgE antibody formation to AAT has been reported, and that is extremely rare.

- A syndrome of transient fever, chest and low back pain, and thrombocytopenia has been reported. It is due to a high molecular weight contaminant in the stabilizer added to the AAT product in the late 1980s

- Pooled human plasma alpha 1-antiprotease contains small amounts of IgA so that IgA-deficient individuals with anti-IgA antibodies are at risk of anaphylaxis with current infusions. Before initiating intravenous AAT therapy, it is recommended to check for IgA deficiency or anti-IgA antibodies.