Contact tonometry with GAT and Perkins tonometers involves direct contact with the cornea (Figure 4). The process of measuring IOP according to the Imbert-Fick principle involves the applanation of the anterior central portion of the cornea. GAT and Perkins utilize the same system to measure IOP, differing only in that GAT requires a slit-lamp (See slit-lamp image), while Perkins is portable and can also be taken in a supine position.

In performing contact applanation tonometry, local anesthesia drops and fluorescein dye must be applied to the eyes. The tonometer tip with the split-image prism (See tip images) is gently applied to the surface of the central portion of the cornea. The tonometer measures the force needed the flatten the cornea in a central diameter of 3.06 mm.

Measurements are taken using a filtered cobalt blue light, which highlights the borders of the semicircles formed by the tip prism (See tip images). The clinician calibrates the force needed on the eye using the rotating dial of the tonometer (See tonometer with dial image) until the superior and inferior arcs align so that the inner margins just touch (See images with arcs). The IOP is measured in mmHg.

Although contact applanation tonometry is considered the gold standard, the disadvantages of GAT include the need for a slit-lamp, upright position of the patient, installation of anesthesia and fluorescein, skilled ability of the clinician, and decreased accuracy in scarred or irregular corneas. Perkins tonometry shows the same disadvantages as GAT, except that it is portable and can be used in a supine position.

Various factors can affect the precision and accuracy of applanation tonometers, which include central corneal thickness, corneal hysteresis, choroidal rigidity, tear film thickness, amount of fluorescein used, high-grade astigmatism, previous refractive surgery, corneal edema, etc.

With regards to NCT, the technique for measuring IOP is rather simple. It involves correctly positioning the patient in front of the instrument and activating the air puff to measure IOP. The force needed to flatten the cornea by the impulse of air is then converted into IOP measurements by the internal software of the tonometers.

The advantages of NCT, when compared to GAT and Perkins, include the fact that it is rapid, simple to perform, and does not require the use of local anesthesia drops and/or fluorescein. NCT can be an interesting tool in select patients and screening; however, it is not recommended in the routine clinical setting, especially in managing patients with elevated IOP and glaucoma.