# Continuing Education Activity

Folic acid is a water-soluble vitamin used to manage and treat megaloblastic anemia. Folic acid has FDA approval for treating megaloblastic and macrocytic anemias due to folic deficiency. This activity describes the indications, mechanism of action, and contraindications for folic acid as a valuable agent in managing megaloblastic anemia and preventing other disorders. One of the beneficial roles of folate appears to be its ability to reduce homocysteine levels in neural tube defects. In addition, this activity will highlight the adverse event profile and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent to healthcare teams dealing with conditions that can benefit from folic acid.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of folic acid.
- Describe the adverse effects of folic acid.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for folic acid.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care to advance folic acid management and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Folate is a generic term that typically refers to a group of water-soluble compounds that play an essential role in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) biosynthesis.

One of the most important indications for folate use is considering the development of the central nervous system. Women planning on getting pregnant should take folic acid supplements to reduce the risk of neural tube defects (NTDs), such as spina bifida, in the developing fetus. Some have proposed that the mechanism by which NTDs form in the absence of folate involves the increased ubiquitination of neural tube closure–related genes, thereby affecting their expression.

Many other therapeutic uses of folic acid exist, though these uses are less impactful than those already mentioned. Folic acid can help protect against neoplasia in ulcerative colitis, prevent cervical dysplasia, treat vitiligo, restore hematopoiesis in macrocytic anemia due to a folate deficiency, and increase gingival resistance to local irritants, thereby reducing inflammation.

# Mechanism of Action

floFolate is mainly concentrated in the liver.

For DNA synthesis, deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) accepts one methyl group from 5-10-MTHF—via thymidylate synthase, which accepts the other—to become deoxythymidine monophosphate (dTMP) and allows the cell cycle to continue while simultaneously regenerating DHF. Drugs used in cancer chemotherapy disrupt this process by inhibiting vital enzymes necessary for cell cycle progression. Methotrexate, for example, inhibits dihydrofolate reductase. By reducing available THF and its downstream components, methotrexate indirectly deprives the thymidylate synthase of its substrates.

Methionine is a byproduct synthesized as folate reduces homocysteine levels in the blood; 5-10-MTHF donates a methyl group to an enzyme, methyl-tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), and then becomes 5-methyl THF.

# Administration

- Folic acid is often administered as an oral supplement. Dosing is usually dependent on the disorder. The recommended daily requirement of folic acid for an adult is 400 mcg.

- The World Health Organization recommends a daily dose of 400 to 800 mcg to prevent neural tube defects in pregnancy. Clinicians generally prescribe iron-folic acid supplements for prenatal vitamins during and before pregnancy.

- Folic acid may be given orally, intravenously, or subcutaneously for macrocytic anemia. Oral recommendations are 1 mg to 5 mg once daily, but doses up to 15 mg once daily have also been recommended.

- To avoid folic acid deficiency in patients on hemodialysis, the recommended dose is estimated to range from 1 mg to 5 mg daily. For intravenous administration, 5 mg or less of undiluted folic acid may be infused over at least 1 minute or combined with 50 mL of either normal saline (NS) or dextrose 5% in water (D5W) and infused over 30 minutes. Folic acid may also be given as an infusion when added to other IV maintenance solutions. To avoid folic acid deficiency in patients on hemodialysis, the recommended dose is estimated to range from 1 mg to 5 mg daily.

- Patients treated with methotrexate should be prescribed folic acid supplements to reduce the adverse events associated with methotrexate therapy.

# Adverse Effects

For the general population, a diet that contains a daily amount of folic acid below the established upper intake level of 1000 mcg has not been demonstrated to result conclusively in any adverse health outcomes. The U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP) examined areas of previous concern, including cognition (relating to vitamin B12 deficiency), cancer, diabetes- and thyroid-related disorders, and hypersensitivity-related outcomes. Researchers identified these areas from previous reports of patients receiving more than 400 mcg daily. Overall, the NTP report concluded that no definitive evidence exists for the areas considered for adverse effects due to folic acid.

This report and other literature reviews performed since draw their conclusions while still emphasizing the need for further investigation. But, overall, the benefits that stand to be gained from folic acid intake justify any potential risk that might be encountered. Furthermore, the mandatory folic acid fortification program guidelines in countries worldwide have yielded no established risks for adverse effects.

# Contraindications

Hypersensitivity to folic acid or its formulation is a potential contraindication to its administration. One must recall that research has yet to establish hypersensitivity reactions to folic acid, but a history of an anaphylactic reaction from any substance must deter the administration of the offending agent.

# Monitoring

Folate deficiency can manifest in numerous ways. The measurement of deficient folate levels in the blood renders a definitive diagnosis, but other signs exist.

Low levels of folate lead to macrocytic megaloblastic anemia. A simple blood smear of an individual with a folate deficiency will reveal erythrocyte macrocytosis and hyper-segmented polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs).

Additionally, oral ulcers may appear without neurological symptoms [as opposed to a vitamin B12 deficiency, which causes subacute combined degeneration (SCD)].

A folate deficiency in pregnancy contributes heavily to fetal NTDs.

The interruption of DNA synthesis due to a folate deficiency will result in elevated homocysteine levels. Hyperhomocysteinemia is also present in vitamin B12 deficiency, but B12 lack also has elevated methylmalonic acid levels, and the neurological signs associated with SCD are absent in folate deficiency. Therefore, physicians must rule out a concurrent B12 deficiency before administering folic acid in apparent folate-deficiency anemia. The rationale behind this is that folic acid administration will address the anemia aspect of B12 deficiency, but methylmalonic acid levels will remain elevated and cause toxic neurological effects. Therefore, a simple measurement of B12 levels before folic acid administration is advisable to avoid potential SCD development.

Deficient folate levels have been detected in up to 16% of patients on antiepileptic drugs, including gabapentin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, valproate, and primidone.

# Toxicity

Like other water-soluble vitamins, folic acid does not have significant storage in the body; hence toxicity is not a common concern. However, infrequent neurologic side effects have been noted in the context of folate supplementation in individuals with pernicious anemia.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The relative safety of folic acid allows healthcare providers to administer it to patients with little concern for adverse effects. However, specific best practice techniques should be kept in mind to ensure positive outcomes. To increase folate levels, the primary care provider should counsel patients to consume a healthy diet, including vegetables, eggs, and milk. Dietary teams can consult on the case to ensure inpatients receive appropriate food selection to enhance folate delivery. Pregnant women should be made aware of folate deficiency risks and take supplements. Healthcare providers should refer to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists for prepregnancy counseling for women of childbearing age and recommend folic acid supplements based on the patient's health condition. All these practitioners comprise the interprofessional healthcare team.

In contrast, pregnant women should be prescribed antiepileptic drugs for only epilepsy in the smallest dose possible to prevent low folic acid level complications. Nurses and pharmacists can alert clinicians that anti-epilepsy medications are on the pregnant patient's list of medicines if no dosage changes start immediately. The source of macrocytic megaloblastic anemia must be determined before supplement administration begins, as folate and vitamin B12 deficiency can both present similarly in patients. Therefore, healthcare providers should consider verifying the vitamin B12 level of the patients to optimize treatment plans and improve patient outcomes when prescribing folic acid. As depicted above, all MDs, NPs, PAs, pharmacists, and dieticians should work collaboratively as an interprofessional team and communicate when dealing with patients that can benefit from folic acid supplementation.