The internal mammary artery (IMA), also called the internal thoracic artery, supplies the anterior chest wall and the breast. Although the IMA usually has a separate origin from the subclavian artery, it may have a common origin with the thyrocervical trunk. After arising from the subclavian artery, it runs anterior to the pleural cupola and crosses the brachiocephalic vein underneath. It then runs posterior to the sternoclavicular joint and costal cartilages and anterior to the parietal pleura. At the third intercostal space (ICS), it enters the space between the transversus thoracis and the intercostal muscles and gives off branches to intercostal spaces. When it reaches the seventh costal cartilage, IMA divides into the superior epigastric artery and the musculophrenic artery.

Histologically, the IMA is a muscular artery that makes it susceptible to spasm when handled surgically. However, because its media is thinner and less muscular than other arteries and veins, the IMA produces a higher basal and stimulated rate of nitric oxide (vasodilator) and exhibits a lower propensity for spasm. The IMA is also found to be less prone to atherosclerosis as compared to venous grafts. This could be a result of the non-fenestrated internal elastic lamina of the IMA, which is less susceptible to intimal hyperplasia, which contributes to the development of atherosclerosis.

The diameter of the IMA is relatively smaller as compared to venous grafts, and the mean flow velocity in IMA is about three times that in saphenous venous grafts. High flow velocities, low thrombotic threshold velocity, resistance to the development of atherosclerosis, the release of vascular endothelial growth factor, and reactivity to vasodilators are some of the factors responsible for the long term patency of IMA bypass.