The reversal or slowing of structural cardiac remodeling has occurred with the use of beta-blockers, aldosterone antagonists, and ACE inhibitors. They are beneficial in patients with ejection fraction less than 40 percent.

Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) has been effective in alleviating the symptoms in electrical remodeling due to heart failure. It decreases the chances of sudden cardiac death in such patients. There is a certain degree of reversal of electrical remodeling of the heart with CRT.

These interventions can be supplemented by interprofessional coordination and communication. Nurses can play a vital role in management by motivational interviewing. There are vast numbers of regional educational programs which can provide critical information to the patients regarding their diseases and conditions. Nurses can play a role in guiding the patients towards these resources. Patient education has a beneficial effect on adherence to the interventions and regular follow-ups. Moreover, nurses can help by managing regular follow-ups. Referral to nutritionists and psychologists is also an important aspect. Since this condition requires lifestyle and diet changes as part of its management.

Pharmacists can play their role in management by overlooking the dosage, safety providing information about the appropriate time of medication ingestion and side effects, reviewing the medication refill history, and providing adherence interventions.

An interprofessional team of health professionals and clinicians can provide a collection of clinical protocols that lay the framework for the expertise of nurses and pharmacists. These collections of clinical protocols can include various steps like ordering laboratory investigations, prescribing, and managing the dose of medications related to a specific clinical condition. These are known as collective prescriptions. The use of collective prescriptions is a valuable strategy in providing effective healthcare to patients.