Considered muscles of facial expression, the muscles acting on the lips are derived from the second pharyngeal arch mesoderm. These muscles are part of the panniculus carnosus which form attachments with the dermis, resulting in dimpling of the overlying skin.

The principal muscle of the lips is the circumferential orbicularis oris, functioning primarily as a sphincter for the oral aperture. Rather uniquely, the orbicularis oris bears no direct bony attachments but is appended by the other oral muscles that attach to it. Specifically, the nasolabial folds are formed by the insertion of the muscles responsible for lip elevation into the orbicularis oris. At the philtrum, the fibers of the orbicularis oris decussate to insert into the opposite philtral ridge. Interdigitation of the muscle’s fibers at the commissures allows for a scissor-like closure. The perpendicular force vectors formed by the contraction of the orbicular oris results in the generation of relaxed skin tension lines angled radially outward from the oral orifice. Adequate function of the orbicularis oris is requisite for the closure of the mouth, chewing and creating an oral seal.

The modiolus is a fibromuscular tissue structure located 10 to 12 mm superolaterally to the commissures of the mouth. It is formed by the decussation of several facial muscle fibers, including the orbicularis oris, levator and depressor anguli oris, risorius, platysma, buccinator, and zygomaticus major. The modiolus plays a critical role in anchoring these muscles, facilitating mastication, phonation and facial expression. Additionally, the modiolus is responsible for the production of facial dimples in a subset of patients.

The additional muscles acting on the lips are divided according to their action in Table 2.