A complete blood count (CBC) will show leukocytosis with elevated neutrophils. Nonspecific inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate are elevated.

The gold standard test for diagnosis is tissue biopsy culture with anaerobic pus cultures. Swabs from the infected sites should be avoided. Cultures can be falsely negative; gram-stain may demonstrate the presence of branched, beaded, gram-positive filamentous rods with sulfur granules, which helps in making a preliminary diagnosis. For examination, under the microscope, the granules should be crushed in between the two slides and then stained with methylene blue to identify the organism.

Serological tests do not help in making the diagnosis.

Imaging results will depend upon the site of infection and can mimic other chronic infections like nocardiosis, TB, and malignancy.

**Cervicofacial**

Imaging findings are nonspecific and are noncontributory in diagnosing the disease but will help in assessing the degree of soft tissue and bone involvement. Dental radiographs are helpful in evaluating the apical abscesses. CT and MRI studies may show osteolysis in the chronic form of infection.

**Pulmonary**

The imaging for actinomycosis is nonspecific. In the acute presentation, it can look like any other pneumonia. In chronic forms, it can present as a pulmonary mass or can cavitate. In the case of a mass malignancy, actinomycosis is an important diagnosis to consider. Especially when it cavitates, tuberculosis is an important differential diagnosis to consider. The computed tomography scan findings can vary depending upon the duration of illness and can include consolidation, cavitation, pleural effusion, lymph node enlargement, atelectasis, and ground glass opacification.

The gold standard test is a histological examination and bacterial culture of a biopsy, which can be obtained with bronchoscopy (pulmonologist), a CT-guided biopsy (interventional radiologist), or video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) performed by a thoracic surgeon. Anaerobic cultures of pleural fluid rarely grow the organism. Sputum culture will not be useful unless the patient has a cavitary disease.

**GI**

Imaging of actinomycosis can be nonspecific; findings will depend upon the site of infection and chronicity. In chronic cases, a CT scan might show an enterocutaneous fistula with multiple abdominal abscesses. The best test is a culture of the infected site.

**Genitourinary**

A CT scan can show pelvic mass (6 to 7 cm) with the cystic lesion. Lymphadenopathy can be seen in 40% to 60% of cases. A tubo-ovarian abscess is highly suggestive of infection with actinomycosis. Bladder actinomycosis can present like bladder carcinoma, with bladder thickening and hematuria.

Pus samples can be taken after removing the IUD. Colonization must be differentiated from infection. Tissue biopsy should be taken in patients presenting with pelvic masses to rule out malignancy.