# Continuing Education Activity

Hand fractures are common in the general population, with a relative propensity seen in contact-sport athletes (e.g., boxers and football players) and manual laborers. Metacarpal fractures typically occur secondary to a direct blow or fall directly onto the hand. These fractures commonly occur during athletic activities, particularly in contact sports. Almost one-fourth of cases occur during athletic events. Metacarpal fractures, when extra-articular, are often managed with closed reduction and cast immobilization. When closed reduction is not successful, and in cases of intra-articular fractures, the management includes open reduction and internal fixation. This activity describes the pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of metacarpal hand fractures and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the typical, most common mechanisms of injury that lead to metacarpal hand fractures.
- Review the examination procedures and diagnostic imaging needed for metacarpal hand fracture assessment.
- Describe the treatment protocol for metacarpal hand fractures.
- Explain why careful planning and discussion among interprofessional team members involved in managing patients with metacarpal hand fractures will improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Hand fractures are common in the general population, with a relative propensity seen in contact-sport athletes (e.g., boxers and football players) and manual laborers.

# Etiology

Metacarpal fractures typically occur secondary to a direct blow or fall directly onto the hand. These fractures commonly occur during athletic activities, particularly in contact sports. Almost one-fourth of cases occur during athletic events.

A direct blow over the dorsum often results in a transverse fracture, while axial and bending forces result in oblique and spiral fractures.

# Epidemiology

Metacarpal fractures make up about 40% of all acute hand injuries, and they constitute about 20% of all fractures occurring below the elbow.

# History and Physical

The mechanism of injury is critical in delineating clinical pathology.

- hand dominance

- occupation and current working status

- athletic participation (including sport-specific position)

- history of prior fracture or injury

- Patients may present with many potential preexisting deformities, which may warrant further questioning regarding previous interventions or surgeries. The provider should also document baseline functional status (e.g., chronic stiffness, deformity, or other limitations)

A thorough examination of the entire hand and digits is imperative.

It is imperative to identify rotational deformity in suspected metacarpal fractures. The rotational deformity can be diagnosed by observing for overriding of the fingers at the time of presentation.

- presence of symmetry or asymmetry between the normal and afflicted sides

- inability to make a full fist secondary to stiffness and/or pain

- rotational alignment when making a fist

- the provider can assess rotation by passively guiding the finger as the patient can tolerate
- the tips of all digits should point toward the scaphoid tubercle in cascading fashion

Assessment of neurovascular status is crucial before administering a local anesthetic.

# Evaluation

The evaluation includes standard radiographs of the hand (anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique). In the vast majority of cases, this will be enough to confirm the diagnosis and form a management plan. If there is doubt, confirmation of more subtle injuries can be obtained using special views such as Brewerton (metacarpal heads), Roberts, and Betts (thumb) views. An external rotation oblique film allows for visualization of the fourth and fifth MC fractures and CMC dislocations, while an internal rotation oblique film allows for visualization of the second and third MC and CMC fractures/dislocations.

CT is sometimes necessary for the base of metacarpal fractures to check for any intra-articular displacement and determine if surgery is needed.

# Treatment / Management

The goal of treatment is a restoration of anatomy and function.

In general, increasing degrees of displacement, comminution, and rotational malalignment are critical factors in assessing the fracture pattern's potential for stability and reduction maintenance with nonoperative management.

Over the last few decades have seen advances and improvements regarding low-profile plates/screw options. Kirschner wires (K-wires) might be a better option for patients who require maximum cosmesis.

**Special Considerations**

**Thumb Metacarpal Fractures**

The thumb metacarpal deserves special consideration, given the relative lack of interossei and deep intermetacarpal ligament support.

- Abductor pollicis longus (APL) - pulls the shaft in a proximal, dorsal, and radial deformity

- Extensor pollicis longus (EPL) - same as APL

- Adductor pollicis - pulls the shaft into supination and adduction

The distal fragment assumes an apex dorsal, adducted, and flexed position.

Despite the thumb tolerating more angulation than other metacarpals due to its higher mobility, an apex dorsal angulation of over 30 degrees often fares poorly with nonoperative management. Indications for closed reduction and thumb spica casting include:

- Extra-articular fracture

- Less than 30 degrees of angulation following closed reduction

- Non-displaced (or less than 1 mm displacement) of an intra-articular fracture (i.e., Bennet fracture)

Note that intra-articular fractures (Bennett – 2 part and Rolando – 3 part fracture patterns) most commonly require surgical fixation, as the joint surface needs to be reduced to avoid long-term post-traumatic deformity and articular cartilage degeneration.

Operative indications for thumb metacarpal fractures include:

- Extra-articular fracture patterns with greater than 30 degrees of angulation following attempted closed reduction

- Loss of reduction following thumb spica casting/splinting

- Intra-articular fracture patterns:

- Bennett fractures with less than 1 mm displacement or
- Rolando fracture (any type, even non-displaced/minimally displaced)

Operative techniques include:

- Closed reduction and percutaneous k-wire fixation

- Open reduction internal fixation

- Often preferred over CRPP techniques in fracture patterns with greater than 1 mm displacement or in fracture patterns with large articular pieces amenable to screw fixation

- Distraction and external fixation

- Preferred in the setting of severely comminuted fracture patterns with associated major soft tissue injuries

**Metacarpal Head Fractures**

Metacarpal head fractures are the least common, and management is best performed operatively if there is an intra-articular step-off. Stable fixation allows for earlier mobilization, which can reduce stiffness. Severely comminuted fractures may require:

- External fixation

- Metacarpophalangeal joint arthroplasty (MCP arthroplasty)

- MCP fusion 

- Indicated in the setting of severe arthritic changes, end-stage

In the setting of "fight bite" injuries, management must include early IV antibiotics, irrigation, and surgical debridement of the MCP joint.

**Metacarpal Neck Fractures**

Metacarpal neck fractures are the most common, as anatomically, the metacarpal neck is the weakest point in the bone.

If the reduction is stable, then early mobilization is ideal, and it rarely needs splinting for longer than six weeks. Radiographs can be obtained to ensure alignment maintenance during the follow-up period.

**Metacarpal Shaft Fractures**

The consensus on the acceptable nonoperative parameters following closed reduction of metacarpal shaft fractures include the following:

- Index and long finger

- Angulation (degrees): 10-20
- Shortening (mm): 2-5

- Ring finger

- Angulation (degrees): 30
- Shortening (mm): 2-5

- Small finger

- Angulation (degrees): 40
- Shortening (mm): 2-5

Shaft fractures can be transverse, oblique, spiral, or comminuted.

Transverse and short oblique fractures tend to result in a dorsal angulation deformity. Less angulation is tolerated compared to metacarpal neck fractures. Oblique fractures tend to shorten as fragments slide on each other. If the fracture line is long enough (twice the diameter of the bone) and bone fragments are large enough (three times the width of the screw), a double lag screw fixation is possible. If it is impossible, a single screw will require a neutralization plate. The use of K-wires is also a possibility.

The same principles apply to spiral fractures while exercising care that lag screws are placed perpendicularly to the fracture line. Screws require less dissection than plating, which can reduce adhesions and scarring, although, with aggressive physiotherapy, stiffness can be minimized in either instance.

**Metacarpal Base Fractures**

In the presence of metacarpal base fractures, it is important to rule out carpometacarpal dislocation, as high energy is likely to be involved in the trauma. Intra-articular fractures are more common on the ulnar side of the hand than the radial due to the higher mobility of these joints.

**Open Fractures**

Open fractures should have treatment with local wound care and antibiotics. Although controversial, healthcare providers are to utilize best judgment practices regarding timely debridement with removal of any dirt/debris and primary versus secondary wound closure in the acute setting. For example, management of fight bite injuries is best with formal surgical irrigation and debridement of the MCP joint, given the high risk of infection with local wound care in the emergency department only. When in doubt, clinicians should consult the hand surgical service on call at the institution.

Extensive open fracture patterns and soft tissue injury may require subsequent/serial irrigation and debridement procedures, depending on the extent of the injury. Occasionally, second look debridement 1 to 3 days later may be necessary.

# Differential Diagnosis

Injuries to neighboring bones (carpal bones, phalanges) and associated soft tissues (ligaments, tendons) must be excluded.

# Prognosis

The prognosis depends on the exact type of fracture, the method of fixation, and any complications arising in the recovery period. Overall, when appropriately managed, the prognosis is good for metacarpal fractures. However, the patient's expectations must be considered while managing these fractures.

# Complications

Unfortunately, irrespective of chosen treatment modality, metacarpal fractures have associated complications, and treating those is essential to achieve good outcomes. The scope for complications is greater with open injuries and those with a soft tissue damage component. The greater the damage to surrounding soft tissues, the poorer the outcome tends to be, and the incidence of complications increases.

Metacarpal fracture complications include:

- **Compartment syndrome.**Severe trauma and/or soft tissue injury may result in compartment syndrome of the hand whether or not the injury presents in a closed (as opposed to open) fashion.

- **Stiffness.**Stiffness is common and often coexists with tendon adhesions. Longer immobilization periods, as well as periosteal stripping and neurovascular injuries, increase the risk of it. Prevention includes using low-profile plates, splinting in functional positions, pain control, and early mobilization. In severe cases, tenolysis might be needed to improve the outcome.

- **Malunion.**Malunion is the most common complication and results in a deformity, which can be functionally and cosmetically problematic. Extensors are more likely to be affected than flexors in metacarpal fractures because of bone shortening. Surgery is required to treat malunion if indicated in a particular patient.

- **Non-union.**Non-union is a lack of bone healing four months after the injury. It is rare and commonly associated with nerve injury, infection, bone loss, and devascularizing methods of fixation. Diagnosis is made clinically with the help of radiological evidence. It can result from inadequate immobilization, failed fixation, bone loss, and poor tissue approximation. The treatment is a stable fixation with or without bone grafting. Occasionally tenolysis is also required to improve function.

- **Tendon rupture.**Plate fixation runs a risk of tendon irritation and, in the worst cases, rupture. If plates are used, periosteal closure should be done whenever possible to reduce this risk.

- **Infection (including osteomyelitis).**Although metacarpal osteomyelitis is rare, it requires the removal of all metalwork, taking cultures from tissues, and thorough debridement. Over 50% of such infections end in amputation.

- **Cold intolerance.**Cold intolerance is a known complication of hand trauma and may affect over a third of patients.

- **Chronic pain.**Intra-articular fractures have a slightly worse prognosis, with 40% of patients with metacarpal base fractures reporting chronic pain irrespective of the management method. Arthrodesis can be performed to manage this if severe.

- **Instability.**Long-term instability is a risk, particularly in thumb base fractures.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Full strength and range of motion is the goal of rehabilitation. Hand exercises with light resistance, such as rubber bands or squeeze balls, can help if scarring or extensor lag develops.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patients should be educated about the potential mechanisms of these injuries and their outcomes. Sportspersons should be particularly briefed about the implications of such injuries and their prevention. When left untreated or inappropriately managed, they can lead to significant morbidity.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Main points on metacarpal fractures:

- Common hand injury

- Require thorough assessment consisting of the history, examination, and radiological investigations

- They mostly divide into open or closed, based on the digit they affect, intra-articular or extra-articular status, and based on the location on the bone itself (head, neck, shaft, base)

- May have conservative or operative treatment

- Can have long-term sequelae requiring further management

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Metacarpal fractures make up about a third of all hand fractures.