**Medical Management**

The medications used frequently are:

1. Antimicrobial agents: Topical fumagillin and fluoroquinolones are important antimicrobials used frequently in the treatment regimen.

Fumagillin, on the other hand, is a parasitistatic derivative of Aspergillus and affects RNA synthesis, and is thus effective against microsporidia.

Molecular studies have proved that microsporidia come under fungi. Azoles are important in the treatment of fungal infection because these inhibit ergosterol synthesis in the plasma membrane of fungi. Topical fluconazole 0.3%, four times a day dosing has been found to be effective.

2. Biguanides: Polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) 0.02% and chlorhexidine gluconate 0.02% are the biguanides found effective in treating microsporidial keratitis when combined with debridement.

3. Lubricants: Microsporidial keratoconjunctivitis was finally found to be a self-limiting disease.

4. Steroids: The spectrum of keratoconjunctivitis showing sub-epithelial infiltrates requires a short course of topical steroids coupled with steroid-sparing agents.

5. Anti-protozoal/helminthic: Albendazole is an anti-protozoal found to be effective in treating microsporidial keratoconjunctivitis.Encephalitozoon species, and can be used in a dose of 400 mg twice daily.

**Surgical Management**

The debridement of corneal epithelium is a viable option in microsporidial keratoconjunctivitis; however, this modality should be kept reserved for more severe cases considering the risk of superadded infection with debridement.

For corneal stromal microsporidiosis, therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty is the only viable option in the current scenario.