**Keratinisation**

Keratohyalin granules promote the formation of the epidermal cornified cell envelope, also known as cornification or keratinization.  Visualization of these granules in the various epidermal layers shows that they grow in size progressively as they move from the stratum spinosum toward the stratum corneum.

The name filaggrin is a contraction of ‘filament aggregating protein.’ In vitro experiments have shown that filaggrin causes bundling and condensation of keratin intermediate filaments.

The process of keratinization, i.e., the formation of the cornified cell envelope is a complex phenomenon. It involves cross-linking of various proteins in the cell periphery, especially loricrin and involucrin at the transition zone in between stratum granulosum and stratum corneum.

**Epidermal Moisturisation via water retention in stratum corneum**

Within the squames, filaggrin undergoes further chemical modification and proteolytic processing. Eventually, it breaks down completely to become natural moisturizing factor (NMF), a natural humectant within the residual cytoplasmic space of the squames structurally/chemically composed of hygroscopic amino acids and their derivatives.

**Other indirect functions**

Through their contribution to keratinization and water retention in stratum corneum, KHG and its constituent proteins contribute to other functions such as  UV protection, and modulation of stratum corneum pH (to make it hostile for pathogenic microbes). Thus, as a whole, KHG, filaggrin, and related proteins are vital for normal healthy function of the skin barrier layers.