The external ear’s flexible structure is maintained by elastic cartilage, which is covered in skin and attached to the skull with ligaments and muscles. The skin of the pinna is rich in sebaceous glands, which serve to protect the ear from cracking. The external auditory canal is laden with specialized ceruminous glands, which produce cerumen (earwax) that may hinder or repel the entry of insects and debris through the external acoustic meatus.

The **helix**is the outer posterosuperior rim of the ear and curves slightly inward towards the external acoustic meatus, giving the ear its concave geometry. The**antihelix**is a convex eminence located anteriorly to the helix; it curves outward from the deep concha anterior to it. Between the helix and antihelix is a shallow concavity, the**scaphoid fossa**. The**external acoustic meatus**arises from the anteriormost part of the concha and marks the beginning of the**external auditory canal**. The canal continues in the skull in sigmoid fashion until it meets the tympanic membrane. Given that the external acoustic meatus is not in perfect alignment with the external auditory canal, the pinna must be pulled backward and upward during an otoscopic examination to allow proper angling of the otoscope tip in the external auditory canal. Anteriorly to the acoustic meatus and concha is a cartilaginous projection called the**tragus**, and inferiorly to it hangs the**lobule**(earlobe). The lobule is devoid of cartilage and contains areolar connective tissue.

A small projection from the tragus, called **Darwin’s tubercle**, is present in a fraction of the population. It is homologous to the tip of the ears of pointy-eared mammals.

The ears are located symmetrically on either side of the head, which allows for **binaural sound localization**in the brain regarding direction and distance away. The brain centers involved in integrating information from both ears are located in the brainstem; these consist the**inferior colliculus**in the midbrain, and a group of pontine nuclei called the superior olivary complex, of which only the**medial superior olive**and**superior lateral olive**truly receive afferents from bilateral sources.

Arrival time and volume from each ear are registered in the brain, and the **interaural time difference (ITD)**and**interaural level difference (ILD)**are computed. ITD and ILD would increase according to the azimuth of the sound source from 0 degrees (centered in front of the subject) up to 90 degrees and decrease from 90 to 180 degrees (centered at the back of the subject). It is unclear whether interaural time or volume difference is the main aspect involved in the localization of sounds. TheDuplex Theory, published by Lord Rayleigh in 1907, prioritizes one over the other based on sound frequency: ITD for lower frequency (i.e., less than 800 Hz) and ILD for higher frequency (i.e., more than 1600 Hz) sounds, with intermediate frequency, sounds presenting an overlap between ITD and ILD dominance. This is based on limitations of the human auditory system in resolving the sound spectrum of frequencies and intensities: below 800 Hz, the wavelengths are larger than the distance between the ears, delivering easily detectable phase delays calculated as ITD. Above 1600 Hz, however, the wavelengths become much smaller than the interaural distance (distance between the ears) itself, rendering phase delays impossible to resolve. Conversely, the differences in sound intensity are poorly resolved at low frequencies and much better resolved at high frequency, allowing ILD to be used at such elevated frequencies. The Duplex Theory only accounts for sounds traveling in the horizontal plane at the level of the ear and does not explain anteroposterior sound source localization.

The anterior orientation and convoluted structure of the pinna are believed to aid in further elucidating whether the sound originates from the front (0 to 90 degrees) or the back (90 to 180 degrees) and in other planes by reflecting and directing waves onto the tympanic membrane, creating a pattern of ripples in the tympanic membrane that would be interpreted by the brain to determine nuances in aurospatial orientation. This is known as the **Pinna Filtering Effect**theory. Further, the structure of the pinna may have evolved to enhance human sensitivity to sounds of a particular frequency, namely around 3 kHz, the frequency of human voice, which is speculated to have favored the development of speech.