In 2008, diagnostic criteria were created in the Practice Guidelines for MODY. The criteria include the age of onset in a family member of 25 years of age, at least two consecutive generations of patients with diabetes in the family, no beta-cell autoantibodies, persistent endogenous insulin production in addition to preservation of pancreatic beta-cell function as evidenced by c-peptide levels >200pmol/L in addition to lack of necessity for insulin therapy even years after diagnosis.

The evaluation of patients should first start at diagnosis by ruling out DM1 by testing for pancreatic autoantibodies.

Particularly in GCK MODY, checking hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) and fasting plasma glucose levels can be helpful as they typically fall within specific ranges. Fasting plasma glucose generally falls between 99-144mg/dL

High sensitive CRP (hsCRP) is another surrogate test that can help distinguish HFN1A MODY from other types of diabetes. This value will be lower in HNF1A MODY (MODY 3), usually less than 0.75mg/L, when compared to other forms of diabetes.

Additionally, one can assess for residual beta-cell function. Patients with MODY generally have elevated C-peptide levels when there is hyperglycemia, usually 0.6mg/dL or higher.

**Who Should be Genetically Tested for MODY?**

Genetic testing for MODY should be done in cases where there is a high index of suspicion that the patient does not have DM1 or DM2. A diagnosis of MODY may change the understanding of the course of the disease and the optimal treatment (or if treatment is needed at all). Genetic counseling may be beneficial to family members of MODY patients.

However, given the time and expense of genetic testing, criteria for narrowing down the patients appropriate for testing have been sought. Indications for genetic testing include:

- Patients with a strong family history of DM presenting in the second to fifth decade of life

- Leanness

- Autoantibody negative

- Features inconsistent with DM1 or DM2 such as:

- 
              
- Low renal threshold
              
              
- A large increase in blood sugar in OGTT
              
              
- Lower than expected CRP levels

- Lower than expected HDL-C

- High insulin sensitivity (although, as noted above, insulin resistance has been observed in a small number of MODY gene defects)

- Children diagnosed with DM1 who are antibody-negative and exhibit elevated C peptide levels

Molecular genetic testing helps to identify which mutation is involved. The type of testing performed depends on the clinician's pretest probability of knowing which particular gene is involved. Should a patient have particular characteristics of a specific subtype, such as typical associated extra-pancreatic features, single-gene testing or serial single-gene testing can be performed. If a patient's phenotype cannot be differentiated from other subtypes, one may opt to perform a MODY multigene panel which tests for 14 known genes to be associated with MODY. Finally, if the patient has clinically suggestive features, but the mutation cannot be found utilizing conventional testing, one can consider comprehensive genomic testing.