A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head is the imaging test of choice when evaluating a significant head trauma. Given the elderly population's comorbidities, frequently inadequate history, and a potentially unreliable physical examination, essentially all of these patients with head injury require a CT scan of the head. Clinical decision rules were developed to guide physicians regarding which patients need a CT head to rule out clinically significant head trauma.  These decision criteria serve to rule out clinically significant head trauma without a CT scan of the head.  However, the three most widely accepted decision rules all acknowledge that in the elderly patient population, clinically significant head trauma cannot be ruled out based on history and physical examination alone.  The Canadian CT head rules and the Nexus II rules place this age at 65 years old while the New Orleans rules place the age at 60 years old.

Diagnosis of clinically significant head trauma such as an intracranial bleed does not require any laboratory testing.  However, labs and other studies are necessary to assess for any underlying medical conditions that may have precipitated the traumatic injury in the first place such a syncope (i.e., EKG, chest radiographs, urinalysis, basic labs, cardiac enzymes, etc.) in addition to help facilitate potential surgical intervention if the diagnosis of a head bleed is confirmed.  In particular,  PT/INR requires examination in patients taking coumadin with a significant head injury in preparation for possible coumadin reversal. While there is no specific test to evaluate novel direct oral anticoagulation (NOAC) efficacy, thromboelastogram can help direct reversal.