There are numerous complications associated with vaginal delivery; these complications vary by stages of labor and are dependent on numerous factors. In general, complications can be generalized into the following categories: failure to progress, abnormal fetal heart rate tracing, intrapartum hemorrhage, and post-partum hemorrhage.

Failure to progress can happen in either the first stage or the second stage. Failure to progress in the first stage of labor can be either protraction of active phase of labor, which is defined as cervical dilation rate less than one to two centimeters per hour in women who’s cervix is at least six centimeters dilated.

Failure to progress during the second stage of labor is diagnosed when there is minimal descent of the fetus in nulliparous women who have pushed for a minimum of three hours and multiparous women who have pushed for a minimum of two hours; women with epidural anesthesia are allowed slightly longer durations for pushing.

Failure to progress can also be due to abnormal passage of descent for the fetus, which is directly related to cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD). CPD can be related to fetal malposition or macrosomia and is a subjective diagnosis which requires conversion of the delivery to a cesarean section. CPD is most commonly observed during the second stage of labor.

During a vaginal delivery, the fetal heart rate must be monitored, and decelerations during labor, whether early decelerations or late decelerations, can indicate head compression of the fetus, cord compression of the fetus, hypoxemia, and even anemia of the fetus. If an abnormal fetal heart rate persists, resolution can be attempted by removing labor augmenting agents such as oxytocin or repositioning the mother on the left lateral side.

Vaginal delivery can be complicated by intrapartum hemorrhage. During a normal vaginal delivery, some blood from the effacement of the cervix or minor trauma of the vaginal canal can mix with amniotic fluid and can present as a serosanguineous appearance. However, the presence of frank blood is abnormal and can either be due to placental abruption, uterine rupture, placenta accrete, undiagnosed placenta previa, or vasa previa. These conditions are true obstetric emergencies and require an emergent cesarean section.

Finally, vaginal deliveries can be complicated by postpartum hemorrhage (PPH). PPH can be due to atony of the uterus, trauma to the birth canal, retained products of conception or due to a coagulopathy; uterine atony is the most common cause of PPH.