Indications for intrathecal therapy through a catheter are:

- Cancer pain. Treatment of refractory pain in patients with cancer and with inadequate pain relief due to ineffective analgesia with drugs administered in other ways, e.g., severe and intractable side effects from oral/transdermal opioids.

- Non-cancer pain conditions. Failure of interventional and surgical techniques such as failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS), and lumbar post-laminectomy syndrome. Difficult to manage painful conditions, including complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) and causalgia (CRPS type 2), phantom limb pain, plexopathy such as brachial plexopathy, and lumbosacral and radiation-induced plexopathy are other indications.

- Severe spasticity. Intrathecal baclofen is indicated for the management of spasticity in patients with serious side effects or with an unsuccessful response to the maximum doses of oral baclofen, tizanidine, and/or dantrolene.

Good circulation of CSF and informed consent are mandatory.

**Pain Management**

Persistent chronic pain is frequent in patients with cancer and has a severe impact on their health-related quality of life (HR-QOL). A recent systematic review found that 38% of patients with cancer rated their pain as moderate or severe. Furthermore, pain prevalence was 39.3% after curative treatment, 55% during anticancer therapies, and 66.4% in advanced, metastatic, or end-stage disease.

**Spasticity**

Spasticity is a motor difficulty featuring tense or rigid muscles with impairment of voluntary muscle movements. It is a serious concern for many individuals affected by MS, SCI, CP, and acquired brain injury such as stroke. Increased muscle tone and spasm impair mobility and interfere with the normal activities of daily life. Spasticity can also combine with significant pain and discomfort, rupture of the skin, contracture, and sleep disorders.

The goals of the treatment are a reduction of spasticity, energy expenditure, and pain, with the aim of improving movement, walking, and autonomy in daily activities or rehabilitation therapy. Current treatments include physical therapy, oral medications, botulinum toxin, or surgery. Alternatively, or in combination with these approaches, intrathecal treatment is widely used; for this purpose, baclofen is the prescribed drug.