There are different causes for different sleep disorders. For each sleep disorder listed below, more details are discussed in the pertinent section referenced below.

**Insomnia**

The exact causes of insomnia are unknown. Some contributing factors include environmental, genetic, psychological, and behavioral, leading to hyperarousal.

**Sleep-Disordered Breathing (SDB)**

The causes of SDB range from breathing control to upper airway and chest wall mechanics, causing compromised ventilatory and resistive loading. SDB is a spectrum of disorders ranging from

**Central Disorders of Hypersomnolence**

The central causes of hypersomnolence are commonly due to intrinsic abnormalities in the central nervous system's control of sleep-wake. Central hypersomnia is usually divided into three main subtypes: narcolepsy type 1, narcolepsy type 2, and idiopathic hypersomnia (IH), which are reviewed in more detail in separate sections.

**Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders (CRSD)**

The responsible causes of CRSD can be divided into two major groups (1): the environment is not well aligned with the internal circadian timing (e.g., shift work, jetlag); and (2) those occurring when the circadian timing system becomes altered relative to the external environment (e.g., delayed sleep phase syndrome, non-24, advanced sleep phase syndrome, irregular sleep-wake rhythm).

**Parasomnias**

The causes of parasomnia vary from environmental, genetic, and gene-environment interactions, all of which may play a significant role in the origin of parasomnias.

**Sleep-Related Movement Disorders**

Abnormal movements during sleep are disorders of motor control excitation or disinhibition often associated with sleep disturbances.