Prisms used in ophthalmology are of different types. These include:

- **Dispersive prisms**– Abbes, triangular

- **Polarizing prisms**– Nicol, Wollaston

- **Reflective prisms**– Penta, Porro, Dove prisms

**Nicol Prisms**

These are made up of calcite crystal cut diagonally, and the two halves are cemented with Canada balsam or an optical cement with a low refractive index. The incident light is split into ordinary and extra-ordinary linearly polarized rays. These prisms are used in Haidinger brushes.

**Wollaston Prisms**

These two right-angled prisms composed of double refracting surfaces like quartz or calcite are cemented to form a rectangular unit. An incident beam of unpolarized light emerges as two oppositely polarized diverging beams from the opposite end. This type of prism is used in keratometers.

**Porro Prisms**

This is a type of reflection prism used to alter the orientation of the image, i.e., the image traveling through the prism is rotated by 180 degrees. These prisms are used in slit lamps. The net effect of a beam passing through this prism is a parallel displaced image rotated by 180 degrees.

The prisms used in orthoptics are available in different forms. These include:

- Loose prisms

- Prisms in a trial frame

- Prism bar

- Fresnel prisms

- Rotating prisms

- Risley double prisms–2 rotating prisms of the same strength on a rotating frame

- Prism flippers

- Vari prisms – prisms power can be changed by rotating two glasses

**Fresnel Prisms**

These are made of polyvinyl chloride material. Parallel tiny prisms are stacked with an apex of one adjacent to the base of the previous prism, which can be struck on the base surface of the spectacles. This provides an overall prismatic effect of a single prism. The Fresnel prism is placed so that the base of prisms is directed towards the side of the defect.