# Definition/Introduction

The Quincke sign, also known as the Quincke pulse, represents the visualization of capillary pulsations upon light compression applied to the tip of the fingernail bed. It is an eponym associated with chronic severe aortic regurgitation.

The Quincke sign is named after Dr. Heinrich Quincke, a German physician who first coined the term in 1868.

# Issues of Concern

The Quincke sign, similar to the other signs of chronic severe aortic regurgitation (AR), results from a widened pulse pressure, an increased systolic stroke volume, and a rapid decrease in arterial pressure.

The sign is not unique to or pathognomonic for aortic regurgitation.

# Clinical Significance

The Quincke sign is one of the over 30 reported eponymous signs of severe aortic regurgitation, with flashing carotids being quoted as the 32nd.

Some of the other classically taught physical examination findings in patients with severe aortic regurgitation include head bobbing (de Musset sign), a bounding carotid pulse (Corrigan pulse), pistol shot sounds over the femoral artery with compression (the Duroziez murmur or Traube sign), the presence of visible pulsation of retinal arteries (Becker sign), and pulsation of the uvula (Müller sign).

Traditionally the Hill sign had been one of the other classic findings of aortic regurgitation. The Hill sign has been described as when the difference of greater than 20 mm Hg between arm and foot systolic blood pressure; this is now thought to be an artifact of sphygmomanometric lower limb pressure measurement and its removal from the list of the classic diagnostic signs for aortic regurgitation has been recommended by some authors.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The Quincke sign is an infrequently encountered physical examination finding. When this sign appears in a patient, the healthcare provider must complete a thorough physical examination with detailed attention paid to the cardiovascular exam.

Proper documentation is necessary for interprofessional communication when describing physical exam findings in an electronic medical record. Any signs and symptoms of valvular heart disease should be further evaluated by a transthoracic echocardiogram. Coordinated patient-centered care is required between the primary physician, nursing staff, cardiologist, and cardiothoracic surgeon to provide the best possible patient care.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Of the healthcare providers, the nursing staff has the most prolonged interaction with the patients. As a result, they can be the first to encounter new symptoms or physical examination findings, which must be communicated to the physicians. Therefore, integrated patient-centered care between healthcare providers is essential for improving patient outcomes.