**Absolute Contraindications**

**Refractive Instability**

Changes greater than 0.5 D in the last year constitute instability, and LASIK is not recommended for patients since it is a permanent procedure and operating on eyes that change rapidly may lead to severe complications such as postoperative ectasia.

**Corneal Ectasia**

A normal corneal thickness is around 540-550 microns.

**Keratoconus**

A cone-shaped cornea is an absolute contraindication for LASIK due to the risk of the condition causing corneal ectasia.

**Uncontrolled Systemic Diseases**

Systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, Graves disease, Crohn's disease, and other diseases that cause keratoconjunctivitis sicca or other forms of ocular pathology.

**Active Infection**

Bacterial blepharitis and keratitis can increase the risk of spreading infection and inflammation through the cornea into the eye.

**Relative Contraindications**

**Age**

While LASIK is generally not advised for children due to the changes in refraction during adolescence, it has been successful in patients under 18 years old with high myopia or other severe pathologies.

**Herpes Zoster Ophthalmicus or Herpes Simplex Keratitis**

Active infection by Herpes should be treated before surgery occurs. A study determined that it is safe to operate on patients with a history of ocular Herpes; however, it is recommended to wait one year for the virus to be in remission before surgical intervention.

**Cataract**

Patients with mild cataracts may still receive LASIK surgery, but with the caveat that when the cataract progresses, visual acuity may be impaired despite LASIK. Intraocular lens implantation following cataract surgery is an indicated alternative procedure to LASIK.

**Glaucoma**

Patients with glaucoma who undergo LASIK may develop a false decrease in intraocular pressure (IOP) after surgery due to decreased corneal thickness.

**Corneal Dystrophy (CD)**

Certain diseases like Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy may be accelerated with surgical interventions such as LASIK.

**Keloidosis**

It is suggested by some sources that patients with a history of keloids may have their surgical results complicated by the disease.

**Pupil Size**

It has been historically reported that patients with a larger pupil size may have an increased risk for postsurgical visual complications, such as halos/star-bursting with light, and glare.