There are newly established guidelines from leading societies on treating obesity hypoventilation syndrome.

Positive airway pressure (PAP) therapy, including continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bi-level positive airway pressure (BPAP), is the first-line therapy.

CPAP delivers constant pressure through the entire respiratory cycle, helping maintain the upper airway patency and reducing obstructive events. In the subset of patients with a lack of improvement in hypercapnia despite objective evidence of adequate adherence to CPAP, BPAP is chosen. BPAP should also be the option if the patient is intolerant of CPAP or demonstrates a need for higher pressures in CPAP (over 15 cm H2O).

The delta or the pressure difference between IPAP and EPAP is the driving pressure, the main contributor to ventilation and CO2 elimination. High levels of positive pressure are often needed because of poor chest wall compliance from obesity, diminished lung compliance from atelectasis, and cephalad displacement of the diaphragm from central adiposity during sleep. Using PAP, arterial blood gases should be monitored closely to ensure clinical improvement. For patients presenting to the hospital with acute worsening of chronic hypoxic hypercapnic respiratory failure, a decision about the ventilation mode must be made based on the severity of the respiratory failure. A trial of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, as an initial choice, can be afforded to an arousable patient with an intact gag and cough reflex.

However, early intubation should be considered when patients cannot protect their airways, do not tolerate bi-level positive airway pressure, or do not improve quickly. Patients admitted to the hospital due to acute, chronic hypercapnia respiratory failure often do not have a formal diagnosis of OSA or known PAP pressures (based on official titration); therefore, empirical treatment is used. In these cases that require empirical therapy with non-invasive ventilation, the choice of pressures (IPAP and EPAP) depends on the severity of respiratory acidosis and body weight (to maintain upper airway patency while providing adequate pressure support for ventilation). See more details in the separate section on non-invasive ventilation.

Adherence to PAP therapy, measured as the average hours of daily use in the past 30 days, is among the most challenging aspects of the management of OHS; this may be due to difficulty with the device and the masks, patient non-compliance, lack of education, or financial constraints. In a meta-analysis that included 25 studies, PAP was associated with improving OHS symptoms and mortality. Further PAP treatment improved gas exchange, daytime sleepiness, sleep quality, quality of life, and frequency of emergency department visits.

Supplemental oxygen therapy is necessary for patients with OHS and hypoxemia despite PAP use. This situation occurs in up to 50% of patients in the literature.

All patients with OHS should be encouraged towards diet and lifestyle modification aiming at weight loss. This weight loss should be controlled and supervised, preferably in a weight loss program. Weight loss improves ventilation and has been shown in various other cardiac and respiratory pathologies to reduce the risk of complications such as pulmonary hypertension. Weight loss improves nocturnal oxyhemoglobin saturation, decreases the frequency of respiratory apneas hypopneas, and improves pulmonary function.

Given that lifestyle and dietary modifications are not sustainable for the vast majority of patients, in the long run, there are surgical interventions for weight loss, including bariatric surgery. Referral to surgery should be when dietary and lifestyle interventions fail, there is low tolerance to high PAP pressures, or there is a progression of OHS symptoms and hypercapnia. Although dedicated studies for patients with OHS are lacking, various studies have shown these interventions to demonstrate mixed efficacy for long-term improvement in OSA symptoms, AHI, and weight loss maintenance. In a meta-analysis done in 2009, including 12 different studies, patients undergoing sleep studies before and after maximal weight loss from bariatric surgery reported a 71% reduction in AHI. Still, only 38% achieved a cure, defined as AHI less than 5/hour. Nearly two-thirds had residual disease, with most of them having persistent moderate OSA, defined as AHI greater than or equal to 15/hour.

Tracheostomy is the surgical modality aimed at sleep-disordered breathing and is generally only for those intolerant of or consistently non-adherent to PAP therapy and those in whom disease progression to complications including cor pulmonale occurs. Most people with a tracheostomy for OHS still require PAP therapy. It targets sleep-disordered breathing but does not alter the pulmonary mechanics, respiratory drive, or neurohumoral milieu.

Pharmacological therapies: The role of pharmacological therapies for OHS is limited. Respiratory stimulants, such as acetazolamide, medroxyprogesterone, and theophylline, offer a compelling theoretical benefit to patients with chronic hypercapnia or depressed respiratory drive but have limited data supporting their use in a practical setting.

Medroxyprogesterone serves as a respiratory stimulant at the hypothalamic level, but results from studies have been insufficient and contradictory, along with increased risks of hypercoagulability and venous thromboembolism. Other side effects like decreased libido and erectile dysfunction in men and uterine bleeding in women should be considered.

The use of recombinant human leptin (metreleptin) as a subcutaneous injection in patients with congenital or acquired generalized lipodystrophy has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to treat metabolic complications of leptin deficiency, however no studies to date in patients with OHS.