Patients receiving vancomycin therapy require monitoring to ensure the safety and efficacy of the medication. Periodic renal function tests and complete blood cell counts can help monitor the patient’s response to the drug.

Assessment of vancomycin trough concentrations is a strong recommendation in the following patients receiving intravenous vancomycin injections:

- A severe or invasive infection

- Critical illness

- Impaired or unstable renal function

- Morbid obesity (body mass index greater than or equal to 40 kg/m)

- Advanced age

- Inadequate response to therapy after three to five days

- Concomitant use of nephrotoxic agents (i.e., aminoglycosides, piperacillin-tazobactam, amphotericin B, cyclosporine, loop diuretics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, contrast dye).

Monitoring vancomycin trough concentrations in stable patients with normal renal function is also recommended to assess satisfactory clinical response. Obtaining vancomycin serum trough concentrations allows healthcare professionals to evaluate the efficacy of the vancomycin dosing regimen and clearance of the drug by the individual patient. The target therapeutic serum trough concentration varies depending on the indication and typically ranges between 10 mcg/mL to 20 mcg/mL.

Serum trough concentrations should ideally be drawn immediately (30 minutes or less) before administering a dose at steady-state conditions. Typically, steady-state occurs after the third dose of vancomycin. Unlike intravenous vancomycin injection, oral vancomycin typically does not require serum concentration monitoring due to a lack of systemic absorption.