The culprit antibody in Graves’ disease is the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor antibody. Its main site of action is on TSH receptors in the thyroid. However, TSH receptors are present in various extrathyroidal tissues. Evidence has suggested that the expression of the TSH receptor is in higher concentration in retro-ocular tissue in patients with Graves disease.

Of note, research has implicated several risk factors, which increase the predisposition of patients with Graves’ disease to develop orbitopathy. In general, higher titers of TSH receptor antibodies link to increased extra-thyroidal manifestations of Graves disease, including Graves eye disease. Other risk factors include female gender, certain genetic factors (however, specific genes or mutations remain unidentified in having a direct causal relationship), and exposure to radioiodine as a treatment modality for Graves disease.

Several cell types play a role in the pathogenesis of Graves orbitopathy. Fibroblasts are stimulated by TSH receptor antibodies as well as by T-cells (mediated by cytokine production) to initiate two pathways.

There is also a postulate that IGF-1 receptors, which are present in fibroblasts, when stimulated via TSH receptor antibodies, also synergistically stimulate GAG production.

Upper eyelid retraction occurs as a result of inflammation and fibrosis of Müller's muscle or a phenomenon called pseudo-lid retraction. This situation occurs when there is restriction of the inferior rectus muscle and thus resultant overactivity of the levator palpebrae complex.