The indications for bariatric surgery were first described in 1991. The classic criteria for a patient to be a candidate for any bariatric surgery include the following:

- A body mass index of 40 or higher or a body mass index of 35 or higher with at least one obesity-related comorbid condition. Such conditions include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and severely limiting musculoskeletal issues.

- Unsuccessful nonoperative weight loss attempts.

- Mental health clearance without alcohol or illegal substance dependence.

- No medical contraindications to surgery.

Updates to these criteria have included patients with a BMI of 30 to 35 with obesity-related comorbidities as an indication for laparoscopic adjusted gastric banding.

There is debate as to the appropriate threshold for bariatric surgery. The National Institute of Health makes the following recommendations: Otherwise, healthy patients with body mass indexes greater than 40 kg/m^2, who have failed at efforts at dieting, exercise, and medications, can be considered. Those with one comorbid condition, such as diabetes mellitus type 2 or obstructive sleep apnea, can be considered if the body mass index is greater than 35 kg/m^2. The American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS) states. Bariatric surgery should be offered as an option for appropriate individuals with a BMI of 30 to 35 kg/m^2 and obesity-related comorbidities who are unable to achieve lasting weight loss or comorbidity improvement with reasonable nonsurgical methods.