The term Ashman phenomenon or Ashman’s beat is used when describing a particular occurrence on an EKG that has been described as a wide QRS complex that follows a short RR interval preceded by a long RR interval. The QRS complex originates above the AV node and not at the right or left ventricle, and due to this, presents as a right bundle branch block (RBBB) or left bundle branch block (LBBB).

A practitioner can easily diagnose Ashman phenomenon by using the Fisch criteria as first described by Dr. Charles Fisch:

- A cycle that is relatively long, immediately ahead of the cycle terminated by the aberrant QRS complex: A short-long-short interval is even more likely to initiate aberration. Aberration could be either LBBB or RBBB or both, and both patterns may be noticed even in the same patient.

- RBBB from aberrancy with a normal orientation of the initial QRS vector: The concealed propagation of aberration is possible, such that there is a likelihood of a series of wide QRS supraventricular beats.

- Irregular coupling of aberrant QRS complexes

- Absence of a full compensatory pause

The degree of aberrant conduction may vary from beat to beat and from patient to patient. While a right bundle branch block pattern is more common, a left bundle block patter pattern or combined block pattern may be observed sometimes even in the same patient. In such situations where both LBBB and RBBB are noted, the patient likely has an underlying heart block, and an Ashman beat is not being seen.

Ashman phenomenon is often confused with premature ventricular complexes due to the similar appearance and subtle nature on EKG.

In summation, QRS morphology is the most crucial clue when it comes to distinguishing between a supraventricular or ventricular origin of wide QRS complexes.