**Patent Ductus Arteriosus**

Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a condition in which the ductus arteriosus fails to close after birth. A PDA is one of the most common cardiac defects associated with congenital rubella syndrome and may severely impact an infant's quality of life.

During fetal development, prostaglandins (E1 and E2) are responsible for maintaining the patency of the ductus arteriosus. Prostaglandin E2 has the most potent effect and is produced both by the placenta and the ductus arteriosus itself.

Patent ductus arteriosus is often treated medically with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as Indomethacin.

It should also be noted that NSAIDs taken during pregnancy can increase the risk of early closure of the ductus arteriosus. For this reason, it is often advised that pregnant mothers avoid these medications after 30 weeks of gestation.

**Aortic Transection**

An aortic transection is a condition where the aorta is torn or ruptured due to some trauma. This condition is most often fatal shortly after its onset since the aorta is the largest vessel in the body and supplies blood directly from the heart to the rest of the vessels. The most frequent site of aortic transection is at the location where the ligamentum arteriosum, the remnant of the ductus arteriosus, attaches to the aorta. The ligamentum arteriosum acts as a tether that holds the aorta and pulmonary artery close to each other. When the body experiences a rapid deceleration (such as in a car crash), a large shearing force is applied to these great vessels due to the rigidity of this tether. This sheering force is responsible for the subsequent rupture of the aorta.