**Where is the HIPAA Privacy Rule Applicable?**

The HIPAA privacy rule applies to almost every department in a medical facility, even when walking to the parking lot with a colleague or on your home internet, the confidentiality of PHI must be preserved. Only the bare minimum health information that is necessary should be disclosed during any health care service, and this also includes human resources or ancillary services. For example, when a pharmacist is about to dispense medication to a patient, he or she should only ask the patient if they know how to take the pill when to take the pill, and to follow up with their healthcare provider. No in-depth discussion with the patient in full view of other people is permitted. This rule also applies to other healthcare providers who may be exchanging information with other healthcare workers who are also actively involved in patient care. For example, it is permitted for a radiologist to ask the ordering medical resident a few questions about why the patient is having the test to ensure that the procedure is necessary and the best choice for the situation, but he or she is not at liberty to discuss this with a third party who is not actively treating the patient. In all such matters, one must first obtain consent from the patient to determine if he or she is willing to permit the doctor to divulge medical information to others. This rule not only applies to verbal communication but all written and electronic text.

In addition to HIPAA, many states have their own restrictive rules on the privacy of PHI, which may be far more stringent than HIPAA, particularly when the information concerns patients with infectious diseases like HIV, mental health problems, certain genetic disorders, and substance abuse. Further, there are also federal rules that are more stringent than HIPAA, such as those pertaining to substance abuse and drug addiction records. However, this does not mean that HIPAA is void when other more stringent rules are in place. In situations where a more stringent rule regarding privacy is in place, the more stringent rule will take precedence over HIPAA for that jurisdiction. All healthcare workers must be aware of both HIPAA and the state and federal rules that govern PHI.

**Contents and Authorizations**

When a patient is admitted to a healthcare institution, he or she must be provided with the information on rights to privacy, what type of PHI will be shared, and for what reason. This notice of privacy practice is now a requirement of HIPAA for all patients, regardless of age or gender. The patient must sign this document, and one copy must be kept in the hospital files. This also indicates that the patient did receive the privacy notice. If for any reason, the patient cannot sign, the reason must be documented and witnessed. If another person signs the document, the reason why the individual is signing must be documented. Once a notice of privacy practices is signed, the healthcare institution does not need to ask the patient repeatedly for disclosure of PHI in the course of normal care. If the patient’s health situation changes or the patient has additional privacy concerns, this should be documented in the note. The patient may ask that no family member or friend is permitted to pick up his or her medications or that none of the medical staff discuss the health condition with family or friends.

**Security With Flexibility**

The HIPAA security rule does provide all healthcare institutions with a practical and flexible format for implementing security measures. Some of these are mandatory requirements but others are flexible and allow the institution to implement security and privacy measures that are consistent with the organization’s resources, infrastructure, and functionality.

**What are Some Exclusions to a Patient’s PHI?**

There are several scenarios where disclosure of PHI may be violating HIPAA, and they include the following:

- Mental health notes, which under HIPAA are not allowed to be shared even for purposes of treatment, without explicit authorization

- Any legal document that pertains to medical records

- Laboratory results, especially the results of sexually transmitted diseases

**When Can PHI be Disclosed Without Consent?**

- If the patient cannot provide consent or is unavailable when disclosure is necessary for public health, by law, or regarding child abuse

- Anytime there is an investigation of fraud by the US department of health and human services

- When a healthcare worker is trying to obtain consent over the phone when the patient is not able to provide one

**Images and Videos**

It is important to understand that HIPAA violations not only occur after vocal or written disclosure of PHI but even after posting images. For example, cosmetic surgeons who routinely post preoperative and post-operative photos of patients, or surgeons who videotape surgical procedures must obtain consent from the patient. In addition, when not necessary, the face should be blanked. Professionals are also prohibited from using the names of patients in case reports. Anything that can identify a patient is not permitted.

**Specific HIPAA Rules That Pertain to PHI Security**

- Ensure that there is integrity, confidentiality, and security of all electronic PHI that the healthcare institution creates, maintains, receives, or transmits

- Develop protection against any reasonably anticipated hazards or threats to the integrity of the security of such data

- Protect against any reasonably anticipated use or disclosure of information that is not permitted or required

- Ensure compliance among the workforce

- Have flexibility in the system, so patient care is not compromised

- Covered entities may use any security that meets the minimal standards

- The type of security depends on the size, complexity, and capabilities of the covered entity