Traditional teaching expresses that resuscitative hysterotomy is performed in mothers carrying a fetus of the gestational age of 24 weeks or older, who are in peri-arrest or have actively arrested. At 24 weeks, the fetus is considered viable. There is also a 20% to 30% fetal survivability at 24 weeks onward if PMCS is performed in a scenario where appropriate neonatal critical care facilities exist. Newer theories argue the 24-week rule, as the primary goal of resuscitative hysterotomy is the resuscitation of the mother. Also, when a patient arrives in extremis, the gestational age may not be known, and the use of ultrasound is not practical. A quick evaluation of fundal height can aid in estimating gestational age. If the uterus fundus can be seen at the umbilicus, the gestational age can be considered to be about 20 weeks. The uterine fundus grows about 1 cm every week after that.

Another critical factor in determining the need to perform PMCS is the time from arrest. Resuscitative hysterotomy should be performed four minutes after the patient arrests. The goal delivery time within the first five minutes of arrest. Four minutes is used because this corresponds to the time after which there will be a precipitous decline in neurologic recovery for the infant from anoxic injury. It is important to re-iterate that PMCS can offer resuscitative benefit to the mother despite fetal survivability or neurological outcome. The 2010 American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines for CPR and Emergency Cardiovascular Care recommend considering starting resuscitative hysterotomy after 2 cycles of CPR.