Treatment of Cogan syndrome depends on its severity, whether it is limited to ocular disease or extensive inner ear, ocular or systemic vasculitis. High-dose corticosteroids (1 to 2 mg/kg/day) for systemic vasculitis are the first line to obtain remission.

If an improvement occurs, corticosteroids may be tapered over 2 to 6 months. The corticosteroid should be discontinued if no response occurs. Failure of treatment will require additional immunosuppressive therapy like methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, and cyclosporine A, which have shown better outcomes.

Interstitial keratitis is treated with topical steroids and cycloplegics, systemic steroids, disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), and biologics.

The early treatment with systemic corticosteroids determines the course of audiovestibular involvement. However, corticosteroid eye drops or local atropine can be used for interstitial keratitis, which shows a good response. Cogan syndrome with large vessel vasculitis has also been treated with oral cyclophosphamide (starting at 2 to 3 mg/kg/day) given for four to six months. If no response to cyclophosphamide is noted, cyclosporine (4 mg/kg/day or less) may be used.

Tumor necrosis factors (TNF-a) inhibitory agents have recently been another therapeutic option, with infliximab, a chimeric anti-TNF-a monoclonal antibody being the most effective, according to a recent literature review that showed 11 out of 12 cases treated with infliximab have achieved clinical remission.

Rituximab has been shown to reduce the medications used to control the systemic manifestations and help avoid cochlear implants or deafness in certain severe cases; however, it is not used as a first-line.

Benzodiazepines, antihistamines, or vestibular therapy can be used for chronic vestibular dysfunction that occurs in a few cases.