The first hour of the exam is fairly standard regardless of the indication. The patient is positioned supine on the gamma camera table. The radiotracer is rapidly infused, and anterior images are acquired at one-minute intervals. At one hour, left anterior oblique and right lateral views are often acquired to help definitively localize radiotracer activity in the common bile duct, gallbladder, and duodenum. On the left anterior oblique view, the anteriorly located gallbladder is seen to move laterally, differentiating it from posteriorly located common bile duct and duodenum which will be seen to move medially.

After the first hour of the exam, various techniques are used depending on the results of the initial imaging as well as the clinical concern.

**Acute Cholecystitis:**

The absence of radiotracer activity in the gallbladder signal at one hour is abnormal but not specific enough to diagnose acute cholecystitis. At this point, two options are available to assess definitively for the presence or absence of acute cholecystitis. The first is acquiring delayed imaging in 3+ hours (4+ from the administration of radiotracer). However, delayed images are suboptimal in the setting of acute cholecystitis when prompt diagnosis and intervention are preferred. A second, more expeditious option is the administration of a sub-analgesic dose of morphine which causes the sphincter of Oddi to contract and the ampulla of Vater to close; this diverts incoming bile to the gallbladder. In a normal patient with a patent cystic duct, filling of the gallbladder will be visible within 30 minutes after morphine administration. This technique allows the completion of the entire exam in 90 minutes. If there is continued non-visualization of the gallbladder after delayed images or morphine augmentation, this confirms the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. If the gallbladder fills, then acute cholecystitis is excluded. Morphine administration in cholescintigraphy is approximately as accurate as delayed imaging with HBS having a sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 90%.

It is worth noting that hepatobiliary scintigraphy is also a reflection of hepatic physiology. Therefore, in the setting of severe hepatic dysfunction and concurrent lack of significant excretion of the radiotracer into the bowel, further delayed imaging past the usual 4-hour protocol, out to as far as 24-hours, may be necessary to confirm cystic duct obstruction.

**Chronic gallbladder disease (aka chronic cholecystitis, functional gallbladder disease):**

The hallmarks of chronic gallbladder disease (CGBD) manifest as delayed gallbladder filling or a depressed gallbladder ejection fraction (GBEF). In the setting of proper patient preparation and the absence of concurrent acute abdominal disease (i.e., pancreatitis, peptic ulcer disease, hepatitis) delayed the filling of the gallbladder (after 1-hour) is consistent with CGBD.

**Biliary Leak:**

A biliary leak is diagnosed when radiotracer is identified outside its normal biodistribution (e.g., outside the liver, biliary tree, and bowel). Most common locations are in the gallbladder fossa (post-cholecystectomy), in the right paracolic gutter or the perihepatic space. In the setting of brisk or large leaks, this may be present during the first hour of imaging. Delayed images may be obtained out to 24-hours to identify slow or small leaks. In indeterminate cases, alternative views (lateral or oblique) versus SPECT or SPECT-CT imaging may be helpful.

**Biliary Obstruction/Atresia:**

If no radiotracer is seen in the bowel during the initial first hour of imaging, delayed biliary-to-bowel transit is present, which can be due to an obstructive process, though it may also be due to intercurrent illness, chronic cholecystitis, a normal variant in 20% of individuals, as well as seen in up to 50% of patients pre-treated with CCK. Delayed images out to 24-hours may be necessary to diagnose obstruction definitively. The degree of obstruction (low-grade/partial versus hi-grade/complete) can be inferred by the degree of delayed transit and amount of radiotracer reaching to the bowel. Biliary atresia, which is a congenital variant of complete biliary obstruction, is suggested scintigraphically when no radiotracer is seen in the bowel by 24-hours. This diagnosis is must then verified by an invasive procedure.