Patient placement is supine on the operating room table with the buttock of the surgical side elevated on a stack of blankets. The operative leg gets prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. Planned skin incisions are marked. Some surgeons prefer anterior and posterior skin flaps for a fishmouth type closure with a slightly longer anterior flap, while others prefer medial and lateral flaps. In a traumatic setting, flaps may be dictated by what tissue remains viable. An optional sterile tourniquet is then applied to reduce blood loss. Incisions are then made along the planned lines, and electrocautery is used to control bleeding. Dissection is performed through the underlying fascia. Depending on the level of the amputation, muscle groups are identified and transected with electrocautery. Muscle groups should be transected approximately 1 to 2 inches longer than the planned bony cut to allow for musculature coverage of the bony end and myodesis. The femoral artery and vein are identified, dissected, ligated, and transected. A similar procedure is performed if encountering any other large vessel branches. Next, the sciatic and saphenous nerves are identified and dissected. Gentle traction is applied, and the nerves are sharply transected to reduce the risk of neuroma formation. A similar procedure is performed for any other nerves encountered, depending on the level of the amputation.

Transection of the femur is typically 12 cm proximal to the joint line, but other factors may dictate the level.