An elective pancreatic surgical candidate must undergo a strict preoperative evaluation. A thorough history and physical examination must be performed on all patients. Current medical conditions and past surgical procedures must be taken into account when planning for surgery. The patient's current presenting signs and symptoms and past family history of cancer must all be included in the assessment. All pancreatic surgery should be performed in carefully selected patients. Preoperative labs, imaging, and overall status should be reviewed. Patients undergoing cancer resections should have preoperative Ca19-9 check for three reasons:

- If elevated confirming concern for malignancy

- If exceedingly high raise suspicion for disseminated disease

- A starting point to be utilized as a reference for post-operative monitoring

The vast majority of patients will undergo preoperative endoscopic ultrasound with biopsy.  Once the diagnosis of the pancreatic disease has been established, the proper steps must be taken to determine if the patient is a surgical candidate. The surgical planning team should undertake preoperative medical and cardiac clearance. In the preoperative planning phase, the patient’s cardiac and respiratory function should be medically optimized to help avoid any postoperative morbidity or mortality. These two body systems carry some of the biggest risk factors for postoperative complications after major abdominal surgery. The patient's nutritional status should be evaluated, as this has also been a marker of postoperative outcomes. Chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer patients often have differing degrees of malnourishment. Multiple formulas and lab measures are used, but the clinician's clinical judgment of the patient should be the most important factor. Any signs of preoperative malnutrition should be addressed and managed accordingly.

**Imaging**

- CT imaging is an extremely valuable tool for the evaluation of pancreatic lesions. The CT can provide the precise location of the lesion, size, and, most importantly, any involvement of any surrounding structures. CT imaging can really help determine the resectability of the tumor. A pancreatic CT protocol involves triphasic cross-sectional imaging with arterial, late arterial, and venous phases. This type of imaging allows identification of the majority of pancreatic cancers in the delayed arterial phase/venous phase, as many are hypovascular in nature. However, the arterial phase can identify many other pancreatic lesions, as well.

- Endoscopic ultrasound can be used in the preoperative and operative settings. The ultrasound can be used to look for vascular invasion and resectability of the mass. Endoscopic is best used to obtain a tissue biopsy. Endoscopic ultrasound is very useful in small pancreatic lesions such as cysts. Another useful advantage for ultrasound is the use of helping diagnose nodal involvement and metastatic diseases, such as with large lymph nodes in the celiac or mediastinal positions.

- MRI also has a role in diagnosing pancreatic lesions. MRI is an excellent modality for determining pancreaticobiliary anatomy and pathology. MRCP can identify pancreatic duct abnormalities, such as strictures. It is better overall at identifying the biliary and pancreatic ductal systems. MRI is becoming more popular for diagnosing and following lesions post-operatively as well.

- PET scans have conflicting evidence for the regular use in diagnosing and staging of pancreatic disease. The sensitivity depends on the lesion's size, so it is susceptible to miss small areas of disease. Elevated serum glucose levels can cause false negatives and cause missed metastatic disease. When CT and PET scans are combined, this can increase the overall accuracy while increasing the sensitivity and specificity, especially for lesions that were missed on CT imaging.