The first consideration in treatment selection is the desire for fertility, which will guide treatment considerations. Hysterectomy is the definitive cure. The remaining options target the primary symptoms of heavy, painful menstrual bleeding while preserving the uterus.

**Medical Therapies**

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are one of the primary medical therapies. These medications target the cyclooxygenase enzyme which produces the prostaglandins responsible for painful cramping during menstruation.

Various hormonal therapies are available which include oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), levonorgestrel intrauterine device (IUD), danazol, and aromatase inhibitors. These therapies aim to reduce the estrogenic effects which lead to endometrial proliferation. Data to support a particular therapy lack well-powered randomly controlled trials (RCTs); however, levonorgestrel IUDs are generally considered to be the primary therapy due to decreased side effect profile and overall success rates.

**Minimally Invasive/Surgical Therapies**

Several interventional radiologic procedures exist which may be options for the patient who fails medical therapy but desires future fertility. MRI-guided and ultrasound-guided high-intensity ultrasound thermal ablation can be done to target focal disease.

Endometrial ablation may be considered in patients who do not desire future fertility but prefer a less invasive alternative to hysterectomy. Limitations include the inability to target deeper adenomyotic foci due to its superficial approach.

Myomectomy and partial hysterectomy are more invasive options that aim to preserve fertility. These options allow for targeting of deeper foci; however, subsequent scarring may lead to disease recurrence as the endometrial-myometrial interface is disrupted, a risk factor for adenomyosis. Additional considerations include the potential for future pregnancy complications due to altered uterine anatomy with an increased risk of uterine rupture, premature rupture of membranes, premature labor, and spontaneous abortion.

Hysterectomy remains the definitive cure for adenomyosis.