Fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, or altered mental status are symptoms that raise the concern for meningitis. However, these symptoms may be associated with multiple other diagnoses. A thorough history and physical exam are necessary to aid indicate that a patient has meningitis. Because meningitis represents a dangerous infectious disease, communication with all levels of the staff is essential. Ensuring the proper isolation and personal protective equipment (PPE) to prevent spread to the medical team or other patients is paramount and should be of primary concern. Once the diagnosis of aseptic meningitis is established and more concerning diagnoses are excluded, only then can these precautions be discontinued.

An LP is necessary to confirm the diagnosis and may be performed by an emergency medicine clinician, an internist on an inpatient floor, or an interventional radiologist in an IR suite. Laboratory expertise is needed to analyze the specimens sent and PCR studies, which help identify the most common etiology (viruses). Unfortunately, these studies are still underutilized.

Depending on the cause of meningitis, other services need to be consulted. For instance, if a patient has tuberculosis meningitis, an infectious disease specialist may be required to develop the correct medication regimen for the patient, along with a pharmacist. If a patient has meningitis due to malignancy, the oncology team consult is of assistance. The nurses play an essential role by administering the needed medications, monitoring vital signs, and maintaining patient isolation.

Aseptic meningitis is usually a benign condition, but the prognosis can vary with the cause. For better outcomes for the patient, an interprofessional team including clinicians, specialists, PAs and NPs, nurses, and pharmacists is essential.