People with T1D require insulin therapy, glucose monitoring (preferably CGM), and diabetes self-management education and support. Multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) using basal (preferably a long-acting insulin) and bolus (preferably rapid-acting insulin for meals and correction)insulins, continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (rapid-acting insulin) through an insulin pump, or use of automated insulin delivery (hybrid closed loop) systems with rapid-acting insulin, are available. Automated insulin delivery is associated with greater time in the target range and less hypoglycemia. When initiating a treatment plan, use shared decision-making, considering individualized realistic and attainable goals, risk of hypoglycemia, lifestyle, and the availability and affordability of different regimens.

Hypoglycemia is the most frequent adverse effect of insulin therapy. It is important to educate people with diabetes and their partners about the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia, which include diaphoresis, tachycardia, lightheadedness, confusion, hunger, visual changes, and tremors. With a long duration of T1D, hypoglycemia unawareness becomes more common. Generally, 15 to 20 g of glucose should be given orally for blood glucose below 70 mg/dL.

When possible, people with T1D should meet with a dietitian, be taught carbohydrate counting, and be instructed to use an insulin-to-carbohydrate ratio (grams of carbohydrate covered by one unit of insulin) for mealtime dosing. If carbohydrate counting is not possible, a carbohydrate-consistent diet is helpful. Estimating the fall in glucose resulting from 1 unit of rapid-acting insulin, called a correction or insulin sensitivity factor, is also recommended when treating hyperglycemia. The correction factor can be initially estimated using the formula 1800 divided by the TDD. This number will need to be adjusted per subsequent glucose monitoring results. When using correction doses, the individual needs to be careful not to take injections too close together (“stacking”) to avoid overdosing (insulin administered when there is still active insulin from previous doses causing overlapping insulin doses) and hypoglycemia.

It is important to note that insulin requirements vary across the lifespan and under specific circumstances. For example, larger insulin doses are typically required during puberty, pregnancy, when steroids are given, and with the development of obesity. Individuals need less insulin when they are engaged in aerobic exercise and during the “honeymoon period.” The honeymoon period occurs soon after diagnosis when there can be a temporary recovery of beta-cell function.

Multiple types of insulin can be used for insulin injection therapy.

For basal insulin injection therapy, long-acting insulin is preferred,  often given once a day (U-100 and U-300 glargine, degludec) or 1 to 2 times daily (detemir and U-100 glargine). Glargine does not have a pronounced peak and lasts approximately 20 to 24 hours. U-300 glargine lasts more than 24 hours, and degludec has a longer duration of action, up to 42 hours. Intermediate insulin (NPH, NPL) is the least expensive basal insulin, but it is associated with more hypoglycemia. It has onset in 1 to 2 hours, peak action at 2 to 8 hours, duration of 12 to 24 hours, and is usually given before breakfast and bedtime. When MDI is used, the individual will ideally use rapid-acting insulin with each meal for hyperglycemia correction and a daily long-acting basal insulin.

Insulin pumps deliver insulin every 5 minutes to provide basal needs and deliver boluses of insulin to control mealtime excursions and correct hyperglycemia. Only rapid-acting insulin is used in insulin pumps/automated insulin delivery systems. Some pumps use external tubing to infuse insulin from the pump to the infusion site in the subcutaneous tissue, while another pump uses a “pod” that contains insulin, which is directly applied to the skin and is controlled via a wireless connection to a controller or smartphone. Insulin pumps are programmed with adjustable basal rates, insulin-to-carbohydrate ratios, correction factors, and target glucose ranges.

Some insulin pumps communicate with CGMs and have threshold/predictive low-glucose suspend features. With these devices, insulin delivery is suspended when hypoglycemia occurs or is predicted to occur. In the newer hybrid closed-loop automated insulin delivery systems, the CGM sends glucose data to an insulin pump with a control algorithm. Basal insulin delivery is automated based on the CGM readings received every 5 minutes and the target glucose. Advanced systems deliver automated correction boluses as well. Mealtime bolus insulin is still required to be delivered under the direction of the user.

Several clinical trials are currently underway, testing “closed-loop” fully automated insulin delivery systems, as well as a closed-loop system that delivers insulin and glucagon. The hope is that these closed-loop automated insulin systems will lead to better glucose management, with minimal risk of hypoglycemia and reduced burden for people with T1D.

Physical activity is recommended for people with T1D. Exercise increases insulin sensitivity, improves cardiovascular health, improves lipid profiles, decreases microvascular complications, reduces the risk of osteoporosis, and decreases mortality. Glycemic control can be more difficult during times of activity related to the intensity and duration of the activity, amount of circulating insulin, glucose level before exercise, and dietary intake. Individuals should be taught the effect of different types of activity (aerobic vs. anaerobic) on glucose levels, how to balance carbohydrate intake and insulin doses when active, and how to avoid hypoglycemia and wide glycemic excursions with exercise.

In addition to insulin therapy, diet, and physical activity, individuals with T1D should generally have an annual eye exam by an eye care specialist and an annual foot exam. Those with foot deformities, neuropathy, a history of foot ulcers, or peripheral arterial disease should have their feet examined at each visit, be educated in proper foot care/footwear, and, if available, see a podiatrist and be evaluated for orthotics if indicated. Other specialists, such as nephrologists, ophthalmologists, and cardiologists, as well as referrals to community resources, social workers, and mental health professionals, may be needed. The use of statins and other anti-hyperlipidemic therapy, smoking cessation, and anti-hypertension therapy to reduce cardiovascular risk and risk of nephropathy and retinopathy are important and discussed later in this article. Pancreatic and islet cell transplantation are two treatment options that can restore normoglycemia.

A pancreatic transplant is usually performed simultaneously with a kidney transplant (SPK transplant). These transplants are considered when end-stage renal disease is present, in relatively younger individuals (<50 years old without coronary artery disease), and when usual treatment options have been unsuccessful in preventing large variability and severe hypoglycemia. Individuals who receive a pancreatic transplant or an islet-cell transplantation require immunosuppressive therapy. Encapsulated islets could obviate the need for immunosuppressive therapy and are a promising future therapy. These and other research initiatives give hope to the increasing number of people with T1D that a cure is in their future.