Wrist drop has many causes and in all cases, if not treated appropriately, it has significant morbidity. Essentially, all function in the hand is lost and one becomes disabled. Thus, to prevent the high morbidity, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team. The majority of cases are managed conservatively with physical therapy and a wrist splint; thus a physical therapist must be involved in the care of the patient. If the cause is neurological, then the patient will need continuous follow up with the neurology team. The nurses should assist in the coordination of care and the education of the patient and family. The key is to manage the primary cause. The patient will need serial neurological exams to determine if the condition is improving. The nursing staff should make sure the patient receives regular follow-up visits, and report progress or lack thereof to the managing clinician.

Some patients may benefit from surgery and in such cases, a neurosurgeon or a hand surgeon specializing in the management of nerves has to be consulted. The timing of surgery when radial nerve palsy is due to a humeral fracture is not yet known. Some surgeons wait a few months to see if spontaneous recovery occurs before undertaking explorative surgery. In the acute setting of humeral shaft fracture, proper immobilization of the wrist is necessary. Surgery patients need to be followed by the appropriate nurse specialist and will need extensive rehabilitation.

Finally, some patients may need occupational therapy to regain function and use of their wrist. Because wrist drop is a serious problem, many patients develop anxiety and depression; thus a mental health nurse consult is appropriate.

**Outcomes**

Approximately 70% of radial nerve palsy cases have been reported to be resolved with conservative treatment. In the case of immunologically mediated wrist drop, as in mixed cryoglobulinemia, drugs such as rituximab may facilitate a rather rapid recovery. Unfortunately, complete recovery may take months or even years and patients should not be given unrealistic expectations.