Cetuximab is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor utilized to treat the following:

**FDA-Approved Uses**

- Colorectal cancer, metastatic, KRAS wild-type (without mutation) - Cetuximab improves both overall survival and progression-free survival and preserves quality-of-life measures for patients with colorectal cancer where other treatments have failed. There is a limitation of use. Patients with colorectal tumor-bearing mutated K-ras did not benefit from cetuximab, whereas patients with tumor-bearing wild-type K-ras benefited from cetuximab. If KRAS mutation in either codon 12 or 13 is detected, then patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma should not receive anti-EGFR antibody therapy.

- Head and neck cancer (squamous cell) - Treatment for locoregionally advanced head and neck cancer with concomitant high-dose radiotherapy plus cetuximab demonstrates improvement of locoregional control and lowers mortality without increasing the common toxic effects associated with radiotherapy to the head and neck. Cetuximab plus platinum-fluorouracil chemotherapy improved overall survival when given as first-line treatment for patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

**Non-FDA-Approved Uses**

- Colorectal cancer, advanced, biweekly administration

- Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), EGFR-expressing, advanced

- Squamous cell skin cancer, unresectable

**Benefits of Combined Therapy and Uses in Clinical Trials**

EPIC trial**:**Cetuximab and irinotecan improved progression-free survival and response rate and resulted in a better quality of life than irinotecan alone.

BOND trial: Cetuximab has clinically significant activity when given alone or in combination with irinotecan in patients with irinotecan-refractory colorectal cancer.

CRYSTAL trial: First-line treatment with cetuximab plus FOLFIRI, compared with FOLFIRI alone, decreased the risk of progression of metastatic colorectal cancer. The benefit of cetuximab was limited to patients with KRAS wild-type tumors.

Adding cetuximab to FOLFIRI as first-line treatment also demonstrates improved survival in patients with KRAS wild-type mCRC. BRAF tumor mutation would be an indicator of a poor prognosis.