The typical post-procedure course involves the development of erythema, peeling, and skin fragility, which can last for up to 3 months after the treatment.

Short-term complications of treatment include the formation of milia and acneiform eruptions in the treated area. Herpes simplex virus reactivation may also occur, for which prophylactic valacyclovir should be given in patients with a known history of herpes simplex virus infection.

Any procedure carries the risk of infection. Bacterial and fungal infections are less commonly seen after CO2 laser resurfacing due to "thermal sterilization" but are often seen in the setting of prolonged use of occlusive dressings, which should generally be removed 48 hours after the procedure.

Changes in pigmentation, both hyperpigmentation, and hypopigmentation, are also common. The risk of these changes is increased in Fitzpatrick skin types III-VI compared with types I-II. Hyperpigmentation is more likely to be self-limited than hypopigmentation; hyperpigmentation is also, fortunately, the more common sequela. Bleaching preparations and chemical peels may be used to reduce the appearance of hyperpigmentation, either prophylactically or therapeutically. Hypopigmentation is more common with the use of CO2 lasers than with other laser types due to the degree of thermal injury and subsequent inflammation that occurs; this complication can be very difficult to treat. Common methods of addressing hypopigmentation include topical steroids, fractionated CO2 laser treatment, blue lasers or intense pulsed light, and ultraviolet light exposure.