Grief is a natural and universal response to the loss of a loved one. The grief experience is not a state but a process. Most individuals recover adequately within a year after the loss; however, some individuals experience an extension of the standard grieving process. This condition has been identified as complicated grief or prolonged grief disorder, and it results from failure to transition from acute to integrated grief.

The terms grief, mourning, and bereavement have slightly different meanings:

- **Grief**is a person's emotional response to loss.

- **Mourning**is an outward expression of that grief, including cultural and religious customs surrounding the death. It is also the process of adapting to life after loss.

- **Bereavement**is a period of grief and mourning after a loss.

- **Anticipatory Grief**is a response to an expected loss. It affects both the person diagnosed with a terminal illness as well as their families.

- **Disenfranchised grief**as defined by Kenneth Doka (1989) is a "grief that persons experience when they incur a loss that is not or cannot be openly acknowledged, publicly mourned, or socially supported." Physicians regularly encounter losses in the form of patient deaths. Grief in healthcare providers is unsanctioned and may play a role in physician burnout. To adequately address the crisis of physician burnout, we need to address the under-recognized role of grief in the physician's clinical experience.

- **Takosubo Cardiomyopathy (Broken Heart Syndrome)**: is a weakening of the left ventricle caused by severe emotional or physical stress such as loss of a loved one, sudden illness, a serious accident, or a natural disaster (e.g., earthquake). It almost exclusively occurs in women and resolves within a month.