Twenty years after reporting the first case, chronic interstitial nephritis in agricultural communities is a significant public health issue in many countries, such as Central America, Sri Lanka, etc. It is estimated that the North Central Province (NCP) in Sri Lanka has more than 60000 estimated cases and more than 20000 annual deaths. The available CINAC statistics from hospital records reveal a steady rise in cases from 2000 to 2015. Between 2000 and 2002, the underlying cause of kidney failure was not found in 82% of CKD cases seen at Anuradhapura teaching hospital.

Many epidemiological studies have shown CKD prevalence in farming communities. Less than half of them have diabetes mellitus or hypertension, males predominate, and kidney damage begins in the early stages of life. While the disease predominantly affects men, other community members, such as women, children, and adolescents in these farming communities, are also affected whether they work on the farms or not. This increased prevalence of CKD has been observed in farming communities both in highlands and lowlands.

Additionally, it has been demonstrated that in these farming communities, pesticides and heavy metals (cadmium and arsenic) are present in well water, floors in homes, and farmlands (more concentrated in crop areas). Farmers that contaminate their clothes with pesticides (due to lack of protection) provide additional exposure to the family, especially to women who wash family clothing. In the United States, a cohort of 55,580 male licensed pesticide applicators showed a significant association between chronic pesticide exposure and the risk for chronic kidney disease.

An epidemic of CKD not linked with conventional risk factors has been observed in places like India, Japan, Central America, and Sri Lanka.

In Central America, increasing numbers of CKD cases and increased CKD-associated mortality have been noted over the last two decades, especially in El Salvador and Nicaragua. The Pan American Health Organization has reported CKD-specific mortality rates (per 100 000 population) as follows: Nicaragua: 42.8; Guatemala: 13.6; El Salvador: 41.9; and Panama: 12.3.