Practitioners should inquire about the location, size, shape, and consistency of any soft tissue mass. Furthermore, providers should inquire about any local scar tissue, especially as a consequence of prior burn injuries. Similarly, the presence of prior vascular grafts, joint prosthetics, or other surgically implanted foreign materials should be noted. Previously irradiated tissues may be a risk factor for the development of a fibrosarcoma as are pre-existing dermatofibrosarcoma or well-differentiated liposarcoma.

Additionally, the regional lymph node examination should be accompanied by a complete neurovascular examination. Fibrosarcomas typically arise in deep connective tissue rich with collagen, and thus, it is less common in the retroperitoneum, mediastinum, head, and neck. Fibrosarcomas generally are spherical with sharp demarcation from surrounding tissue and have a firm consistency on palpation. Fibrosarcoma tumors typically range from 3-8 cm in size.

Fibrous tumors often have a very delayed diagnosis, as they arise from deep tissue and cause painless soft-tissue swelling. It is often not until symptoms arise from the local mass effect of a deep tumor that the lesion is identified and diagnosed. Impeded blood circulation, nerve compressions, or movement restriction is often present when diagnosing a fibrosarcoma.

Late presentations of fibrosarcomas may be accompanied by weight loss and anorexia. Furthermore, pain associated with a deep soft tissue mass greater than 5 cm in size increases suspicion of malignancy, and warrants referral for further specialist evaluation.