The cord is dependent upon three longitudinal arterial trunks or channels. The anterior and posterior spinal artery longitudinally runs along the whole spinal cord and often anastomose with each other forming plexuses.

- The anterior and posterior spinal arteries receive supply via the vertebral arteries only up to the cervical segments of the spinal cord. Inferiorly the spinal arteries receive blood through the lumbar and radicular arteries.

- **Anterior spinal artery (ASA)****:**
- Runs the length of the spinal cord longitudinally along the anterior median fissure
- Primary blood supply of anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord
- The diameter of the ASA through the thoracic spinal cord is notably narrower when compared to its size in the cervical and lumbar regions.  Thus, much of the blood flow to the thoracic spine derives from segmental arteries branching from the dorsal aorta. 
- The anterior artery supplies the motor tracts and forms from the fusion of the vertebral arteries and receives reinforcement of blood supply from 6 to 8 radicular arteries.


- **Posterior spinal artery (right and left):**
- Run longitudinally on each side of the midline of the posterolateral sulcus consistently through the length of the spinal cord 
- The two posterior spinal arteries originate directly from the vertebral arteries and are the primary blood supply to the posterior columns, dorsal grey matter, dorsal sensory columns - these arteries are often found to be discontinuous, and occasionally one artery will move across to supply the opposite side.
- It is useful to think of the posterior spinal artery as a plexus as it often anastomoses with the contralateral posterior spinal artery and may receive anastomoses with the anterior spinal artery via a plexus that encases the cord.


- **Artery of Adamkiewic:**
- It is the largest anterior radiculomedullary artery of that individual, contributing to its significant variation of location - it is also the largest anterior segmental artery.
- It typically arises from the left posterior intercostal artery and is the only significant arterial supply feeding the anterior spinal artery along the lower thoracic, lumbar, and sacral spinal cord.
- Due to its atypical nature, the artery of Adamkiewicz typically arises from the left side of the aorta between T8 and L2 in 75% of people, although it is important to realize that the artery of Adamkiewicz can also be present above T8 in about 20% of people - other less common variations exist, and collateral circulation with lumbar arteries exist.


- Other unnamed radicular arteries exist that also supply an important collateral support network.****