Management of patients presenting with atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia begins with an initial evaluation of their hemodynamic stability. Hemodynamically unstable patients present with tachycardia associated with hypotension, ischemic chest pain, altered mental status, respiratory failure, or shock. These patients need their AVNRT terminated electrically with an urgent electrical cardioversion. Hemodynamically stable patients should be treated first with vagal maneuvers to cease the rhythm acutely. If attempted twice and the patient remains in AVNRT, the clinicians should perform modified vagal exercises at least twice to terminate the arrhythmia. Once such maneuvers are unsuccessful or are inappropriate, intravenous (IV), it warrants medical therapy.

First-line medical therapy is IV adenosine, administered up to 18 mg given in increments of 6 mg in the absence of contraindications such as severe bronchospastic lung disease or severe coronary artery disease. In the event both vagal maneuvers and IV adenosine are unsuccessful or ruled inappropriate,  IV non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, IV beta-blockers, or IV digoxin are next in consideration. The selection of these IV medical agents is based upon the presence of concomitant factors, such as in patients with AVNRT and hypotension; IV digoxin may be appropriate as it lacks anti-hypertensive properties. Subsequently, in a patient who is actively wheezing secondary to a reactive airway, IV non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers should be used first.

IV adenosine terminates approximately 80% of AVNRT arrhythmias. Patients in whom medical treatment and Valsalva maneuvers fail or those who cannot tolerate medication due to its side effects might opt for catheter ablation as a one-time definitive cure. Catheter ablations in patients with AVNRT have a high success rate, reported to be as high as 95%. Prolonged medical therapy with Class III or IC antiarrhythmics such as flecainide, propafenone, amiodarone, dofetilide, or sotalol can be done in instances where the patient does not respond to calcium channel blockers or beta-blockers and refuses catheter ablation. The selection of these antiarrhythmics usually is based on patients' comorbidities and the drug side effect profiles.