The trachea begins at the caudal aspect of the cricoid cartilage and extends to the carina. During organogenesis, the laryngotracheal structures form from the laryngotracheal bud emanating from the foregut immediately caudal to the fourth branchial arch. The development of the tracheoesophageal septum ensues and is crucial in separating these structures. As mentioned, newborn tracheal diameter ranges from 4 to 7 mm, and the adult diameter ranges from 12 to 25 mm. The length of a newborn trachea is approximately 4 cm and ranges from 11 to 13 cm in adults.

The trachea is composed of stacked c-shaped cartilaginous rings, and this rigid structure is key to preventing collapse. The membranous posterior wall contains the trachealis muscle, and the creation of this incomplete ring structure allows the trachea to expand during the dynamic respiratory process. There are typically 16 to 20 cartilaginous rings along the trachea that grow with the patient early in life.

When considering reconstruction, it is important to understand the blood supply to the trachea. Arterial supply is provided by branches from the inferior thyroid and bronchial arteries, which enter the lateral sidewall bilaterally. During reconstruction, it is crucial to preserve this lateral vascular supply.

Another key element in tracheal reconstructive surgery is a clear understanding of nearby structures and their intimate relationships with the airway. In the cervical region, the esophagus parallels the posterior wall of the trachea. The recurrent laryngeal nerves run in the tracheoesophageal groove bilaterally before entering the larynx and must be identified and preserved. The thyroid gland spans the cervical trachea and is intimately attached anteriorly via Berry’s ligament. In the thoracic cavity, the trachea is surrounded by multiple mediastinal structures, particularly the lungs and vascular structures entering and leaving the heart. This fact emphasizes the necessity of a multidisciplinary approach when managing distal or LSTS reconstructions, which will be discussed later.