Valproate toxicity requires excellent interprofessional team coordination between physicians, resident doctors, nurses, emergency medical technicians/paramedics, pathologists, radiologists, hospital pharmacists, and medical toxicologists. Patients can present to the emergency department with impaired hemodynamics and CNS depression. Rapid triage and resuscitation by an emergency physician are critical for initial stabilization. Consultation with the radiologist is vital to identify cerebral edema. As the patient undergoes triage in the ICU in severe cases of poisoning, critical care nursing is of paramount importance for hemodynamic monitoring and overall care of the patient.

Critical care physician supervision is necessary for the care of intubated patients with severe valproate toxicity. The hospital pharmacist should assist with medication reconciliation and provide accurate dosing for carnitine(intravenous L-carnitine of 100 mg/kg once, followed by infusions of 50 mg/kg (to a maximum of 3 g per dose) every 8 hours till serum ammonia levels are decreasing

Mental health professional consultation is crucial in cases of intentional overdose. Medical students may provide a vital role in the review of the medical chart and patient education. The night float team/nocturnist should receive a face-to-face handoff with all the important information regarding the case. As depicted above, there are multiple health care providers involved in the care of the patient with acute valproate toxicity, and hence excellent and prompt communication is mandatory for improving patient outcomes and reducing morbidity and mortality. The benefits of teamwork are that it leads to improved coordination of care, reduces provider burnout rates, and ultimately helps to achieve better patient outcomes.

In summary, the interprofessional team approach using evidence-based medicine and patient-centered care correlates with reduced utilization of health care services and better patient outcomes.