Endometritis is the most common postpartum infection. Disease severity can range from mild to severe, with treatment regimens ranging from outpatient PO antibiotics with adequate obstetrics follow-up and return precautions to inpatient hospitalization with IV antibiotics and surgery.

Patients will often present to generalists: non-obstetric primary care providers, urgent care centers, and emergency departments. Early obstetric consultation is critical. Such a consult can help aid efficient and appropriate diagnosis and treatment. If imaging is needed, ultrasonographers, radiology technicians, and diagnostic radiologists are all critical in providing an accurate diagnosis. For ideal antibiotic choice, dosing, and administration, a clinical pharmacist may help validate antimicrobial therapy against the latest antibiogram data, check for interactions, and alert the staff to the potential adverse effects. If operative intervention is required, an anesthesiologist is also necessary for a successful surgery.

To ensure that a patient with endometritis receives optimal care, an effective interprofessional approach is crucial. Prompt involvement of appropriate specialists and strong communication between providers can make a significant difference in the patient's clinical course, morbidity, and mortality. Obstetrical nurses should promptly report fevers to the managing providers, administer treatment, and educate patients. With interprofessional collaboration, patient outcomes will improve. [Level 5]