The major vessels that run through the femoral triangle include the femoral artery and femoral vein. In the area of the femoral triangle, the great saphenous vein connects to the femoral vein on its anterior medial surface just inferior to the inguinal ligament through an anterior aperture in the fascia lata. The femoral artery gives rise to several branches near its posterior lateral surface near the center of the femoral triangle: slightly superiorly the deep femoral artery and slightly inferiorly the medial and lateral circumflex arteries; there is a well-known anatomical variation.

The superficial epigastric artery emerges from the femoral artery near the proximal portion of the femoral triangle; it provides blood supply to the skin overlying the femoral triangle as well as the skin of the lower abdomen.

Lymphatics are the most medial major structures contained within the femoral triangle. The deep inguinal lymph nodes are positioned within the femoral triangle and are separated from the superficial inguinal nodes by the fascia lata. The deep inguinal nodes receive drainage from the glans, clitoris, deep leg structures, and superficial inguinal nodes.

The Cloquet node is located within the femoral triangle just inferior to the inguinal ligament and is the most superior inguinal node; it receives drainage from both the superficial and deep inguinal lymph nodes and can be removed to assess metastasis in cases of cancer within its region of drainage. The perineum, genitalia, abdomen below the umbilicus, lower anus, and lower back all drain to the superficial inguinal nodes.