A host of diseases impact the salivary glands, and age can often be an essential factor when determining etiology. Viral causes are more likely to be seen in young children, while autoimmune and inflammatory conditions occur more frequently in middle-aged and elderly populations. A thorough history and complete physical exam can further characterize the disease process. For example, the sialotropic Paramyxovirus that causes mumps is usually seen in unvaccinated children and would be expected to demonstrate acute swelling of both the parotid glands with or without fever. If a fever is present and there is acute swelling of only one salivary gland, usually the parotid gland or submandibular gland, this may be indicative of sialolithiasis or acute sialoadenitis, and ultrasound is necessary for confirmation. Confirmatory findings of acute bacterial sialoadenitis include hypoechoic salivary glands associated with ductal dilatation if found early or, if detected late, abscess resulting in a relatively anechoic focus. The most common cause of acute sialoadenitis is Staphlococcus aureus, but other causes can include Streptococcal species and Haemophilus influenza. If the diagnosis is confirmed, the clinician should initiate oral antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin-clavulanate over a 10-day course.

Several chronic conditions impact salivary glands. One important chronic condition that affects the major salivary glands is Sjogren syndrome. Often seen in adults, Sjogren syndrome is an idiopathic autoimmune condition that causes inflammation and atrophy of the salivary glands and lacrimal glands, causing atrophy and resulting in xerostomia and xeropthalmia, respectively. Sjogren syndrome commonly presents with other autoimmune conditions, most frequently systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Diagnosis of Sjogren syndrome is through serological testing, positive anti-SSA (Ro) and anti-SSB (La) antibodies, physical exam findings, dry eyes and mouth for at least three consecutive months, positive Schirmer’s test, and histologically through labial biopsies. The histological hallmark of the condition is focal lymphocytic infiltration in otherwise normal-appearing glandular acini. It is worth noting that one does not biopsy the parotid glands directly to make the diagnosis of Sjogren syndrome due to the risk of damaging the facial nerve. While ultrasound can be useful, sialography or contrast-enhanced CT can be used to determine the extent of salivary involvement with Sjogren syndrome. Other causes of salivary adenopathy may include sarcoidosis, human immunodeficiency virus infection, mycobacterial infection, or radiotherapy. If chronic swelling of a single gland is present, a ductal obstruction must be ruled out via ultrasound.

Neoplastic disease may also affect the salivary glands. Pleomorphic adenoma is the most common benign tumor, constituting up to two-thirds of all salivary gland tumors, while mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is the most common malignancy. Pleomorphic adenoma shows a predilection for females ages 30 to 50, most often involves the parotid gland, and is best treated by wide local excision. MEC is also most commonly seen in females ages 40 to 60 years old and predominantly affects the parotid gland as well. Similar to pleomorphic adenoma, surgical excision is also the treatment of choice for MEC.

**Conclusion**

Human salivary glands represent a crucial part of oropharyngeal anatomy. Saliva contains amylase, which initiates digestion through the breakdown of carbohydrates. Salivary gland pathology may be a harbinger of systemic disease, including conditions that may shorten the life span. These glands also play a crucial role in immunologic defense as saliva contains many immunoglobins, mainly IgA, which help defend the oropharynx from microbes. Ultrasound is the gold standard for imaging of salivary glands. Histologic findings of salivary glands can be imperative in determining a diagnosis, and biopsies should be considered, especially in the setting of chronic autoimmune or inflammatory conditions.