Glipizide is a second-generation sulfonylurea that is FDA-approved for the treatment of adults with diabetes mellitus type 2. Its use is as an adjunct to diet and exercise. It is usable in combination with metformin, a biguanide, to reach goal HbA1c in patients with not adequate metabolic control in 3 months, despite compliance with diet, exercise, and medication. In a specific context, it can be a monotherapy in cases of intolerance or a contraindication to use metformin. Given its lower cost, availability, and efficacy to control type 2 diabetes, glipizide and the other sulfonylureas are common choices for physicians.

Second-generation sulfonylureas are considered to be more potent by weight when compared to the first-generation agents. Sulfonylureas were discovered in 1942 and have enjoyed extensive use in type 2 diabetes mellitus treatment since the 1960s.

Other drug classes used in the treatment of diabetes mellitus type 2 include alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, biguanides, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, glinides, and thiazolidinediones.

**Dosing Forms:**

Glipizide is available in doses of immediate-release tablets of 5 mg, and 10 mg, and extended-release tablets of 2.5 mg, 5 mg, and 10 mg. Glipizide is only indicated for type 2 diabetes.

Immediate-release tabs: Start with 5 mg PO daily initially, increase dosage 2.5 to 5 mg based on blood glucose tolerance response. Maintenance dose range: 2.5  to 20 mg PO daily or every 12 hours. The maximum dose is 40 mg/day.Extended-release tabs: Initially: 5mg PO daily, given with breakfast. Dose adjusted according to patient tolerance response and blood glucose.

Switching from insulin to glipizide:Patients with low insulin doses around less than 20 Units: The recommendation is to discontinue insulin and initiate glipizide at an appropriate dose.Patients with a moderate insulin dose using more than 20 Units: The recommendation is to decrease the insulin dose around 50% of the current dose, and start glipizide at the appropriate doses. Then begin reducing insulin dose according to patient response.**Dose adjustments:**Hepatic failure: Start dose at 2.5 mg PO daily, immediate-release tabs.Renal failure: In patients with a GFR of less than 50 ml/min, decrease the dose by 50%.