Laboratory workup of hypoalphalipoproteinemia includes a comprehensive metabolic profile, a plasma fasting lipid profile, and a plasma ApoA-I level. Secondary causes of low HDL levels must also be considered and ruled out before diagnosing HA. Low HDL levels can be seen in patients with marked hypertriglyceridemia, monoclonal gammopathy, or severe liver failure. Low HDL levels can also be seen in patients taking anabolic steroids, beta-blockers, or benzodiazepines.

Secondary etiologies causing a decrease in HDL can be ruled out with a complete medical history and a metabolic profile, including protein electrophoresis, a fasting lipid profile, and a hepatic panel. In the absence of any secondary causes of low HDL levels, the following step in the workup is to measure plasma ApoA-I levels using immunoassay to evaluate for hereditary causes of low HDL.

A review of the medication list of a patient presenting with low HDL levels will help rule out secondary causes. For example, beta-blockers may increase triglyceride and VLDL levels while causing a decrease in HDL levels.

Lipid abnormalities in disease-specific causes of low HDL-cholesterol:

ApoA-I deficiency: normal triglycerides and LDL-C, HDL-C <5mg/dL, and undetectable ApoA-I levels. Tangier disease: increased triglycerides, decreased LDL-C, HDL-C <5 mg/dL, and ApoA-I present (<10 mg/dL) Partial LCAT deficiency (fish-eye disease): increased triglycerides, LDL-C levels about 50% of normal, HDL-C about 10% of normal, and ApoA-I levels around 20% of normal. LCAT deficiency: increased triglycerides, decreased LDL-C, HDL-C <5 mg/dL, and ApoA-I levels <40 mg/dL.