Once the diagnosis of NF1 has been established, the most important component of management is surveillance for complications associated with the syndrome. For the clinician to understand this, there must be an understanding of the natural history of NF1 as described above in the manifestations. Complex neurofibromas can grow, becoming symptomatic by compressing the spinal cord or airway, prompting referral for surgical management. Because of the increased risk for optic glioma, patients require annual ophthalmologic evaluation, at least until they are 6-7 years of age since optic glioma is unlikely to develop after that age. If the patient develops symptoms from an optic glioma, the treatment commonly is chemotherapy. Monitoring blood pressure is vital because renal artery stenosis or pheochromocytoma could lead to hypertension. Once the patient stands or ambulates, around 10 to 12 months of age, long bone dysplasia, more commonly tibial dysplasia, may be more evident and radiographs will show the findings. Once confirmed, the patient should receive a prompt referral to orthopedics for further management. It is of great importance to recognize NF1 early, due to the neurocognitive dysfunction that at least half of the patients will develop, most commonly learning disabilities. Early recognition of these neurocognitive problems, leading to early intervention, will give the patient the best opportunities available to develop and function well into adulthood.

In patients with NF1, there is also an increase in the incidence of pheochromocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, leukemia, and Wilms tumor, compared with the general population.

In NF2, the need for treatment is only if the tumors become symptomatic, and the treatment of choice would be surgery.

For TSC, it is very important as well to identify the disorder early, especially if the patient develops infantile spasms or seizures because those warrant timely instauration of treatment. The goal is to avoid intractable seizures and to prevent severe cognitive impairment.