Patients presenting with DFUs should be queried as to how long the wound has been present and what treatment, if any, has been tried. Many neuropathic patients are unaware that a wound is present until drainage begins or tissue becomes necrotic and malodorous. This is the classic "fetid foot" presentation. Patients with DM are immunocompromised and often do not mount a fever or elevated white blood cell count in the face of significant infection.

The patient should have both feet examined at every visit. The toes should be manually separated and interdigital tissue assessed for cracks, fissures, or signs of fungal infection. The patient should be asked about glycemic control and informed that for DFUs to heal the blood sugar must be consistently 150 mg/dL or less. A Semmes-Weinstein 10-gram monofilament test to assess for loss of protective sensation should be performed and result documented. Dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses should be assessed. If these are not palpable, Doppler signals should be assessed and documented. It is recommended that all patients over 50 years of age should undergo a baseline arterial ultrasound with Ankle-Brachial and Toe-Brachial indices and Pulse Volume Recordings. Any abnormality in peripheral circulation warrants referral to a vascular surgeon.

The patient's footwear and gait should be assessed and documented. Many DFUs are caused by inappropriate footwear which causes friction and pressure on the deformed diabetic foot.

The wound is the last thing that should be assessed. The length, width, and depth should be documented in centimeters. Any tunneling or undermining should be noted. The wound bed should be assessed to determine if the wound extends to or probes to the bone. The periwound tissues should be assessed for fluctuance, induration, or maceration from moisture associated with wound drainage. Odor, color, and quality of wound drainage should be noted and documented.