The diagnosis of acute intermittent porphyria results from finding elevated PBG in urine in a random sample kept protected from light. Diagnostic confirmation should include quantitative measurement of PBG, ALA, and total porphyrins from the same urine sample. Normal values are 0 to 4 mg/L, but values may reach as high as 25 to 100 mg of ALA and 50 to 200 mg of PBG during an acute attack of AIP.

A urinary PBG level of only 0 to 4 mg/L during acute symptoms almost rules out acute porphyria as the cause of neurovisceral symptoms.

Although urine collection for quantification of PBG and ALA is optimal during the peak of an attack of AIP, it may be collected within a few days to weeks after the acute episode also, owing to the persistent elevation of urinary ALA and PBG for many months to years after an attack.

Elevation of urine porphyrins, especially copro porphobilinogen (caused by spontaneous polymerization of porphobilinogen in the urine), is often observable. However, it merits noting that the nonspecific elevation of urine porphyrins, especially coproporphyrins (1 to 2 times the reference range), is common and not specific for porphyria. Stool porphyrins are typically within the reference range or just mildly elevated.

An increase in plasma porphyrin confirmed by increased fluorescence emission scan peak at 619 nm can present. Molecular and DNA testing of HMBS deficiency is unnecessary for the diagnosis but has utility for family screening.

**Associated Laboratory Abnormalities (During An Acute Attack):**

- Hyponatremia - most common

- Hypomagnesemia is also common

- Mild aminotransferase elevations

- Mild leucocytosis

**Differentiating Between Acute Porphyrias**

As mentioned below (vide infra), most acute porphyrias' symptomatology shows significant overlap. Symptoms of AIP are often clinically indistinguishable from those of hereditary coproporphyria and variegate porphyria. Although the diagnostic approach to distinguish AIP from other acute porphyrias has little evidence backing at present, new evidence-based diagnostic strategies are under development for these conditions.

**Plasma Fluorescence Staining**

In contrast to AIP, HCP, and other porphyrias in which the sera of subjects with biochemically active disease have emission peaks at approximately 619 nm to 620 nm, the serum from patients with VP have a unique porphyrin-peptide in plasma that has its peak fluorescence at approximately 626 nm, following excitation by light of 410 nm (the Soret band). This reaction forms the basis of the utility of fluorescence of diluted sera at physiologic pH to differentiate VP from other acute as well as cutaneous porphyrias.

**Emerging Role of Genetic Mutation Analysis in Diagnostic Confirmation**

The specific type of acute porphyria is now discernable by genetic testing, which is available commercially at several labs. The approach involves sequencing of the four genes that are defective in the acute porphyrias:

**Gene/Type of Acute Porphyria**

- ALAD/ALAD-deficient porphyria (Doss porphyria)

- HMBS/AIP

- CPOX/HCP

- PPOX/VP

The evolution of next-generation sequencing (NGS) to porphyria diagnosis is ongoing, with investigators having recently designed a panel containing four genes - ALAS1, HMBS, CPOX, and PPOX for mutational analysis of AIP, HCP, and VP.