Stroke is the fifth leading cause of death and the leading cause of serious long-term disability in the United States (US). The incidence of stroke continues to rise, driven by an aging population with 7 million stroke survivors currently in the US. The combined cost of stroke treatment and care is expected to double to $240.7 billion annually by 2030. Improvements in primary and secondary stroke prevention are necessary to reduce the current and projected economic burden of stroke. Stroke survivors have physical and cognitive impairments and complex medical and social needs that are unmet by the current fragmented system of outpatient stroke care. To improve outcomes, an interprofessional team dedicated to stroke patients is now the current standard of care.

Acute stroke treatment advances in intravenous thrombolytic therapy and endovascular capabilities have contributed to improvement in stroke outcomes. However, it largely remains a chronic condition with a limited evidence base for recovery measures.

Stroke rehabilitation provides a conduit after acute hospitalization to address residual functional deficits that a majority of stroke survivors suffer. AHA guidelines suggest rehabilitation programs with varying levels of care and interventions, management of comorbidities, and disability assessments.

Outpatient stroke prevention clinics provide an opportunity to address transitions of care and provide patient-centered care for stroke survivors.

The primary care provider, pharmacist, and nurse practitioner should educate patients on the prevention of stroke by discontinuing smoking, adopting healthy eating habits, exercising regularly, maintaining healthy body weight, and being compliant with medications. Pharmacists are also tasked with medication reconciliation and verifying dosing, and reporting back to the healthcare team if they find anything that warrants attention. Nursing staff often has the first contact with a patient at each follow-up visit and can assess for progress and also any adverse medication effects. Physical and occupational therapists may also be involved and must report back to the managing clinician regarding progress and any setbacks. The entire interprofessional team needs to collaborate and communicate to drive outcomes effectively. [Level 5]

Fundamentally, enhancing post-stroke health outcomes rests heavily on an interprofessional effort consolidated by an interprofessional team that includes physicians with expertise in stroke and other health care providers that includes speech and physical therapy.