The goal of treatment is to increase the diameter of the ring to allow unobstructed passage through the esophagus. Breaking the ring most often does this. Methods of doing so include dilation and/or biopsies of the ring with biopsy forceps.

Dilation can be done with bougies or pneumonic balloons. Bougies can be used with a  guidewire (Savory dilators), without a guidewire (Maloney dilators), or with a pneumonic balloon dilator. Dilation with a bougie is done without direct visualization of the esophagus, but guidewire placement is done with direct visualization during endoscopy showing the path of the dilator. The pneumonic balloon dilators allow dilation with direct visualization. Fluoroscopy can be used as well to assist with dilation.

There has been evidence that doing four quadrant biopsies with jumbo forceps will obliterate a Schatzki ring as well. This allows direct visualization of the treatment since it is done during an endoscopy. The whole ring is not broken with biopsies; therefore, there is some concern that the residual tissue may lead to recurrence, a concern that is being studied further.

Often patients are on some type of acid-reducing medication like a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), especially if they have mechanical obliteration of the ring with dilation or biopsy forceps. There is evidence that PPI, along with dilation, is safe and effective. The effect of PPI alone has been looked at as well in patients with average ring diameters of around 10 mm and can be followed with a barium-pill esophagram reducing the need for procedures and risks of dilation. Duration of treatment is, on average, 10 months, and the initial study only had nine participants; however, treatment is a consideration for populations of patients that are at high risk for procedures or dilations.