**Carpal tunnel syndrome**

The normal course of carpal tunnel syndrome is that it tends to be progressive in the vast majority of patients. However, there may be fluctuations in the severity of symptoms between weeks. Patients with mild disease will have improvement with conservative treatment. Up to 80% of patients will have an improvement in symptoms with a corticosteroid injection. For these patients, only 22% remain symptoms free after one year. However, failure to improve from an injection is a poor prognostic indicator for success from surgical intervention. With surgical intervention, the success rates range from 70 to 90% in improving or relieving symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome following a year after surgery. The rate at which symptoms persisted following one year postoperatively ranges from 2 to 20% depending on the severity of the initial presentation.

**Ulnar tunnel syndrome**

Ulnar tunnel syndrome is a rare neurological disorder with limited data available regarding treatment outcomes. Conservative management can be successful in some cases. However, the mainstay treatment for severe cases remains surgical, especially during instances where there is an identifiable mass or lesion, causing compression. The reported outcomes in case studies have yielded good outcomes, but there is a lack of large, comparative studies published.

**Wartenberg syndrome**

Most patients experience spontaneous resolution of their symptoms, with up to 71% of patients reporting excellent outcomes from conservative management. Surgical outcomes have yielded mixed results with success rates as high as 74% in a study by Lanzetta and Foucher, whereas a report by Calfee et al. reported that 55% of patients treated operatively continued to have symptoms at 3.5-year follow-up.