A multiple organ approach is indicated when treating patients with heat-related illnesses. Respiratory, hepatic, renal, and circulatory support must be initiated with potentially multiple cooling methods. Giving fresh frozen plasma and blood platelets as needed is also recommended. Previous animal studies have also shown that the administration of thrombomodulin can be helpful because it demonstrates anti-DIC and anti-inflammatory properties.

Malignant hyperthermia is rare but life-threatening. Susceptible patients typically have an inherited mutation that results in abnormal ryanodine receptors (RYR-1) or have other myopathies such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, central core disease, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and King-Denborough syndrome. When a susceptible patient is given certain anesthetic agents, notably halogenated or neuromuscular depolarizing agents, the abnormal RYR-1 cause an unregulated release of calcium ion resulting in excessive skeletal muscle contraction and increased metabolism. The initial clinical features present as muscle rigidity elevated heart rate and elevated end-tidal carbon dioxide. The person’s temperature becomes elevated along with metabolic acidosis.

The rapid treatment of malignant hyperthermia is paramount to prevent a fatality. Once malignant hyperthermia is suspected, dantrolene must be given intravenously as it is a ryanodine receptor antagonist. It is also important to rapidly cool the patient, give 100% oxygen, and regulate metabolic acidosis.

Serotonin syndrome and neuroleptic malignant syndrome are other disorders of temperature regulation. Although they both present with hyperthermia and are both due to adverse drug reactions, it is important to distinguish them from one another. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) persists over many days and is depicted by rigidity or the complete loss of voluntary movements. Serotonin syndrome is much more rapid, happening over a time span of hours, and can present with fast movements such as tremors, muscular spasms, and hyperactive reflexes. These two reactions must be managed emergently to avoid organ failure, especially if the patient’s temperature goes past 40.5 degrees Celsius. There are both physical and pharmaceutical ways to cool the affected patients. Physical methods include providing cool towels, ice packs, cooling blanket systems, and intravenous infusion of fluids. Pharmaceuticals include sedatives and antipyretics such as paracetamol and NSAIDs. (Note that in critically ill patients, it is important to consider the individual patient’s renal function and gastric function before administering NSAIDs.)

Hyperthyroidism is another disorder of thermoregulation. In this endocrine disease, the thyroid is overactive resulting in increased metabolic pathways. The core temperature is elevated due to an elevated basal metabolic rate with resultant increased heat production, as well as increased oxygen consumption and ATP turnover.

In contrast, some diseases that can cause decreased heat production, or hypothermia include endocrinological diseases such as diabetes, hypothyroidism, hypoadrenalism, and hypopituitarism. Those who are most at risk for hypothermia are elderly patients, trauma patients, those who are mentally ill, those who are abusing alcohol or drugs, and those with low socioeconomic status. Ordinarily, people who get hypothermia have an underlying issue—either from a disease or surgery.

When a patient with one of these diseases presents with hypothermia, it is imperative to treat the underlying disease in order to effectively treat the hypothermia. This includes treatments with pharmaceuticals including triiodothyronine and steroids. Other causes of hypothermia from decreased metabolic rates include malnourishment, severe burns, and hypoglycemia.

Hypothermia, like hyperthermia, affects all of the human body’s systems. When the core temperature drops below 30 degrees Celsius, the heart is vulnerable to developing arrhythmias. Hypothermia can cause hypovolemia and electrolyte disturbances; therefore, it is important to keep the patient hydrated and to manage their electrolyte disturbances.

Central pathology can also result in impaired thermoregulation. Patients with traumatic brain injury are likely to have impaired thermoregulation due to the hypothalamus's key role in regulating core body temperature. Other problems in the CNS that affect thermoregulation can include tumors in the CNS, spinal cord injuries, intracranial hemorrhage, and diseases such as Parkinson, Wernicke encephalopathy, and multiple sclerosis.

Patients who are on the extreme spectrums of age (such as infants and elderly persons) are at higher risk for disorders of thermoregulation, especially when ill. The very young and the very old cannot easily increase their metabolic rates given their lower muscle mass and decreased shivering reflex. Senescent changes include those affecting vasomotor sweating function, skeletal muscle response, and temperature perception. Elderly persons have lower than normal internal body temperatures and decreased immunity; when they have an infection they may not mount a normal pyretic response. Instead, they may present with hypothermia secondary to infection. Studies have shown that the core temperatures of elderly patients with sepsis within their first 24 hours of presentation are a predictor of mortality.

Hypothermia is not always deleterious and it can be useful in treatments. Certain patients who have endured hypoxic-ischemic brain injuries or suffered from cardiac arrests may benefit from therapeutic hypothermia (TH). Elevated body temperatures in the setting of brain injury or post-cardiac arrest are associated with higher mortality rates and slower recovery. Thus, hypothermia in post-cardiac arrest patients and perinatal hypoxic patients is used to prevent neuronal injury by lowering the demand for metabolic oxygen.

When TH is recommended, it should proceed very rapidly. Ice packs and intravenous administration of cold fluids are utilized to cool the patient. Cooling blanket systems, cooling suits, and cooling helmets or caps may also be effective. For post-cardiac arrest patients, intranasal cooling using nasal probes also may be utilized.