If the diagnosis of a perinephric abscess is delayed, this can lead to increased mortality. A perinephric abscess should be suspected if a patient remains febrile after 4 to 5 days of receiving adequate antibiotic therapy for pyelonephritis.

Routine blood work including a chemistry panel and complete blood count (CBC) can assess underlying kidney function and leukocytosis. Urinalysis is used to assess the presence of pyuria and proteinuria. Urinalysis may be normal in perinephric abscess since abscess might not communicate with the collecting system. Urinalysis is also normal in a patient with a perinephric abscess that develops from hematogenous seeding since there is no communication with collecting system. Blood cultures may grow bacterial organisms in patients with perinephric abscess due to hematogenous seeding of infection.

Leukocytosis is a very nonspecific parameter. People with diabetes can also present with acidosis initially. Inflammatory markers including erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are always elevated.

Abnormalities can be visualized on different radiographic imaging methods, but computed tomography (CT) with contrast enhancement is the preferred imaging modality.

Plain radiography may show abnormalities that might suggest perinephric abscesses. These radiological abnormalities include an absence of psoas margin, the presence of an abdominal mass, an enlarged kidney with ill-defined borders, a radio-opaque stone and ill-defined kidney shadow.

Ultrasonography is suggestive of abscess suppuration when there is a horizontal separation seen between urine (low density) and pus (more dense fluid).

CT with contrast is the best modality to identify perinephric abscesses, it identifies the abscess and defines its extent. Enhanced CT can also be used to assess perinephric suppuration to adjacent structures including the liver, mediastinum, and diaphragm. Gerota's fascia usually confines abscesses within the perinephric area. These abscesses may extend to the retroperitoneal organs or rupture into the collecting system.

Nephrolithiasis should always be excluded once a perinephric abscess is diagnosed especially in patients with high urine pH since this may indicate the presence of a urea-splitting organism.

Nuclear imaging and MRI have limited use in the diagnosis of a perinephric abscess.