Clinically, Meckel diverticulum should be suspected in any child younger than 2 years of age with painless rectal bleeding. It accounts for approximately 50% of all lower GI bleeding in children younger than 2 years of age.

The most sensitive test is a Meckel radionuclide scan (commonly known as a Meckel scan). It is a nuclear study done by injecting technetium-99m, which is absorbed by the ectopic gastric mucosa allowing for visualization of the Meckel diverticulum. The uptake of the dye can be enhanced using cimetidine or glucagon. The feeding artery of the Meckel diverticulum, (an anomalous superior mesenteric artery branch), has a long and non-branching course and ends toward the right lower quadrant.

In the case of active, and ongoing bleeding, contrast extravasation is evident in the angiogram. A superior mesenteric angiogram may be helpful if the bleeding is greater than 0.5 ml/min. Usually, the bleeding has stopped by the time angiography is completed. Angiography is not very useful for most types of lower gastrointestinal bleeding.

An angiogram is only indicated when the results of barium or nuclear scan are negative. With conventional contrast arteriography, a Meckel diverticulum is characterized by the finding of an anomalous superior mesenteric artery branch feeding the diverticulum. The diagnosis of a bleeding Meckel diverticulum can be established by Meckel scan or mesenteric arteriography, double-balloon enteroscopy, and capsule endoscopy. However, if diagnostic testing is not conclusive, or the patient is hemodynamically unstable, either laparotomy or laparoscopy is indicated to determine whether a Meckel's diverticulum is the source of bleeding.