# Introduction

Urinary tract infections (UTI) are one of the leading causes of infections in the United States. By the age of 18 years or older, at least 10% of females would have been diagnosed with a UTI. By the age of 24 years, 1 in 3 females would be treated for a UTI.

# Specimen Collection

There are a variety of methods aimed at specimen collection to diagnose a UTI. Some of the factors that dictate the method used include patient comfort, the ability to void, and reducing the small risk of iatrogenic infection. Sterile collection methods can be employed, such as a suprapubic puncture or urethral catheterization, in an effort to reduce overdiagnosis and subsequent overtreatment.

**Specimen Collection **

There are a variety of collection techniques for urine culture, including suprapubic aspiration, straight catheter technique, and mid-stream catch with or without cleansing. In pediatric patients who are not toilet trained, diaper collection, and sterile bag, urine collection methods are used. Suprapubic collection is the best method to avoid specimen contamination with bacteria, particularly in the distal urethra. Owing to patient discomfort, invasiveness, lack of indication (except in rare instances), and inappropriate resource use, this method is rarely deployed. Urine collection with a single catheter (straight catheter technique) is the next best option. Still, due to labor intensiveness as well as the possibility of introducing bacteria into the bladder, potentially causing a UTI, this technique is seldom used and only when indicated. The previously aforementioned methods of specimen collection are therefore reserved for those patients who are unable to self-collect. Hence, the most common method a urine sample is obtained for urine culture is via a clean-catch midstream technique, which is neither invasive nor uncomfortable. Colony counts from these samples correlate reasonably well compared to suprapubic aspiration and single catheter technique.

The current standards for self-collection include mid-stream clean-catch technique, mid-stream catch without prior cleansing, and random sampling delivered without instruction. There are no clinically significant differences seen between the various self-collection techniques.

**Specimen Transportation**

Owing to the probable increase risk of growth of colony-forming units (CFU) non-indicative of the patient's true sample, urine specimens must be plated within two hours of collection, unless refrigerated or placed in a preservative.

# Procedures

**Specimen Preservation and Processing**

Preservation of the urine sample can be achieved with a boric acid solution or refrigeration for up to 24 hours. Both techniques yield adequate preservation of the sample. Samples that are left at room temperature for greater than 4 hours run the risk of bacterial overgrowth of causative and contamination organisms.Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, have been noted to be inhibited when boric acid is used as a storage medium. Therefore, careful consideration of the storage medium should be practiced, and timely refrigeration must be prioritized.

Specimens are processed routinely using calibrated loops for plating. This method allows for CFU/mL findings as well as the isolation of colonies for identification and susceptibility testing. Some of the most utilized media are blood agar and MacConkey agar. The temperature of the plates should be kept between 35 to 37 degrees Celcius with a recommended incubation time of 24 to 48 hours. However, Oligella urolytica, a slow-growing, gram-negative, and rare UTI-causing organism, has been reported to have an incubation of over 48 hours.

# Indications

Routine bacterial urine cultures are not always necessary in the evaluation of outpatients with uncomplicated UTIs and simple lower UTIs, such as uncomplicated cystitis.

Additionally, new-onset or worsening sepsis without evidence of an alternate source is also another appropriate indication for urine culture. New-onset or worsening sepsis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients globally and should be swiftly recognized clinically for the purposes of swift urine culture collection.

Urine culture is not indicated and is therefore deemed inappropriate when the urine characteristics are odorous, cloudy, or discolored in the absence of other localizing signs or symptoms, reflex urine cultures based on results of urinalysis such as pyuria in the absence of other indications, and to document successful response to therapy.

# Potential Diagnosis

The positive findings of a urine culture can lead to the diagnosis of UTI (uncomplicated vs. complicated), asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB), catheter-associated UTI (CA-UTI), and catheter-associated asymptomatic bacteriuria (CA-ASB). These diagnoses lead to the possible identification of the source of sepsis. Proper diagnosis lends itself to proper antibiotic stewardship and decreases in morbidity and mortality. As up to 25% of hospitalized patients in North America receive indwelling catheter placement, utilization of the urine culture is of utmost importance to determine potential diagnoses.

# Normal and Critical Findings

**Normal Findings**

Urine is normally sterile. However, there is a possibility of contamination. Hence, samples from patients without UTI symptoms with low colony counts certainly below the threshold for bacteriuria, and no detection of organisms, are considered to be normal samples.

**Critical Findings**

- **UTI**: UTI symptoms. Gold standard confirmation is the urine culture.

- **CA-UTI:**According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America's (IDSA) 2010 guideline for diagnosis of CA-UTI, it is defined as patients with an indwelling catheter with the presence of symptoms or signs compatible with UTI with no other identified source of infection. They must also have greater than or equal to 1000 CFU/ml with more than one bacterial species in a single catheter urine specimen or in a midstream voided urine specimen in patients whose urinary catheter (urethral, suprapubic or condom) has been removed within the past 48 hours. According to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the patient must meet the following three criteria: 1) The patient must have an indwelling urinary catheter in place for more than 2 days on the date of the event, 2) The patient has a fever (of greater than or equal to 38 degrees Celsius, costovertebral angle (CVA) pain or tenderness, suprapubic tenderness, urgency, frequency or dysuria, and 3) The patient has a urine culture with no more than two species of organisms identified, at least one being a bacterium of greater than or equal to 1000 CFU/ml.

- **CA-ASB:**Positive urine culture in the absence of UTI symptoms.

- **Bacteriuria**: The most commonly used cut-off for significant bacteriuria is greater than or equal to 100,000 CFU/ml of urine.

The most common cause of UTIs in both inpatient and outpatient settings is Escherichia coli, accounting for the overwhelming majority of cases. E. coli is followed by coagulase-negative staphylococci, Klebsiella species, Proteus species, and Enterobacter species.

# Interfering Factors

Urine culture results may be deemed faulty and inconclusive due to patient factors. Recent antibiotic use is a major culprit, as this therapy may mask the presence of UTI-causing organisms. Furthermore, the use of diuretics or the consumption of large amounts of fluids may also dilute the urine and invariably lead to a decrease in the number of bacteria present in the sample. Moreover, the large consumption of ascorbic acid has been long known to interfere with the results of urine dipstick results.

Culture results are invariably affected by faulty collection techniques, leading to the contamination of urine and invariably, by urogenital flora.

# Complications

The various stages of urine collection, whether collection itself, storage, and preservation, have a tremendous impact on the results of a urine culture. Without adequate care, specimens can become contaminated with perineal, vaginal, or periurethral flora. The presence of the true pathogenic agent can be obscured due to the contamination, whether due to an overgrowth or an inhibition of the true pathogens. Even more than that, the medium in which the specimen is stored also plays a significant role in the true urinary pathogen. Inhibition of Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae have been observed with the use of boric acid as the storage and preservation medium.

# Patient Safety and Education

Specimen collection by means of clean-catch midstream technique poses no risk to the patient. Despite the longstanding belief that pre-cleansing yields an uncontaminated specimen, several studies have shown that pre-cleansing has no significant effect on test results. Prevention of UTI is worthy of discussion and has been traditionally under-researched in the past. Patients should be educated on correct wiping methods, adequate hydration, frequent urination, avoiding feminine products, precoital bathing, and postcoital voiding, and avoid the use of a number of certain birth control products. With these increased measures aimed at improving hygiene, health behaviors, and sexual practices, UTI-related morbidity, and the use of antibiotics for these infections would invariably decrease.

# Clinical Significance

Accurate diagnosis of patients experiencing symptoms of a UTI is paramount in efforts to practice proper antibiotic stewardship, by limiting antibiotic misutilization and overutilization.Clostridium difficile infections, adverse drug reactions, and colonization or infection of resistant bacteria.