**Indications for ONSF**

As stated earlier, the indication for optic nerve sheath fenestration is in the setting of vision loss due to elevated ICP causing papilledema. Increased ICP can result from a multitude of CNS disease states. The most common of these include PTC syndrome, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, and intracranial tumors causing ICP elevation from decreased CSF outflow. Other less common and historical indications are discussed as well.

**Pseudotumor Cerebri Syndrome (Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension)**

ONSF is most frequent in the setting of PTC, also known as benign intracranial hypertension. It is a syndrome of elevated ICP in the absence of an underlying CNS pathology. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is a subset of PTC syndrome in which no secondary cause (e.g., transverse sinus stenosis, venous sinus thrombosis, corticosteroid use, hormonal abnormality, etc.) is present. IIH most commonly presents in women of childbearing age who are obese or have recently gained weight. Patients commonly present with symptoms of elevated ICP, including headaches and pulsatile tinnitus, as well as visual symptoms of transient visual obscurations and diplopia from unilateral or bilateral cranial nerve (CN) VI palsies.

Diagnostic criteria for IIH in adults and children were revised in 2013 by Friedman et al.

- Papilledema

- Normal neurologic exam, except for cranial neuropathies

- Neuroimaging will show one or more of the following:

- Typical female patient with obesity: MRI will show normal brain parenchyma and no meningeal enhancement without hydrocephalus, masses, or structural lesions
- Other types of patients: normal MRI and magnetic resonance venography
- If MRI is unavailable or unobtainable, CT imaging may is an option.

- Normal CSF composition

- Elevated opening lumbar puncture pressure of greater than 250 mm CSF in adults and greater than 280 mm CSF in children or 250 mm CSF in non-sedated or normal weight child

If papilledema is not present, IIH can be diagnosed if 2 to 5 of the above are present and if it is also unilateral or bilateral CN VI palsy. If both papilledema and CN VI palsy are absent, it is suggestive of IIH (but not positively diagnosed). If 2 to 5 of the above are present, and the patient has at least 3 of the following on neuroimaging: empty sella; flattening of the posterior globe; distension of the perioptic SAS with or without a tortuous optic nerve; and/or transverse venous sinus stenosis.

Optic nerve sheath fenestration is an attempt to preserve visual function in patients with PTC who present with vision-threatening papilledema or who have not responded adequately to or cannot tolerate maximal medical therapy. It is an essential tool in the acute setting for patients presenting with “malignant” PTC (extremely high opening pressure, evidence of optic neuropathy, and poor prognosis if treated with medical therapy alone).

Unilateral ONSF can result in papilledema resolution in both eyes; however, in most cases of severe papilledema and vision loss, bilateral ONSF is required. A review of unilateral ONSF shows that the unfenestrated eye typically shows less papilledema reduction than the operated eye.

**Cerebral Vein Thrombosis or Stenosis**

Obstruction of venous drainage from the cerebral venous system secondary to thrombosis or stenosis can result in increased ICP and papilledema from decreased CSF outflow. This condition can present very similarly to PTC and IIH but tends to have a more rapid onset and more severe visual loss from significant ICP elevation; it is not limited to the demographics of PTC syndrome and should be suspected in non-obese women or men with symptoms and signs of PTC syndrome. It presents in patients with prothrombotic states, including pregnancy, oral contraceptives, Factor V Leiden mutations, Factor XII deficiency, G20210A mutations, antithrombin III, and protein S deficiency. Therapies include anticoagulation, stenting, or thrombectomy of the cerebral sinus and CSF diversion procedures. ONSF can also be performed to protect visual function in patients with vision-threatening papilledema. The European Federation of Neurological Sciences (EFNS) 2010 guidelines appropriates ONSF in cases of serial lumbar punctures, acetazolamide, and/or VPS do not prevent the progression of visual loss in these conditions.

**Intracranial Masses**

Intracranial masses/tumors create increased ICP primarily by restricting the flow of CSF through the ventricles or outflow of CSF and blood from the brain via the dural venous sinuses. Optic nerve sheath fenestration is a viable option for patients in whom ICP develops rapidly and causes profound vision loss and in whom complete resection of the mass is not possible with resulting persistent intracranial hypertension. Performing ONSF can dramatically increase the quality of life in these patients by preserving their vision. Of all indications for ONSF, this has the poorest visual prognosis, as the surgery is generally a therapeutic option in late-stage patients with intracranial illness.

**Other Indications for ONSF**

Cryptococcal meningitis: up to 40% of patients develop ocular disease; papilledema is the most common manifestation of CNS infection and may result in a profound visual loss for patients who survive. Cryptococcal meningitis usually results in a very high organism burden in the CSF and marked inflammation; this leads to increased ICP from the possible aggregation of cryptococcal capsular polysaccharide and the resulting CSF outflow obstruction through arachnoid granulations.before antifungal medication administration.

**Local Disease of the Optic Nerve**

- Traumatic optic neuropathy (TON)

- This can cause elevated intraorbital pressure. It commonly manifests early as an optic nerve hematoma. The treatment of TON is controversial, and a large prospective study showed no difference in outcomes whether treatment for TON was with observation, corticosteroids, or optic nerve decompression.

- Optic nerve tumors

- The most common optic nerve tumors are gliomas and meningiomas. Visual improvement with ONSF in patients with meningiomas has mixed results in reported cases. Other optic nerve tumors reported having visual improvement after ONSF include bilateral infiltration with T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma and metastatic breast cancer.

- Optic nerve drusen

- This may uncommonly cause central and peripheral visual loss through an unknown mechanism. A few small studies showed some improvement in the management of visual loss via ONSF. To date, no clear recommendations exist on the treatment of optic nerve drusen with ONSF. Further studies are warranted.