Surgery for papillary fibroelastoma excision requires a full cardiopulmonary bypass. Depending on risk factors (i.e., personal and family history), pre-operative coronary evaluation via catheterization may be helpful. If the tumor is on the aortic side of the aortic valve, there may be some concern about possible emboli due to dislodgement induced by the angiography catheter. Traditionally, the heart is approached via median sternotomy. Arterial cannulation is achieved with the ascending aorta. Venous cannulation is achievable via dual-stage through the right atrium or bicaval, depending on the presumed location of the tumor. Bicaval cannulation allows for the most flexibility in case the right atrium must be opened. Cardioplegia can be given antegrade only or both antegrade and retrograde. Aortic cross-clamping with full arrest is necessary. For tumors involving the aortic valve, an aortotomy (transverse or hockey stick) is made in the proximal ascending aorta. Exposure is obtained, and the aortic valve is inspected. The PFE mass is gently excised off the valve while minimizing trauma to the leaflets. All visible tumor mass requires excision; however, sometimes, this will require the removal of part of the leaflet. The LVOT is thoroughly inspected as well, along with the ventricular side of the mitral leaflets. If the aortic valve is competent, then the aortotomy is closed. If the aortic valve is not competent, either primary repair or replacement is necessary. The patient is then de-aired as per routine and weaned off cardiopulmonary bypass. TEE must be performed before decannulation to ensure that there are no other obvious abnormalities seen. Any specimens require a histological examination for pathology. Frozen section is not routinely necessary.