It is clear that "Stone Age" humans did eat a variety of high-quality foods that were rich in nutrients and fiber. Compared to this diet, modern diets provide much less variety and are loaded with artificial sugars and salt.

Since it is impractical to mimic the exact diet that our Stone Age ancestors ate, we can reasonably take some key foods and adapt them to a modern lifestyle.

Whalen KA, et al. have done studies on the Paleolithic Diet, comparing it to the Mediterranean Diet. In one study of over 2,000 people, participants in each group consumed the list of foods that would fit into each diet pattern. The results were similar in both the groups, although the consumers of a Paleolithic diet decreased their all-cause mortality, decreased oxidative stress, and also decreased mortality from cancers, specifically colon cancers.

Another study by Blomquist C, et al. involved women who were postmenopausal and also overweight. They found that a Paleolithic diet decreased lipogenesis promoting factors, improved insulin sensitivity, and reduced circulating triglycerides.

The Paleolithic diet also has been studied as a supplement for therapeutic management in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. An article by Dr. Jacob Eaton and Dr. Lara Lannotti, strong advocates and pioneers of the Paleolithic Diet, focuses on the mismatch of genomic evolution and the modern day diet. As discussed above, the diet that our ancestors ate has had a major impact on our genetic evolution. Since today's diet no longer contains the same variety and nutrition, however, there is an increase in chronic diseases caused by both “undernutrition” and “overnutrition.” Multiple other smaller-scale studies confirm similar results.

Physicians across the globe have been trying to incorporate healthy dietary and lifestyle habits into the therapeutic regimen of their patients. A Paleolithic diet is certainly a reasonable option for physicians to choose as it advocates healthy eating.