MPO encoded by a single gene located on band 17q22-23 is a tetramer of 150 kDa consisting of two heavy chains, two light chain subunits, and two iron atoms. The MPO gene encodes for a single translational product that after glycosylation and proteolytic processing is packaged as mature MPO in the azurophilic granules. MPO production is determined by various genetic mutations and deletions. MPO, once released by activated leukocytes, utilizes the oxidative potential of its co-substrate hydrogen peroxide in the peroxidation and halogenation cycles to generate the cytotoxic oxidant species and potent bactericidal compound hypochlorous acid (HOCl) along with other toxic oxidants that are capable of not only initiating lipid peroxidation but also promoting a series of post-translational modifications, such as halogenation, nitration, and oxidative cross-linking to target proteins at sites of inflammation. The toxicity and bactericidal activities of HOCl occur due to its potential to modify lipids, DNA, amines, and tyrosine into halohydrins, 5-chlorouracil, chloramines and 3-chlorotyrosine respectively.

Primary MPO deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder and is generally present with varying degree of severity and clinical features. A number of point germline mutations resulting in MPO deficiency have been detected in primary form. Some of these mutations are associated with the defective posttranslational processing of the MPO precursor protein and others with pre-translational defects caused by mutations in the regulatory portion of the MPO gene. Most of the mutations associated with hereditary form are R569W (the commonest), Y173C, M251T, G501S, and R499C and a deletion of 14 bases (D14) within exon 9. It is noteworthy that eosinophils are never involved in MPO deficiency since eosinophil peroxidase is encoded by another gene than MPO.

A secondary MPO deficiency is less common than the hereditary form but may develop due to somatic mutations of the MPO gene. In most cases, the deficiency is partial and affects only a proportion of neutrophils. The acquired form is usually transient and generally resolves once the underlying condition improves.

The various disorders that can lead to acquired or secondary MPO deficiency include diabetes mellitus, pregnancy, iron deficiency, renal transplantation, thrombotic diseases, lead poisoning, obstructive jaundice, disseminated cancers, hematologic disorders and neoplasms such as acute and chronic myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, polycythemia vera, Hodgkin lymphoma, severe infections, cytotoxic agents, and some anti-inflammatory drugs like sulfapyridine.