When a patient presents with tinnitus, the most critical step is to obtain a thorough history. One of the most important distinctions to make is if the tinnitus is pulsatile or non-pulsatile. The next step is to determine if the tinnitus is unilateral or bilateral. This distinction will help with directing your questioning and eventually guide your workup. Both pulsatile and non-pulsatile tinnitus can be unilateral or bilateral. Other important questions include the onset of symptoms, aggravating or alleviating factors, duration, and change in symptom quality or severity.

The physical exam is essential for patients with pulsatile tinnitus. In general, the physical exam will allow the practitioner to further categorize the pulsatile tinnitus into subjective vs. objective. Every patient should receive an in-depth head and neck exam, paying particular attention to pneumatic otoscopy, cranial nerve exam, and tuning fork exams. Otoscopy may help in identifying paragangliomas, aberrant carotid arteries, otitis media, and eustachian tube dysfunction. Tympanic paragangliomas, also known as glomus tumors, may present as a pulsatile mass on the medial side of the tympanic membrane. A rhythmic motion of the tympanic membrane may be suggestive of tensor tympani myoclonus. Pneumatic otoscopy may suggest otosclerosis or cause nystagmus, which may be indicative of labyrinthine fistula. The palpation of the temporomandibular joint can help identify pathology, which may be contributing to symptoms.

In addition to a head and neck examination, it is important to do a full cardiac examination, including auscultation for carotid bruits. The cardiac examination, along with vitals, can help evaluate causes such as carotid bruits, hypertension, and aortic stenosis. This is also a good time to ascertain if the tinnitus is synchronous with the heartbeat helping to identify underlying arterial pathology.

Palpation can also help to evaluate if compression changes the patient’s symptoms, which may help differentiate venous vs. arterial etiologies. If compression of arterial structures decreases symptoms, it suggests an arterial cause. Compression of ipsilateral venous structures may decrease symptoms in venous etiologies such as a high-riding jugular bulb, while compression of the contralateral side may increase symptoms. Rotation of the head to the ipsilateral side of the tinnitus may also decrease symptoms in patients with pulsatile tinnitus due to venous pathology. Similarly, the Valsalva maneuver may reduce symptoms with a venous cause.