Although morbidity and mortality from sepsis have declined in the last 2 decades considerably, there remains a large need for improvement in management. This decline in mortality associated with sepsis can be in part attributed to earlier recognition and intervention, as well as advances in the understanding of this disease process. Important markers for disease severity and prognostic implications, such as the SIRS or qSOFA criterion, have been able to provide some framework for treatment as well as insight into the prognosis for affected patients. Goal-directed therapies that have contributed to this decline in mortality are geared towards goals that have significant prognostic implications. For example, lactic acid accumulation in the setting of sepsis has been shown to be highly specific for predicting the acute phase of death and in-hospital mortality as it increases with levels greater than 4 mmol/L having a 28.4% likelihood of mortality. Although using lactate to guide therapy has not been shown to independently affect mortality in these patients, 2-hour lactate clearance has been shown to be an independent predictor of in-hospital mortality.

The large majority of clinical trials and interventions involving sepsis and septic shock address relatively short-term outcomes, typically 28 day in-hospital mortality. Long-term mortality data with respect to many of the interventions already discussed above is lacking. Mortality following hospitalization from sepsis is high, with rates reported around 31% in the first year and nearing 43% by year 2.