Enteroviruses trigger uptake into the various host cells by interaction with receptor molecules. Key receptors are intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDL-R), and non-protein factors such as heparan sulfate or sialic acid. Incubation times for enteroviral infections generally range from 12 hours to 5 days. Rarely, experimental volunteers reported non-serious symptoms several hours after artificial inoculation.

**Non-rhinovirus Enteroviruses**

Enteroviruses replicate in the mucosa of the oropharynx and intestines. Therefore, excretion of the virus can be detected in oral secretions as well as by rectal swabs, with excretion in stool lasting months after infection symptoms resolve. Lymphatic tissues such as Peyer's patches and tonsils are also targets. From there, spread to the lymph nodes and bloodstream is possible. This viremia contributes to disseminated disease, including myocarditis and pancreatitis, and, rarely, to an extension to the central nervous system (CNS). More often, this disseminated disease instead causes a second, stronger viremia, more likely to result in clinical illness and CNS involvement.

Non-rhinovirus enteroviruses can invade the central nervous system via the primary infection sites. Several models for this spread have been proposed, including the direct crossing of the blood-brain barrier, as mentioned above. Additionally, the neuromuscular junction may participate in this spread via a retrograde transport model. This is supported by the fact that muscular injury is associated with poliovirus neuroinfection. A “Trojan horse” entry model involving virus-infected leukocytes has also been proposed, among others.

Enteroviruses cause damage within the central nervous system by inducing apoptosis and autophagy. The immune response may also contribute to the disease state. Mechanisms of the pathophysiology are not fully understood. Once present in the central nervous system, a persistent infection may result.

Poliovirus, the most comprehensively studied enterovirus with neurological involvement, presents mostly in children under five years old, and in multiple forms. In the abortive form, a mild illness lasts approximately one week, resolves, and terminates with a full recovery. The nonparalytic form causes serous meningitis with meningeal symptoms but without lasting paralysis. The most dangerous, paralytic, form, affects 1% of patients, with paralysis occurring within hours, due to damage caused to the spinal cord anterior horn. Paralysis is irreversible in a minority of patients, but this form is associated with a 10% mortality. 90% to 95% of poliovirus infections are asymptomatic/subclinical.

**Rhinoviruses**

Rhinoviruses primarily infect airway epithelium and spare the subepithelial layer. Uptake occurs via endocytosis or pinocytosis, depending on the host cell and virus type. Once the virion is inside the cell, a conformational change occurs, triggered by either the low endosomal pH or receptor binding. This change exposes hydrophobic domains and results in a pore-mediated release into the cytoplasm of the genome. From there, host cell ribosomes participate in polyprotein synthesis.

Rhinoviruses do not result in direct cell destruction. They compromise epithelial barriers by stimulating reactive oxygen species (ROS) during replication and causing dissociation of zona occludens-1 from the tight junction complex. Infection also triggers the release of cytokines that activate granulocytes, dendritic cells, and monocytes. IgG and IgA response does not occur until after the virus has already cleared, taking about 1 to 2 weeks, but is essential in preventing re-inoculation. Levels remain detectable for approximately a year but have little to no cross-serotype reactivity. At higher levels, viral load predicts disease severity.

Rhinovirus infections in infants induce cell damage within the respiratory tract and alter the immune response. They are an independent risk factor for the development of recurrent wheezing and the development of asthma. Rhinoviruses are the most common respiratory viruses causing acute exacerbations of COPD, necessitating hospital stays. They also cause about two-thirds of viral upper respiratory tract infections (URTI)-associated asthma exacerbations.

Enteroviral diseases were more likely to be severe in immunocompromised patients, including patients with diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), neoplasm, or post-transplant status.