**Rotator Cuff Injury**

Rotator cuff tears are either partial-thickness or full-thickness tears. Partial-thickness tears most commonly occur at the articular or bursal side of the rotator cuff tendons. Full-thickness tears often involve some degree of tendon retraction. The patient's age, baseline shoulder function, tear size, chronicity, and degree of tendon retraction are several critical elements to be considered when deciding how to manage each patient most appropriately.

The supraspinatus tendon is the most commonly injured tendon of the rotator cuff muscles, followed by infraspinatus, subscapularis, and teres minor. The teres minor tendon is only rarely involved in rotator cuff injuries. The subscapularis tendon tear can be associated with a biceps tendon dislocation from the bicipital tendon groove moving into the subscapularis tendon medially. Confirmation of intra-articular tendon tears is by the absence of the biceps tendon in the empty bicipital groove.

**Labral Injuries and Dislocations**

Multiple types of shoulder labral injuries can occur in different patient populations. One particularly common injury subgroup includes young athletes afflicted with a traumatic shoulder dislocation. In the setting of glenohumeral instability, clinicians should recognize the importance of not only a recurrent dislocation but the risk of increased bone loss and soft tissue compromise, which may ultimately affect the outcome following surgical repair.

Glenohumeral instability, especially in the setting of trauma, is most commonly seen anteriorly. Posterior shoulder instability can be seen in weightlifters or football linemen. Rare dislocation patterns include the superior and inferior glenohumeral dislocation (luxatio erecta).

It is important to note that in the setting of multidirectional instability (MDI), especially in cases of bilateral ligamentous laxity or in a patient with a personal or family history of a connective tissue disorder, the probability of recurrent instability is relatively common.  The mainstay treatment for these injuries centers on physical therapy and shoulder strengthening programs.

Para-labral cysts are most often seen in association with glenoid labral tears.  Para-labral cyst formation can cause subsequent nerve compression and denervation of shoulder muscles.  The suprascapular nerve is susceptible to compression from a para-labral cyst due to its location as it passes through the suprascapular and spinoglenoid notches adjacent to the anterior-inferior labrum. The subscapular nerve is also susceptible to compression from a para-labral cyst in the subscapular recess. Isolated atrophy of the teres minor implies injury to the axillary nerve.

**Adhesive Capsulitis**

The cause of frozen shoulder is the deposition of hydroxyapatite crystals into the muscle-tendon. The shoulder is the most common site of hydroxyapatite calcification in the human body. The supraspinatus tendon is the most common site of hydroxyapatite crystal deposition. Frozen shoulder is associated with diabetes mellitus but may also be associated with coronary artery disease, cerebral vascular disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and thyroid disease.

**Subacromial Bursitis**

Subacromial bursitis, specifically the acute phase, results in painful overhead movement. This is due to friction between the acromion and deltoid superiorly and the humeral head and supraspinatus inferiorly. Chronic bursitis leads to chronic pain because there is inflammation within the bursa. This inflammatory process can lead to weakness and rupture of the nearby ligaments and tendons. When confronted with chronic bursitis cases, it is also important to consider tendinitis since it can present simultaneously with bursitis.

Subacromial bursitis can be caused by repeated steroid injections as they increase the risk of infection within the shoulder and can also lead to damage to the rotator cuff muscles. Treatment most commonly consists of avoiding activities that include repetitive overhead movements, taking oral NSAIDs, and rest.