Adrenal hypoplasia can be due to adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC). Affected patients present with adrenocortical insufficiency in infancy and childhood. Research has identified four forms of AHC.

- The X-linked form is the result of a mutation or deletion of the nuclear receptor protein DAX-1 gene located on the X-chromosome. NROB1 gene encodes for this DAX-1 protein, which is thought to be important in the development and function of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. There have also been suggestions that this chromosomal aberrancy could be a part of a contiguous chromosomal deletion of a large segment on the X-chromosome carrying the NROB1 gene. Such a large deletion can additionally result in Duchenne muscular dystrophy and glycerol kinase deficiency.

- The autosomal recessive form involves a gene that codes for steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1). This gene is on chromosome 9q33. Another discovered form of the disease is associated with metaphysical dysplasia, intrauterine growth retardation, and genital abnormalities.

- IMAGE syndrome, SERKAL syndrome (rare autosomal form). Few other rare syndromes and mutations can lead to adrenal hypoplasia and aplasia.

- Autosomal recessive ACTH resistance syndrome, such as triple-A syndrome and familial glucocorticoid deficiency present with ACTH insensitivity.

Secondary adrenal hypoplasia can arise from pituitary or hypothalamic dysfunction. These include transcription factor defects in pituitary development, pituitary adenomas, POMC defect, and convertase 1 (PCSK1) enzyme defect. Other causes of secondary adrenal hypoplasia are isolated ACTH deficiency, diseases of pituitary development, and central nervous system developmental anomalies. Adrenal hypoplasia can occur due to chronic exogenous glucocorticoid treatment. The resultant reduced ACTH action leads to adrenal hypofunction and hypoplasia due to a low stimulus.