Cystic fibrosis is a systemic illness that has broad implications for both quality and quantity of life when poorly controlled. Therefore, treatment should focus on optimizing function to avoid acute illness events. This should target maintaining lung function by aggressively controlling respiratory infection and clearing airways of mucus, optimizing nutritional status with pancreatic enzyme supplements and multivitamins, and finally, by managing any other health complications that may arise. This is best performed when using a team approach of specialists who are experienced in managing cystic fibrosis.

As stated previously, pulmonary disease is the most common cause of mortality in cystic fibrosis. As such, it is extremely vital to have a low threshold for diagnosis and intervention in pulmonary illness exacerbations. A pulmonary exacerbation is the worsening of lung function due to an infection. Often this is characterized by shortness of breath, fatigue, productive cough, and fever. Pulmonary function testing will worsen from baseline during an exacerbation. Any acute illness should prompt admission to a hospital facility familiar with cystic fibrosis management.

Pulmonary illness should be managed with two primary goals: treat the infection and improve oxygenation. P. aeruginosa typically induces infectious etiologies, and antibiotic therapy should have spectrum coverage against this pathogen. However, sputum culture should be obtained and a sensitivity profile obtained for the pathogens present. CF guidelines recommend at least one antibiotic to cover each pathogenic bacteria cultured from respiratory secretions and two antibiotics for P. aeruginosa infections. Mild exacerbations may be amenable to oral antibiotics, but more severe exacerbations require intravenous medication use. Inhaled antibiotics are not recommended whenever an intravenous alternative is possible. Ventilation and oxygenation should be supported through the use of inhaled bronchodilators, including albuterol and ipratropium bromide. Agents such as inhaled dornase alfa or inhaled hypertonic saline are prescribed to promote airway secretion clearance in conjunction with chest physiotherapy. Anti-inflammatory medicines such as glucocorticoids are also used to assist in opening airways to relieve the obstruction. The work of breathing should be optimized, utilizing nasal cannula oxygen when appropriate. Bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) ventilation may be necessary to overcome airway trapping. Intubation with mechanical ventilation is an option but should be avoided whenever possible and used only when respiratory failure is imminent.

Chronic, supportive therapy for patients with CF includes regular pancreatic enzymes, fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K), mucolytics, bronchodilators, antibiotics, and anti-inflammatory agents.

A new class of medications known as CFTR modulator therapies is designed to correct the dysfunction by improving production, intracellular processing, or function of the CFTR protein caused by the mutated gene. Each medication is targeted at a specific dysfunction caused by a specific gene mutation. Ivacaftor is used in the treatment of class 3 dysfunctions, where a mutation at G551D is the primary aberration. It acts by binding the defective CFTR protein at the cell surface and opening the chloride channel, thus restoring the proper function of the protein. This was the first medication to directly impact the protein channel rather than treating the effects of CF.  Dosing for patients older than six years is 150 mg by mouth every 12 hours. Younger patients should receive weight-based dosing where those with less than 14 kg bodyweight receive 50 mg by mouth every 12 hours, and those with greater than 14 kg bodyweight should receive 75 mg by mouth every 12 hours. Lumacaftor is a chaperone molecule that was designed to move the defective CFTR protein from the intracellular organelles where it is processed and onto the cell surface. As such, it is effective in delta F508 homozygous mutation genotypes. Clinically, this medicine has no benefit when given alone. However, when combined as lumacaftor/ivacaftor has been shown in the 92-week PROGRESS study to have modest benefits for patients who tolerate the medicine in both pulmonary function testing and body mass index (BMI). This medicine combination was subsequently approved for use in a patient older than six years old. Dosing is two tablets containing lumacaftor 200 mg/ivacaftor 125 mg taken orally every 12 hours. Another medication combination currently in clinical trials is tezacaftor/ivacaftor. Tezacaftor, as a medicine, is very similar to lumacaftor in that it is a CFTR protein chaperone that improves the intracellular processing and trafficking of CFTR. Likewise, its clinical efficacy is only seen when placed in combination with ivacaftor. This medicine is showing a good safety profile, and preliminary EVOLVE and EXPAND trials are indicating less side effect profiles compared to lumacaftor/ivacaftor.

Despite major advancements in medical therapies for CF, the disease process continues to advance, and the lungs will ultimately fail prematurely from the disease burden without surgical intervention. Lung transplant is the treatment of choice for end-stage lung disease. The timing of the transplant is multifactorial. The International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation published a list of conditions to be used when considering transplant referral and takes into consideration the 5-year predicted survival of less than 50%, the FEV1 that has fallen to 30% of predicted values, rapidly falling FEV1 despite optimal therapy, a 6-minute walk distance of less than 400 meters, the development of pulmonary hypertension in the absence of a hypoxemic exacerbation, clinical decline characterized by increasing frequency of exacerbations including acute respiratory failure requiring noninvasive ventilation, a pattern of poor clinical recovery from successive exacerbations, worsening nutritional status despite supplementation, pneumothorax, or life-threatening hemoptysis despite bronchial artery embolization.  Virtually all lung transplants for CF will need replacement of both lungs. This is because a native, diseased lung would act as a source of infected secretions that would threaten the transplanted lung and possibly induce respiratory failure. It is important to note that transplantation is not a cure for CF, but it confers a prolongation of life and offers significant symptomatic relief.

**Diet and Exercise**

Individuals with CF are encouraged to consume a high-fat diet with supplemental fat-soluble vitamins to compensate for malabsorption. Additionally, patients living with CF are encouraged to consume a high-calorie diet to maintain a healthy weight and combat chronic inflammation and frequent infections that are commonly encountered. According to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, women should consume 2500 to 3000 calories a day, while men should consume 3000 to 3700 calories a day. Those living in hot climates or who participate in activities that cause sweating are encouraged to consume additional sodium in their diet. Oral feedings are preferred; however, if the intake does not meet metabolic demand as determined by continued decreases in BMI, enteral (tube) feedings should be considered. These are typically in the form of gastric tube feedings or jejunal tube feedings. Multiple control studies of enteral nutrition in patients with CF have shown benefit in the form of improved, or neutral lung function following exacerbations of illness that directly correlate with BMI. With that noted, however, no randomized studies of enteral nutrition have been performed in patients with CF to date. Parenteral nutrition may be considered only when oral or enteral nutrition is not meeting metabolic needs. Parenteral nutrition has been linked to increased risk for sepsis events and should be used sparingly. Regular exercise is encouraged in patients with CF to maintain and support lung function.