**Acute Dislocations**

Acute management of an acute patella dislocation is prompt reduction of the dislocation. This procedure is usually performed in the emergency department with some sedation as needed. The reduction process involves flexing the hip, applying gentle pressure to the lateral pole of the patella, in a medial direction, while slowly extending the knee. It is also possible to perform the reduction maneuver with the patient sitting up with legs hanging off the side of the trolley.

The mainstay of treatment for first-time dislocators without evidence of loose bodies or intra-articular damage is conservative, including analgesia, icing and NSAIDs to reduce pain and swelling, physiotherapy and activity modification. Bracing in a J brace or a patella stabilizing sleeve may be beneficial short term (2 to 4 weeks) to allow the soft tissues to heal. Subsequent, physiotherapy should be started with an emphasis on quadriceps and vastus medialis oblique strengthening, core strengthening and proprioception. The patient can be allowed to weight bear as tolerated.

There remains debate on the role of surgical management of acute first time dislocations. A recent Cochrane review revealed that, although there was some evidence in support of surgical management, the quality of the evidence was insufficient to support a change in current practice.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical management can be a consideration in several situations

- A first time dislocation with osteochondral fracture/loose body

- MRI demonstrating disruption of MPFL

- Subluxed patella on Merchant radiograph view with a normal contralateral knee

- Failure to improve with conservative management with anatomical factors which predispose to dislocation

- Recurrent dislocations

There is evidence which suggests that early stabilization procedures can reduce the rate of subsequent dislocations but in the absence of clear subjective benefits at long term follow up.

Surgical management is usually via proximal and distal realignment. There are numerous surgical options available:

Arthroscopy with or without open debridement

Arthroscopic or open debridement with removal of any loose bodies may be necessary for displaced osteochondral fractures or loose bodies. Osteochondral fragment repair is favored if sufficient bone is available for fixation.

MPFL repair (re-attachment) or reconstruction 
(proximal realignment)

Proximal realignment constitutes repairing or reconstructing the MPFL. In brief, to repair the ligament, a longitudinal incision is made at the border of the VMO, just anterior to the medial epicondyle. The ligament is usually re-attached to the femur using bone anchors. If the patient has had recurrent dislocations, then reconstruction of the MPFL is necessary using gracilis or semitendinosus autografts, or allografts.

Isolated repair/reconstruction of the MPFL is not a recommendation in patients with bony abnormalities including TT-TG distance greater than 20mm, convex trochlear dysplasia, severe patella alta, advanced cartilage degeneration or severe femoral anteversion.

Lateral release (distal realignment)

A lateral release cuts the retinaculum on the lateral aspect of the knee joint. The aim is to improve the alignment of the patella by reducing the lateral pull. It is not performed in isolation, but usually in combination with other more powerful realignment procedures.

Osteotomy (distal realignment)

An osteotomy is necessary when there is abnormal anatomy contributing to poor patella tracking and a high TT-TG distance. The most common procedure of this type is known as the Fulkerson osteotomy. This osteotomy involves cutting the anterior tibia at a certain angle to allow for anterior and medial displacement of the osteotomized fragment, moving the patellar tendon insertion on the tibia (along with the patella) more medially and anteriorly. This will reduce the Q angle and will decrease the risk of recurrence. If the patient has patella alta, an osteotomy allows the surgeon to effectively lower the patella by distal displacement of the osteotomized fragment.

In the presence of a rotational deformity, a derotational osteotomy of the femur may be considered. Those procedures are not appropriate in patients with open growth plates.

Trochleoplasty

Trochleoplasty is indicated in recurrent dislocators with a convex or flat trochlea. The trochlear groove is deepened to create a deeper groove for the patella to glide through; this may take place in conjunction with an MPFL reconstruction. Studies have suggest that trochleoplasty is not advisable in patients with open growth plates or severely degenerative joint. This procedure is uncommon but may be considered in severe cases.