**Skills**

Knowing how to perform a brachial plexus block is very useful as it allows the surgeon to perform a range of procedures on the ipsilateral arm. While an anesthesiologist usually performs a brachial plexus block, the nurse's role is vital. During the block, a nurse must observe the patient's vital signs for changes. Additionally, the nurse must frequently auscultate lung sounds to ensure that air entry is bilateral and equal; these procedures can be associated with a pneumothorax.

**Strategy**

It is most appropriate and ideal to maintain continuous closed-loop communication between all members of the perioperative care team regarding the need, technique, and potential management issues associated with the brachial plexus block utilized.

**Ethics**

It is necessary to obtain thorough and comprehensive informed consent from either the patient or patients without the capacity to consent from their designated and authorized decision maker before placing any brachial plexus block. It is most appropriate for all team members to feel empowered to state any concerns they might have regarding the process, as this ensures buy-in from all stakeholders and provides additional layers of review and insight into any problematic matters as soon as possible.

**Responsibilities**

All team members must communicate their concerns, responsibilities, and activities with all other team members contemporaneously and as indicated throughout the perioperative period, based on their professional discretion.

**Interprofessional Communication**

All team members should respect the free flow of information and concerns among team members without allowing or producing an environment of hostility.

**Care Coordination**

All interprofessional team members should consider it their duty to neither disrupt the work done by other team members nor to, through their actions or inaction, create additional issues or increase the workload for other team members. [Level 5]