LSAs branch off at right angles from the MCA, rendering the blood flow through the LSA disturbed and non-laminar. The friction between the blood flow and lateral walls of the blood vessels gives rise to a shear force. Furthermore, the changes in blood pressure, velocity, and diameter that occur at the branching of arterioles to capillaries increase the shear force in LSAs. Over time the increase in blood pressure and wall stress upregulates atherogenic factors and smooth muscle cell proliferation, causing abnormality in the cell junctions and formation of microaneurysms. Rupture of the microaneurysms leads to bleeding and hematoma formation in the deep structures of the brain - commonly in the basal ganglia.

Following this sequence of events is the disruption of the surrounding parenchymal structure, mass effect on surrounding structures, disruption in neurotransmitter release, and membrane depolarisations. Through different mechanisms, several inflammatory pathways become activated. Some of these mechanisms include:

- Release of inflammatory substances from the blood into the perihematomal region

- Mechanical destruction of surrounding neural and glial tissue

- Breakdown of hemoglobin that causes neuronal insult

- Activation of the clotting cascade and increase in thrombin levels that further increases pro-inflammatory processes

Most of the hematoma enlargement occurs within the first 3 hours of onset, but it can continue to expand post 12 hours of onset. The perihematomal edema peaks at five days from onset. With increased intracranial pressure, cerebral perfusion decreases, and patients are at risk of global cerebral hypoxia.