Patients receiving therapy with patisiran should be monitored for infusion-related adverse responses such as hypersensitivity reaction and anaphylaxis. Treatment with patisiran should be delayed or interrupted, and appropriate management should be initiated as clinically required. Infusion should be resumed gradually once there is a resolution of adverse manifestations. In the event of critical infusion-related adverse responses, therapy should not be continued. Patients receiving treatment with patisiran should also have their vitamin A levels monitored routinely as therapy decreases its levels. Patients should be initiated on vitamin A supplementation not exceeding recommended daily dosage and monitored for clinical manifestations of vitamin A deficiency.

Liver function tests (LFTs) should be monitored at baseline and routinely thereafter in patients receiving treatment with givosiran as an increase in alanine transaminase (ALT) was observed during clinical trials. Elevation in liver function is reported to occur around 3 to 5 months from the initiation of therapy. Recommendations are to measure LFTs every month for the first six months of givosiran. Treatment should be discontinued in patients with severe elevations in ALT. Along with LFTs, patients should also have their estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and serum creatinine levels monitored at baseline and routinely while receiving givosiran. Alterations in eGFR and creatinine were reported during clinical trials.

Patients receiving givosiran should also have their homocysteine levels measured at baseline and routinely thereafter. Elevations in homocysteine levels in the blood were reported in 16% of subjects during clinical trials. Patients with evidence of homocysteine elevations should have their vitamin B9, vitamin B12, and B6 levels assessed and consider initiating vitamin B6 supplementation.

Immunogenicity with all four siRNA agents is possible and may serve as a barrier to therapeutic delivery. An unwanted biological immunogenic response may identify siRNA as viral RNA antigen provoking undesirable adverse responses. During clinical trials, anti-drug antibodies (ADA) developed in 3.6% of subjects receiving patisiran, 6% of subjects receiving lumasiran, 0.9% of subjects receiving givosiran, 1.8% of subjects prior to inclisiran dosing, and 4.9% of subjects at 18 months therapy. ADA did not influence effectiveness or safety in all four siRNA agents, resulting in no clinically significant discrepancies in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics.