Several predisposing factors have been identified as increasing the likelihood of aneurysm formation. These include older age, male gender, systolic and diastolic hypertension, history of current or past cigarette smoking, and first-degree relatives with a history of AAA. After age 50 in men and age 60 in females, the risk of an aneurysm increases with each subsequent decade. Males are four times as likely as females to have aneurysms, and having a first-degree relative with AAA increases risk four times. Smoking is the most important amendable risk factor, influencing both the likelihood of developing an aneurysm and rate of growth acceleration.

Although ideally individuals would have been identified and managed before developing complications like rupture, more than half of patients presenting with rAAA have previously undiagnosed aneurysms and as many as 30% of patients with rAAA are initially misdiagnosed. It is reported that 25% to 50% of patients with the rAAA present with the classic triad of hypotension, flank/back pain, and pulsatile mass. Possible presentations of rupture can include hypotension of unknown etiology, groin pain, and sometimes lower extremity pain. Other possible complications of AAA are hematuria or gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Therefore, physicians should have a high index of suspicion and a low threshold for evaluation in this disease, which has a wide variety of presentations.

On presentation, the degree shock varies depending on the location, size and the delay in presentation. Rupture from the anterolateral wall communicates directly with the peritoneal cavity, so most often is associated with death at the scene. Posterolateral wall rupture communicates with retroperitoneal space so usually patient presents alive. The small-sized rupture causes less blood loss compared to bigger sized rupture also small size might initially seal the rupture limiting the blood loss.

The sensitivity of physical examination to detect a pulsatile mass has been reported between 51% to 100%. Studies have shown that the pooled sensitivity for aneurysm detection increases with increasing size with sensitivities of 29% for aneurysms of 3.0 cm to 3.9 cm, 50% for aneurysms of 4.0 cm to 4.9 cm, and 76% for greater than 5.0 cm. Obesity has been demonstrated to reduce the accuracy of detection. Grey-Turner's sign, ecchymosis involving the flank from dissection of blood along the retroperitoneum is rarely seen, however firmness of the lateral abdominal wall may be detected in some cases.