Pinna perichondritis is an infection of the perichondral lining of the ear cartilage. It is primarily caused by pseudomonas aeruginosa and staphylococcus aureus. Patients will present with an erythematous, swollen, hot external ear, with sparing of the lobule. There may also be a collection of pus present. It is commonly caused by minor trauma, such as ear piercings through the cartilaginous pinna, but other causes must be considered.

Prompt diagnosis is needed so the appropriate antibiotic therapy can be started. Whilst this is primarily an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) condition, uncomplicated cases such as those without a collection can be managed in a primary care setting with oral antibiotic therapy. If there is any concern regarding antibiotic therapy, the ENT surgeons, infectious disease, and pharmacists should be consulted, and they will be able to advise what the local protocol for antibiotic therapy is in both adult and pediatric populations of patients.

If the medical practitioner has identified a complicated pinna perichondritis with the presence of an abscess and necrosis, a referral to the ENT surgeons should be made as management involves surgical incision and drainage or debridement of the pinna. If there is a late presentation of this condition, the patient should be counseled on the possibility of residual cosmetic deformity.

A delay in treatment or misdiagnosis can cause permanent damage, so it is important to manage this condition quickly and effectively. It is important to distinguish pinna perichondritis from relapsing polychondritis as both have different management plans.