Trihexyphenidyl is available as 2 mg and 5 mg oral tablets and as a solution of 2 mg/5 mL.****The dosage of trihexyphenidyl HCl varies with the individual and is determined empirically. Clinicians should prescribe a low initial dose and increase the dose gradually, especially in adults older than 60 years of age. The patient can take the oral drug before or after meals; this depends on the individual patient; those with excessive xerostomia (due to trihexyphenidyl's anticholinergic effects) could take the medication before meals, and those who feel nauseous or are prone to excessive salivation could take the drug after meals. Trihexyphenidyl is better tolerated with food in 3 separate doses daily. Higher doses, such as more than 10 mg per day, could be divided into four doses daily (one taken with each meal and one at bedtime).

Clinicians should avoid abrupt withdrawal of trihexyphenidyl in patients undergoing treatment for parkinsonism symptoms, as this could cause an acute exacerbation of existing symptoms. In addition, there are reports of neuroleptic malignant syndrome in patients who had an abrupt withdrawal from treatment.

**Idiopathic Parkinsonism**

For initial therapy for symptoms of idiopathic parkinsonism, 1 mg tablet of trihexyphenidyl is given on the first day. This dose could then increase by 2 mg accretions at intervals of around four days until a total dose of 6 to 10 mg is administered daily to the patient. The final daily dose is determined by the clinician to what is deemed the optimal dosage for symptom control. Most patients show significant symptom improvement on 6 to 10 mg daily. Still, some, especially those of the postencephalitic sub-group, could require daily doses of around 12 to 15 mg for symptom management.

According to American Academy of Neurology guidelines, anticholinergics, including trihexyphenidyl, should be prescribed only if the tremor is predominant.

**Drug-Induced Parkinsonism**

The optimal dose and dosing frequency of trihexyphenidyl required to control the extrapyramidal symptoms of commonly used CNS drugs, such as thioxanthenes and phenothiazines, is determined empirically by the clinician. The total daily dosage ranges from 5 to 15 mg for most patients, although there have been reported cases of symptoms being sufficiently controlled on as minimal as 1 mg daily. Therefore, the recommendations are to start treatment with a single dose of 1 mg. Failure of the extrapyramidal manifestations to resolve in a few hours could prompt an increase in dosage until achieving adequate control of symptoms. Adequate control of symptoms is sometimes possible in a shorter duration by briefly decreasing the CNS drug dosage when initiating trihexyphenidyl and gradually adjusting the dose of both drugs for the desired effects without the onset of extrapyramidal symptoms.

American Psychiatry Association guidelines (APA 2020) suggest that patients with acute dystonia due to antipsychotic therapy be treated with anticholinergic medication like trihexyphenidyl. In addition, APA suggests that for drug-induced parkinsonism due to antipsychotic therapy, reduce the dose of the antipsychotic drug, change to another antipsychotic drug, or treat with anticholinergic medications.

**Concomitant Use with Levodopa**

The usual dose of both levodopa and trihexyphenidyl may require reduction when administering both of these drugs concomitantly. Any adjustment in dosage needs to be made carefully, depending on the level of symptom control and subsequent side effects. An adequate dosage for symptom control with minimal side effects is generally around 3 to 6 mg daily, given in divided doses.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No information regarding dose adjustment for hepatic impairment is provided in the manufacturer's labeling. Use with caution.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No information regarding dose adjustment for renal impairment is provided in the manufacturer's labeling. Use with caution.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Trihexyphenidyl crosses the placenta and is classified as a former FDA pregnancy risk factor class C. Miscarriage and molar pregnancy has been reported. In a cohort of 2323 patients exposed to anticholinergics drugs, major congenital disabilities were not increased. However, miscarriage and molar pregnancy has been reported in a few cases. Use with caution.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Prolonged use of trihexyphenidyl may lead to suppression of lactation, but a single dose is not likely to interrupt breastfeeding. During long-term use, monitor for signs of decreased lactation.

**Potentially Inappropriate Medicine (PIM):**According to the American Geriatric Society (beers criteria), trihexyphenidyl is a PIM for use in older adults. Older adults have an increased risk of anticholinergic adverse effects like cognitive impairment, confusion, delirium, constipation, and urinary retention. It is also not recommended to manage antipsychotic drug-associated extrapyramidal effects in older adults. Consequently, elderly patients should be prescribed low doses of trihexyphenidyl and monitored closely.