**Arterial Sonography**

Doppler ultrasonography utilizes Doppler shift to determine the rate at which red blood cells are moving through the vasculature system. A positive doppler shift indicates that blood is moving towards the transducer, while a negative Doppler shift indicates movement away from the transducer. The angle at which a doppler beam intercepts moving blood flow is termed the Doppler angle.

Vascular sonographers should always scan at a doppler angle less than 60 degrees. The reasoning for this is described according to the equations below, where Fd is the frequency of the echo shifted secondary to the doppler effect and Ft is the frequency of the initial doppler beam prior to Doppler shift:

- Doppler frequency shift = [2 * (Fd) * (velocity of blood) * cosine(doppler angle)] / (velocity of sound in tissue)

Rearranging this equation gives:

- Velocity of blood = [(Doppler Frequency shift) * (velocity of sound in tissue)] / [2* (Ft) * cosine(doppler angle)]

Note that in the equation for blood velocity, cosine(doppler angle) appears within the denominator. Since cosine(0)=1 and cosine(90)=0, a doppler angle closest to zero imparts the maximum calculation of blood flow velocity. Likewise, as the doppler angle increases above 60 degrees and approaches 90 degrees, the calculated blood flow velocity will become falsely low as it ultimately approaches zero. The Doppler angle is estimated by the vascular sonographer and is highly operator dependent.

Arteries may be classified as high resistance or low resistance. High resistance vessels classically form a triphasic waveform on doppler. These waveforms are found in arteries situated within skeletal muscles and include arteries such as the external iliac, femoral, radial, and the corresponding downstream arteries. When the flow is less laminar and more turbulent, spectral broadening can occur.

There are three classic components to a triphasic waveform. These include the following:

- An initial sharp rise in velocity during systole, with a rapid fall during ventricular contraction.

- A short-timed reversal of flow follows this during diastole.

- Finally, there is a remaining small amount of forward-direction flow in the last portion of diastole

Low resistance vessels classically show a monophasic waveform.

In a low resistance waveform, there are typically two physiologic portions that may be visualized:

- A slow initial rise in velocity during systole

- A gradual decrease in velocity during systole in diastole. In comparison to high resistance waveforms, there is no reversal of flow in either systole or diastole. This allows for increased tissue oxygenation

There has been some confusion in the literature and amongst clinicians regarding the biphasic waveform and its meaning. A recent consensus statement by the Societies for Vascular Ultrasound and Vascular Medicine recommends describing the classic biphasic waveform under the umbrella-term “multiphasic,” which includes both triphasic and biphasic waveforms. Multiphasic waveforms cross the baseline. The historical biphasic waveform had both high-resistance and low-resistance characteristics, with a sharp upstroke, a brisk downstroke, but continued forward flow during diastole. Now, the term biphasic has been replaced with the description of an intermediate-resistance multiphasic waveform.

Resistive index (RI), also termed Pourcelot index, is defined by the following equation, where peak systolic velocity = PSV and end-diastolic velocity = EDV:

- RI = (PSV-EDV)/PSV

A high RI is found within the vasculature, which is either constricted or limited in distensibility. This may be produced by downstream stenosis or congestion within an organ such as the kidney.

Lower extremity arterial stenosis causes characteristic changes to the waveform pattern. While the gray-scale US is useful in detecting plaques and vessel narrowing, doppler US helps categorize the degree of stenosis.

A ratio of the peak systolic velocity within and proximal to the stenosis called the PSV ratio may help determine the degree of stenosis. A PSV ratio > 2 correlates to greater than 50% stenosis of the lower extremity artery.

**Venous Sonography**

In comparison to arterial doppler, venous flow is typically low velocity. Venous flow may have phasicity secondary to respiration or mild pulsatility secondary to right heart motion.

The portal vein is typically low velocity, contains phasicity due to heart motion and respiration, and normally has a forward flow into the liver termed hepatopedal flow. Blood flow reversal within the portal veins, termed hepatofugal, is abnormal and indicates portal hypertension. Portal hypertension most commonly occurs due to liver cirrhosis. The most common cause of cirrhosis in the United States is alcohol abuse.

Hepatic veins converge upon the inferior vena cava just inferior to the right atrium. Doppler waveforms of hepatic veins are directly related to cardiac motion and function. Pathology such as tricuspid regurgitation and heart failure can be directly correlated to changes within hepatic venous waveforms. In hepatic venous waveforms, reverse or retrograde flow occurs towards the transducer and appears above the baseline. Antegrade flow into the heart is away from the transducer and appears below the baseline.

Hepatic veins normally contain five waveform components:

- A-wave, defined by reversal of flow of blood in atrial systole. The A-wave may be accentuated in both tricuspid regurgitation or right-sided heart failure.

- C-wave, a small peak of reverse flow after the A-wave, correlates to the bulging of the tricuspid valve during the beginning of ventricular contraction. This wave may or may not be present and is considered a normal variant.

- S-wave represents the dominant forward flow of atrial filling occurring during ventricular systole. In tricuspid regurgitation, the S-wave is characteristically shortened. This is due to less atrial filling from the hepatic veins secondary to atrial filling from regurgitation of flow from the right ventricle. The S-wave is preserved in right heart failure.

- V-wave, defined by the end of atrial filling.

- D-wave, defined by the tricuspid valve opening with a subsequent filling of both right atrium and right ventricle in atrial diastole.

Peripheral veins are normally low velocity and phasic due to respiratory variation.

**Lymphatic Sonography**

While some studies have investigated the role of sonographic assessment of lymphatic vessels, the small size of these vessels limits the role of ultrasound in the evaluation of lymph nodes.