**LIPCOF**

CCh is typically bilateral and characterized by loose redundant conjunctival folds. It can involve any portion of the bulbar conjunctiva but generally is more prominent inferiorly. Slit-lamp examinations may confirm the LIPCOF, typically found over the lower lid. As the entity progresses, the redundant conjunctiva can shorten the fornices and mechanically obstruct the punctum.

The depth of the fornices can be measured using the slit-lamp beam or devices such as the fornix depth measurer. Studies have shown that anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) can aid in diagnosing and monitoring patients with CCh as the cross-sectional area of conjunctiva prolapsing can be measured.

**Grading Systems**

Multiple grading systems have been developed. Hoh et al.’s system comprise grades 0 to 3 depending on the number and height of folds.

- Grade 0 (no persistent fold)

- Grade 1 (a single, small fold)

- Grade 2 (two or more folds but not higher than the tear meniscus)

- Grade 3 (multiple folds and higher than the tear meniscus)

Meller et al. proposed a new multiparameter system, which considers the location, height of the folds, punctal occlusion, and whether there are changes in downgaze and with digital pressure (Table 1). It has further been subclassified as T, M, and N if the folds are primarily located in the temporal, middle, or nasal part of the eyelid, respectively. The grading system has subsequently been widely used and adapted.

**TABLE 1:**Meller et al.’s CCh grading system

LOCATION

FOLDS VERSUS TEAR MENISCUS HEIGHT

PUNCTAL OCCLUSION

CHANGES IN DOWNGAZE

CHANGES BY DIGITAL PRESSURE

0: none

1: one location

2: two locations

3: whole lid

A: < tear meniscus

B: = tear meniscus

C: > tear meniscus

O+: nasal location

with punctal

occlusion

O-: nasal location

without punctal occlusion

G⇑: height/extent of CCh increases in downgaze

G⇔: no difference

G⇓: height/extent of CCh decreases in downgaze

P⇑: height/extent of CCh increases on digital pressure

P⇔: no difference

P⇓: height/extent of CCh decreases on digital pressure

Eifrig developed a new grading system based on the degree of conjunctival rolling beneath the margin of the cornea when the patient is asked to look toward the midline (referred to as the ‘roll sign’) and the speed at which conjunctival tissue/vessels return to their primary position after blinking (‘blink sign’). Both roll and blink signs are graded from 1 to 4.

**Secondary Features**

CCh is often associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), with a higher prevalence of KCS in patients with severe CCh. Therefore, additional tests such as Schirmer, tear break-up time, fluorescein staining, and clearance rate are critical. In isolated CCh cases, a discrete punctate or linear staining can be seen on the mucosal aspect of the lid margin near the redundant conjunctiva, which is different from the exposure pattern seen in patients with KCS. Although not readily available, an ocular surface interferometer can also be used to monitor changes in lipid layer thickness in patients with CCh.

Other characteristic signs comprise subconjunctival hemorrhage (due to vessels in loose conjunctiva prone to rupture when blinking), swollen puncta, and anterior migration of the mucocutaneous junction (likely secondary to the delayed clearance of inflammatory proteins).

Some studies have also found a correlation between the presence of a pinguecula and the severity of CCh in the same conjunctival area.