Rectal anatomy and physiology are incredibly complex, and a clear understanding of relevant landmarks, key structures, and neurovascular supply is crucial in rectal surgery.

**Anatomical Landmarks**

The rectum is a distinct structure from the rest of the colon and bridges the last 15cm of the alimentary canal before reaching the anal orifice. The partition between the sigmoid colon and rectum is marked by the coalescence of tenia coli and loss of appendices epiploicae, normally found at the level of the sacral promontory. From an anatomical perspective, the rectum can be arbitrarily divided into three parts - upper (12 to 15 cm from the anal verge), middle (7 to 11 cm from the anal verge), and lower (up to 6cm from the anal verge). Functionally, the rectum has two parts - the upper part acting in a propulsive manner similar to the sigmoid colon. In contrast, the lower part is dilated and forms a reservoir for storage purposes.

**Relationship to Other Structures**

The upper two-thirds of the rectum is covered in the pelvic peritoneum (continuation of parietal peritoneum), which thickens and reflects anteriorly and laterally to protect the ureters and posterior bladder in both sexes. This forms the rectovesical pouch in men and the pouch of Douglas in women. The pelvic peritoneum covers the uterus and fallopian tubes (broad ligament) before extending posteriorly over the cervix and vaginal fornix to form the rectouterine pouch.

Denovillier's fascia is the rectoprostatic fascia that lies between the anterior surface of the rectum and the prostate and seminal vesicles. Within this fascia, it may be possible to identify the hypogastric nerves and small vessels supplying the male reproductive organs, although this is often not easily recognized.

Waldeyer's fascia is found on the posteroinferior side of the rectum as a thickening of the presacral fascia that descends to meet the mesorectal fascia about 3 to 5 cm from the anorectal junction. This fascia appears to act as an anchor tethering the rectum to the sacral bone.

**Mesorectum**

The rectum is enveloped in a layer of adipose tissue known as the mesorectum, surrounded by mesorectal fascia. The mesorectum contains the descending branches of the superior rectal artery, corresponding venous tributaries, and draining lymphatics and nodes. The site of surgical dissection in total mesorectal excision lies in a relatively avascular areolar plane between the mesorectal fascia and parietal pelvic fascia.

**Neurovascular Supply**

The vascular supply to the rectum comes from three main arteries - the superior rectal artery, middle rectal artery, and inferior rectal artery. The inferior mesenteric artery gives off the superior rectal artery, which supplies the upper part of the rectum and provides approximately 80% of the total blood supply. The remainder comes from the anterior division of the internal iliac artery, below the level of the pelvic floor, giving rise to the middle rectal artery and internal pudendal artery. The inferior rectal artery is a branch of the internal pudendal artery and supplies the anorectal junction, internal and external anal sphincters, and peri-anal skin.

Similar to artery supply, the venous drainage of the rectum occurs via three veins - superior, middle, and inferior rectal veins. The superior rectal vein drains into the inferior mesenteric vein as part of the portocaval system. Meanwhile, the middle and inferior rectal veins drain back into the systemic venous system via the internal iliac and internal pudendal veins, respectively. The lymphatic drainage for the upper third of the rectum follows the superior rectal vessels from the pararectal lymph nodes to the inferior mesenteric nodes. The lower aspect of the rectum drains along the middle rectal vessels directly into the internal iliac lymph nodes.

The autonomic supply to the rectum is provided by sympathetic and parasympathetic systems. The sympathetic nerves reach the rectum via the lumbar splanchnic nerves and superior and inferior hypogastric plexuses. The parasympathetic supply is delivered by the pelvic splanchnic nerves (S2, S3, and S4), traveling down into the pelvis to become the inferior hypogastric plexus on either side of the rectum. The inferior hypogastric plexus is an important network of nerves that controls the function of pelvic organs. Injury to the plexus can therefore lead to significant urinary and sexual dysfunction.