Management of gallstones can be divided into two categories: asymptomatic gallstones and symptomatic gallstones.

Asymptomatic gallstones require the patient to be counseled regarding symptoms of biliary colic and when to seek medical attention. Cholelithiasis without complications can be treated acutely with oral or parenteral analgesia in the emergency department or urgent care center once the diagnosis has been established and alternative diagnoses excluded. Patients should also be offered dietary advice to reduce the chance of recurrent episodes and referred to a general surgeon for elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Today, laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the standard of care and most patients are managed as outpatients.

Patients with symptoms and workup consistent with acute cholecystitis will require admission to hospital, surgical consult and intravenous antibiotics.  Patients with choledocholithiasis or gallstone pancreatitis will also require admission to hospital, gastrointestinal (GI) consultation and ERCP or MRCP. Patients with acute ascending cholangitis are usually ill-appearing and septic. They often also require aggressive resuscitation and ICU-level care in addition to surgical intervention to drain an infection in the biliary tract.

Medical treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid is an option but not practical. The patient must have stones less than 1 cm with high cholesterol content. But the therapy can take 9-12 months to dissolve the stone in only 50% of cases.

Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy for non-calcified gallstones is another option.