Overall, the prognosis depends on patients' co-morbidities including but not limited to baseline renal function. Depending upon the scoring system, following contrast administration, there can be a probability of CIN. Generally, it is reversible and biopsy is rarely needed for the diagnosis.

CIN is normally a self-resolving process, with renal function getting back to normal within 7-14 days of the administration of contrast. Fewer than one-third of patients develop some level of residual renal impairment.

Renal replacement therapy is required in less than 1% of the cases, with a slightly raised incidence in patients who are either having an underlying renal impairment (3.1%) or undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention for myocardial infarction (3%). However, in patients suffering from diabetes and severe kidney failure, the rate of dialysis may be as high as 12%.   18% of CIN patients who require dialysis end up needing it permanently. However, the majority of these patients have severe renal insufficiency and coexisting diabetic nephropathy. They would have progressed to requiring dialysis regardless of the development of CIN.   There is a growing understanding that AKI after contrast media exposure can be an indicator of CRF or ESRF. In an observational study, 3986 patients were included in which coronary angiography was performed, 12.1% of patients developed contrast-induced AKI, and of those, 18.6% sustained permanent renal damage.

Patients who need dialysis have a worse prognosis, with 35.7% inhospital mortality reported (compared to 7.1% in the nondialysis cohort) and 2-year survival of only 19%.

In a study on the long-term mortality associated with CIN after PCI in patients with or without CKD, CIN was observed to be significantly linked with long-term mortality in the whole group (hazard ratio 2.26, 95% confidence interval 1.62 to 2.29, P value less than 0.0001) and in patients having CKD (hazard ratio 2.62, 95% confidence interval 1.91 to 3.57, P value less than 0.0001) but not in patients without CKD (hazard ratio 1.23, 95% confidence interval 0.47 to 2.62, P is equal to 0.6). The occurrence of CIN in patients with CKD was found to be 11% and 2% in patients without CKD.