**Intimate Partner Violence**

Domestic violence or intimate partner violence (IPV) takes many forms and involves the maltreatment of another within a romantic union or partnership. Men, women, teenagers, heterosexuals, gays, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgender individuals may be affected. Domestic violence may include emotional, physical, sexual, economic, spiritual, or psychological insults. IPV involves one partner in the relationship subjecting the other to some form of abuse to exert power and control over them.

Much like human trafficking, domestic violence is a significant public health issue that plagues millions of people. Individuals subjected to IPV, especially teenagers, are vulnerable to practicing risky behaviors such as drug use and sexual promiscuity. These vulnerabilities place them in high-risk situations of being victims of human trafficking. Traffickers feed off this opportunity to exert power and control over a victim. Power and control manifestation takes many forms of abuse on the part of the trafficker.

**The Human Trafficking Power and Control Wheel**

The Human Trafficking Power and Control Wheel finds its basis in the power and control wheel for domestic violence. The wheel for human trafficking depicts the different types of abuse inflicted on trafficking victims at the hands of traffickers. Power and control, the wheel center, represent the primary weapon a trafficker uses to manipulate a victim and keep them bound to the trafficker.

Other tools in the arsenal to demoralize and dehumanize a victim involve coercion and threats.

- **Intimidation:**Intimidation is another tactic used by the trafficker and involves physical violence inflicted upon children, pets, or other victims. It may include threats with a weapon or actual weapon use, destruction of property, and misleading information regarding police.

- **Emotional Abuse:**Emotional and psychological abuse can be particularly devastating to a victim. The trafficker humiliates the victim in front of others, calls them names, blames the victim for the situation, and convinces them that they would be all alone if the trafficker did not love and care for them. The exploiter repeatedly tells the person under their control how worthless they are and that they are too weak to survive outside the existence the trafficker has created for them. They may threaten to expose or shame the victim by releasing sex tapes, nude photos, drug addiction, or participation in violence or sex acts against other victims.

- **Isolation:**A trafficker may isolate a victim by confinement, frequently moving so the victim cannot become familiar with their surroundings, or keep them cut off from others by a language barrier. A victim may be isolated from family and friends or be accompanied by the trafficker while in a public place. The trafficker may not allow the victim access to routine, preventative medical care. Thus, medical problems may be exacerbated, and overall health compromised.

- **Minimizing, Denying, and Blaming:**A trafficker often blames the victim and denies there is anything wrong with the situation, minimizes their involvement in the abuse or exploitation, and lets the victim think the victim is the reason for their current circumstance: the victim is the one that ran away, reached out to them on social media, went to that party or hotel room.

- **Sexual Abuse:**Sexual assault may be useful to the trafficker as a means of power and control. The victim is treated as a sex object, only as good as the money they bring in. They may be forced to submit to sex with multiple partners daily or risk the wrath of the trafficker. Forced abortions, threats to end a pregnancy or violence during pregnancy are control tactics. Unwanted pregnancies, either through forced sexual assault or consensual sex, are a way to control a victim.

- **Using Citizenship or Residency Privilege:**The trafficker may use privilege or superiority as a means of control. The trafficker may hide or threaten to destroy immigration papers such as work visas, passports, or other forms of identification. A victim might be used as a servant or a pawn to entice others into trafficking. The trafficker or pimp may threaten the family and threaten to report to immigration.

- **Economic abuse:**Debt bondage is used to manipulate and control. The victim may be charged enormous interest rates that they can never repay. They are restricted from leaving their situation because they have no access to money, are allowed only a small allowance, or have any earnings confiscated.

- **Coercion and Threats:**Threats of actual physical abuse are another manipulation tool used to exert power and control over the victim. It may involve shoving, punching, hitting, kicking, and strangulation injuries. Torture can take the form of cigarette burns or branding as well as withholding basic needs such as food, water, and clothing. Threats to harm a child bind the victim to the trafficker for fear of no food or shelter or the actual threat of physical harm to the child. They may threaten to contact the Department of Children and Families or law enforcement. Traffickers may use drugs as a form of control over the victim. Introducing drugs to the victim or threatening to withhold drugs from a victim already struggling with addiction allows the trafficker to be in control. These addiction issues may have led the person trafficked to the initial point of contact with the trafficker or be a result of trying to cope with the trafficking situation.