**Methods to Measure Cerebral Autoregulation**

Assessment of pressure autoregulation has traditionally been through calculating cerebral blood flow at two different equilibrium states of arterial blood pressure. These steady states correspond to particular cerebral blood flow values. One pressure measurement could be taken at baseline, and the second measured after manual or pharmacologic manipulation of blood pressure, at which point brain blood flow could get measured again. Because this approach involves stable pressures and flows, it is referred to as a static autoregulatory measurement.

The advent of transcranial Doppler (TCD) ultrasound allowed for the visualization of real-time blood-flow velocities (with a temporal resolution of approximately 5 msec), paving the road for dynamic assessments of autoregulation. Dynamic autoregulation refers to short-term, fast responses of blood flow to changes in systemic pressure. As TCD cannot measure flow directly, the blood flow velocity is useful as a surrogate. Pressure changes are inducible using stimuli such as body tilt, thigh-cuff release, or lower body negative pressure.

While controlling the exact timing and magnitude of the hemodynamic stimulus provides a precision advantage, pressure manipulations in critically ill patients are potentially harmful. For example, a thigh-cuff inflation-deflation sequence may incite a precipitous pressure drop of up to 25 to 35 mmHg. In a patient with an ischemic stroke, this drop could cause secondary brain injury from significant hypoperfusion, particularly in a setting where there is autoregulatory physiology compromise in the first place.

Alternatively, one may isolate intracranial vessels without any particular blood pressure challenges and measure the CBF response to spontaneous arterial blood pressure fluctuations. This approach renders dynamic assessments of cerebral autoregulation safe and feasible for patients with acute brain injury. The dynamic response is likely to occur within 10 to 15 seconds, suggesting that arterioles can counter slower fluctuations in systemic blood pressure. Faster changes, such as those greater than 0.5 Hz, are not compensated – for example, those occurring with each cardiac systole. This selective compensation is referred to as the high-pass filter principle. The cerebrovascular system accordingly buffers against slow hemodynamic oscillations (0.01 to 0.4 Hz), while higher frequencies may pass unfiltered to the circulation of the brain.

In addition to blood flow velocity, other intracranial signals are frequently helpful in dynamic vasoregulatory investigation. Examples include near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), local brain tissue oxygenation (PbtO2), and intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) draining systems. The fundamental principle of these dynamic measurements is the same across methodologies – the input signal is blood pressure or volume change. The resulting change in the intracranial compartment acts as the output signal. Using spontaneous fluctuations of blood pressure and cerebral blood flow, researchers have devised several mathematical methods for modeling autoregulatory indices. This brief review will pay particular attention to transfer function analysis and the time-correlation approach, with subsequent nods to wavelet analysis and projection pursuit regression.

**Transfer Function Analysis**

Transfer function analysis (TFA) has its basis in linear, stationary modeling and a fast Fourier transform algorithm to compute spectral estimates of blood pressure and cerebral blood flow. Autoregulation, when properly functioning, attenuates the influence of blood pressure on brain blood flow velocity by preventing direct propagation of the pressure waveform at lower frequencies (usually under 0.2 Hz). Two key parameters – gain and phase shift – can be derived from TFA at each frequency. The gain reflects the compression of brain blood flow velocity amplitude changes in response to blood pressure. For example, a gain of 0.65 denotes that 65% of the relative amplitude of cerebral blood flow velocity gets attenuated with regard to a unit of change in arterial blood pressure. Phase shift quantifies the time lag between blood pressure and brain flow velocity at a given frequency and is represented in degrees or radians. Larger phase shifts between the two signals mean autoregulation properly buffers the cerebrovascular tree from blood pressure changes.

Of note, TFA can only rationalize linear relationships between arterial blood pressure and mean flow velocity, which is why coherence usually accompanies TFA to test the linearity between the two waveforms. Generally, a coherence above 0.5 is considered acceptable for TFA. Regarding frequency bands, values for gain, phase-shift, and coherence get reported in three bins: very low (0.02 to 0.07 Hz), low (0.07 to 0.2 Hz), and high (0.2 to 0.5 Hz) ranges.

**Time Domain Analysis**

This method measures the degree of correlation between blood pressure and various cerebral output signals. A rolling Pearson correlation coefficient gets calculated between 30 consecutive, time-averaged (10 sec) values of arterial blood pressure and cerebral blood flow (or its surrogates). The resulting coefficient provides an estimate of autoregulatory function respective to each variable. The mean cerebral blood flow velocity coefficient is Mx, while the tissue oxygenation index (TOx) derives from NIRS.

There are over 20 cerebral autoregulation indices, which have apparent pros and cons for autoregulation research. Perhaps the most rigorously studied index is the pressure reactivity index (PRx), which derives from ICP instead of cerebral blood flow velocity or tissue oxygenation.

In all cases, a positive correlation coefficient reflects synchrony between the two signals, suggesting impaired cerebral autoregulation, whereby systemic pressures passively propagate to the cerebral vasculature. Meanwhile, a negative or near-zero coefficient implies active buffering of the cerebral vasculature against blood pressure changes and, thus, intact autoregulatory physiology.

**Wavelet Analysis**

This approach, also known as multimodal pressure-flow analysis, represents an alternative to classical spectral analyses, such as fast Fourier transform, and considers both the time and frequency content of the signal. The wavelet analysis produces maps of phase shift and coherence between blood pressure and cerebral blood flow velocity over a range of frequencies and time points. Enforcing a minimal coherence threshold and focusing the analysis on areas in the time-frequency map with a high degree of correlation increases the reliability of the phase shift estimation. Signal decomposition with wavelet analysis has also been applied to tissue oxygenation using NIRS.

**Projection Pursuit Regression**

Projection pursuit regression (PPR) is a non-parametric method wherein a model is not specified a priori but derives directly from the variables of interest (i.e., arterial pressure and cerebral blood flow). The analysis modifies a linear transfer function between input (blood pressure) and output (brain blood flow). A linear autoregressive transfer function gets passed through kernel functions, also known as ridge functions, determined by minimizing the mean squared error.

A 2016 study by Santos et al. used PPR to show that patients suffering from delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI) after subarachnoid hemorrhage had distinctive hemodynamic profiles concerning those not suffering from DCI.

In the last two decades, these autoregulatory indices have also served to generate optimum cerebral perfusion pressures and ideal pressure ranges based on the lower and upper limits of autoregulation. Steiner et al. published a landmark study in 2002 using continuous autoregulation monitoring to identify optimal cerebral perfusion pressure in patients with traumatic brain injury.