**Acetylcholine in the Peripheral Nervous System**

At the presynaptic terminal, acetylcholine storage occurs within the presynaptic vesicle. With the stimulation of the presynaptic terminal, acetylcholine is released from the vesicles and into the synaptic cleft, where the neurotransmitter is free to bind with receptors.  Binding with receptors can have different effects depending on the area of the nervous system that acetylcholine is affecting. Acetylcholine can cause an action potential, or it could activate a secondary messenger system. Free acetylcholine within the synaptic cleft is degraded by an enzyme called acetylcholinesterase. This enzyme assures that no excess of acetylcholine remains in the synaptic cleft to cause the continuous activation of receptors.

Acetylcholine has different roles and functions at different synapses throughout the body. In the somatic nervous system, acetylcholine is used at the neuromuscular junctions, triggering the firing of motor neurons and affecting voluntary movements. Within both the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, acetylcholine is utilized by presynaptic neurons of the intermediate horn of the spinal cord to communicate with post-synaptic neurons. Within the parasympathetic nervous system alone, the postganglionic neuron releases acetylcholine as its primary neurotransmitter. Within the sympathetic nervous system, the only postganglionic neurons that release acetylcholine as their primary neurotransmitter are those found innervating the sudoriferous (sweat) glands and some blood vessels of non-apical skin.

**Acetylcholine in the Central Nervous System**

Within the brain, acetylcholine has involvement in memory, motivation, arousal, and attention.  Acetylcholine originates from two major places in the brain: 1) basal forebrain and 2) the mesopontine tegmentum area. Acetylcholine originates in the basal forebrain from both the basal nucleus of Meynert and the medial septal nucleus. The basal nucleus of Meynert works on the M1 receptors within the neocortex. The medial septal nucleus functions in the hippocampus and parts of the cerebral cortex at the M1 receptors.

The mesopontine tegmentum is in the brain stem, and acetylcholine comes from its pedunculopontine nucleus and laterodorsal tegmental nucleus. The mesopontine tegmentum mainly activates the M1 receptors in the brainstem.  The M1 receptors in the brainstem are present in the raphe nucleus, lateral reticular nucleus, deep cerebellar nuclei, pontine nuclei, locus coeruleus, and the inferior olive. However, the mesopontine tegmentum also projects to the basal ganglia, thalamus, basal forebrain, and tectum.

Acetylcholine is known to have effects on a person's memory. For example, drugs such as scopolamine, an anticholinergic that works primarily at M1 receptors, prevent the learning of new information. Also, studies have shown that acetylcholine is essential in the neocortex to learn simple tasks of discrimination.  In the hippocampus, the absence of acetylcholine causes forgetfulness.

**Altering the Acetylcholine Pathway**

Alteration or interference with acetylcholine in the nervous system can result in several different pathologies. Pharmacology frequently targets the acetylcholine receptors, pathway, or acetylcholinesterase to correct human physiology during various pathologies. Acetylcholine itself has few uses pharmacologically because it is non-selective for all of the various nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. Additionally, it undergoes rapid inactivation by acetylcholinesterase. One way that acetylcholine is useful pharmacologically is as eye-drops to constrict the pupil during cataract surgery; this occurs because the constrictor pupillae and ciliary muscles of the eyes are both controlled by cranial nerve III, which has a parasympathetic function and can thus activate the M3 receptors of these muscles by acetylcholine secretion.

Cholinesterase inhibitors cause an increase in activity at acetylcholine receptors by blocking the breakdown of acetylcholine. Because the blocking of acetylcholinesterase causes a build-up of acetylcholine in the synaptic cleft, there is continuous activation of the cholinergic receptors. Pharmacologically, cholinesterase inhibitors can help to treat Alzheimer disease and myasthenia gravis since, in both conditions, there is a severe reduction in the amount of native acetylcholine receptor stimulation. Specifically, in Alzheimer disease, there is a decrease in acetylcholine in the neocortex. In myasthenia gravis, there is a severe reduction in the amount of N1 receptors at the neuromuscular junction due to the aberrant production of autoantibodies. Many toxins are cholinesterase inhibitors as well, and these toxins can cause death if given in high enough dosages.

Botulinum toxin works by preventing acetylcholine release from the presynaptic terminals.  Hence, local injections can be useful in treating muscle spasticity, cosmetic wrinkles, and migraines. Black widow spider venom has the opposite effect of botulinum toxin. It causes the cells to release all of their acetylcholine, causing excessive muscle contraction. If all acetylcholine supplies are exhausted due to the venom, then paralysis occurs.