In fractures of the clavicle, serious complications are rare. Brachial plexus injury or injury to the subclavian vessels can occur at the time of presentation or during the healing and callus formation of the clavicle. Excessive callus formation can lead to compression of the brachial plexus, resulting in peripheral neuropathy.

The most common complication of clavicle fractures is malunion, or when the clavicle fracture heals with angulation, shortening, or a poor cosmetic appearance. Patients with malunion of clavicle fractures typically have except full function and are clinically not significant. Some malunions may cause neurologic or functional problems, especially if there is a shortening greater than 2 cm.

Nonunion is the failure of the fracture to heal in 4 to 6 months. In middle-third clavicle fractures, the nonunion rate for all fractures treated nonoperatively is 6%, increasing to 15% in displaced fractures. Nonunion rates for distal third clavicle fractures range from 28% to 44%. Risk factors for nonunion include advanced age, female gender, smoking, significant displacement or shortening of fracture, fracture comminution, and inadequate immobilization. Many patients with clavicle fracture nonunion are asymptomatic and do not require any further treatment. Other symptomatic clavicle fracture nonunion patients may have continued pain, loss of range of motion, or loss of function. These patients should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon for further surgical management.

Proximal-third clavicle fracture complications include nonunion and posttraumatic arthritis. Acutely, proximal clavicle fractures displaced inwardly may result in severe intrathoracic injuries, including brachial plexus injury, subclavian vessel injury, and pneumothorax.