**Acute Contrast Reactions**

Severe acute reactions such as anaphylaxis or life-threatening hemodynamic changes are more common with ionic, monomeric contrast agents compared to low or iso-osmolar contrast agents (0.22% vs. 0.04%). Controversy still exists over the mechanism by which iodinated contrast reactions occur, but it is likely a combination of anaphylactoid (i.e., histamine, tryptase, and bradykinin release), as well as some degree of IgE, mediated response in both immediate and delayed reactions.

Acute reactions typically are benign and occur within one hour of administration. More common benign reactions include nausea, vomiting, pain on injection, and rash. Approximately 70% of adverse reactions are limited to the dermatologic system. Contrast agents are sometimes associated with a vagal response producing temporary bradycardia with subsequent hypotension. Agents with a higher osmolarity are much more likely to produce adverse reactions, especially when injected intravascularly.

**Contrast-Induced Acute Kidney Injury**

The most notable adverse effect of contrast media is contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI). Contrast inflicts damage to the kidney through direct tubule cell toxicity, ischemia by decreasing the availability of nitric oxide, thus inhibiting vasodilation as well as aiding in the creation of reactive oxygen species in the kidney's medulla. Under normal physiologic conditions, the renal medulla operates in a near hypoxic environment, making it sensitive to ischemia combined with cytotoxic agents.

A meta-analysis of randomized control trials in the 1980s and 1990s found that when comparing high-osmolarity contrast media with low-osmolarity contrast media, a 50% reduction in the occurrence of CI-AKI can be observed in patients with a pre-procedure glomerular filtration rate of less than 60 mL/min when low-osmolarity contrast agents are utilized. Consequently, high-osmolarity contrast media have become much less preferred for all but enteric procedures. The difference in the occurrence of CI-AKI amongst low-osmolarity and iso-osmolar contrast media is less clear.

**Protection from Contrast-Induced Acute Kidney Injury**

The mainstay for renal protection involves the use of non-ionic ow-osmolar or iso-osmolar contrast agents coupled with intravenous hydration with either normal saline or sodium bicarbonate.  The amount of contrast agent utilized should be minimized as much as possible and should not exceed the calculated maximum allowable contrast dose to reduce the incidence of nephrotoxicity.  Hydration with normal saline is a suitable strategy for most patients at risk of nephrotoxicity and a requirement for those with a glomerular filtration rate of less than 60 mL/min. Intravenous hydration increases volume, helps to dilute intravascular contrast concentration, promotes vasodilation, and promotes diuresis of contrast media.

Randomized control studies have shown normal saline to be more beneficial for most patients when compared to half-normal saline. Sodium bicarbonate has been proposed as a hydration strategy to theoretically act as a scavenger for free reactive oxygen species, but currently, available evidence comparing sodium bicarbonate to normal saline for hydration has been conflicting.  Despite the acceptance of the benefits of hydration prior to contrast utilization in those with diminished renal function, a set regimen or criteria has not been established.

**Managing Patients with Iodinated Contrast Hypersensitivity Reactions**

When patients note a previous hypersensitivity reaction to iodinated contrast media, several avenues for management can be pursued: choosing to not use contrast media, premedication prior to injection, or utilization of an alternate contrast agent such as a gadolinium-based agent.  Gadolinium-based agents do not appear to have cross-reactivity with iodinated agents and thus are a reasonable alternative.  A practice advisory has been published detailing the risks of gadolinium-based contrast agents in interventional pain procedures noting the potential for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in patients with preexisting renal disease, gadolinium-based contrast retention/deposition in the brain after repeated injection, and encephalopathy subsequent to unintentional intrathecal injection.  Of note, interventional pain procedures do not typically involve intrathecal or intravascular injection unless performed unintentionally.