In the classic scenario of appendicitis, the patient first describes periumbilical pain that migrates to the right lower quadrant. Following the onset of pain, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, fever may develop. Non-classic symptoms include malaise, heartburn, flatulence, constipation, and diarrhea.

Findings are often subtle, especially in early appendicitis. As inflammation progresses, signs of peritoneal inflammation develop. Signs include:

- Right lower quadrant guarding and rebound tenderness over McBurney's point (1.5 to 2 inches from the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) on a straight line from the ASIS to the umbilicus)

- Rovsing's sign (right lower quadrant pain elicited by palpation of the left lower quadrant)

- Dunphy's sign (increased abdominal pain with coughing)

Other associated signs such as the psoas sign (pain on external rotation or passive extension of the right hip suggesting retrocecal appendicitis) or obturator sign (pain on internal rotation of the right hip suggesting pelvic appendicitis) are rare. The time course of symptoms is variable but typically progresses from early appendicitis at 12 to 24 hours to perforation at greater than 48 hours. Seventy-five percent of patients present within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms. The risk of rupture is variable but is about 2% at 36 hours and increases about 5% every 12 hours after that.

Several practical scores have been defined to facilitate the prompt diagnosis of acute appendicitis, mainly based on the history and physical examination, accompanied by laboratory tests and imaging measures, including abdominal ultrasonography. Accordingly, evaluation of patients with suspicious signs and symptoms suggestive of acute appendicitis has been widely undertaken with Alvarado criteria since 1986. The highest score among Alvarado criteria is allocated to the tenderness in the right iliac fossa, leukocytosis, and each of the other predicted symptoms, including migratory right iliac fossa pain, nausea, and or vomiting, and anorexia, hold one score. Moreover, positive findings in the remaining indexes of physical examination, including fever and rebound tenderness in the right iliac fossa, would hold a similar score of one.

Gravid women are less likely to have a classic presentation of appendicitis than age-matched nonpregnant women, especially in the late stages of pregnancy; however, the majority of pregnant women will still present abdominal pain, close to the McBurney point. As the location of the appendix may migrate cephalad with the enlarging uterus, pain may be described in the right flank or even in the right upper quadrant as pregnancy advances.

Abdominal tenderness may be less prominent during pregnancy because the gravid uterus lifts the anterior abdominal wall away from the inflamed appendix. In the pregnant patient, the uterus may also inhibit contact between the omentum and the inflamed appendix.