When considering treatment for spasticity, the clinician must take into account the etiology of the spasticity, the timing of onset, medical comorbidities, the patient’s support system, and the overall goals of management. As with other conditions, treatment options follow a stepwise approach, starting with more conservative routes and extending to more invasive surgical procedures. One of the initial treatment approaches involves identifying and avoiding noxious stimuli, such as infection, pain, DVT, heterotopic ossification, pressure ulcers, urinary retention or stones, and ingrown toenails. Next, it is crucial to implement physical modalities and therapeutics, such as stretching, splinting, serial casting, heat and cold modalities, direct tendon pressure, functional electrical stimulation, vibration, and biofeedback.

**Baclofen:**This functions as gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonist at GABA receptors, thereby increasing the overall inhibitory effects within the reflex pathway.

**Tizanidine:**This drug is an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist, chemically related to clonidine. Its mechanism of action is to enhance presynaptic inhibition of the spinal reflex. Its side effects include sedation and drowsiness in up to 50% of patients, liver damage, hypotension, dry mouth, bradycardia, and dizziness. Clinical trials have shown tizanidine to be as effective as oral baclofen or diazepam but with better overall tolerability.

**Dantrolene Sodium:**This is unique to spasticity treatment when compared to other agents because it acts peripherally at the level of the muscle by blocking the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

**Diazepam:**This functions by facilitating GABA’s effects on GABA receptors, leading overall to membrane hyperpolarization and decreased firing of neurons. Its net effect is increased presynaptic inhibition and reduced reflexes.

In addition to oral agents, spasticity can be managed with local interventions, such as diagnostic nerve blocks, chemical neurolysis, chemodenervation with botulinum toxin, and motor point blocks. These procedures are the typical choice for treatment of focal spasticity or when the systemic effects of the oral agents mentioned above are prohibitive at required treatment doses.

**Diagnostic Nerve Blocks:**A local anesthetic is injected perineurally using electrostimulation as guidance to block nerve conduction for a few hours. This temporary measure allows the clinician to plan for more permanent interventions such as chemoneurolysis, botulinum toxin, or possible surgery because seeing the temporary reduction in spasticity allows for assessment of potential benefits to be obtained from longer-lasting procedures. These local anesthetics function by blocking the voltage-gated sodium channels on the axon, thereby preventing the depolarization of the axon membrane and interrupting the travel of the signal along the axon. Local anesthetics should not be injected through infected skin or skin that cannot be properly cleaned. Common agents used include lidocaine and bupivacaine.

**Chemoneurolysis:**Chemical neurolytic agents function for anywhere between months and years. These agents cause demyelination and axonal destruction via protein denaturation and axonal necrosis.

**Chemodenervation with Botulinum Toxin:**This is another treatment option. The FDA has approved three type A toxins, onabotulinumtoxin A, incobotulinumtoxin A, and abobotulinumtoxin A, and one type B toxin, rimabotuinumtoxin B, for clinical use.Clostridium botulinum in the form of one heavy and one light chain. The light chain is the active portion, and once it enters the host cell cytoplasm, it cleaves to the host protein SNAP-25, which is responsible for fusion. Once cleaved, SNAP-25 is not able to fuse vesicles. Thus, the overall effect is to prevent the exocytosis of acetylcholine-containing vesicles into the nerve terminal cleft, causing chemical denervation. Botulinum toxin is contraindicated in patients with a known sensitivity if there is evidence of infection at the planned injection site. The toxin should be used with caution if a patient is undergoing concurrent treatment with aminoglycoside or spectinomycin antibiotics. Patients with an underlying neuromuscular disease, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, or peripheral motor neuropathic disease, are at increased risk of severe reactions including respiratory depression or dysphagia. As above, electrical stimulation, EMG, or ultrasound are all methods to localize the muscle in question.

**Intrathecal Baclofen Pump:**Another management option is an intrathecal baclofen (ITB) pump. This device allows for direct delivery of baclofen into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the intrathecal space. This allows a patient to receive a high concentration of the medication directly to the spine while decreasing the CNS risks associated with high oral doses of baclofen, with a ratio of 100:1 for the baclofen concentration at the spinal cord level when administered intrathecally versus orally.

Symptoms of baclofen overdose include hypotonia or severe weakness, somnolence, nausea/vomiting, hypotension, respiratory depression, and seizures. Symptoms of baclofen withdrawal include fever, nausea, hyperthermia, dizziness, insomnia, pruritis, hallucinations, altered mental status, and exaggerated rebound spasticity.

ITB pump is indicated for patients with generalized spasticity who either cannot tolerate or lack response to more conservative agents (oral, nerve blocks, etc.).

**Surgery:**The most invasive management options are surgical. These include orthopedic surgeries such as tendon lengthening, tendon transfer procedures (such as the split anterior tibial tendon transfer known as SPLATT) as well as neurosurgical procedures such as sectioning at the level of a peripheral nerve (neurectomy), central electrical stimulators, rhizotomy, and neuroablative procedures.