Platelets form by the fragmentation of megakaryocytes within the bone marrow. Megakaryocytes duplicate in the marrow without dividing, resulting in the production of giant cells. Within these giant cells, organelles organize into discrete domains, which will eventually become individual platelets, separated by a network of invaginating plasma membranes. These megakaryocytes are positioned next to the sinusoidal walls, such that shearing forces from circulating blood fragment the megakaryocyte cytoplasm into individual platelets and sweep these new platelets into the bloodstream.

Platelets circulate in the blood in discoid form but undergo significant structural changes following activation, mediated by actin and myosin within the cytoplasm. The platelets transform from discoid forms into compact spheres with dendritic extensions, which allow platelet adhesion. A variety of membrane-bound glycoprotein receptors facilitates adhesion and aggregation of platelets.

As described above, platelets are anuclear but do contain RNA, ribosomes, mitochondria, and various granules, which are important in enacting platelet function.

- α-granules: the most abundant and largest secretory granules. They contain most of the platelet factors involved in hemostasis, including p-selectin, von Willebrand Factor and fibrinogen

- Dense granules: the smallest granules, which are visible on electron microscopy as dense bodies. They contain ADP and serotonin, as well as high levels of calcium

- Lysosomes: contain hydrolytic enzymes including acid phosphatase and arylsulfatase

An ‘open canalicular system’ formed of deep surface membrane invaginations facilitates the secretion of granules.