All interprofessional healthcare team members, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, and pharmacists, are frontline professionals in preventing chickenpox. Because of the anti-vaccination sentiment in society, healthcare professionals must educate the public on the importance of vaccination.

**Outcomes**

Chickenpox in a healthy individual is a self-limiting illness with an excellent outcome. However, in immunocompromised individuals, the infection can be associated with very high morbidity and mortality. The currently available Varicella vaccine is safe and well-tolerated. According to some sources, injection site complaints after vaccination were slightly higher after the second dose than the first. The most commonly reported adverse effect is soreness or swelling at the injection site.

Varicella/herpes zoster vaccines require the collaboration of the entire interprofessional healthcare team. In many states, pharmacists are empowered to administer the vaccine in the pharmacy, and they must let the patient's physician know so records can be updated appropriately. Physicians, nurses, and pharmacists all bear responsibility for patient counseling and ensuring the patient is a viable vaccine candidate, in line with the restrictions outlined above. Should they encounter any of these contraindications, they must communicate them to the entire healthcare team so all members are on the same page and patient records can be updated. This interprofessional approach ensures maximal effectiveness for varicella/herpes zoster vaccination strategies. [Level 5]