Peptide Hormones

The peptide hormones are water soluble molecules composed of amino acids (AA) linked by amide bonds. They exist as single polypeptide chains or as multimeric proteins, ranging in size from 3 to 200 AAs. They commonly derive from a single gene, with multimeric proteins being an exception. The peptide hormones act on cell surface receptors and therefore must be capable of exocytosis after translation. First, a ribosome translates a signal sequence that docks it to a signal recognition particle (SRP) on the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). Translation continues within the RER, and the growing peptide is cleaved from its signal sequence, forming a large preprohormone, which is cleaved to a prohormone, packaged in a vesicle, and sent to the Golgi apparatus. In the Golgi, peptides are cleaved into their final form and packaged into secretory vesicles that enter the cytoplasm. These vesicles undergo exocytosis upon cellular stimulus. Classic examples of this processing are pre-pro-PTH, pro-PTH and PTH as well as pre-pro-insulin, proinsulin, and insulin. The secretory vesicles often contain cleavage products in addition to the hormone as seen with insulin and C-peptide, which are co-secreted in equimolar concentrations. In addition to cleavages, other modifications occur in the RER and Golgi, namely N-linked and O-linked glycosylation of AA side chains.

These hormones range broadly in size and structure, but several peptide families are of note. The glycoproteins are a group of heavily glycosylated alpha:beta heterodimers. The alpha-subunit is 92 AAs long and shared by all peptides of this class.  This family includes thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and the gonadotropins: follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). The POMC family consists of hormones derived from a single protein product that is cleaved at various lysine residues into multiple active peptides, including adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and beta-lipotropin.  The posterior pituitary produces two peptide hormones that differ by only two AAs: oxytocin and anti-diuretic hormone (ADH). Both are nonapeptides with a disulfide bridge, which get packaged with carrier proteins called neurophysins. The Insulin/Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family of hormones are peptides with three disulfide bonds. Insulin is a 51 AA hormone, consisting of two disulfide-linked polypeptide chains, while IGF-1 is a single polypeptide comprising 70 AAs. The growth hormone (GH) family are large, unglycosylated single polypeptide chains of approximately 200 AAs that have two internal disulfide bonds. This group includes GH, prolactin, and human placental lactogen.

Steroid Hormones

The steroid hormones are synthesized from cholesterol and are therefore lipophilic, freely diffuse across cell membranes, and have a structure of three contiguous cyclohexyl rings joined to one cyclopentyl ring. These cholesterol derivatives differ in their side groups and covalent bonds, which permits binding to different intracellular receptors. Steroid synthesis begins when the endocrine cell is stimulated by a peptide hormone, e.g., ACTH, leading to cleavage of stored cytoplasmic cholesterol esters and shuttling of newly-freed cholesterol to the mitochondria. The cholesterol side chain is then cleaved by cholesterol desmolase, forming pregnenolone; this is both the first committed step and the rate-limiting step (RLS) in steroid synthesis. Tissue-specific enzymes determine further transform pregnenolone to steroid end-products. Using the adrenal cortex as an example, zona glomerulosa cells form aldosterone via aldosterone synthase, zona fasciculata cells route pregnenolone towards cortisol formation via 17alpha-hydroxylase, and zona reticularis cells further route precursors towards sex steroid formation via 17,20 lyase.

Tyrosine Derivatives

Within the chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla, a single tyrosine molecule transforms into norepinephrine or epinephrine, water-soluble catecholamines that act as ligands for cell surface receptors. In the cytoplasm, tyrosine converts to dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) via tyrosine hydroxylase, which is the RLS in catecholamine formation. DOPA then converts to dopamine via amino acid decarboxylase. Dopamine gets packaged into vesicles via vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT) where it converts to norepinephrine via dopamine beta-hydroxylase. About 80% of the norepinephrine then transforms to epinephrine via phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase, whose activity is significantly increased by cortisol. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are exocytosed when these chromaffin cells undergo stimulation by acetylcholine acting at nicotinic cell surface receptors.

In the follicles of the thyroid gland, tyrosine converts into thyroid hormone (TH), a lipophilic polyiodinated dityrosine molecule that interacts with intracellular receptors. First, TSH stimulates iodide uptake along the basal surface of follicular cells via the sodium-iodide symporter. This transport is ATP-mediated and works against an electrochemical gradient, ensuring adequate iodide uptake.