**Preoperative Assessment**

When considering a patient for bariatric surgery, if the qualification standards discussed above are met, a preoperative assessment is required. A comprehensive evaluation is utilized, and an interprofessional team is assembled. An interprofessional team that includes behavioral health professionals, including psychiatrists or psychologists, nutritionists, medical bariatric specialists, nurse specialists, and skilled surgeons, are utilized. The preoperative assessment includes psychological, cognitive, emotional, current social situation, and anesthetic risk components.

The preoperative psychological assessment is used to identify prior diagnosed psychiatric disorders to properly determine if an operative candidate has the ability and willingness to make the required lifestyle changes for sustainable weight loss. Any identified significant psychological disorders, including antisocial personality disorder, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, should be treated in the preoperative period to decrease the challenges to weight loss initiatives and postoperative psychological complications. According to the American Society of Metabolic and Bariatric Surgeons, there are suggestions for the preoperative assessment to include behavioral, health-related risk behaviors, cognitive or emotional, and current life situation components.

The behavioral component serves to determine the role of food in a patient's current lifestyle and determine if their extent of eating is driven by behavioral and environmental stimulation. The aim is to identify any prior attempts at weight loss. This may be a multitude of dietary restrictions that may or may not include the addition of exercise.

An assessment for eating disorders is performed. Examples of such would include binge eating, nighttime eating, overeating, or grazing. Maladaptive eating styles can have a stress-related pattern, which is important to identify preoperatively. Physical activity levels should be evaluated. The patient should have the ability to incorporate an exercise regimen in the postoperative state as they are recovering. The provider should encourage them to initiate an exercise program before surgical intervention.

History of or current substance abuse should be assessed in these patients. The patient should have tools for self-management, rational judgment, and coping skills at hand. The need for self-medication should also be explored further with the psychological assessment. Any health-related risk behaviors could include impulsive or compulsive behavior patterns. These will be evident with patient compliance with medical treatment of comorbid disease, likely indicating compliance with postoperative management.

Patient emotional, cognitive intellect should be assessed; they should have the capacity to understand the type of procedure to be performed, the risks associated, benefits, and behavioral changes that are key to weight loss. Any deficits should be addressed, and counseling measures should be taken to help the patient develop coping skills or illuminate maladaptive behavior. An appropriate amount of time should be taken to educate the patient on the procedure, not only on obtaining consent but also on the risks of obesity. This cognitive assessment should include both knowledge of the procedure at hand and alternatives.

The patient's current lifestyle should be evaluated for any chaos or triggering life stressors that may negatively impact balanced meals or a regular exercise routine. Stressors are not necessarily a contraindication to surgical intervention, but if unrecognized or untreated, they may lead to recidivism or result in mental illness in the postoperative period. Stressors at home like discourse with a spouse or child, loss of a job, death of a loved one should be investigated. They should be addressed and offered appropriate counseling. The patient should have social support at home as utilization of such is related to increased healing and effective weight loss. The patient's motivation, whether it is a primary one of health benefits or other reasons, can help in guiding their postoperative course. Expectations, including social, emotional, and lifestyle-wise, should be evaluated to determine if realistic. These will also help determine if the patient is genuinely committed to making permanent changes and adherence to postoperative guidelines to improve their health.

A nutritionist and dietitian must be part of the multidisciplinary team. There should be a tailored nutritional plan for before, perioperative, and postoperative to bariatric surgery. The patient should be educated on reading the nutritional content of foods, appropriate portion sizes, alternatives to snacks and drinks, healthy preparation of food, and how to shop for the household. The medical assessment includes a complete history and physical examination. This is utilized to assess for comorbid illnesses such as diabetes mellitus, obstructive sleep apnea, hypertension, and restrictive lung disease. When considering a patient for a bariatric procedure, a comorbid condition is likely identified before the patient falls in the class 2 category of obesity. Many patients may have undiagnosed elements related to their obesity, like obstructive sleep apnea. Screening tools like questionnaire methods like the STOP-Bang are utilized but then confirmed using polysomnography.

If a patient is determined to have moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea, it is pertinent to obtain pulmonary function tests. A cardiac risk assessment should be performed. A patient with a history of weight loss medications should undergo an echocardiogram. Fenfluramine has a known side effect of cardiac valvular disease. Any patient with a history of gastroesophageal reflux disorder, peptic ulcer disease, a history of an H. pylori infection, or hiatal hernia should undergo an esophagogastroduodenoscopy to rule out any active disease. If a patient is suspected of having nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, with evidence of hepatomegaly on physical examination, liver function tests should be obtained. Radiographic imaging should also be obtained, whether ultrasound or CT scan. A biopsy may be needed to evaluate for cirrhosis as well. As obese patients may have a long-standing history of hypertension or diabetes mellitus, renal function may be impaired, requiring serum chemistries, like a blood urea nitrogen and creatinine level. The hemoglobin A1c should be obtained as part of the preoperative workup for all patients.

A musculoskeletal examination should be performed to evaluate for cervical osteoarthritis. Cervical osteoarthritis will affect positioning in the operating room for bariatric surgery. Any woman of childbearing age should be seen by an OB/GYN to discuss birth control options. Within the 18-to-24-month operative period, pregnancy is discouraged. The discussion with the OB/GYN should include the type of procedure performed. If a patient is undergoing a malabsorptive bariatric procedure, the patient may not adequately absorb certain birth control pills, thus making the form of contraceptive ineffective. If a patient has a hypercoagulable state or a history of venous thromboembolism, hematology/oncology should be consulted. They can help determine the duration of thromboprophylaxis in the perioperative period. An anesthetic risk assessment should be performed as obese patients tend to have respiratory and cardiovascular changes that can impact the delivery of general anesthesia and preoperative anesthesia.

**Contraindications**

When considering a patient for bariatric procedures, contraindications should be assessed. A bariatric procedure is not an indication for glycemic control, lipid control, or cardiovascular risk reduction independent of the noted BMI parameters. Patients identified with bulimia nervosa are not candidates for bariatric surgery. Advanced age, identified as greater than 65 years old, is controversial and surgeon specific. Pediatric patients under 18 years of age are becoming more common. The American Academy of Pediatrics endorsed patients with severe obesity being evaluated for bariatric procedures. Pre-existing medical or psychological conditions that preclude surgery include any uncontrolled psychosis or major depressive disorder, uncontrolled eating disorder, abuse of any drug and/or alcohol, any severe cardiac disease with prohibitive anesthetic risks associated, severe coagulopathy, or a patient inability to comply with nutritional requirements like lifelong vitamin replacement adherence.

**Bariatric Procedures for Management of Severe Obesity**

Bariatric mechanisms for weight loss include a combination of volume restriction, nutrient malabsorption, and intestinal hormone alteration. The combination of methods affects satiety, absorption of nutrients and calories, and insulin sensitivity. A bariatric procedure along with behavioral modifications can help a patient achieve but sustain meaningful weight loss. A patient who undergoes bariatric surgery should undergo lifelong surveillance. From 1993 to 2016, approximately 2 million patients in the United States alone underwent bariatric surgery.

The field of bariatric surgery has evolved from an exclusively open procedure like an open gastric bypass or vertical banded gastroplasty to now 98% laparoscopic surgery like a sleeve gastrectomy or a gastric bypass. Complications and mortality rates have reduced from approximately 11.7% and 1%, respectively, in 1998 to 1.4% and 0.04% in 2016.

The mechanism of weight loss typically falls into one of two categories, but some procedures have both components. These mechanisms include malabsorption and restriction. There is a contribution of neurohormonal effects on the regulation of energy balance and hunger control. Key hormones include leptin and ghrelin. Examples of restrictive procedures include the vertical banded gastroplasty, laparoscopic adjustable gastric band, and sleeve gastrectomy. Malabsorptive procedures include jejunoileal bypass, biliopancreatic diversion (BPD), or biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. A combination procedure commonly performed is the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.

**Restriction**

The purpose of a restrictive procedure is to reduce the stomach reservoir capacity, thus limiting the caloric intake. A restrictive procedure can be performed via resection, creation of a proximal gastric outlet, or bypass. Both vertical banded gastroplasty and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding are purely restrictive procedures and do have similarities in anatomical configurations. When discussing these procedures, the mechanism of action is by limiting solid food intake secondary to the reduced stomach size but leaving the absorptive functions of the small bowel intact. Both procedures, the vertical banded gastroplasty, and the laparoscopic adjustable gastric band, have been largely abandoned. The sleeve gastrectomy is a main restrictive procedure likely due to more successful hormonal effects on hunger control.

There are investigational procedures like aspiration therapy or intragastric balloon placement, which restrict food gradually with modest weight loss. These may have higher recidivism rates than the contemporary bariatric procedures performed.

**Malabsorption**

The malabsorptive mechanisms of weight loss reduce the effectiveness of nutrient absorption by reducing the absorptive length of the small bowel. These procedures can be accomplished either by a bypass of the small intestine absorptive surface area or by the end of diversion of biliopancreatic secretions, which facilitate absorption.

**Combination**

A combination procedure can also serve as an option for patients. Examples of such include the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass as well as BPD with duodenal switch. Roux-en-Y gastroplasty functions by creating a smaller gastric pouch that limits oral intake with small bowel reconfiguration providing the additional mechanism for weight loss. It creates dumping physiology as well as positive hormonal changes and has mild malabsorptive properties.

**Approach**

When considering technical approaches for surgical intervention, laparoscopic versus open surgical are options. The laparoscopic approach improves both recovery and mortality; thus, it is more commonly utilized. The Nationwide Inpatient Sample from 2003 to 2008 documented data that the proportion of performed laparoscopic procedures increased from 20% in 2003 to 90% in 2008. The laparoscopic approach offers advantages like reducing blood loss, lower incidence of wound infection, incisional hernia, faster recovery, and shorter hospital stay. Important considerations should be taken given the patient's size as laparoscopic instruments, and trocar lengths may be limiting factors for a laparoscopic approach. Prior abdominal surgery is not a contraindication for a laparoscopic approach in a bariatric procedure.