# Continuing Education Activity

Reentrant arrhythmias are a diverse group of cardiac conduction defects that can manifest in a wide range of presentations. The common reentrant arrhythmias include atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia, atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia, other pathway-mediated tachycardia, and ventricular tachycardia. In atrial fibrillation, multiple reentry circuits are found in the left atrium and pulmonary veins, while typical atrial flutter is characterized by a macro reentry circuit in the right atrium. Atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) is the most common reentrant supraventricular tachycardia and utilizes the atrioventricular (AV) node as its reentry circuit. Proper patient assessment and diagnosis are crucial in the management of this condition. This condition has low mortality but, if managed incorrectly, can result in sudden cardiac death. This activity describes the treatment, management, and diagnosis of patients with reentrant arrhythmias and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the stepwise approach for the evaluation of reentrant arrhythmias.
- Summarize treatment modalities available for a patient with a reentrant arrhythmia.
- Review the pathophysiology of various reentrant arrhythmias.
- Describe how the coordination of an interprofessional team can lead to a more rapid diagnosis of reentrant arrhythmias and subsequently decrease associated morbidity and mortality in affected patients.

# Introduction

Tachyarrhythmias are produced by one of the three mechanisms; reentry, enhanced automaticity, or triggered activity.

The common reentrant arrhythmias include atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia, atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia, other pathway-mediated tachycardia, and ventricular tachycardia. In atrial fibrillation, multiple reentry circuits are found in the left atrium and pulmonary veins, while typical atrial flutter is characterized by a macro reentry circuit in the right atrium.

The clinical symptoms and signs of different reentry arrhythmias are variable, and the clinical course and outcomes depend on the cardiac status. Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia is the most benign reentrant arrhythmia, while scar-related ventricular tachycardia is a life-threatening tachyarrhythmia.

# Etiology

Reentry arrhythmias can manifest in a multitude of ways depending on the specific variation of the abnormal rhythm. If the origin involves the atrioventricular (AV) node, the arrhythmia purely occurs due to an anatomic abnormality in the AV node associated with the different conduction pathways in the node itself.

Atrial fibrillation is the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia, and multiple cardiac and non-cardiac causes and triggers of atrial fibrillation have been reported in the literature. The most common cardiac triggers of atrial fibrillation include mitral valve diseases, heart failure, myocardial infarction/ischemia, intracardiac shunts, and hypertension. Advanced age is one of the major causes of atrial fibrillation in people with structurally normal hearts.

The reentry ventricular arrhythmias are caused by structural heart diseases and scars in the myocardium. Ischemic cardiomyopathy is the main etiology of reentrant ventricular tachycardia, followed by non-ischemic, dilated cardiomyopathy.

# Epidemiology

Arrhythmias with pre-excitation origins are estimated to occur in 1 to 3 per 1000 people in the United States, and 60% to 70% of patients discovered to have evidence of pre-excitation, generally detected on routine electrocardiograms, have no other heart disease.

AVNRT is the most common paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. Approximately 89,000 new cases of SVT are discovered each year, with roughly half a million people in the United States currently living with SVTs. AVNRT is more common in females, and this difference is due to the female hormones and autonomic tone.

The global burden of atrial fibrillation has increased exponentially over the last five decades due to population aging.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of reentrant tachycardia depends on the origin and location of the reentrant circuit. A similarity that all reentrant arrhythmias possess is the formation of a circuit that allows for constant re-excitation of the myocardium. This constant re-excitation of the myocardium can manifest in dangerous arrhythmias, syncope, or even sudden death. Reentry has a characteristic mechanism by which tachyarrhythmias are started and sustained. Reentries can be divided into three main types; circus-type reentry, reflection, and phase II reentry.

**Circus Type Reentry**

This is the basic model of reentry, characterized by circus movement of an impulse around an anatomic or functional obstacle. The ring model of reentry was described by Mayers at the start of the 20th century. In 1913, G.R.Mines proposed the three basic requirements of a circus-type reentry, which included; 1) a unidirectional block, 2) circus movement that allows the excitatory wave to progress along a distinct pathway, return to its origin and recirculate again, and 3) Any interruption in the circuit should result in termination of the reentry.

**Reflection**

Reflection is an example of reentry without circus movement. The basic concept of reflection first came after studying the electrical characteristics of potassium-depolarized Purkinje fibers in the 1970s.

**Phase II Reentry**

It is the third mechanism of reentry, does not depend on circus movement, and has been found to have a focal origin in the ventricular myocardium. Phase 2 reentry occurs due to heterogeneity in the action potential in epicardial and endocardial myocytes.

Typical atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) is a prototype of reentrant arrhythmias. It is characterized by two atrioventricular nodal pathways having different refractory periods (slow and fast pathways). When a premature atrial impulse comes, an antegrade impulse propagates via the slow pathway (the fast pathway is refractory). When the impulse reaches the lower end of the slow pathway, the fast pathway has already recovered, so the retrograde impulse goes via the fast pathway. When this alternate movement of the cardiac impulse continues, it starts a reentrant tachycardia.

# History and Physical

Patients with supraventricular reentrant arrhythmias have a multitude of presentations. The common presentations of these arrhythmias include palpitations, shortness of breath, or chest pain; however, the patients may remain asymptomatic until a complication is developed, e.g., atrial fibrillation. If asymptomatic, the diagnosis is likely found on a routine electrocardiogram (ECG) or a rhythm strip while being worked up for another complaint. Other symptoms commonly seen in these patients are nervousness, anxiety, neck pounding, lightheadedness, and even syncopal episodes.

Ventricular reentrant arrhythmias are potentially life-threatening, and the patients may present with palpitations, chest pain, shortness of breath, syncope, or even cardiac arrest.

An accurate past medical and surgical history is paramount when working up a patient with suspected reentrant arrhythmia. Since these arrhythmias can be iatrogenic, any cardiac surgery would be an important history to gather from the patient. One should also derive information on medications, illicit drug use, and past medical history that need to be obtained to consider other differentials.

In symptomatic patients, the first thing that needs to be evaluated is the patient’s hemodynamic stability. A proper physical exam is required to work up possible differentials and rule out triggering conditions that would elicit another condition mimicking signs of this arrhythmia. Many patients who truly have a reentrant supraventricular arrhythmia will have a completely normal exam.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of reentrant supraventricular tachycardia s usually made in the emergency department based on electrocardiographic features; however, certain points in history may indicate the possible diagnosis. The first step in evaluation for a patient with a reentrant arrhythmia is to obtain a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) during tachycardia (if possible) and compare it with an ECG in sinus rhythm.

An ambulatory ECG monitoring may be considered in symptomatic patients when resting ECG is normal, and there is no electrocardiographic evidence of arrhythmia. The contemporary guidelines recommend echocardiograms in patients with atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter to assess the underlying cardiac structure and function. Thyroid function tests and other targeted investigations are also recommended in selected patients.

The diagnosis of reentrant ventricular tachycardia is made on a 12-lead ECG. A 12-lead ECG in sinus rhythm should be compared with ECG during tachycardia. A 12-lead ECG sinus rhythm should be evaluated for myocardial ischemia or infarction. For patients with exercise-related symptoms, an exercise ECG is recommended to document exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias. For symptomatic patients with undocumented ventricular arrhythmia, an ambulatory ECG is recommended to assess the correlation of symptoms with arrhythmia. While those patients with infrequent symptoms, implantable cardiac monitors may help in the diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

There are various modes of management for a patient with a reentrant arrhythmia. Assessment of the patient's hemodynamic status is the first step of management, which determines the mode of treatment. For all patients with hemodynamically unstable reentrant tachycardia, electrical cardioversion is the first choice of management, irrespective of the origin of the arrhythmia. Advanced cardiac life support should be initiated immediately if the patient presents with cardiac arrest.

Vagal maneuvers are recommended as the first choice treatment for hemodynamically stable patients with reentrant supraventricular tachycardia (SVTs). The recommended vagal maneuvers are the Valsalva maneuver and carotid artery massage. The Valsalva maneuver is performed by instructing the patient to forcefully exhale against a closed glottis. An alternate technique is performed by exhaling against a closed glottis followed by a passive leg raise at a 45-degree angle.

Adenosine is a good treatment option in a patient where the AV node is the origin of arrhythmia; however, it can be catastrophic in a patient with a circuit formed by an accessory pathway. If adenosine is given to a patient with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, the AV node will be blocked by the medications. However, the accessory pathway will remain uninhibited, which can lead to ventricular fibrillation and possible cardiac arrest.

After initial management, all patients with AVNRT and AVRT should be referred to an electrophysiologist for catheter ablation. Catheter ablation for AVNRT/AVRT is a very safe procedure in the contemporary era, and it has a very high success and very low recurrence. In AVNRT, the cure rate is above 95%, with complications below 1%. In WPW, the success rate is above 90%, with a complication rate of less than 5%.

The acute treatment of hemodynamically stable patients with a reentrant ventricular arrhythmia includes intravenous procainamide, amiodarone, or sotalol, while electrical cardioversion is recommended for hemodynamically unstable patients. Beta-blockers and long-term antiarrhythmic drugs can be considered in patients with recurrent arrhythmias.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses for reentrant arrhythmias include other tachyarrhythmias. Most reentrant circuits are located above the ventricles; consequently, other supraventricular tachycardias can be confused with reentrant arrhythmias. A 12-lead EKG should be obtained during the tachycardia as well as in sinus rhythm to differentiate these arrhythmias from one another.

Differentials include:

- Sinus tachycardia

- Atrial tachycardia

- Ectopic junctional tachycardia

- Torsades de pointes

- Accelerated atrioventricular rhythm

- Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia

# Prognosis

The prognosis of reentrant arrhythmias depends on the origin of the arrhythmia. Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter are associated with a long-term risk of thromboembolism (stroke), even in the absence of other structural heart defects. Low-risk patients have less than one percent annual risk of stroke, while the high-risk group of patients has as high as 7 to 10% annual risk of stroke if not anticoagulated properly.

Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia has an excellent prognosis, and 9=more than 95% of people remain free of arrhythmias after successful ablation and modification of the slow atrioventricular nodal pathway.

Reentrant ventricular arrhythmias are usually found in patients with cardiomyopathy and do not have a good prognosis. Ventricular arrhythmias in patients with cardiomyopathy lead to decompensated heart failure, recurrent hospitalization, impairs quality of life due to hospitalization and repeat implantable cardioverter-defibrillator shock and even result in sudden cardiac death,

# Complications

Complications in reentrant arrhythmias vary depending on the origin and anatomic location of the arrhythmia. As with any uncontrolled heart rate, reentrant arrhythmias can lead to cardiac remodeling, hemodynamic compromise, and, eventually, heart failure.

Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter are associated with a risk of thromboembolic complications and heart failure.

Many complications can occur from cardiac ablation. The most common complication is bleeding from the site of insertion. Mechanical trauma to the heart valves, vessels, and chambers may lead to pericardial effusion and even cardiac tamponade. A rare but worrisome complication is the iatrogenic creation of another arrhythmia, which potentially could make the patient unstable. The ablation of AVNRT and AVRT may result in an atrioventricular block, and the patient may require a pacemaker.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be taught that reentrant arrhythmias are caused by a problem with the heart’s conduction mechanism, which coordinates the beating of the heart. They should be informed of the mechanism of the disease, i.e., that the problem occurs when a circuit is formed, causing the conduction system to re-excite itself continuously. Typical symptoms include anxiety, lightheadedness, palpitations, and losing consciousness. Patients need to be taught to watch for worrisome symptoms such as more than a brief time period of headaches, palpitations, and presyncope symptoms. They should be advised to seek medical attention promptly, especially those with prior myocardial infarction,  treated with ablation, and those with recurrent symptoms.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team approach with good communication and established roles is crucial for optimal patient care in a patient with an unstable arrhythmia. This interprofessional team includes clinicians, nursing staff, and pharmacists. Depending on the type of reentrant arrhythmia and the management approach chosen, various interprofessional team members will contribute from their specialty (e.g., pharmacists if medication is chosen, nurses will also participate in medical management, or if surgery or ablation is the choice, nursing will assist throughout the process, including post-procedural monitoring. Open communication channels are essential to optimal outcomes.

Healthcare professionals trained and oriented to the hospital’s specific policies are essential for any rapid response or code blue situation. One study at a Vancouver General Hospital showed that nurses felt the team performed better after training and with assigned team roles. Prior to training, many nurses noted that it was unclear who the team leader was and who had which roles. Establishing proper roles for healthcare professionals on an interprofessional team is extremely important in unstable patients with advanced conditions such as reentrant arrhythmias.