Action potentials from nerve fibers of the central nervous system depolarize muscle down the length of the sarcolemma to the innermost fibers through a transverse tubule (T tubule) system. The action potential responds with a dihydropyridine receptor on the T tubule; this acts as a voltage sensor allowing for calcium to be released. Calcium subsequently activates ryanodine receptors in the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release even more calcium. Higher quantities of calcium can then bind to the protein troponin that is located on the actin filaments. The calcium-troponin complex displaces the protein tropomyosin from the active site of the actin filament and allows for myosin binding and muscle contraction. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is needed to detach myosin from the actin filaments and allow for muscle relaxation.

In a similar fashion to skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle is triggered by calcium binding to troponin in the actin filaments of the cardiomyocyte. This binding then removes tropomyosin and allows for the binding of myosin to actin filaments and eventual contraction. The significant difference between cardiac and skeletal muscle is in the cardiomyocyte's automaticity. Specialized cardiac pacemaker cells located in the sinoatrial (SA) node are responsible for creating cardiac muscle contraction. These act to trigger action potentials that allow for sodium and potassium influx and calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The cardiac muscle can then contract as a single, coordinated unit.

Smooth muscle contraction is not under voluntary control and is done through the autonomic regulation of a calcium-calmodulin interaction. Contraction begins through a change in action potential or activation of mechanical stretch receptors in the plasma membrane. Intracellular calcium is increased and combines with the protein calmodulin. It is this complex that activates the myosin light chain (MLC) kinase to phosphorylate and form cross-bridges between myosin and actin, leading to muscle contraction. Some smooth muscle maintains tone, which is caused by a constant phosphorylation level in the absence of external potentials. A decrease in intracellular calcium levels induces relaxation.