These patients most commonly present with progressive, painless bilateral central vision loss. The presenting visual acuity ranges from 20/20 to 20/200. The other presenting symptoms include central scotoma, delayed dark adaptation, photosensitivity, photopsia, and abnormal color vision.

Mutations in the ABCA4R gene can lead to various clinical phenotypes, i.e., STGD1, bull's eye maculopathy (BEM), and chorioretinal atrophy. We will stick our discussion mainly to STGD1. The typical triad associated with STGD1 includes flecks, macular atrophy, and peripapillary sparing. Flecks are yellowish-white round- or pisciform- (fish-tail) shaped lesions of varying sizes located within the RPE. They tend to develop centrifugally from the macular region and may even progress beyond the vascular arcades till the mid-periphery but usually spare the far periphery.

The macula is involved early in the disease course because of the presence of high density of the rod cells. The highest density of rod cells (150,000 rods/mm) is present in a ring-like area located at a distance of 3-5mm from the foveola. This corresponds to the region of the BEM. The macular atrophy changes are usually progressive. However, its severity can be variable, ranging from a small region of central macular atrophy to atrophy beyond the vascular arcades. Peripapillary sparing is considered to be a diagnostic feature in STGD1. Studies have shown no abnormalities, even on fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and optical coherence tomography (OCT).

BEM may rarely be seen in STGD1. The differential diagnoses for BEM include hydroxychloroquine/ chloroquine retinopathy, STGD1, cone dystrophy, cone-rod dystrophy, advanced dry age-related macular degeneration, and central areolar choroidal dystrophy, benign concentric annular macular dystrophy, fenestrated sheen macular dystrophy, Juvenile Batten's disease, fucosidosis, ceroid lipofuscinosis, clofazimine maculopathy. Flecks tend to appear later in eyes with this phenotype.

Chorioretinal degeneration is the most severe phenotype related to ABCA4 gene mutation. It is characterized by chorioretinal degeneration, choriocapillaris atrophy, widespread nummular pigmentary deposits, and bony spicule. In addition, severe cases may be associated with a visible sclera, vascular attenuation, and peripapillary disease involvement.