**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise Only From Odontogenic Epithelium Without Odontogenic Ectomesenchyme**

**Ameloblastoma**

Multi-cystic or Solid type appears as****multi-locular radiolucency that resembles honeycomb or soap bubble appearance. Expansion of the buccal and lingual cortices can be seen as well**(Fig. 1 and 2)**. At the same time, the uni-cystic type shows Well demarcated Uni-locular translucency that mimics dentigerous cysts. An impacted tooth may be present, and the peripheral type may show superficial erosion of the alveolar bone in few cases**(Fig. 3)**. Malignant type is usually similar to multicystic type. In these cases, the use of functional PET/ CT scans is extremely helpful in determining the extent of soft tissue involvement and distant metastases.

Other tumors include adenomatoid odontogenic tumor that usually appears as a well-circumscribed unilocular translucency around an unerupted tooth, usually a canine.**(Fig. 4)**Finally, squamous odontogenic tumors that are usually unilocular in small lesions and multilocular in large ones and they may displace the affected tooth.

**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise From Both Odontogenic Epithelium and Odontogenic Ectomesenchyme, With or Without Dental Hard Tissue Formation**

Odontogenic ghost cell tumor (calcifying odontogenic cyst) usually appears as well-circumscribed unilocular translucency with flecks of radio-opacity and may be associated with unerupted canine.**(Fig. 5)**. Developing odontoma may be translucent and mostly associated with unerupted teeth.

**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise From Ectomesenchyme With or Without Included Odontogenic Epithelium**

Odontogenic fibroma usually appears as well-circumscribed unilocular translucency with sclerotic borders and flecks of radio-opaque areas. Larger lesions may be multilocular and may be associated with root resorption.**(Fig. 6)**While odontogenic myxoma appears as either unilocular or multilocular radiolucency and is usually may be associated with teeth resorption. Thin bone trabeculae can be seen in the radiolucency, usually arranged at the right angle. This gives these tumors the characteristic “step ladder” pattern. However, it is not pathognomonic.**(Fig. 7)**Lastly, cementoblastoma usually presents as a radiopaque lesion surrounded by a thin rim of translucency which represents the periodontal ligament space. It often leads to resorption of the root of the affected teeth.**(Fig. 8)**

**Malignant Odontogenic Tumors**

Cone beam CT scan and PET scan may be beneficial to assess the extent of the lesion and the potential metastases. Ameloblastic carcinoma appears to be an ill-defined radiolucent lesion with significant cortical destruction.