The cervical spine has 7 vertically stacked bones called vertebrae, labeled C1 (cervical 1) through C7 (cervical 7). C1 (called the atlas) connects the top of the cervical spine to the base of the skull, and C7 connects to the upper thoracic spine at about shoulder level. These uniquely shaped bones (the spinal column) protect the spinal cord, a cylindrical bundle of nerve fibers and associated nerve roots enclosed within the cervical vertebrae and connect the body to the brain.

The upper cervical spine is unique. The atlas (C1) and axis (C2), functioning together, are primarily responsible for spinal rotation, flexion (bend forward), and extension (bend backward) and are the most mobile part of the entire spine. Roughly 50% of flexion and extension and 50% of rotation of the neck occurs in the area of C1 and C2.

The remainder of the cervical vertebrae (C3-C7) are smaller compared to the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. The vertebral bodies are round with a hollow center that continues from C1 and C2 and houses the spinal cord as it travels distally from the brainstem. The cervical intervertebral discs are "shock-absorbing pads" between each level starting below C2 (axis). The discs are strong yet flexible tissues composed of fibrocartilage. In the middle of each disc is a nucleus pulposus, a gel-like material surrounded by a strong protective outer layer called the annulus fibrosus.

At each vertebral level of the spinal column, the discs function to hold the vertebrae together and absorb shock to the spine. The presence of the discs also creates spaces (called foramen) between each bony vertebrae that allow nerves to exit from the spinal cord.  Spinal nerve roots are bundles of nerve fibers that exit (or enter) the spinal cord, in pairs from each side of the spinal cord, and travel through the foramen to send and receive nerve impulses from the body. Each cervical nerve innervates or provides sensation and motor function to both sides of a corresponding part of the upper body. Muscles, tendons, and ligaments help support the cervical spinal column by limiting excessive movement in all directions.

Common disc disorders include degenerative disc disease and disc herniations ("ruptured disc") that can cause adjacent spinal nerve irritation. This can happen when a disc flattens or becomes deformed, as the space for a spinal nerve passing through the foramen is compromised. Nerve compression may cause pain that may radiate throughout the neck and into the head, back, and arms.

Cervical spinal stenosis is a narrowing of the hollow center of the spinal canal and can lead to compression of the spinal cord and impingement of the nerve roots exiting the spinal cord.

Cervical trauma may affect the cervical spinal column by causing injury to bones, nerves, muscles, tendons, and ligaments. Trauma can disrupt nerve communication between the brain and various somatic and visceral systems, sometimes resulting in weakness, paralysis, and loss of sensation.

Cervical strain is typically the result of a stretch injury to the muscles and ligaments of the cervical spine. Oftentimes, it is the result of trauma from sports-related injuries, falls, or motor vehicle accidents. Prolonged improper positioning (poor workplace ergonomics) can cause postural deviations, which may eventually result in neck pain even in younger patient populations.

To be an adequate cervical HVLA OMT provider, the provider must have adequate background knowledge in cervical spine and neck anatomy.

The transverse processes are small bony projections off the right and left sides of each vertebra. The two transverse processes of each vertebra function as the site of attachment for muscles. The transverse foramen (foramen transversarium) of the cervical vertebrae is a hole or opening in the transverse process of a cervical vertebra for the passage of the vertebral artery and vein and the sympathetic nerve plexus. The paired vertebral arteries (one on each side) are of particular importance because they provide blood to the brain and spinal cord, and they can be damaged during traumatic events involving the transverse processes.

The spinous process is a projection of bone off the posterior aspect of a vertebra.  It arises from the neural arch at the junction of two laminae and provides attachment for muscles concerned especially with flexion, extension, and stability of the spine.

Efficient and careful palpation of the cervical vertebral elements, particularly the spinous processes and the transverse processes, is essential to establish an accurate diagnosis of cervical somatic dysfunction. Likewise, the same knowledge base is required to provide cervical HVLA OMT for the patient in the safest way possible.