# Introduction

Opiates, among the oldest drugs known to humankind, have been used medically for thousands of years for pain relief and sedation. They are natural extracts of the poppy plant, Papaver somniferum. In particular, morphine (named after Morpheus, the Greek God of dreams) binds to opioid receptors in the central and peripheral nervous systems.

Subsequently, a plethora of other endogenous opioid peptides were identified. The endogenous opioid system is vital in regulating various physiologic functions like pain relief (analgesia), euphoria induction, stress resilience, cardiovascular protection, food intake control, etc.

- Endorphins

- Enkephalins

- Dynorphin

# Issues of Concern

**Opioid Tolerance**

Tolerance is a phenomenon in which an increasing dose of the medication is required to produce the same pharmacologic effect. The body develops tolerance after repeated administration, and higher doses of opioids are required to maintain the same level of analgesia. Tolerance develops quickly to sedation, respiratory depression, analgesia, and gastrointestinal distress. However, there is minimal tolerance to constipation and miosis. Tolerance develops by various mechanisms such as desensitization, downregulation, receptor internalization, and mu/delta heterodimer formation.

# Cellular Level

**Anatomical Distribution**

Different brain areas contain different opioid peptide-producing neurons. Enkephalins-producing neurons are found in multiple brain regions. Enkephalins are involved in the regulation of several biological processes in different organs, including the cardiovascular system, gastrointestinal tract, respiratory system, and pain perception.

Emotional responses are regulated by their action on the limbic system, mainly the amygdala. Other areas with a high concentration of enkephalinergic neurons include the hypothalamus and basal ganglia, particularly globus pallidus. Their respiratory and cardiovascular effects are mediated by their action on the autonomic nuclei of the hypothalamus.

These findings further enhance their neuroendocrine roles. Neurons containing beta-endorphins are predominantly found in the anterior and intermediate lobe of the pituitary and brain stem (the nucleus of tractus solitarius).

# Molecular Level

Endogenous opioids are neurotransmitters or neuromodulators that act by changing the electrical properties of other target neurons, thereby making these neurons difficult to excite.

Pro-opiomelanocortin is a polypeptide cleaved by the enzyme peptidase into adrenocorticotropin-releasing hormone (ACTH) and beta-Lipotropin (beta-LPH), containing 93 amino acids. Beta-LPH is further cleaved to yield alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) and beta-endorphin (beta-endorphin), a polypeptide containing 31 amino acids.

Pro-enkephalin is a seven-peptide-containing structure, first identified in the adrenal medulla. Each molecule of pro-enkephalin contains four met-enkephalins, one leu-enkephalin, one octapeptide, and one heptapeptide. Enkephalins have a short half-life both in vivo and in vitro. They are metabolized primarily by two peptidases acting on the N-terminal morphine motif. Enkephalinase-A splits the Gly-Phe bond, and enkephalinase-B breaks the Gly-Gly bond. Aminopeptidase N (APN), which splits the Tyr-Gly bond, also contributes to its catabolism. Recent studies have developed a mixed peptidase inhibitor, kelatorphan, that completely inhibits the metabolism of exogenous met-enkephalin thereby reducing the intracerebroventricular analgesic dose in mice.

# Function

The action of endogenous opioids is regulated by their action on the specific opioid receptor. Three major classes of opioid receptors have been identified. Three major categories of opioid receptors have been identified and cloned: mu-opioid receptor (MOR), kappa-opioid receptor (KOR), and delta-opioid receptor (DOR), with differences in affinity and selectivity to endogenous peptides.

- Pain modulation: This is one of their major effects, and studies have shown that the levels of beta-endorphins rise after oral, gynecologic, and abdominal surgeries.

- Neuroprotection: Research has shown that activation of DOR increases the pro-survival signals and decreases oxidative injury in neurons.

- Respiratory depression: The degree of respiratory depression depends on the stimulated receptor. MOR produces a significant decrease in the respiratory rate than DOR and KOR.

- Ionic homeostasis: Activation of DOR decreases the hypoxia-induced ionic imbalance.

- Constipation: This is due to decreased muscle movement in the gastrointestinal tract.

- Euphoria

- Cardioprotection

- Sedation

# Mechanism

The action of opioid compounds is mediated through their action on opioid peptide receptors (OPR). Opioid receptors exist throughout the body, but their expression and distribution vary significantly among different organs. An opioid peptide can interact with more than one type of opioid receptor. The receptor-ligand binding engenders a series of biochemical events and brings about various effects. In addition to the three classic groups of opioid receptors, the fourth class of receptors has been identified recently, nociception or orphan FQ receptor (NOP/OFQ). Due to the sequence homology, the OFQ receptor does not bind to common opioid ligands but is still considered a part of the opioid family. There is a maximum sequence homology in the cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains and minimum homology in the extracellular domain where the ligand binds.

Opioid receptors belong to a family of 7-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs).

**Opioid-Mediated Pain Suppression**

Opioids mediate both ascending and descending pain pathways. The primary afferent pain fibers are the thinly myelinated A-delta fibers and the unmyelinated C fibers. Stimulation of A-delta fibers releases glutamate, which is responsible for fast pain. Stimulation of C fibers leads to the release of glutamate and substance P, responsible for slow pain. These afferents reach the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, where they synapse with the neurons of the ascending spinothalamic tract. Opio-containing interneurons in the dorsal horn terminate where the pain afferents terminate.

The endogenous opioid system also modulates the descending pain suppression pathway by their action on the PAG in the midbrain. The PAG neurons are influenced by the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Opioids inhibit the release of GABA, thus activating the PAG. The neurons of the PAG then activate serotonergic neurons in the nucleus raphe Magnus and noradrenergic neurons in the rostral ventromedial medulla. These neurotransmitters stimulate the enkephalinergic interneurons in the spinal cord, thus inhibiting pain perception.

# Clinical Significance

The opioid system is considered one of the most complex neurotransmitter systems in the body that plays a critical role in major biological processes. The use of exogenous opioids for analgesia has limitations due to their undesirable adverse effects, including sedation, respiratory depression, and constipation. However, experiments have shown that drugs that bind to the delta-opioid receptor (DOR) lack respiratory and gastrointestinal adverse effects. So, developing DOR-specific drugs will prove to be a clinical advantage. Research suggests that acupuncture produces analgesia by the release of endogenous opioids. This is supported by the finding that the administration of an opioid antagonist reverses the analgesia induced by acupuncture.

Another notable finding is the correlation between alcohol consumption and endogenous opioids. Alcohol induces the activation of the endogenous opioid system. Clinical trials on outpatient alcoholics have demonstrated that administration of opioid antagonist naltrexone decreased the average number of drinking days per week, the desire to drink, and the alcohol-induced high. Another interesting piece of evidence is the in vivo studies of immunomodulatory activity of enkephalins on rats revealed their dual dose-dependent effect. In other words, high doses of enkephalins inhibit while low doses enhance the immune response. Recent investigations suggest that enkephalins act as modulators of cardiac function and play a vital role in aging, ischaemic preconditioning, heart failure, and hypertension.

Placebo-induced pain suppression is another area for clinical research on opioids. Placebo induces the release of endogenous opioids in anticipation of pain relief. Functional MRI (fMRI) response shows that placebo enhances the response in the rostral anterior cingulate gyrus, periaqueductal gray, rostral ventromedial medulla, and hypothalamus.

A new class of endogenous opioids, endomorphins, has been identified, with the highest affinity and selectively for mu-opioid receptors. Research has found their remarkable role in neuropathic pain, unlike other opioid analgesics.