If the patient is hemodynamically unstable, they must undergo emergent surgical intervention regardless of the mechanism of blunt vs. penetrating injury.

Stable vital signs allow for a supine chest x-ray. An abnormal chest x-ray with findings of a widened mediastinum greater than 8 cm, tracheal shift to the right, blurred aortic contour, irregular or loss of aortic knob, depression of the left main bronchus, opacification of the aortopulmonary window, deviation of the nasogastric tube to the right, wide paraspinal lines, thoracic spine fracture, fracture to the first rib, clavicular fracture, pulmonary contusion, or left apical cap. If an abnormality is found, the patient will need to undergo CT imaging of their chest with contrast. You must always rule out other injuries to the brain, abdomen, and other areas of the chest, especially when dealing with penetrating trauma to the chest. Findings on CT imaging of the chest have nearly a 100% sensitivity and negative predictive value and can include intimal flap, thrombus, or dissection.

Transesophageal echocardiography is a new emerging imaging technique that the trauma team and colleagues can add to their imaging armamentarium for better visualization of the aorta, including the branches of the arch. The anesthesia team often uses this technique during a laparotomy to view the chest for evaluation of the aorta and its vessels. This imaging technique does have limitations as it is operator dependent, and there is often a hematoma in the chest or surrounding tissues that limits visibility.

The gold standard for visualization of the aorta and its branches are aortography with a digital subtraction angiogram. Unstable patients with blunt or penetrating chest trauma or other life/limb-threatening injuries should not be taken to the endovascular suite. The patients that do meet the criteria for imaging with an angiogram should be taken immediately, as the sensitivity and specificity are nearly 100% when placed in an experienced endovascular surgeon’s hands. When in the endovascular suite for imaging and findings are compatible with endovascular repair, the surgeon can often place a stent graft over the damaged area.