While myriad distinct clinical entities may produce either peripheral vestibulopathy or central vertigo, it is important to understand the relationship between the nystagmus that may be apparent on physical examination and the underlying vestibular pathophysiology in patients with peripheral vertigo. In cases of peripheral vertigo, the lesion almost always causes hypofunction rather than hyperfunction; the main exceptions are "third window" phenomena, such as perilymphatic fistulae and semicircular canal dehiscences, in which sound waves stimulate the vestibular system and cause a Tullio phenomenon. The Tullio phenomenon occurs when nystagmus and/or vertigo are produced as a result of loud sounds; it was named for Pietro Tullio, who described it in 1929.

Both vestibular hyperstimulation and hypofunction activate the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) abnormally and cause nystagmus. The VOR is produced by a neural pathway that begins with the vestibular organs, consisting of the semicircular canals, which sense rotational acceleration (superior/anterior, horizontal/lateral, and posterior/inferior semicircular canals, which sense rotation in the sagittal, transverse, and coronal planes, respectively), and the otolith organs - the utricle and saccule - that sense linear acceleration (horizontal and vertical, respectively). These send signals through the vestibular nerves to Scarpa's ganglion and thence to the ipsilateral vestibular nucleus. From there, signals follow different pathways through the pons and medulla, depending on the vestibular organ that was stimulated, via the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, the ventral tegmental tract, the medial longitudinal fasciculus, the ascending tract of Deiters, and the brachium conjunctivum to ultimately stimulate the nucleus of the nerve controlling the relevant extraocular muscle contralaterally and inhibit the nucleus of the nerve controlling the opposing extraocular muscle on the side ipsilateral to the stimulation.

Alexander's Law states that:

- After an injury, the fast phase of the resulting nystagmus will be directed toward the uninjured side.

- After an injury, the amplitude of horizontal nystagmus will increase when a patient looks in the direction of the fast phase of the nystagmus and decrease or disappear when directed towards the side of the injury.

- Nystagmus produced by an injury will be magnified by a lack of visual fixation. This is readily apparent on videonystagmography testing, in which the patient's eyes are examined under infrared light while the patient perceives darkness.

Ewald's Laws state that:

- 1. Stimulation of a semicircular canal causes nystagmus in the plane of that canal.

- 2. For the horizontal semicircular canals, the movement toward the ampullated end (ampulopetal movement) causes greater stimulation than movement in the opposite direction (ampullofugal).

- 3. For the superior and posterior semicircular canals, ampullofugal movement causes greater stimulation than ampullopetal movement.

The semicircular canals are filled with endolymph, and at one end of each canal is an ampulla that contains the cupula. This gelatinous bulb rests upon hair cells and shifts with rotation, thereby triggering the hair cells to send impulses via the vestibular nerves. The ampulla of the horizontal canal is located at the anterior end of the canal. The ampullae of the superior and posterior canals are also located anteriorly; their posterior ends join together into a crus commune prior to entering the vestibule. The three semicircular canals are effectively arranged at right angles to one another to ensure that at least one canal is stimulated by every head rotation, thereby keeping the vestibular system informed of head movement and orientation. The otolith organs - the utricle and saccule - are located within the vestibule itself, with the saccule situated more anteriorly, close to the round window of the cochlea. The utricle is oriented roughly horizontally and the saccule roughly vertically.

Similar to the semicircular canals, the otolith organs each have a sheet of hair cells with their stereocilia and kinocilia embedded in a gelatinous layer that moves when the head shifts. The gelatinous layer is weighted down with otoconia that provide the inertia required for the gelatinous layer to move relative to the hair cells during linear acceleration, deflect the kinocilia, and cause a signal to be sent to the vestibular nerves. These otoconia, if dislodged, become the canaliths and cupuloliths that are the primary culprits in BPPV. Even though each hair cell in the semicircular canals and otolith organs has many stereocilia, it is only the kinocilium on each cell that will cause a signal to be sent if it is deflected. The horizontal and superior semicircular canals, as well as the utricle, are all innervated by the superior vestibular nerve, while the posterior semicircular canal and the saccule are innervated by the inferior vestibular nerve.