**Tongue musculature:**The various functions of the tongue require the effective functioning of the extrinsic and intrinsic tongue musculature. The inferior fibers of the genioglossus muscle help in protrusion of the tongue, the middle fibers help in depressing the tongue, whereas the superior fibers of the muscle draw the tip of the tongue backward and downward.  The hyoglossus muscle depresses and retracts the tongue, whereas the styloglossus muscle elevates and retracts the tongue. The activation of palatoglossus muscle helps in elevating the posterior aspect of the tongue.

Among the intrinsic muscles of the tongue, the transverse muscle lengthens and protrudes the tongue whereas the vertical muscle flattens and widens the tongue. The superior longitudinal muscle runs in the longitudinal direction from their point of origin to insertion and aid to elevate the tip and lateral surface of the tongue, thus, shaping the dorsal surface of the tongue into a concavity. The inferior longitudinal muscle depresses the tip and lateral surface of the tongue, thus, shaping the dorsal surface of the tongue into convexity.

**Taste buds:**The taste buds present on the tongue contain taste villi. The stimulating substances present in the food or liquid interact with the taste villi.  The taste chemical binds to a protein receptor molecule that lies on the external surface of the taste receptor cell. This interaction opens ion channels allowing positively charged sodium or hydrogen ions to enter the cell leading to depolarization. The type of receptor protein determines the type of taste that will be perceived in each taste villus.