Medications are crucial components of the practice of medicine. In addition to procedural treatments, medications represent an essential aspect of therapy delivery. However, the process of delivering medication to a patient involves a complex interplay between interprofessional healthcare team members from several disciplines.

- A qualified physician or mid-level practitioner (NP or PA) must prescribe the medication with appropriate knowledge and assessment of the medication's efficacy and safety profiles according to the patient's demographics, comorbidities, and clinical needs.

- The pharmacist who receives the prescription must verify that the dosage prescribed is appropriate and is responsible for communicating with the provider should any mistake or unsafe prescription be discovered and check for potential drug-drug interactions.

- The pharmacy technician assisting the pharmacist is encouraged to aid in this role and remain vigilant when physically placing the pills in a bottle and ensuring the label is clear and correct.

- The nurse is responsible for administrating the medication to the patient requires vigilance and awareness of the potential hypotension associated with Terazosin and should be meticulous in their measurement of vital orthostatic signs after administration.

- A medical assistant may also assist in measuring vital signs and could be the first person to discover medication safety issues.

- The patient and/or their caregiver are the crucial final step in the process, verbalizing any questions or concerns they may have regarding the use of the prescribed medication and signs/symptoms for which they should be vigilant.

Though Terazosin is relatively contraindicated in geriatric populations, it may still prove to be a useful drug that treats multiple comorbidities at once to limit polypharmacy.