Prior to surgery, a number of investigations assessing middle ear functionality are undertaken – the results can, in turn, influence both the tympanoplasty technique used and also the postoperative outcome.

Initially, any patient presenting with otorrhoea and hearing loss should undergo a complete history and examination, including a focused head and neck examination and examination of the ear using an otoscope/microscope. This will yield important information regarding TM perforation size, location (categorized into a quadrant, as mentioned previously), otorrhoea ('wet' or 'dry'), and whether there is active inflammation present. Tuning fork evaluation (Rinne and Weber tests at 512 Hz), pure tone audiometry (PTA) with speech discrimination, and tympanography should be performed before and after surgery for comparative evaluation of the difference between air and bone conduction thresholds (air-bone gap).

Imaging is rarely required in simple tympanic membrane perforations, but if required, computed tomography (CT) is the preferred imaging modality.

As well as assessing the middle ear clinically, the use of questionnaires measuring health-related quality of life outcomes is increasing for patients undergoing tympanoplasty.

Prior to surgery, patients will consent to tympanoplasty. Risks include pain, bleeding, infection, failure of the graft, recurrence, further surgery, worsening hearing loss or deafness, dizziness, and facial nerve injury resulting in facial palsy or to the chorda tympani nerve resulting in taste disturbances. The procedure is typically performed under general anesthetic, and patients will have an opportunity to speak with an anesthetist prior to surgery.