Deep lacerations to the occiput and scalp, in general, are inclined to bleed profusely for several reasons:

- The firm adherence of the dense connective tissue to the blood vessels prevents vasoconstriction.

- The pulling effect of the occipitofrontalis muscle prevents the closing of the actively bleeding vessel and the surrounding skin.

- There are numerous anastomoses of the scalp blood vessels, such as the anastomosis of the occipital and the posterior auricular veins.

The scalp veins may be used for venous catheterization as they offer easy access with little risk, with the occipital vein being among the most commonly used. Scalp catheterization is utilized in infants and neonates after unsuccessful attempts at cannulation of extremity veins as the scalp veins in this population have less overlying subcutaneous fat and are more prominent compared to other peripheral sites, and they are less obscured by hair, providing easier visualization and cannulation.

The ‘danger area of the scalp’ refers to the layer of loose areolar connective tissue as it contains the valveless emissary veins that connect the superficial veins in the subaponeurotic space with the intracranial venous sinuses. Although not always present, the occipital emissary vein connects the occipital vein to the confluence of the sinuses. This connection makes it possible for an infection to spread from the occipital scalp to the meninges.

Since the abducens nerve runs near the clivus of the basilar part of the occipital bone, increased intracranial pressure may trap the nerve at this point, causing abducens palsy. The clivus also serves as a critical landmark for ensuring anatomical atlanto-occipital alignment on cervical spine x-rays.

Occipital trauma may cause a basilar skull fracture, which would present with ecchymosis behind the ears, or “battle sign.” If occipital bone surrounding the foramen magnum is fractured, there is a higher risk of damage to the exiting blood vessels and nerves described above.

During delivery, it is crucial to identify the location of the fetal occiput. Several genetic disorders may present with a prominent occiput, the most common of which is trisomy 18, or Edwards syndrome. This condition is important to identify because of its association with heart (most commonly VSDs and ASDs) and renal defects, among others, and survival beyond one year of life is rare, although many of the afflicted will not make it to birth. Other signs that would be indicative of Trisomy 18 are microcephaly, micrognathia, low-set and malformed ears, and rocker bottom feet. It is associated with omphalocele.