While pertinent pathophysiology differs for each dental emergency, a basic understanding of the anatomy and structure of the teeth and their surrounding structures sets the foundation for understanding the impact of the disturbances of normal physiology for each category of dental emergencies.

Each tooth consists of a crown, the visible portion, which is connected to the root, or the portion of the tooth that extends into the gingiva and alveolar bone. The enamel is the outermost layer of the tooth and overlays the dentin layer. Within the dentin layer is the pulp, which houses the neurovascular supply that extends from the alveolar bone through the tooth’s root.

The periodontium consists of four main components that comprise the surrounding structures that support dental health: the gingiva, periodontal ligament, alveolar bone, and cementum. The gingiva (i.e., the gums) is the specialized mucosa that surrounds and protects the teeth. The periodontal ligament connects the alveolar bone to the cementum tissue, which covers the tooth root.

**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

In tooth luxations and avulsions, the periodontal ligament can partially or fully tear, allowing for a partial or complete displacement of the tooth from its alveolar socket. As the neurovascular supply for each tooth comes from the alveolar bone, disruption of this periodontal ligament can ultimately lead to pulp necrosis, infection, and tooth loss. The fibers of the periodontal ligament are delicate and may not fully recover even with the replantation of an avulsed tooth. Resorption of the root may occur, further compromising the neurovascular supply, and leading to dental fractures and tooth loss.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

**Pulpitis and Pulp Necrosis**

The pulp is the center part of a tooth directly beneath the dentin layer, which contains nerves and blood vessels. Bacterial decay can erode through the enamel and dentin layers and enter the pulp; this causes an infection of this tissue resulting in pulpitis. The microbes causing pulpitis continue to be an area of study, but it is predominantly thought that anaerobic bacteria are the leading cause of pulp infections.

**Periapical Abscess**

The apex of a tooth is the area where the nerve enters the tooth through the root tip. Bacterial infections of the pulp can progress and collect in the periapical region, creating an abscess. Initially, this abscess is small and focal to the involved tooth. However, local extension of this infection can lead to serious complications.

**Periodontitis and Necrotizing Periodontal Disease**

Periodontitis is an infection of the pocket surrounding the base of the tooth and gum tissue. It can almost universally be attributed to untreated dental caries, which spread to the gingival epithelium. Advanced periodontitis can lead to irreversible loss of tooth attachment and alveolar bone loss.

Periodontal disease is a progression from gingivitis and involves transition and accumulation from aerobic bacteria to anaerobic bacteria such as Aggregatibacter actinomycemcomitans and Porphyromonas gingivalis. This fosters a host inflammatory response that further contributes to the condition. While periodontal disease is not considered a dental emergency, it becomes emergent when it progresses into a necrotizing infection. While the pathogenesis of necrotizing periodontal disease is not entirely understood, it is largely thought that a reduced host immune response allows commensal oral organisms to become pathogenic. These bacteria produce several metabolites that subsequently cause the rapid destruction of the periodontium.

**Periodontal Abscess**

A periodontal abscess occurs when there is an obstruction of the periodontal pocket, causing the accumulation of bacteria. These abscesses involve the supporting structures of the teeth, including the periodontal ligaments and alveolar bone. Blockage can be caused by foreign body impaction, e.g., toothpick or dental floss, or calculus accumulation. The local inflammatory response to the abscess formation, such as lysosomal enzyme release from host neutrophils, contributes to tissue damage in addition to bacterial accumulation.

**Pericoronitis**

Pericoronitis is an infection of the gingival tissue surrounding an erupting or partially erupted tooth. Before the eruption, the crown of the tooth exists in a sterile space of the dental follicle. Eruption requires exposure through the gingiva into the oral cavity, which contains a flourishing microbial environment. A small pocket can form between the gingiva and the grooves of the erupting tooth, making it difficult to clean and creating an area where food can easily be impacted. This creates an ideal environment for bacterial overgrowth to progress to an infection of the surrounding soft tissues.

Interestingly, the microbial composition of pericoronitis is thought to be different than that of periodontitis.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-procedural Bleeding**

When the vascular endothelium is injured during a routine dental procedure, hemostasis starts by triggering the clotting cascade and forming a platelet plug. While gingival bleeding may occur after dental extractions, the major source of bleeding is the alveolar bone. Local soft tissue bleeding is more likely to occur with a traumatic extraction, which can result in lacerated blood vessels. Osseous bleeding can be from the central vessels or nutrient canals.

Bleeding in hemophilia A and B occurs because of defective fibrin stabilization due to deficiencies in factors VIII and IX, respectively.

Bleeding in patients on anticoagulation therapy occurs because of the inhibition of specific clotting factors, depending on the medication used. Enoxaparin specifically potentiates antithrombin III, which in turn inactivates factor Xa.

Liver and renal pathology can also lead to hematologic consequences. Patients with cirrhosis can experience pancytopenia due to hypersplenism, which can affect platelet plug formation during hemorrhage. Additionally, cirrhosis also leads to impaired coagulation, with the vitamin K-dependent factors being the most affected.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

The pathophysiology is not well understood, but it is generally accepted that either physiologic or non-physiologic mediators trigger premature clot lysis, which ultimately results in alveolar bone exposure after exodontia. Because the literature has shown many factors significantly affect clot formation and lysis, alveolar osteitis is likely a multifactorial phenomenon. Some areas of the previous study include cytokines (specifically IL-6), several biomarkers, local intraoral bacteria, and poor oral hygiene, all of which have been implicated as potential culprits in the pathogenesis of this disease.