**Imaging Equipment**

American College of Radiology (ACR) and the United States government provide specific guidance and accreditation standards for breast ultrasound (US), mammographic, and MR machines. Most of these standards are a part of an institution’s quality control program performed at regular intervals by certified medical physicists or associates. It is imperative that institutions obtain and maintain accreditation standards when performing breast imaging and interventions.

US machines come in a variety of configurations and capabilities. This article will focus on hand-held US machines utilized in brightness mode. These machines are generally equipped with interchangeable hand-held transducer (probe), and a display/monitor, which vary per manufacturer. The machines produce images by intermittently transmitting ultrasonic waves through the probe and into a thin slice of the body. Then the machine measures returning frequencies, amplitude, and time-to-return. A series of mathematical calculations are performed and displayed as different levels of brightness on the monitor. Usually in the form of an image.

The mammographic guided stereotactic biopsy machine is a specialized device that develops images using ionizing radiation. Generally, these devices are similar to mammographic machines used in women’s imaging with roughly three types being mass-produced:

- Specially designed machines for biopsies only

- Mammographic units with add on biopsy devices

- L-arm type mammographic devices

These devices are produced by a number of manufactures with some differences in biopsy table/chair apparatus and software capabilities. Patient positioning varies per machine. Options include prone, sitting, and lateral decubitus.

MR imaging uses a combination of radio frequencies and magnetic field strength to produce images. Simplistically, a supercooled electromagnet produces a magnetic field, which the patient is brought into. The magnetic field is then altered by the use of coils, the patient, and radio frequencies. The subsequent changes/alterations are measured and used to produce an image.

**Tissue Sampling Devices**

Fine needle aspiration (FNA) is a familiar procedure for most physicians and can be performed under the US, mammographic, or MR guidance. Typically, a 21 gauge to 27 gauge beveled needle of variable length is placed into the target lesion in a to-and-fro motion. The needle can be attached to a small syringe (2 mL to 20 mL). If the needle is attached to a syringe, slight negative pressure is applied to the syringe to assist in sample collection. This technique requires the aspirate sample to be placed on a slide and immediately evaluated by cytopathologic or tech for sample adequacy. The advantage of this device is the ease of use, while the disadvantages are the volume of tissue, lack of histopathologic data, and sensitivity. This device has a limited role in breast cancer diagnostic workup and is largely replaced by the core needle biopsy device.

Vacuum-assisted biopsy devices (VAD) are made by a number of manufacturers but have basic similarities. These similarities include a core needle-type system ranging from 9 gauge to 14 gauge, between 9 cm to 12 cm in length, with terminal biopsy aperture 12 mm to 20 mm in length. Multiple vacuum holes on the opposite side of the aperture, which assist in sampling, and a thin hollow cutter type blade/cannula that slides over the aperture during sampling. Some systems have a rotating knob, which allows the aperture to spin while the housing remains stationary, while other systems require the user to rotate the housing during the procedure if sampling is desired at different angles. During the sampling phase, a vacuum pulls tissue into the aperture under negative pressure. The tissue is then cut from the breast by the cannula as it passes over the aperture and seals the device. It is imperative to assess adequate vacuum pressure of 25 mmHg to 35 mmHg throughout the procedure if the vacuum pressure is less than this the tissue samples may be inadequate.

Spring-loaded core needle biopsy devices are common throughout the procedural rooms of hospitals and outpatient clinics. These devices typically come in sizes similar to the VAD, but with wider variation in needle sizes and gauges. Spring-loaded biopsy devices are similar to a stylet with an aperture at the distal end. The stylet is propelled forward from potential energy stored within the corresponding spring, called a throw. The throw can be adjusted on some models from 0.5 cm to 2.5 cm, depending on the manufacturer. Similar to the VAD, a cutting cannula is then deployed over the aperture, and a sample is taken. The device is removed, and tissue samples are collected after re-exposing the aperture and rolling the device onto a sterile gauze or into a tissue cup. This process can be repeated as needed.