**Debulking Surgery**

Treatment of ovarian cancer conventionally includes a combination of chemotherapy and surgery. In the early stage of invasive epithelial ovarian carcinoma, unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy while preserving the uterus and contralateral ovary is done, with comprehensive surgical staging where lesions show a low likelihood of progressing to malignancy. However, for advanced-stage ovarian cancer, a debulking surgery comprising hysterectomy/bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) has shown better outcomes. It is imperative to determine whether debulking surgery would be beneficial for a patient by initially performing exploratory laparoscopic surgery. The presence of a large or residual tumor burden can block perfusion to the affected region leading to damaged tissue and increase chances of further cellular damage with multidrug chemotherapy resistance.****Laparoscopic surgeries are noted to be less invasive with decreased recovery time as opposed to debulking surgeries. Patients with ovarian cancer should have genetic risk evaluation and germline, somatic (BRCA 1/2) testing done if previously not tested, as the latter guides the maintenance therapy.

**Primary Debulking Surgery versus Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy**

A gynecologic oncologist initially evaluates patients with suspected advanced stage IIIC or IV ovarian cancer to determine if they are appropriate surgical candidates or not. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is recommended to decompress the tumor burden for the ones deemed poor surgical candidates with a low likelihood of optimal cytoreduction.  According to the Society of Gynecologic Oncology (SGO) and American Society of clinical oncology (ASCO), clinical practice guidelines state that women with a favorable surgical profile can receive either neoadjuvant chemotherapy or undergo cytoreduction surgery. But if they have a high likelihood of attaining cytoreduction to less than 1 cm with acceptable morbidity, primary cytoreductive surgery should be preferred. Before administering neoadjuvant chemotherapy, patients should carry a histological diagnosis of invasive ovarian cancer confirmed by biopsy preferred over specimens obtained from fine-needle aspiration of paracentesis.

Various clinical trials have compared neoadjuvant chemotherapy with interval cytoreduction surgery versus primary cytoreductive surgery upfront, showing equal overall median survival. Two of the phase III trials have shown non-inferiority of neoadjuvant chemotherapy compared to cytoreductive surgery followed by chemotherapy in women with stage IV disease. This proves that neoadjuvant chemotherapy can be significantly utilized in patients with advanced-stage invasive ovarian cancer patients who are poor surgical candidates with high tumor burden. The European organization for research and treatment of cancer (EORTC), phase III trial EORTC 55971 recruited women with stage IIIC-IV epithelial ovarian cancer (n=670) and CHORUS trial had a similar recruitment profile with women of stage III A-B besides (n= 550). They showed non-inferiority of median overall survival with neoadjuvant chemotherapy when compared to primary cytoreductive surgery upfront. In a pooled analysis of individual patient data from these two trials, EORTC 55971 and CHORUS trials, women with stage IV disease had better survival outcomes with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by cytoreductive surgery.****An exploratory analysis of the EORTC 55971 randomized trial found that patients with stage IIIC (<4.5 cm) and less invasive metastatic tumors had better survival outcomes with primary cytoreductive surgery. In contrast, patients with stage IV disease (>4.5cm) and more invasive metastatic tumors had better survival outcomes with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

**Maximal Cytoreductive Surgery**

One of the most powerful independent determinants of improved median survival among patients with stage III or IV ovarian carcinoma is to achieve maximal cytoreduction. Hence, irrespective of the surgery sequence, before or after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, optimal cytoreduction is strongly recommended to achieve ideally no residual disease. A meta-analysis of 6885 patients with stage III and IV ovarian cancer showed a 5.5% increase in overall median survival with a 10% increase in maximal cytoreduction in one of the studies. When the actuarial survival was being estimated comparing cohorts with less than or equal to 25% maximal cytoreduction and more than 75% maximal cytoreduction, there was an increase of 50% of mean weighted median survival time.  However, platinum dose intensity did not have a statistically significant relation to the log median survival time.

**Primary Chemotherapy and Neoadjuvant Therapy**

- Early-stage ovarian cancer:Adjuvant chemotherapy in women with early-stage ovarian cancer has been studied extensively and based on the evidence. The final clinical decision has to be individualized for every patient. Based on four randomized control trials (ACTION 2003; Bolis 1995; ICON1 2003; trope 2000) which studied platinum-based chemotherapy, women with early-stage epithelial ovarian cancer showed better overall survival (OS) (HR 0.71; 95% CI 0.53 to 0.93) and progression-free survival (PFS) (HR 0.67; 95% CI 0.53 to 0.84) with adjuvant chemotherapy than the ones who did not receive it.  However, one of those trials, ICON1 2003, showed similar evidence in high-risk patients with adjuvant chemotherapy but not among others. Based on the pooled data in a meta-analysis, which included all the patients (total of 772) in ICON1 2003 and two-thirds of patients in ACTION 2003, evidence of overall benefit in early-stage ovarian cancer women was observed after sub-optimal staging.

- Advanced stage ovarian cancer:The standard approach in treating patients with advanced ovarian cancer uses platinum and a taxane. The option of intravenous (IV) and intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy depends on the optimal debulking of the tumor. A phase III trial, GOG111, showed improved overall survival in patients with a combination of cisplatin and paclitaxel when compared to the cohort receiving cisplatin and cyclophosphamide combination. The first line chemotherapeutic agent for epithelial ovarian cancer is platinum-based cisplatin or carboplatin along with a taxane family agent, paclitaxel or docetaxel. There have been many studies concluding that carboplatin is as effective as cisplatin and better tolerated. Also, weekly dose-dense chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel combination has not shown any additional benefit in PFS than standard three-weekly chemotherapy or an additional third agent or a longer period of the chemotherapy cycle.

**Chemotherapy in Elderly**

Elderly patients aged over 70 years or older with comorbidities who have stage III-IV ovarian cancer were studied in a randomized control trial, which showed worse survival outcomes with carboplatin monotherapy versus carboplatin-paclitaxel three weekly/weekly.****An ongoing prospective trial of older women of age equal to or greater than 70 on different chemotherapy regimen combinations will help us predict chemotherapy tolerance. However, preliminary results have commented on patients with higher baseline instrumental activities of the daily living score are more likely to complete four chemotherapy cycles and less likely to experience high-grade toxicity.

**Maintenance Therapy**

Maintenance therapy is conceptualized to ensure the effective killing of residual slowly dividing cells by decelerating the cell turnover so that the dormant population of cancer cells does not progress to grow enough to be detected by either elevation of biomarkers or clinical evidence of recurrent disease. Several randomized trials have been done to compare maintenance therapy versus observation.

- Platinum-based agent:A phase III trial, GOG 178, randomized patients to 12 months versus 3 months of maintenance therapy with paclitaxel after complete clinical response with platinum/paclitaxel therapy in patients with stage III-IV ovarian cancer. After 50% accrual interval analysis, improved PFS was seen favoring the extended therapy cohort. However, the study closed early. A follow-up study later showed no overall survival benefit compared to the same maintenance monotherapy for 22 months versus 14 months.

- Anti-angiogenic inhibitor:Pazopanib, an oral multikinase inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) -1/2/3, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGFR) alpha/beta and c-kit, has also been studied as maintenance therapy in a study of 940 patients with patients of ovarian cancer stage II-IV. These patients had a complete clinical response to five cycles of platinum-taxane chemotherapy and were randomized to pazopanib versus placebo for 24 months showing a median improvement in PFS in the pazopanib arm; no benefit was seen in overall survival data. BRCA1/2 carriers were noted to have an additional significant benefit.

- Poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors:PARP inhibitors have recently gained momentum for the maintenance treatment of ovarian cancer. Olaparib was the first FDA-approved drug in this subgroup indicated to treat advanced BRCA mutated ovarian cancer after platinum-based chemotherapy, based on SOLO-1, phase III randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. It showed a reduction in disease progression or death by 70% (hazard ratio 0.30, 0.23 to 0.41; P<0.001).

- Immunotherapy:It has recently shown significant benefits in solid malignant tumors. However, published data do not show any benefit in patients with ovarian cancers so far. The resulting controversial data diverted the focus on combination strategies involving immune- checkpoint inhibitors with PARPs, chemotherapy, anti-angiogenic agents, and more. A combination of such therapies shows more significant anti-tumor activity than concentrating on a single pathway. This promising data is from initial phase trials, and further results from ongoing phase II and III trials are awaited.

- Vaccines:Vaccines are currently being studied for ovarian cancer, where the basis lies in activating the immune cells to destroy the cancer cells. The potential tumor-associated antigen molecules targeted in ovarian cancer in ongoing ovarian cancer vaccine researches are CA-125, p53 protein, HER-2, and more.

**Recurrent Ovarian Cancer**

About 80% of women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer more commonly have tumor progression or recurrence. Platinum free interval (PFI) is one of the most reliable predictors indicating the response of recurrent ovarian cancer to subsequent chemotherapy. PFI refers to the interval between the completion of the last platinum-based chemotherapy and the occurrence of relapse.

The role of surgery in cases of recurrent ovarian cancer is yet quite undefined. GOG 213, a phase III multicenter randomized clinical trial enrolled patients with platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer, randomized patients to surgical cytoreductive surgery followed by adjuvant PBC or only PBC with a primary endpoint of overall survival showed no improved benefit in patients receiving secondary surgical cytoreduction followed by chemotherapy and chemotherapy alone (HR for death 1.29, 0.97 to 1.72; P=0.08).

Large phase III trials have also resulted in the approval of bevacizumab, as discussed above, which was studied in combination with chemotherapy for the treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer as well as for maintenance therapy (GOG 218, or OCEANS and AURELIA trials).

PARP inhibitors have been under clinical development at various stages and have shown their efficacy in patients with germline BRCA mutations. They were first approved as monotherapy in ovarian cancer patients with deleterious germline or somatic BRCA mutations who have not responded to chemotherapy. Further studies showed significant PFS benefit in patients with an initial response to be BC with maintenance PARP inhibitor therapy. An overall survival benefit is yet to be proven, which requires a longer follow-up. SOLO-2 study assessed maintenance monotherapy with olaparib in patients with platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer and BRCA mutation showing significantly improved PFS for the patients receiving olaparib with no significant detrimental effect on patient's quality of life.

PAOLA-1, a phase III trial, studied olaparib with bevacizumab in platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer showing PFS benefit in the patients receiving the combination. The results were quite consistent with those observed in the SOLO 1 trial. The safety profile of olaparib was quite consistent in the trials, with a higher incidence of serious adverse events noted in the group receiving a combination of olaparib and bevacizumab than with placebo plus bevacizumab, the most common one being anemia.

Platinum resistance poses a very poor prognosis, where these patients have a recurrence of the disease within 6 months of completion of cytoreductive surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy.  It is imperative to have goals of care discussion with these patients as their overall survival rates are quite grim. Focusing on newer targets like tumor vasculature, DNA repair, intracellular signaling inhibition, and other molecular targets will provide more avenues to be explored for optimizing the treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer.

To conclude, advanced-stage ovarian cancer patients are treated with primary reductive surgery, followed by platinum-based chemotherapy. But poor surgical candidates or patients who might not achieve effective cytoreductive surgery are recommended to undergo neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Optimal cytoreductive surgery is very important to achieve as it is one of the most powerful predictors of survival of these patients. There is a high rate of relapse in patients with advanced-stage whose response to subsequent platinum-based chemotherapy depends on various factors. Targeted therapies are the new emerging treatment strategies where bevacizumab and PARP inhibitors have become first-line therapies for maintenance and PARP inhibitors as the first line for recurrent cases. Genetic screening for all newly diagnosed ovarian cancer is recommended.