The ICHD-3 provides the following diagnostic criteria for glossopharyngeal neuralgia

A. Recurrent paroxysmal painful attacks in unilateral glossopharyngeal nerve distribution and should fulfill the criterion.

B. Pain should have all the following characteristics

- Duration: Pain lasts from a few seconds to about 2 minutes

- Intensity: Severe

- Type of pain: Sharp, stabbing, shooting, or electrical shock-like sensations

- Precipitating factors: The pain is precipitated or exacerbated by coughing, yawning, swallowing, or talking

C. Pain should not be accounted for by any other ICHD-3 diagnosis.

The usual onset for glossopharyngeal neuralgia is anywhere between 21 to 75 years of age.  The incidence is most common in those of middle age. There is no sex predilection. Painful attacks may occur without any prodromal or warning symptoms. The pain occurs anywhere below the ear, in the epiglottis, palatine tonsils, the base of the tongue, and/or the posterior pharynx. Swallowing both solids and liquids can make the pain worse. The pain is aggravated by drinking both hot and cold water. The onset and resolution of pain are abrupt. Some patients experience their initial attacks as excruciating, but the pain can then become relatively mild in the chronic state. Patients usually feel no pain in between the attacks, but some can feel a residual sharp pain in between the paroxysms. In rare cases, the attacks are not transient, sharp, or stabbing painful episodes but present as a deep agonizing pain that can last for days.

The pain pattern in an individual with glossopharyngeal neuralgia is remarkably uniform. Pain episodes can occur within minutes of each other and then stop entirely for days at a time. Paroxysmal pain is felt mostly during the day, but it may wake the patient up at night. Patients with glossopharyngeal neuralgia are predisposed to lose weight from the severe pain associated with chewing and swallowing. Attacks of pain surprisingly subside on their own most of the time, but unpleasant sensations may remain for several weeks to months in the affected areas.

The physical examination of patients with glossopharyngeal neuralgia is generally benign, and the painful areas do not show any signs of sensory abnormalities for both light touch and pinprick. Sometimes glossopharyngeal neuralgia is associated with dysesthesias and/or hyperalgesia in the affected areas. If there is an absent cough or gag reflex, a detailed investigation into the etiology of the pain is necessary. In some rare cases, glossopharyngeal neuralgia and trigeminal neuralgia can occur concurrently.