**Biocompatibility**

Any foreign material that remains in the eye for a long time must be inert. The original Ridley lens was made of PMMA. This material from the canopy of aircraft was found to lie inert in the eye of injured pilots for a long period.

**Aqueous Absorption by IOL**

The IOL should not absorb water in the eye. Some IOL materials may absorb aqueous and form glistening, which may not affect vision.

**IOL Opacification**

Opacification of the IOL may occur in hydrophilic IOLs.

Calcium deposits in the anterior surface of the lens may be caused by factors such as air injection or gas injection intraocularly, causing an electrolyte imbalance in the anterior chamber. Chronic inflammation and systemic diseases such as diabetes mellitus may be other factors.

**Compatibility with the Site of Placement**

- Compatibility with iris in case of an anterior chamber IOL and anterior fixated iris-claw lens:

- Compatibility with ciliary sulcus in case of sulcus fixated IOL: In a study of 559 pseudophakic cadaver eyes obtained from eye banks, hydrophobic acrylic IOLs were noted in 256 eyes and had anterior and posterior square optic edges.

- Compatibility with the capsular bag in cases of in the bag IOL: Small capsulorhexis, pseudoexfoliation syndrome, retinitis pigmentosa, and closed-loop haptic lenses may all predispose to capsular bag phimosis.

- Compatibility with the iris in case of posterior (retropupillary) fixation of the iris-claw lens:

- Compatibility with pars plana (ciliary body) in case of scleral fixated IOL: In a retrospective study of 45 eyes of 42 patients who underwent glueless, sutureless scleral fixation of intraocular lens, visual acuity improved from a median LogMAR of 1.48 to 0.6 LogMAR.

**Protection from Ultraviolet Rays**

Intraocular lenses should provide protection from ultraviolet (UV) rays.

UV light and other light of short wavelengths such as blue light may cause damage to the outer segments of the photoreceptor and the retinal pigment epithelium. The development of blue filtering intraocular lenses (BFIOL), which are yellow or orange tilted, may further improve protection from possible phototoxicity to the macula, improve contrast sensitivity, and reduce the chromatic aberrations.

IOL can be rigid or foldable. In a study comparing the results of rigid PMMA lenses implanted through a 5 mm sclerocorneal tunnel and hydrophilic acrylic lenses implanted through a 2.5 mm corneal incision, visual outcomes were found to be comparable after one year. However, posterior capsular opacification was higher in the PMMA group (36%) than in the foldable group (23%).

**Posterior Capsular Opacification (PCO)**

The lens design should prevent posterior capsular opacification by preventing the migration of Elschnig's pearls. PCO may be associated with capsular bag distension and cyst-like structures at the posterior capsule.

PCO is caused by the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) by cells with myofibroblast phenotype arising from the lens epithelial cells after epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Higher expression of smooth muscle actin (SMA) and fibronectin (FN) which are the components of the ECM, was seen in bags with single-piece haptic IOLs compared to three-piece lenses. Capsular bags with silicone lenses had lesser SMA and FN expression than acrylic IOLs. Lens epithelial cells (LEC) behaved differently depending on the lens biocompatibility.

Different lens coatings have been tried to prevent posterior capsular opacification.

- Sharp truncated edges of IOL optic were found to have a lesser incidence of posterior capsular opacification than round-edged IOLs.

- Maximal touch of the IOL optic to the posterior capsule, angulated haptics enhancing the contact of the optic to the posterior capsule, and bioadhesive material to promote a 'shrink-wrap' of the capsular bag around the optic.

- The biocompatibility of IOL materials: The rate of PCO is highest with hydrogel IOL, intermediate with PMMA, and lowest with silicone and acrylic material of the optic.

- A continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis with a 360-degree overlap of the anterior capsulorhexis margin over the IOL optic creates a 'shrink-wrap' around the IOL optic.

- Meticulous cortical cleanup assisted by hydrodissection, and

- Implantation of the IOL in the capsular bag.

The rate of PCO is higher with rigid IOLs compared to foldable IOLs.

**Endothelial Cell Loss**

IOL should not cause endothelial cell loss while being implanted or long-term. The location of the IOL and the complications encountered during the procedure rather than the lens material causes endothelial cell loss. The use of different viscoelastic materials protects the corneal endothelium during various stages of cataract surgery and while implanting the intraocular lens.

Endothelial cell loss has been evaluated during phacoemulsification. Francisco Sorrentino studied endothelial cell loss in 50 eyes after phacoemulsification. The main damage to endothelial cells was found to be in the second phase of phacoemulsification (quadrant removal as opposed to sculpting).

**Aberrations**

Spherical and chromatic aberrations have been studied with various monofocal IOLs after IOL implantation. Nakajima et al. studied longitudinal chromatic aberrations (LCA) after implantation of three different types of yellow-colored IOLs. Alcon IOL and IOL from HOYA corp were found to have the same LCA as phakic eyes. The LCA in all the lenses did not affect the visual function.

A study comparing chromatic aberrations after implanting monofocal, multifocal and extended depth of focus lenses did not find a significant difference between the three types of lenses.

Nanavaty et al., while comparing monofocal IOL with enhanced depth of focus IOL, did not find differences in corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) or significant differences in aberrations with normal pupil size.

**Inflammation and Infections**

The surface should be resistant to bacterial adherence. Lens material has been found to be the most important factor determining bacterial adherence. Silicone and hydrophobic acrylic material allow bacterial adherence more readily than hydrophilic material.

**Endophthalmitis**

Amongst all the complications after cataract surgery, endophthalmitis is the most devastating.

**Dysphotopsia**

Photic phenomena perceived by patients after cataract surgery can be noted, including arcs, rings, flashes, and haloes seen near the central axis of vision (positive dysphotopsia) or seen as blockage of light from certain parts of the retina, which appears as a dark shadow in the temporal field of vision (negative dysphotopsia).

The incidence varies from 0.2 %, as reported by Davison in patients who had hydrophobic acrylic IOLs implanted, to 15.2% on the first preoperative day, which decreased to 2.4% after two years, as reported by Osher. Most of the time, there is no need for IOL explantation.