The basic mechanisms of hypernatremia are water deficit and excess solute. Total body water loss relative to solute loss is the most common reason for developing hypernatremia. Hypernatremia is usually associated with hypovolemia, which can occur in conditions that cause combined water and solute loss, where water loss is greater than sodium loss, or free water loss. Combined loss can be seen in extra-renal conditions such as gastroenteritis, vomiting, prolonged nasogastric drainage, burns, and excessive sweating. Excessive sweating can occur due to exercise, fever, or high heat exposure. Renal losses can be seen in intrinsic renal disease, post-obstructive diuresis, and with the use of osmotic or loop diuretics. Hyperglycemia and mannitol are common causes of osmotic diuresis. Free water loss is seen with central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI) and also in conditions with increased insensible loss. Central DI can occur due to inadequate production of ADH. Common causes of central DI are idiopathic, head trauma, cranial neoplasm, and pituitary infiltrative diseases, such as sarcoidosis and histiocytosis. Nephrogenic DI occurs due to tubular unresponsiveness to the action of ADH and can be inherited in an X-linked pattern or secondary to certain medications including lithium, foscarnet, and demeclocycline. Rarely, hypernatremia with inadequate fluid intake can be seen in breastfed babies, child or elder abuse, and patients with an impaired thirst response. Excess sodium usually is iatrogenic and seen in the hospital setting but can be associated with improper formula mixing, excess sodium bicarbonate ingestion, salt tablet poisoning, hyperaldosteronism, and seawater drowning.