Anaphylaxis is a clinical diagnosis. The chemical mediator measurements are not readily available to the clinician. They can retrospectively confirm the allergic reaction and support the diagnosis. Blood cell counts for the measurement of mast cells, and basophil mediators are also helpful if obtained soon after the onset of symptoms. Some suggest that serial tryptase levels be drawn at 15 minutes, 3 hours, 6hours  and 24 hours. If elevated at 24 hours, then referral to allergy/immunology specialists for evaluation of possible systemic mastocytosis or a mast cell activation syndrome is recommended.  These patients with mast cell disorders can have hypotensive reactions to insect stings even in the absence of immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated allergy. Tryptase measurements have been assessed in patients presenting to the emergency department. A level of 12.4 ng/ml had a high specificity of 88 percent and a positive predictive value of (0.93) and low sensitivity of 28 percent and a negative predictive value (0.17).  Anaphylaxis patients with hypotension were more likely to have elevated tryptase levels. Another marker is plasma histamine levels, which peak within 5 to 15 minutes of the onset of symptoms and decrease to baseline in 60 minutes; this is because histamine undergoes rapid metabolism by N-methyltransferase and diamine oxidase. The levels do correlate better with anaphylaxis than tryptase levels. As most patients arrive well beyond the 15 to 60 minutes window to emergency departments, measurement of histamine levels is not practical as they will be back to baseline. A 24-hour urine histamine collection started as soon as possible after anaphylaxis can be helpful. Future tests will focus on mature beta-tryptase over total tryptase and alpha tryptase.