The diagnosis of X-linked ichthyosis is based on biochemical and/or genetic analysis. The most accurate diagnostic method is genetic analysis. Chromosomal microarray will often detect the STS deletion as well as contiguous gene syndrome. STS hydrolyzes sulfated (conjugated) alkyl steroid sulfates, including dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEAS), to their unsulfated (unconjugated) form (DHEAS->DHEA). As a result, decreased STS activity results in higher conjugated and lower unconjugated steroid sulfates. Notably, in women carrying an affected fetus, absent placental STS activity will lower the mother’s unconjugated serum estriol (uE3). A falsely low uE3 level will result in false-positives in second-trimester Down syndrome screening tests; therefore, X-linked ichthyosis may be diagnosed prenatally as an unexpected finding in women undergoing elective genetic screening tests during the second trimester of pregnancy. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis or chromosomal microarray analysis can be used to confirm the diagnosis; affected boys will have variable (and sometimes no) manifestations, presenting during infancy. For those who carry microdeletion within the STS gene, assaying for STS activity from skin fibroblasts, keratinocytes, or lymphocytes of X-linked ichthyosis-suspect patients is recommended. For carrier detection, both multiplex quantitative fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR) and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) are capable of detecting complete deletion of the STS gene and identifying a female carrier.