Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can be classified into mild, moderate, or severe. Mild insufficiency occurs with reduced secretion of one or two enzymes with preserved bicarbonate and normal fecal fat. Moderate insufficiency includes the above with impaired bicarbonate secretion. Severe insufficiency occurs when all of the above plus steatorrhea.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can be suspected in patients with suggestive symptoms and clinical history. However, this differs between patients depending on the severity of insufficiency and its cause. To confirm the diagnosis, laboratory and radiological evaluation would be required.

Two categories of tests are recognized; direct and indirect tests. Direct tests such as the secretin-cholecystokinin stimulation test and endoscopic pancreatic function test. The two tests evaluate the pancreatic secretive function, and while they are sensitive and specific, they are invasive, expensive, and time-consuming, limiting their use in clinical practice. On the other hand, indirect tests such as fecal, breath, and blood tests assess the implications of EPI. Despite being less sensitive and specific, they are more feasible and less expensive.

The gold standard test for diagnosing EPI is the 72-hour fecal fat quantification and determination of the coefficient for fat absorption; however, its use is limited by unacceptance for both patient and laboratory.

Fecal elastase-1 (FE-1) is considered a reliable, non-invasive, and less time-consuming test to evaluate EPI. It is not affected by enzyme replacement as well. Such advantages make it a popular test in screening for EPI.

Fecal chymotrypsin might be of benefit to evaluate compliance with pancreatic enzyme therapy. its value is limited due to intestinal degradation and less availability in laboratories.

Serum pancreatic enzymes are not considered a reliable tool to diagnose pancreatic insufficiency. However, only serum trypsinogen could be used as a useful marker for EPI. A serum level below 20 ng per milliliter was sensitive to pancreatic steatorrhea.

A replacement for the previously used Secretin-cholecystokinin stimulation test is the endoscopic pancreatic function test (ePFT), which can evaluate pancreatic secretion through quantification of bicarbonate concentration in samples retrieved endoscopically from the duodenum 45 tp 60 minutes after intravenous Secretin injection. It is a highly sensitive test and can be used to confirm the diagnosis of EPI in borderline cases.

Breath tests measure fat digestion by pancreatic lipase. The test depends on quantifying the recovery rate of 13CO2 over 6 hours after a meal, which contains 250 mg of 13C-MTG.it can be used to diagnose EPI, but while equally sensitive to fecal elastase, it is not widely available.

Testing for nutritional deficiencies such as magnesium, fat-soluble vitamins (A, E, D, and K), and lipoproteins can support the diagnosis of EPI and monitor treatment.

Secretin-stimulated magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (S-MRCP) could be considered the most appropriate morphological test for EPI assessment. It could be used as an indicator of pancreatic function. However, it has a low sensitivity (69%) with limited supporting evidence for use in EPI diagnosis.