The occipital area receives its blood supply from the occipital artery, and the blood drains via the occipital vein. The occipital artery has its origin from the external carotid artery, where it is deep to the digastric posterior belly and the hypoglossal nerve winds around it. It travels superiorly and posteriorly, passing superficially to the internal carotid artery and the vagus nerve, before anastomosing with the deep cervical artery as it courses just beneath the mastoid process of the temporal bone. It then travels along the deep to the sternocleidomastoid and splenius capitis muscles until it reaches the occipital bone's superior nuchal line, where it then travels superficially to the semispinalis capitis muscle. After it has coursed about halfway across the semispinalis capitis and just lateral of the trapezius, the artery then courses vertically up the back of the head superficial to the occipital belly of the occipitofrontalis. It ascends tortuously up the head in the superficial fascia, anastomosing with a branch of the posterior auricular artery. Then at the crown of the head, it anastomoses with the parietal branch of the superficial temporal artery.

The occipital artery supplies blood to more than just the occipital area, as evidenced by its several branches, including the auricular, descending, meningeal, muscular, and sternocleidomastoid branches. The auricular branch supplies the area behind the ear, and a mastoid branch supplies the mastoid air cells, diploe, and dura mater. The descending branch is the largest division and contains a deep and superficial portion. The superficial portion provides blood to the trapezius, and the deep portion anastomoses with a branch of the costocervical trunk, providing collateral circulation via the external carotid and the subclavian artery. The meningeal branch supplies the posterior cranial fossa dura mater. The muscular branches supply several muscles along the course of the occipital artery, including the digastric and longus capitis muscles. The sternocleidomastoid branch divides at the carotid triangle into upper and lower branches and supplies the muscle it is named after.

The occipital vein originates from small vessels on the posterior aspect of the scalp and drains the superficial muscles and skin of the occipital region. It is superficial to the occipital fascia and the occipital artery and anastomoses laterally with the parietal branch of the superficial temporal vein and inferolateral to the posterior auricular vein. It then runs into the inferior portion of the posterior auricular vein, where it becomes the external jugular vein. The occipital vein also has an anastomosis with the intracranial confluence of the sinuses via the occipital emissary vein. The occipital lymph nodes are located posterior to the occipital artery and vein, with the occipital lymph vessels draining into the jugulodigastric lymph node, which then drains into the jugular lymph vessels.