In type I hypersensitivity reactions, there is a history of atopy or a patient suffering from an allergic condition (e.g., bronchial asthma, allergic rhinitis, or food allergy). It may be associated with recurrent infections caused by viruses and bacteria. For instance, bronchial asthma may link to recurrent bacterial pneumonia. Clinically allergic disorders may be accompanied by airway inflammation, wheezing attacks, bronchial hyper-responsiveness, tachycardia, tachypnea, intense itching of the eyes and nose, sneezing, rhinorrhea, dermatitis, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Anaphylaxis, the most severe type of allergy, is clinically characterized by bronchospasm, angioedema, hypotension, loss of consciousness, generalized skin rash, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramps among other symptoms.

In type II hypersensitivity reactions, a patient may report multiple blood transfusions, rhesus incompatibility, and drug history. Clinically, it may manifest as autoimmunity, e.g., autoimmune hemolytic anemia (characterized by jaundice), immune thrombocytopenia (characterized by bleeding disorders), and other blood dyscrasia (autoimmune neutropenia). In this type of hypersensitivity, drugs may attach to red blood cells and stimulate the production of anti-red blood cell antibodies or anti-dsDNA antibody that causes drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

Type III hypersensitivity reactions may manifest as immune complex-mediated diseases including glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, serositis, arthritis, and skin manifestations of autoimmunity such as malar rash, which is due to photosensitivity. The prevalence of serum sickness has decreased dramatically as animal anti-serum is rarely used to treat or prevent infectious diseases. General manifestations of disease including anorexia, loss of weight, and asthenia may be reported in IHR.