Initial treatment includes rest, physical therapy, and corticosteroid injections. The length of time to attempt conservative treatment before advancing to surgical options varies. Six months of conservative treatment is reasonable if there is not DRUJ instability.

There is limited evidence to support the use of bracing as a treatment option for TFCC tears. One case report followed one patient with a TFCC tear for one year. This patient wore a new brace for 12 weeks after failing conservative management as an alternative to surgery. The results were an increase in upper extremity use immediately following wearing the brace and persistent improvements noticed at a follow-up appointment in one year. This was the first study to show a beneficial non-surgical option after failing conservative management.

Surgical options should be a consideration if conservative treatment fails or if there is DRUJ instability. Common surgical options include arthroscopic repair, arthroscopic debridement, ulnar shortening, and the Wafer procedure.

A debridement is a surgical option that induces bleeding to stimulate healing. Debridement has beneficial outcomes for central TFCC tears but has been shown to have worse outcomes in degenerative tears or patients with higher positive ulnar variance.

Surgical treatment will depend on the Palmer classification of the injury, discussed in the staging section.

1A: This injury is in an avascular region that will not heal if it does not receive treatment. Due to the lack of vascularity, it does not respond to direct surgical management, so debridement is the intervention of choice.

1B: The area has vascularization, so a direct surgical repair is an option. If the triangular fibrocartilage disc is completely detached from the ulnar insertion, then there is an injury to the radioulnar ligaments, and there will be instability. If this is the case, the amount of retraction of the tendon should be measured, and a tendon graft may be necessary as part of the surgical repair. Partial tears would not involve radioulnar ligament injury and thus are stable and could be treated with sutures arthroscopically. Tears at the foveal insertion require bony reattachment, and therefore these are of more significant consequence than styloid insertion tears.

1C: Arthroscopy and debridement are both options. Debridement is an option if the ligaments are beyond repair.

1D:  If the injury involves radioulnar ligament damage, surgical reattachment is the treatment of choice. If the injury spares the radioulnar ligaments, partial resection via arthroscopy is an option.

Type 2 lesion treatment is separated by whether the lunotriquetral ligament is torn or intact. The best way to determine this is MR arthrography, although CT arthrography is also effective. Types 2A, 2B, and 2C lesions can have conservative therapy. If conservative management fails, a reasonable next step is the Wafer procedure, which is resection of the distal aspect of the ulnar head. Type 2E lesions can also be treated by resection of the ulnar head. Type 2D lesions can be treated via ulnar shaft-shortening with osteotomy.

For patients with chronic tears who undergo surgery, one study of 57 patients who had pain for nine months on average prior to surgery found a 98% satisfaction and return to work around nine weeks.

Contraindications to arthroscopy include if the radiocarpal joint is an arthritic or insufficient ligament on the scaphoid and lunate.

Treating athletes can vary from treatment for non-athletes. A high school athlete who will not compete beyond high school should begin with four weeks of rest, ice, and anti-inflammatories.  For elite athletes, if there is no distal radioulnar joint instability, one week of rest with splinting and re-examination after one week is reasonable. If there is a tear of the TFCC with instability of the distal radioulnar joint, this is potentially career-threatening. If non-surgical treatment is elected, this could include long arm immobilization for 3 weeks followed by short arm immobilization for 3 weeks with a gradual return to play. If there is a chronic tear, the athlete can receive counsel that the risk of further damage is minimal. Therefore, the athlete can choose to try to play through the injury until the season is over, or the athlete could elect surgery immediately.