The goal in strongyloidiasis is to eradicate the infection, decrease morbidity, and prevent complications.

- Albendazole and mebendazole are sometimes used in Strongyloides stercoralis infection, but results are varied.

- Ivermectin is more effective than albendazole.

- The disseminated disease should be treated with ivermectin. For those too sick to tolerate oral ivermectin, subcutaneous or rectal dosing may be effective.

- Ivermectin should be administered daily until symptoms have resolved and larvae have not been detected for at least 2 weeks.

Parasite pathways are different from the human host and allow selective interference by chemotherapeutic agents. The effectiveness of anthelmintic agents against larvae is poor; they are more effective in established infection.

**Ivermectin**

- Ivermectin is the drug of choice for both acute and chronic strongyloidiasis in intestinal stages, hyperinfection syndrome, and disseminated strongyloidiasis.

- This drug has not been studied extensively in children, and it has been used as an adjuvant in patients with hyperinflation not responding to thiabendazole.

- Ivermectin is a semisynthetic macrolide that binds selectively to glutamate-gated chloride ion channels in nerve and muscle cells, increasing cell membrane permeability with hyperpolarization and causing paralysis and cell death.

- Ivermectin's half-life is 16 hours, and it is metabolized in the liver.

- The cure rate is close to 100% with a 2-day course.

**Albendazole**

- Albendazole is an alternative to ivermectin for acute and chronic strongyloidiasis.

- Albendazole has a high affinity for binding free beta-tubulin in the parasite's cells and inhibiting tubulin polymerization, resulting in loss of cytoplasmic microtubules and decreasing ATP production in the worm, which results in energy depletion by inhibiting glucose uptake, immobilization, then causing death.

- Albendazole should be administered with high-dose glucocorticoids and anticonvulsants to avoid a central nervous system inflammatory response.

**Mebendazole**

- Mebendazole has variable efficacy against strongyloidiasis.

- This agent inhibits microtubule formation and causes worm glucose depletion, and is available in chewable form for pediatric use.