Bisphosphonates are generally well tolerated, with most adverse effects being non-severe. Reports exist of some serious adverse effects with bisphosphonate use, but these are extremely rare.

**1. Gastrointestinal Adverse Effects**

All oral bisphosphonates have correlations with upper gastrointestinal adverse effects, including gastrointestinal reflux, esophagitis, esophageal/gastric ulcers, and gastritis. Gastrointestinal side effects are the most common reason for the discontinuation of oral bisphosphonates. The risk increases in patients who take concomitant NSAIDs.

**2. Infusion Reaction**

Intravenous bisphosphonates have associations with an infusion/acute phase reaction characterized by flu-like symptoms, fevers, myalgias, arthralgias, and headaches within 1 to 3 days of the infusion.  The symptoms usually respond to acetaminophen or NSAIDs and resolve within a few days.  The risk of the acute phase reaction is highest with the 1st infusion of the intravenous bisphosphonate (up to 30%), and the risk declines significantly with further dosing (less than 7%). This infusion/acute phase reaction is usually mild and self-limiting and does not necessitate discontinuation of the intravenous bisphosphonate therapy.

**3. Hypocalcemia**

Transient hypocalcemia is a common issue secondary to bisphosphonate use, and the incidence may be as high as 18%. Severe hypocalcemia, however, is rare. Hypocalcemia is more common, secondary to intravenous bisphosphonates, and in patients with an underlying untreated vitamin-D deficiency, hypocalcemia, poor calcium intake, and hypoparathyroidism.

**4. Arthralgia and Myalgia**

Bone, joint, and muscle pain can occur secondary to bisphosphonates.  The symptoms are rare, with an incidence of less than 5%. Symptoms are usually mild, although there have been reports of severe pain.

**5. Ocular Adverse Effects**

Rare ocular adverse effects, including uveitis, conjunctivitis, and scleritis, have been reported with all bisphosphonates.

**6. Atypical Femur F****ractures**

Another rare but serious adverse effect of bisphosphonates is an atypical femoral fracture, typically involving diaphysis or sub-trochanteric region of the femur. Over suppression of bone turnover, pathophysiological alteration in the bone quality, and impairment of fracture repair process, or thought to be responsible for these atypical femur fractures, which are considered stress fractures. The incidence is 3.2 to 50 cases per 100,000 person-years, and the risk increases with the duration of exposure to bisphosphonates.  Atypical femur fractures are usually not seen within the first five years of bisphosphonate treatment, with most cases reported with more than seven years of bisphosphonate treatment. Initial symptoms are dull aching pain in the groin. Plain X-rays may reveal cortical thickening. Findings of radiographs, especially if early/mild, shall be confirmed by further imaging with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or bone scintigraphy. Bisphosphonates shall be discontinued in patients who suffer an atypical femur fracture in one leg; if the drug is not stopped, these patients are at higher risk of developing atypical femur fracture in the other leg. Discontinuation of bisphosphonate is associated with a decline in this risk. A drug holiday shall be considered after prolonged exposure to bisphosphonates when clinically appropriate.

**7. Osteonecrosis of the Jaw**

One of the most severe adverse effects is bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ). Most cases of BRONJ have occurred in patients with multiple myeloma and breast cancer treated with high doses of intravenous bisphosphonates. It has also been reported in patients taking bisphosphonates for osteoporosis with an incidence of approximately 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 100,000.

- History of treatment with a bisphosphonate;

- Those who had more than eight weeks of exposed bone in the maxillofacial region

- No radiation therapy to the jaw

The American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons has further defined the stages of Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ) as follows:

- **Stage 0:**Indicated by no visible bone but nonspecific symptoms. Common treatment includes Symptomatic treatment and conservative management of underlying dental issues; antibiotics are recommended if the infection is present.

- **Stage 1**: Indicated by exposed, inflamed necrotic bone without symptoms. Common treatment includes antimicrobial rinses (if the infection is not present).

- **Stage 2**: Indicated by exposed, necrotic bone with local signs or symptoms of infection. Standard treatment includes symptomatic treatment, antimicrobial rinses, and systemic antibiotics.

- **Stage 3**: Indicated by exposed, necrotic bone with pain and infection, pathologic fracture, extraoral fistula, and extensive osteolysis. Standard treatment includes symptomatic treatment, systemic antibiotics, and superficial surgical debridement of the necrotic bone.

If planning an invasive dental procedure, the recommendation is to delay the initiation of bisphosphonate therapy for a few months to allow for healing of the jaw. In patients who have been on bisphosphonates for more than four years and are planning for an invasive dental procedure, recommendations are to stop the bisphosphonate two months before the dental procedure and resume them after jaw healing has been complete. When clinically appropriate, consider a drug holiday after 3 to 5 years of intravenous bisphosphonates and 5 to 10 years of oral bisphosphonates.