The pigment showers and fine dark deposits found in the aqueous, AC, and TM, in addition to elevated IOP, can mimic other ocular pathologies, which include:

- **Trauma and intraocular surgery**can cause pigment deposits in the AC and TM, trans-illumination iris defects, and elevated IOP; however, history and careful slit-lamp examination can aid in the true diagnosis in these cases.

- **Pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PEX)**can give rise to pigment deposits in the AC and TM, elevated IOP, and trans-illumination iris defects. The typical clinical signs in PEX patients tend to differ from PDS/PG in that the deposits in the AC are white flakes as opposed to dark pigments. The pigmentation of the TM in PEX tends to be patchy and not intense and uniform. Trans-illumination iris defects in PEX are patchy, mottled, and located around the pupillary border, whereas PDS/PG eyes tend to show spoke-like mid-peripheral iris atrophy.

- PG may be misdiagnosed as **normal-tension glaucoma**as with aging, the pigmentation reduces, and IOP may become normal.

- **Intraocular tumors**, like anterior uveal melanomas, can give rise to elevated IOP and pigment dispersion released by tumor cells.

- **Uveitis**can cause a release of debris, inflammatory cells, and pigment into the AC, in addition to patchy pigmentation of the TM.

- **Horner syndrome**gives rise to anisocoria, which could be similar to eyes with PDS/PG that show asymmetric iris trans-illumination defects.

- **Other**conditions, like rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, cataract surgery, diabetes, frequent or long-term mydriasis, Posner Schlossman syndrome, and physiological aging, can show signs of pigment dispersion in the AC and the TM, IOP spikes, and iris trans-illumination defects. A detailed history and thorough examinations are essential to provide a correct diagnosis.