Initial management should include control of epistaxis and closure of any lacerations of the external skin or internal nasal lining whenever possible. Epistaxis may be conservatively controlled with digital pressure, pushing the nasal alae against the septum. More serious epistaxis may require cauterization or nasal packing.

Observation without surgical intervention is recommended in patients who do not have an obvious cosmetic deformity or nasal obstruction. Conservative measures such as elevating the head and icing the area are recommended until local edema subsides. Patients should be closely followed within three to five days for reexamination, as nasal deviation can be unmasked with the resolution of edema.

Closed reduction of nasal bone and septal fractures is generally recommended for fractures that cause nasal deviation or airway obstruction. The procedure may be performed under local anesthesia or with minimal sedation, but general anesthesia is often preferable due to improved airway protection and overall patient comfort.

Closed reduction may also be performed on the nasal septum using a Boies elevator or Asch forceps. If adequate reduction of the nasal septum cannot be performed in a closed fashion, some authors advocate for open septoplasty in the acute setting, reporting that patients have significant improvement in nasal obstruction postoperatively.

Open septorhinoplasty is generally avoided in the acute setting as nasal lacerations or cartilage disruptions frequently accompany nasal trauma. Further dissecting these cartilages can devascularize them in the acute setting, and any cartilage grafts placed during rhinoplasty may be more susceptible to infection and extrusion or absorption. It is therefore often recommended that septorhinoplasty be delayed 3 to 6 months post-injury.