Migraine is one of the most burdensome primary headache disorders in the pediatric population.

The prevalence increases with age and reaches 80% at the time they transfer to adult neurologic care. Before puberty, no sex differences exist, but in later adolescence, females predominate.

Data from ∼1.2 million children and adolescents in Germany revealed that the incidence of migraine increased with age, reaching about 1% per year around the age of 10 for both sexes, 3.49% per year in females, and 1.72% per year in males at the age of 19. Incidences in males and females were the same until 13 years of age but higher in females.

Pooled data from China, Japan, and South Korea revealed that the overall prevalence of migraine increased with age. There were reports on the significant association of migraine with high levels of disability and negative effects on quality of life. Studies suggested low levels of disease awareness/diagnosis within each country studied. Moreover, findings showed that over-the-counter medication use was high and prescription medication use was low in each country, which suggested that there are unmet needs for migraine in terms of sufficient and appropriate diagnosis and better management and therapies for the treatment of migraine in East Asia. There is also a need to conduct population-based studies assessing disease burden and clinical management of migraine to confirm unmet needs for migraine across East Asia.

Migraine in children below seven years of age is challenging for clinicians. As there are only a few studies in this age group, what we have shows migraine in this age group affects up to 4% of the general population. This is most likely underestimated due to the lack of specific diagnostic markers, the frequent difficulty of describing pain in childhood, and the necessity of reliable parental reports. Recent findings showed that migraine has some differences, especially in clinical and therapeutic terms, in this age group compared to subsequent ages. Current literature also showed that the onset of migraine in younger children might play an unfavorable role in its natural history; therefore, early identification and management of migraine is vital to the point of considering the factors of prenatal and perinatal development in the predisposition and anticipation of migraine onset.

A study for the association between preterm categories and migraine in Finland revealed no evidence for a greater risk of migraine among individuals born preterm. Migraine was predicted by parental migraine, lower socioeconomic position, maternal hypertensive disorder, and maternal smoking during pregnancy.

Migraine and epilepsy comorbidity is also being studied since they represent prevalent chronic childhood neurological disorders. Both diseases rely on the common pathophysiologic and genetic mechanisms of paroxysmal disorders, the similarity of their precipitating factors, clinical manifestations, and therapeutic approaches. Numerous genetic diseases accompanied by migraine and epilepsy could lean towards the shared pathogenetic mechanisms of these paroxysmal disorders in which genetically determined channelopathies may play a vital part. The efficacy of antiepileptic drugs has been proven as the prophylactic treatment of migraine in pediatric patients as well as the advantages of levetiracetam as the prophylactic treatment for migraine and epilepsy comorbidity in children.

Another study evaluated the prevalence of headache subtypes, epilepsy, atopic disorders, motion sickness, and recurrent abdominal pain among ADHD children and their parents. Findings showed that migraines were significantly common among children with ADHD and their mothers. This means that migraine is a vital part of ADHD comorbidity, not only for children but also for mothers.

Other migraine comorbidities are atopic disorders such as allergic rhinitis, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, and seasonal allergic rhinitis, as well as the disability caused by headache (ISAAC - International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood; CARATkids - Control of Allergic Rhinitis and Asthma Test for Children; PedMIDAS - Pediatric Migraine Disability Assessment). Results showed higher scores on the PedMIDAS than those patients without atopy for children with current allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. There was also a significant positive correlation between CARATkids scores and PedMIDAS scores. Therefore, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis is correlated to enhanced disability caused by headaches among children with migraine.

Migraine was observed in 29% of 96 patients with sarcoidosis in another study. Among those with sarcoidosis, only the female sex was predictive of having migraine. There was no association between migraine and age, depression, dyspnea, immunosuppression use, or ESR.