In preterm and very-low-birth-weight (VLBW) infants, i.e., infants with birth weight less than 1500 grams, a consistent blood glucose level of more than 200 mg/dL is a cause for concern. A blood glucose level measured as >200 mg/dL with a 4-hour interval and glucosuria of +2 or more necessitates treatment. Currently, hyperglycemia treatment in the absence of an increase in osmolarity and osmotic diuresis is not supported.

- The first step in evaluating neonatal hyperglycemia is to assess the GIR.
            GIR = IV infusion rate (mL/kg/day) x Dextrose concentration (%) / 144
            The GIR is lowered by reducing IV dextrose concentration or the infusion rate. GIR can be decreased by 1 to 2 mg/kg/min every 2 hours, with frequent glucose monitoring until the GIR reaches 4 mg/kg/min.

- In case of persistent hyperglycemia, underlying causes such as sepsis, stress, medications need to be explored and treated accordingly.

- Role of Insulin 

- Hyperglycemia persisting at low GIR (4 mg/kg/min) may indicate relative insulin deficiency or insulin resistance. 
- The role of insulin therapy in treating hyperglycemia in neonates is controversial. Consider insulin if blood glucose level is more than 250 mg/dl, and if urine glucose is more than 2+ in two separate samples obtained four hours apart. 
- Bolus insulin therapy has a high risk of causing hypoglycemia. So, bolus insulin therapy is usually not preferred in treating neonatal hyperglycemia.
- Two approaches are available for using Insulin.

- The first approach is to add insulin to maintenance fluids.
- Another approach is to run insulin independently. This approach's advantage is that the insulin rate can be adjusted without changing the total IV fluid rate.


- The dosage of Insulin 

- The initial dosage for insulin infusion is 0.01 to 0.05 U/kg/hour.
- Titrate the insulin infusion rate based on blood glucose concentrations 
- Titrate the insulin with an increment of 0.01 U/kg/h. The maximum dose can be up to 0.1 U/kg/h.
- The target is to maintain the blood glucose level between 100 mg/dL and 150 mg/dL.
- If the blood glucose level decreases to 180 mg/dL, insulin infusion is reduced by 50%.
- If the blood glucose level is below 150 mg/dL, discontinue the Insulin. 


- It is crucial to monitor serum glucose levels every 1 hour when the infant is on insulin. Measure the blood glucose level half an hour after each change in insulin infusion
- If hypoglycemia develops, discontinue the insulin infusion and give 2 ml/kg D10 IV bolus.
- After discontinuing the Insulin, monitor for rebound hyperglycemia.

- Any electrolyte imbalance due to osmotic diuresis should be corrected. Sodium and potassium imbalance is very common.

Hyperglycemia needs to be prevented in all neonates, particularly among preterm infants, due to associated complications such as the increased risk for infection, impaired immunity, poor wound healing, increased morbidity, and mortality. The following preventive measures help in the practice to prevent hyperglycemia.

- Early initiation of enteral feedings

- Early supplementation of amino acids in TPN, leading to an increase in insulin secretion that prevents hyperglycemia.

- Targeting optimal and physiologic GIR in TPN as per the glucose monitoring

- Limiting IV lipid infusions during hyperglycemia

- A more direct and immediate approach is to decrease the catecholamine infusions as tolerated.

- Discontinuing catecholamine infusions and glucocorticoid treatments as soon as the infant's condition has improved.