# Continuing Education Activity

In 2016, the World Health Organization published a revised classification of central nervous system tumors using molecular parameters. In this classification, some tumors previously recognized in the 2007 classification had been renamed or eliminated. The primitive neuroectodermal tumor is no longer recognized as such and those tumors are now under the classification of embryonal tumors. Medulloblastomas are embryonal tumors but have their own genetically (molecular) and histologically defined groups. The other embryonal tumors are classified depending if they have on chromosome 19 an amplification of the C19MC region (19q13.42). Those embryonal tumors that no amplification of the C19MC, no alterations of INI1 or BRG1, or no rosettes are identified, are called embryonal tumor, NOS (WHO 9473/3). This activity reviews the evaluation, and management of embryonal tumors, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of primitive neuroectodermal tumor medical conditions and emergencies.
- Outline the evaluation of primitive neuroectodermal tumor.
- Review the management options available for primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

# Introduction

In 2016, the World Health Organization (WHO) published a revised classification of central nervous system (CNS) tumors using molecular parameters.

Medulloblastomas are the most common embryonal tumors and have their own genetic/molecular defined groups (SHH-activated TP53-mutant, SHH-activated TP53-wildtype, WNT-activated, non-SHH/WNT group three, and non-SHH/WNT group four) in addition to their histologically defined groups (classic, desmoplastic/nodular, medulloblastoma with extensive nodularity, and large cell/anaplastic). A combination of the genetic profile and the histology determines the prognosis of these tumors.

All other embryonal tumors are classified depending if they have an amplification of the C19MC region (19q13.42) on chromosome 19. If they have the amplification, they are called embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes, C19MC-altered (WHO 9478/3*). If they do not have the amplification, they are called embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes, NOS (WHO 9478/3). The other embryonal tumors are classified as medulloepithelioma (9501/3), CNS neuroblastoma (9500/3), CNS ganglioneuroblastoma (9490/3), and atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (ATRT) with alterations of INI1 or in rare occasions BRG1.

Immunohistochemical staining for INI1 or BRG1 expression is used to distinguish them. Those tumors that do not have alterations of either INI1 or BRG1 are classified as embryonal tumors with rhabdoid features (WHO 9508/3). Those embryonal tumors without amplification of the C19MC, no alterations of INI1 or BRG1, and no rosettes, are called embryonal tumor, NOS (WHO 9473/3). This last group is a wastebasket category for the tumors previously called PNET, which can not be classified under a genetic/molecular group.

Concurrent with the publication of the WHO 2016 classification, a group recognized four new categories for PNET.

# Etiology

The PNET terminology has been removed from the CNS tumors with the new 2016 WHO revised classification. They were aggressive tumors from poorly differentiated embryonic cells in young children, but on rare occasions affecting adolescents and adults.

Tumors are now classified according to their molecular characteristics. Embryonal tumors are primarily classified depending if they have on chromosome 19 an amplification of the C19MC region (19q13.42). Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor tumors have an alteration of INI1 or, on rare occasions, BRG1. Other embryonal tumors have FOXR2 activation, CIC alteration, MN1 alteration, and BCOR alteration. The SMARCB1 (also known as INI1, BAF47, hSNF5,) located on chromosome 22 at locus 22q11.2 is important for the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex.

Those embryonal tumors that no amplification of the C19MC, no alterations of INI1 or BRG1, or no rosettes are identified, are called embryonal tumor, NOS (WHO 9473/3). At present, there are no molecular or genetic alterations associated with them. These embryonal tumors have to be well investigated. This is an exclusion diagnosis. They have to be differentiated from supratentorial ependymoma, high-grade glioma, embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes, and ATRT based on their specific genetic alterations.

# Epidemiology

Primary CNS tumors are the second most common tumor in children and adolescents after leukemia.

Using the data available for CNS tumors diagnosed in the United States in the years 2012-2016, and excluding medulloblastoma, the incidence of PNET is 0.15 per 100,000 children age 0 to 4, 0.05 per 100,000 children age 5 to 9, 0.04 per 100,000 children age 10 to 14, and 0.03 per 100,000 adolescents age 15 to 19 years.

The incidence of ATRT is 0.32 per 100,000 children ages 0 and 4 and 0.03 per 100,000 children ages 5 to 9 years. Very few cases are diagnosed after nine years of age. The 10-year survival estimates for ATRT is 37%.

The high-grade neuroepithelial tumor with BCOR alteration is an extremely rare tumor, with only 24 cases reported. The four-year survival is 50%.

A study investigating previously histological supratentorial PNET, which reanalyzed them using molecular parameters, found that the diagnosis changed in 71%.

# Histopathology

All embryonal tumors are classified as WHO IV.

Embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes shows abundant neuropil and true rosettes, and have amplification of the C19MC region on chromosome 19.

ATRT usually shows a loss of SMARCB1 (INI1) protein immunoreactivity. They have three groups (ATRT-TYR frequent at infratentorial regions in very young children, ATRTMYC prevalent at the supratentorial area in older children, ATRT-SHH at both ages).

CNS neuroblastoma with FOXR2 activation is highly cellular with small cells with hyperchromatic nuclei surrounded by a clear halo. Areas of neuropil, neurocytic cells, or ganglion cells are seen. Vascular pseudorosettes, nuclear palisades, and Homer Wright rosettes are commonly found. It can have microvascular proliferation.

CNS Ewing sarcoma family tumor with CIC alteration is densely cellular with small round cells. The tumor has both alveolar and fascicular patterns of growth. It does not have markers of differentiation.

CNS high-grade neuroepithelial tumor with MN1 alteration shows a mixture of solid and pseudopapillary patterns with pericellular hyalinization. Commonly expressed glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).

CNS high-grade neuroepithelial tumor with BCOR alteration shows a combination of spindle to oval cells with perivascular pseudorosettes and fibrillary processes. Commonly expressed GFAP. They are highly cellular with a thin-walled capillary network.

Medulloepithelioma show neuroepithelial cells with papillary arrangement that may mimic the embryonic neural tube. It can have necrosis and hemorrhage.

# History and Physical

Patients with embryonal tumors usually present with signs of increased intracranial pressure, which may include headache, nausea, vomiting, irritability, and lethargy in decreasing order of frequency.

The location of the tumor, supratentorial or infratentorial, is important for the manifestation of symptoms. Those with an infratentorial location usually develop hydrocephalus with headache, vomiting, irritability, and lethargy. Ataxia or other cerebellar signs and cranial nerve palsies are common. They rarely have seizures. In supratentorial locations, vomiting, seizures, and headaches are common. Hemiparesis is present if the tumor affects the cortical motor areas or the descending tracts. The presentation is also affected by age. Younger patients present irritability, vomiting, and visual problems. Those older than three years usually show headaches, vomiting, and ataxia.

These aggressive tumors have a short prediagnosis interval between the first symptoms and the radiological diagnosis, with a median of 20 days.

A complete physical examination with emphasis on the neurological evaluation is essential. The neuro-ophthalmologist must evaluate visual problems as they are challenging to identify in younger patients.

# Evaluation

Brain MRI shows a large, demarcated, solid mass with surrounding edema, often with significant mass effect. On T1-weighted images, they are hypointense but sometimes can be isointense; on T2-weighted images, they are isointense to hypertense, and the T1-weighted images with contrast shows patchy contrast enhancement.

Magnetic resonance spectroscopy shows a choline peak with reduced N-acetyl-aspartate and a high ratio of choline/aspartate.

Spinal MRI is usually required for the detection of seeding and prognosis.

# Treatment / Management

The current most effective therapy in these tumors is triple therapy, which is surgical resection plus radiation and chemotherapy.

Chemotherapy varies with each protocol, but a combination of vincristine, cisplatinum, cyclophosphamide, etoposide is common. Bevacizumab is used to block the vascular endothelial growth factor. Intrathecal methotrexate and topotecan can be included in the treatment protocol. Myeloablative chemotherapy has been used in some cases, followed by hematogenic stem cell rescue.

# Differential Diagnosis

ATRT: Usually found in patients under the age of two.

Ependymomas: Usually have no restriction.

High-grade gliomas: The majority are indistinguishable, and diagnosis is based on molecular characteristics. Some can have vascular endothelial proliferation and pseudopalisading necrosis.

Medulloblastomas: Have their own genetic/molecular defined groups.

Medulloepitheliomas: Usually found in very young patients.

# Prognosis

Due to leptomeningeal dissemination and possible extraneural metastasis, prognosis is poor. Approximately 32% of supratentorial embryonal tumors have metastases to the spine.

Several factors influence a poor prognosis, including delay in the diagnosis, poor general status, inadequate initial response to treatment.

Supratentorial high-grade glioma has a 12% five-year overall survival, which is significantly worse compared to embryonal tumors (pineoblastomas included) with a 78.5% five-year overall survival.

# Complications

These tumors impose a severe burden on the patient, and many significant complications occur as a consequence of the tumor and the triple therapy received. Surgery is challenging and sometimes tricky. Radiation and chemotherapy contribute to substantial morbidity due to the ionizing radiation's effects and the adverse effects of the chemotherapeutic agents.

- Motor deficits

- Sensory deficits

- Seizures

- Neurocognitive problems

- Developmental delay

- Learning delays

- Neuroendocrine deficit (delayed puberty, hypothyroidism, low growth hormone levels)

# Consultations

Consultations may be required from neuropathologists, pediatricians, neurosurgeons, hematologist-oncologists, radiation oncologists, and endocrinologists.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The previously called CNS PNET is no longer recognized. Nowadays, most tumors can be assigned to a specific category based on molecular analysis. A careful histopathological examination is required. As many high-grade gliomas are now excluded, the prognosis is nowadays better for the patient. Anyhow, the prognosis for these tumors is poor. Counseling for the patient and the parents is necessary as many of them will suffer the burden of the disease.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Proper diagnosis of the tumor has significant implications in the patient's clinical course and outcome.

Many patients develop hypopituitarism secondary to chemotherapy and radiotherapy; therefore, the endocrinologist has an essential role in documenting and correcting these deficiencies. Collaboration shared decision making and communication are crucial elements for the outcome in these patients. The interprofessional care provided must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach. Prompt recognition of signs and symptoms of the disease can aid in the prognosis and outcome.