**Cytokine Release Syndrome (CRS)**

CRS is the most common type of toxicity following CAR-T therapy. It is a multi-systemic inflammatory response caused by cytokines released following the infusion of CAR-T cells that can lead to multiorgan dysfunction. The onset of symptoms usually occurs during the first week after CAR-T cell infusion, with a typical duration of 7 to 8 days.

Multiple risk factors for CRS include high disease burden, a high number of administered CAR-T cells, the high peak of CAR-T cell expansion, thrombocytopenia, endothelial activation before CAR-T infusion, and lymphodepletion therapy with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide.

Studies have suggested that disease characteristics such as tumor burden, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status, ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and C reactive protein (CRP) levels prior to CAR-T can be used as predictors of the onset of CRS and ICANS, thus guiding the outcomes of CAR-T.

**Pathophysiology**

CRS is thought to be related to the production of inflammatory cytokines by CAR-T, e.g., TNF-a, IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-8, IL-10, and GM-CSF following interaction with corresponding target cells.

**Clinical Features**
****

CRS typically presents with constitutional symptoms such as a fever, fatigue, myalgia, arthralgia, rigors, or anorexia. It can rapidly progress to tachycardia, hypotension requiring vasopressors and intensive care unit (ICU) care, tachypnea, and hypoxia. Eventually, it can lead to coagulopathy, capillary leak, respiratory failure, shock, and multiple organ failure.

**Immune Effector Cell-associated Neurotoxicity Syndrome (ICANS)**

It is a form of clinical and neuropsychiatric disease manifestation that occurs within days to 2-3 weeks following CAR-T therapy administration.

**Pathophysiology**

The pathophysiology behind ICANS is not well studied. Theories include CNS trafficking of CAR-T cells and endothelial disruption within the blood-brain barrier. Moreover, myeloid cell activation in the CNS with the secretion of IL-1 and IL-6 by monocytes, GM-CSF-mediated stimulation of monocytes after CART, elevated levels of IL-15, and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor agonists (e.g., glutamate and quinolinic acid) have all been suggested to cause ICANS.

**Cytopenias**

Cytopenias are very frequent following CAR-T cell therapy, the most common being neutropenia. They occur in about 20-40% of patients and can last beyond 30 days after administration.

**Tumor Lysis Syndrome (TLS)**

TLS can be a life-threatening condition leading to arrhythmias and renal failure. It usually occurs due to cell depletion following chemotherapy but can occur as a direct effect following CAR T-cell therapy.

**Anaphylaxis and Immunogenicity**

CAR-T cells involve the addition of non-human products that renders a risk for allergic reactions. Anaphylaxis is rather uncommon and is reported only with repeated CAR-T infusions. Additionally, anti-murine antibodies against CD-19 have been detected prior to CAR-T cell infusion. Fully human-containing CAR-T cells are under clinical trials.

**Hypogammaglobulinema due to B-Cell Aplasia**

B-cell aplasia with hypogammaglobulinemia is an expected AE associated with CAR-T therapy.

**Infections**

Multiple etiologies can explain recurrent infections, including underlying disease, cytotoxic treatment, neutropenia, hypogammaglobinemia, treatment for CRS and ICANS, and the CAR-T itself. In addition, patients with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <500 cells/mm3 receiving higher doses of CAR-T therapy administration carry a higher risk than other patients.

**Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)**/Macrophage Activation Syndrome (MAS)****

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) was reported in around 1% of patients receiving CAR-T cells.

**Diagnostic Criteria of Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)/Macrophage Activation Syndrome (MAS) [****adapted from criteria proposed by the CARTOX Working Group]**

Ferritin >10,000 ng/ml during CRS

And two of the following:  Grade 3 liver toxicity (increase in levels of bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase, or alanine aminotransferase)  Grade 3 kidney toxicity (oliguria or increase in serum creatinine)  Grade 3 pulmonary edema  Hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow or other organs

**Secondary Malignancies**

Secondary malignancies after CAR-T are primarily related to lymphodepletion chemotherapy, including myelodysplastic syndrome, acute myeloid leukemia, etc.

**Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD)**

Patients receiving allogeneic CAR-T cells from donors carry a risk of developing mild acute GVHD or slow worsening of previously existing chronic GVHD, though this has only rarely been reported.