The nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are ligand-gated ion channels. They are composed of five polypeptide subunits that always have two or more α subunits and may have β, δ, and γ subunits. The muscular type (N1) is composed of 2α, β, δ, and one γ subunit for a total of five subunits while the neuronal type (N2) is composed of 2α and 3β subunits. Upon binding 2 acetylcholine molecules to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, the pentameric structure will change its internal conformation, creating a transmembrane pore for the passage of sodium, potassium, and calcium ions. The passage of these ions will then give rise to the depolarization of the cell, depending on the strength of the initial stimulus.

Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors are G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) composed of a single polypeptide with seven discrete regions arranged in an α-helix. In these α-helices are hydrophobic residues that allow the polypeptide to span the neuronal cell membrane seven times. The carboxy-tail and fifth cytoplasmic facing loop of this polypeptide are the regions that interact with the second messenger system G proteins. G proteins are composed of an α, β, and γ subunit. When the muscarinic receptor is bound by acetylcholine, it will change its conformation, causing the α subunit to release the natively bound guanosine diphosphate molecule (GDP) and trade it for guanosine triphosphate (GTP). Once GTP binds to the α subunit, the α subunit will dissociate from the β and γ subunits and interact with other downstream effector molecules. The α subunit has intrinsic GTPase activity and will eventually catalyze GTP back into GDP, thus turning the second messenger system “off” intrinsically with time. The use of second messenger pathways to exert their effects allows muscarinic receptors to have diverse functions in human physiology that are tissue-dependent and can be either inhibitory or stimulatory.

Muscarinic receptor subtypes M2 and M4 exert their effects through inhibition of adenylate cyclase. Once the M2/M4 receptors are bound by acetylcholine, the now activated α subunit of the G protein will cause inhibition of adenylate cyclase and, thus, a reduction in intracellular cAMP. Reduction in cAMP has widespread effects as this molecule is central to many downstream effector’s activation or inhibition.

Muscarinic receptors M1, M3, and M5 all exert their functions through the stimulation of phospholipase C. When the α subunit of the G protein complex becomes activated, it will then be able to interact with phospholipase C (PLC) and activate it. Activated PLC will then hydrolyze phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate into two separate second messengers, inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 binds the IP3 receptors in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum to release calcium into the cell's cytosol, thus increasing the intracellular calcium concentration. DAG serves to activate protein kinase C, which can phosphorylate a multitude of downstream effector molecules that exert tissue-specific functions.