Snakebites are responsible for a significant degree of morbidity and mortality worldwide, especially in low resource countries. There are over 600 species of identified venomous snakes worldwide, with the majority belonging to the Viperidae and Elapidae families. Common names among the Viperidae family are vipers, pit vipers, and adders. Distinguishing features of the Viperidae family include long, retractable fangs, triangular heads, elliptical pupils, and small scales on their tails. The pit vipers also have a heat-sensing pad adjacent to their nares for infrared vision. Common names among the Elapidae family are cobras, coral snakes, mambas, and copperheads. The Elapids can be distinguished from the Viperids as they have fixed, short fangs, less triangular heads, circular pupils, and larger scales on their tails. The remainder of the venomous snake species belongs to the Atractaspididae, Colubridae, and Hydrophidae families. This activity discusses the evaluation and management of snake envenomation and the associated toxidromes. It highlights the importance of effective first aid, patient monitoring, and targeted treatment throughout the disease process by the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the most common symptoms associated with snake envenomation worldwide.
- Describe the presentation of a patient exhibiting systemic venom toxicity.
- Outline the management considerations for patients with systemic venom toxicity.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of timely and effective care to patients suffering from a snake envenomation.