While the diagnosis is clinical, the distinction of suture hypersensitivity from the normal process of wound healing may not be straightforward. However, the clinical relevance of this distinction depends on the severity of the tissue reaction and is warranted in the most severe cases.

Additional testing is usually not required except in a few select cases or scenarios. If confirmation is desired, skin allergen testing is sufficient. The test involves re-exposing the individual to the culprit suture material and observing for a reaction. Placement of a single interrupted suture exposes the content to the dermis, where the stitch is commonly placed, allowing for a response to occur. In cases involving prior oncologic surgery, it may be necessary to perform a biopsy to rule out the recurrence of the malignancy.

Patch testing like the American Contact Dermatitis Society Core allergen series, the North American Contact Dermatitis Group patch test, and the thin-layer, rapid-use (TRUE) test is a vital tool for the recognition of the offending agent. None of the patch series screens for allergy to 2-octyl cyanoacrylate which is found in topical skin adhesives. In cases where such patches are not available, it has been suggested to consider testing with a suture through the skin versus placing the offending agent against the skin. In the case of suspected topical skin adhesives allergies, a stand-alone, cutaneous test is recommended.

For suspected cases involving deeper tissues, sonographic evaluation is useful. Suture granulomas in the abdominal ultrasound manifest as nodular hypoechoic lesions. A pathognomonic sign of this type of granulomas in the sonogram is the presence of a double hyperechoic line. Granulomas with clinical presentation can present with slight peripheral vascularization on ultrasound.