- A study suggested an association between E. gallinarum gut translocation and autoantibodies production, as seen in inflammatory bowel disease.

- Extracellular superoxide produced by E. faecalis causes DNA instability and inflammatory changes in the colonic mucosa, leading to colorectal cancer. E. faecalis in the stools of colon cancer patients than control individuals.

- Enterococcal cytolysin causes liver cell injury, especially in patients with alcoholic hepatitis, correlating with both-disease severity and mortality. Hence one of the therapies suggested for this patient population is cytolytic enterococci-specific bacteriophages.

- Fecal enterococci abundance has been associated with high graft versus host disease (GVHD) in the allogeneic hematopoietic transplant patients population. Interestingly, the predominance of enterococci over regular clostridia species in the gut of patients with GVHD was associated with diets with higher lactose intake. Hence lactose-free diet or lactase based therapy is suggested for these patients to prevent overgrowth of enterococci.

- E. faecalis and E. faecium strains have been utilized as human probiotics in common preparations for diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome, hypercholesterolemia, and immunity boosters. They have also been used in animals to promote growth and as starters for fermenting food. So far, no infections or safety concerns of these specific probiotics have been reported. However, they need to be monitored closely for the potential development of problematic lineages from old or new strains.