# Introduction

The postcentral gyrus is on the lateral surface of the parietal lobes between the central sulcus and postcentral sulcus. The postcentral gyrus contains the primary somatosensory cortex, a significant brain region responsible for proprioception.

# Structure and Function

The postcentral gyrus is found on the lateral surface of the anterior parietal lobe, caudal to the central sulcus, and corresponds to Brodmann areas 3b, 1, and 2.

# Embryology

The early central nervous system first appears as the neural tube. Over time, the anterior portion of the neural tube develops into the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain, and the dorsal neural tube differentiates to become the somatosensory pathway in the brain and spinal cord.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The anterior and middle cerebral arteries provide the postcentral gyrus blood supply. The anterior cerebral artery is responsible for perfusing the medial third of the postcentral gyrus, while the middle cerebral artery perfuses the lateral two-thirds of the postcentral gyrus. Venous blood drains through the superior sagittal sinus for the superior two-thirds of the postcentral gyrus and the superficial Sylvian veins to the transverse sinus for the inferior third of the postcentral gyrus.

# Nerves

Dorsal Column-Medial Lemniscus Pathway

The dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway is the primary somatosensory pathway for fine touch, vibration, two-point discrimination, and proprioception. This pathway is comprised of three neurons that connect the mechanoreceptor to its specific region within the primary somatosensory cortex. Meissner's corpuscles, Merkel's disks, and Ruffini's corpuscles are stimulated by touch, vibration, and skin tension, respectively leading to the production of an action potential in the first-order neuron.

Spinothalamic Tract

The spinothalamic tract (also known as the ventrolateral system) is the somatosensory pathway for crude touch, pressure, nociception, and temperature. The spinothalamic tract divides into two systems; the anterior spinothalamic system is responsible for crude touch and pressure, and the lateral spinothalamic system is responsible for pain and temperature sensation.

In the anterior spinothalamic system, A-beta fibers carrying crude touch and pressure stimuli travel through the dorsal root ganglion and synapse in the ipsilateral dorsal horn. A-beta fibers are myelinated and have a large diameter compared to other fiber types in the spinothalamic tract.

Unlike the anterior spinothalamic system, the lateral spinothalamic system is made up of multiple nerve fiber types. A-delta fibers are myelinated nerves with a smaller diameter than A-beta fibers.

# Physiologic Variants

Although there are interhemispheric and interindividual variations in the gross appearance of postcentral gyri, the overall topographic sensory distribution remains the same.

# Surgical Considerations

Common surgical considerations regarding the postcentral gyrus or structures near the postcentral gyrus, such as the precentral gyrus, posterior parietal lobe, or insula, include tumor resection surgery, brain mapping for treatment of seizures, and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Cancers that can manifest near the postcentral gyrus include gliomas, astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and meningiomas. Patients with lesions in the primary somatosensory cortex experience somatosensory deficits, especially in the hands and face.

Other surgical considerations involving the postcentral gyrus are the use of deep brain stimulation for the treatment of Parkinson disease. Patients with Parkinson disease undergo deep brain stimulation and dopaminergic therapy to correct motor deficits. The subthalamic nucleus and globus pallidus internus are two common targets for deep brain stimulation to treat motor symptoms seen in Parkinson disease.

# Clinical Significance

Stroke

The postcentral gyrus is at risk of damage due to strokes. The two major arteries that supply the postcentral gyrus are the anterior and middle cerebral arteries. Sensory deficits can often help to determine which artery is affected and the location of the infarct. For example, ischemic stroke in the anterior cerebral artery will affect the medial postcentral gyrus and may present with sensory deficits in the contralateral leg. A stroke in the middle cerebral artery may show a contralateral sensory loss in the face or upper extremity, depending on the location of the infarct. Cerebral infarctions to these arteries will often have accompanying motor deficits, aphasia, and visual deficits depending on the location of the occlusion.

Pain Modulation

Nociception pathways can be suppressed by ascending and descending modulating pathways. The pain perception circuit in the brain includes the primary somatosensory cortex, insula, anterior cingulate gyrus, prefrontal cortex, and thalamus.

Descending pain modulating pathways appear to originate in the periaqueductal grey and rostroventral medial medulla.