The clinical diagnosis of PBK is made by detailed history and clinical evaluation.

**History**

The patient usually gives a history of gradually progressive vision loss after cataract surgery. The patient may also give a history of prolonged surgical time or a history of intraocular complications. The patient also gives a history of early morning blurring due to overnight fluid accumulation and corneal edema.

**Symptoms**

At presentation, the patient may be asymptomatic. In the early stages, the patient may complain of blurring of vision. In advanced stages, the patient will complain of severe loss of vision. Other symptoms can be pain, redness, excessive photophobia, irritation, foreign body sensation, and halos around light.

**Signs**

A meticulously performed slit-lamp examination may reveal findings in each layer of the cornea. In the epithelium, there can be an epithelial defect, epithelial edema, microcysts, and bullae. The subepithelial layer may show scarring or haze formation, the stromal layer shows stromal edema, scarring, and haze, the Descemet membrane shows folds and scarring, and the endothelium reveals edema and decompensation.

Other signs to look for are the type of surgical incision (superior scleral incision for SICS and superior or temporal clear corneal for phacoemulsification), corneal neovascularization, shallow anterior chamber, iris chaffing, atrophic patches, iridodialysis, peripheral anterior synechia or posterior synechia, peripheral iridectomy pupil irregularity, pupil peaking, posterior capsular rupture, zonular dialysis, the position of IOL whether anterior, iris fixated, iris-claw, sulcus or posterior chamber IOL, optic capture and any vitreous prolapse in the anterior chamber, vitreous touch syndrome or vitreous wick syndrome. The other eye should also be examined for guttae and to rule out Fuch’s endothelial, congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy, posterior polymorphous endothelial dystrophy, or any other endothelial pathology. The guttae appear as a golden brown confluent excrescence of Descemet membrane and give endothelium a beaten bronze appearance.