Cystoscopy is necessary prior to any ureteroscopy to better understand the patient's individual anatomy, visualize the bladder and ureteric orifice, perform retrograde pyelography, and place the initial guidewire.

If having trouble negotiating the ureteral orifice, use an angled tip, stiff hydrophilic guidewire through an open-ended catheter (which helps stabilize the wire).  Place the cystoscope tip as close as possible to the ureteral orifice to avoid bowing of the guidewire.  A torque vise attached to the distal end of the wire can help control the guidewire while gently twisting and advancing.  An Albarran bridge can help cannulate an awkwardly oriented ureteral orifice. Sometimes, changing the orientation of the cystoscope by 90-180 degrees will assist the entry and passage of the guidewire. A retrograde pyelogram using a cone tip ureteral catheter can help visualize the distal ureter where entry through the ureteral orifice is difficult. If all the above fails, try positioning a semi-rigid ureteroscope directly at the ureteral orifice; then try passing the guidewire through the scope. A retrograde pyelogram can also be performed in the same manner.

A small volume, typically around 3 cc's, of diluted fluoroscopic contrast (usually 50/50) is gently injected into the distal ureter via the ureteric catheter for a retrograde ureteropyelogram to visualize the ureteral anatomy and identify the size, shape and exact location of any stones. Next, a safety guidewire is placed through the ureteral catheter into the renal pelvis.

The bladder should be drained prior to inserting the ureteroscope. This helps advance the scope through the orifice without undue intramural ureteral compression.

There are several advantages to using the dual lumen catheter. A retrograde pyelogram can be done through the second channel for better visualization. Just passing the dual lumen catheter can act as a ureteral dilator. Since it has a relatively large lumen, lidocaine jelly can also be injected to help reduce spasm. If the dual lumen catheter has trouble entering or advancing in the ureter, this is an indication of ureteral narrowing. In such cases, it is prudent and advisible to just leave a double J stent for a few weeks to allow for passive ureteral dilation and return a few weeks later to complete the ureteroscopy. At the very least, a smaller caliber ureteral access sheath should be used but the likelihood of intimal ureteral injury and scarring is increased.

The handle of the ureteroscope should be held with the dominant hand while the scope is advanced with the non-dominant hand. The scope may be slowly and easily advanced (with the distal tip kept straight) into the renal pelvis. The use of pressurized irrigation (normal saline is preferred due to the reduced risk of tissue damage if the fluid is absorbed or extravasates) will assist in dilating the more proximal ureter and filling the renal pelvis to allow for better visualization.

Although there are several diagnostic and therapeutic indications for ureteroscopy (as mentioned above), the procedure is most commonly used for the management of ureteric or renal stones. The choice of either semi-rigid or flexible ureteroscopy comes into play at this point as several factors must be weighed: stone location, size, and shape, cost, availability of equipment as well as the individual surgeon's preference and experience.

**Ureteral Access Sheaths**

A ureteral access sheath may be inserted over the "working" guidewire (to the point of the stone location or ureteropelvic junction depending on the patient's clinical presentation) to allow for repeated ureteroscope passage.

It is important not to forcefully advance the ureteroscopic sheath, its dilator, or the dual lumen catheter if there is considerable ureteral resistance. The dilator and sheath should be carefully advanced only to the level at which the ureteroscopy is expected to be performed.  It is very easy to advance the sheath or dilators too far and risk mucosal injury, ureteral disruption, or renal pelvic perforation, so we recommend only advancing an inch at a time with full fluoroscopic guidance when the tip of the sheath or dilator approaches its expected final position. Despite these risks and cautions, we generally recommend the use of two guidewires (one "working" and one a "safety" guidewire) as well as ureteroscopic access sheaths.  Overall, the use of ureteral access sheaths is safe and does not appear to substantially increase the risk of ureteral strictures compared to ureteroscopy without sheaths.

Up to 20% of patients undergoing ureteroscopy will have narrow ureters that require substantial effort to dilate sufficiently to pass a ureteral access sheath.

Using an access sheath is optional as it has both pros and cons. The main benefit is to facilitate repeated introductions of the ureteroscope into the ureter and renal pelvis.  The main disadvantage is that placement is not always easy as it can easily cause ureteral intimal tearing, hematuria and even ureteral perforation.  Further, it is highly advisible to use a double J stent whenever a ureteroscopic sheath is used unless the ureter has been previously stented.

When the decision is made to use a ureteral access sheath, the correct lengths are as follows:

- Use a 35 to 36 cm long ureteral access sheath or shorter for all semi-rigid ureteroscopy (male and female) and for flexible ureteroscopy in female patients.

- In males, use a 45 to 46 cm length ureteral access sheath for flexible ureteroscopy.

**Semi-rigid Ureteroscopy**

Semi-rigid ureteroscopy is typically reserved for the distal ureter which avoids the angulation necessary to advance into the mid and upper ureters.  While semi-rigid scopes can be advanced further, as a general rule a flexible ureteroscope is preferred in these situations.  When using a semi-rigid scope, it is prudent to remember that this is an inflexible, sharp ended instrument that can easily cause considerable damage if not handled properly.  It can be advanced into the bladder by itself, over a guidewire, through a short ureteral access sheath or even a through an empty cystoscope sheath but using sheaths limits the potential proximal advancement of the scope.  Consider advancing the ureteroscope over a guidewire to minimize urethral trauma in complicated urethras. Careful adjustment of the irrigation fluid flow can help advance the scope, but it may also push the stone retrograde and out of reach if not reduced and adjusted appropriately. We prefer to dilate at least the intramural portion of the ureter with the dilator portion of a ureteral access sheath or a dual lumen catheter to help facilitate initial entry of semi-rigid ureteroscopes. Stones removed without an access sheath can be deposited in the urinary bladder to facilitate the re-introduction of the ureteroscope into the ureter without the need to remove it completely from the bladder each time.

When advancing the ureteroscope, the ureteral mucosa should appear to pass the scope. If there is much resistance and the mucosa is not moving, avoid using excessive force.  Instead, gently pull back on the scope and retry advancing.  If there is obvious mucosal damage or injury, it is prudent to remove the ureteroscope and leave a double-pigtail stent.  The ureteroscopy can be rescheduled for a later date (usually around two weeks).

**Flexible****Ureteroscopy**

Once the ureteroscope is inserted into the renal pelvis, the "working" guidewire, which helped to “navigate” the ureter, should be removed. This leaves a second "safety" guidewire in place. The distal end of the "safety" guidewire should be secured in its holder or by clamping it to the drapes in such a way that it will not interfere with completing the ureteroscopy. A small basket (such as a zero-tip basket) or a small laser fiber may then be placed within the “working channel” of the ureteroscope.

If there is only a single channel, then a dual-channel adapter should be used such as a Tuohy-Borst Y adaptor.  This allows the irrigation to be attached to the channel using the offset port leaving the adjustable diaphragmatic port available for the basket, laser fiber, or guidewire.  In general, there was no significant difference in complication rate between the use of a continuous high-pressure irrigation bag vs. a hand-operated pressure syringe, although there were slightly fewer complications with the pressure bag, most likely from the avoidance of overly high irrigation pressures.

In longer cases, the lubricious coating to the lumen of the ureteral access sheath may become worn.  To minimize this, adding a little lubricant to the scope each time it is removed prior to its reinsertion, will help maintain the easy passage of the ureteroscope through the sheath's lumen.

**Lasers**

For stone fragmentation, the laser can be set to initial settings of 5 to 10 Hz frequency with 5 to 9 Watts of power.

Unlike stone fragmentation, laser vaporization is best accomplished without having the laser fiber in direct contact with the target.  It is only necessary to closely approach the stone with the laser fiber to vaporize it.  The main issue with laser stone vaporization is that it takes more time and it may limit the stone material available for chemical analysis. In some cases, there will be a harder, more resistant central stone at the core that may be best managed by fragmentation and stone basket extraction rather than vaporization.

A combination of vaporization and fragmentation techniques may also be used.

Once the stone is visualized, the surgeon can begin to fragment it into basketable sized pieces. The pieces can then be captured with a stone basket and removed along with the ureteroscope through the ureteral access sheath.  If the stone fragment is too large to enter the access sheath, it can be repositioned inside the basket by pushing it back into the dilated proximal ureter or renal pelvis; then carefully opening and closing the basket slowly to allow the stone to reorient in a more favorable, longitudinal position. Repeat lasering of the stone can also be done until it is small enough to fit through the access sheath.

It is possible to laser a stone already in a basket if the stone is engaged but too large to extract.  Open the basket and use a small laser fiber to break up or vaporize the stone until it is small enough to extract. Avoid lasering the wires of the basket.

Another technique involves pulling the stone as much as possible into the proximal end of the ureteral access sheath and then removing the sheath, ureteroscope, basket, and stone all together while keeping traction on the stone basket. This allows the access sheath to act as a dilator or leader and facilitate the stone's removal, but there is a real risk that the stone may still get stuck.  Therefore, it should only be done when the stone is close in size to the diameter of the access sheath.  Also, the ureteral access sheath will have to be replaced after extraction of the stone with the sheath which takes additional time.  This is a relatively risky maneuver which becomes more dangerous the more proximal the stone's location.  It should generally not be done for larger or borderline calculi in the renal pelvis.  In such cases, additional lasering of the stone is preferred. (If this maneuver fails and the stone gets stuck, overly aggressive pulling on the stone, sheath or ureteroscope should be avoided.  Instead, disengage the stone by releasing it from the basket and use laser lithotripsy to reduce its size so it will fit through the access sheath.) There is also the risk of getting a piece of the ureter jammed between the stone and the sheath which would cause a rent, perforation or could even disrupt the ureter completely.  Therefore, this technique is not recommended as a routine practice and only by experienced practitioners.

The dual lumen catheter is the ideal tool to replace the second guidewire (assuming the "safety" guidewire is still in place) which allows the ureteral access sheath to be easily replaced. The ureteral access sheath should never be advanced without the dilator in place and only over a guidewire.  **The inner dilator should never be placed or advanced except over a guide wire due to the very significant risk of a perforation of the ureter or renal pelvis.**All stone fragments removed should be sent for chemical analysis.

Once all the stones have been removed, the ureteroscope and ureteral access sheath may be slowly extracted together, to inspect the ureter for any passed stones as well as for any intimal or mucosal injury.

Lastly, a double-pigtail ureteral stent may be placed over the remaining "safety" guidewire and inspected for good curl both within the renal pelvis and distally in the bladder. This decision is up to the individual surgeon but is strongly recommended for patients with ureteral damage on ureteroscopic inspection and those with an increased risk of bleeding, perforation, urinary tract infections, or significant residual fragments.

It is recommended that the dangler thread NOT be removed until after the stent is in an optimal position as it allows for easy removal if an exchange is desired and stabilizes placement. Stiffer guidewires make placement easier but are also more likely to cause a perforation so they should be placed more carefully. Measuring the ureteral length with an appropriately marked ureteral catheter is a far more reliable way to select a double-pigtail stent length than relying just on patient height alone. Use a stiffer stent if bypassing a stone as it better resists compression and it will often have a tighter curl for the renal pelvis.  Do NOT leave a dangler thread for any stent that is critical.  Placement is optimized by pulling the guidewire back enough to allow the tip of the stent to curl while maintaining traction on the dangler thread and the pusher.  This can be moved into and out of the ureteral orifice slightly to allow the tip of the stent to curl properly.

Once the guidewire has been removed and all aspects of the genitourinary tract have been inspected for any iatrogenic injury, the patient may be safely extubated and transferred to the post-operative care unit. The ureteral stent can be left with or without a dangler thread. If the dangler thread is left on the stent, the stent can be easily removed at the bedside, in the clinic or even by the patient themselves at home. If the thread is removed, flexible cystoscopy will be required to extract the stent with a flexible grasper. Stents are usually removed between 3 to 7 days postoperatively after successful ureteroscopy. After the stent is removed, follow-up ultrasound or an x-ray (KUB) should be performed between 4 and 6 weeks later to rule out any residual fragments or silent hydronephrosis.

American Urological Association Guidelines on stones recommends that all patients who have had ureteroscopic stone surgery should be informed about the potential benefits and availability of 24-hour urine testing and prophylactic medical therapy for nephrolithiasis.

Bilateral ureteroscopic procedures can be done with good success rates and only slightly higher complication rates.  Individual patient circumstances should be considered as well as the extra anesthesia time necessary.

**"Tricks of the Trade"**

- Some experts recommend doing a semi-rigid ureteroscopy immediately prior to all flexible ureteroscopies for distal ureteral inspection and dilation.  It will also help identify any stones that have unepectantly relocated to the distal ureter.

- Every ureteroscopy is different and unique.  Do not assume that any ureteroscopy will be "routine" as this can lead to unintended consequences.

- Have a wide variety of stents, guidewires, connectors, clamps, baskets, and scopes available.

- It is recommended to have a "safety" guidewire in place in the renal pelvis for access in case of unexpected difficulty.  Secure it carefully so it isn't accidentally lost, pulled or removed.

- Be aware of the skills and experience of your assistants.  It can be very disconcerting when your assistant accidentally removes your safety wire, cuts the dangler or opens instead of closing the basket. Review procedures with your assistants before starting the surgery.

- Stiffer guidewires can help make ureteral access sheath placement and double-pigtail stent advancement easier.  They are also less likely to buckle but may increase the risk of perforation so place them with extra care.

- The dual lumen catheter is an extremely important accessory.  It can be used as a ureteral dilator, a stone pusher, to inject diluted contrast for retrogrades, to place a second guide wire or to replace a guide wire.

- If one guidewire type cannot bypass a stricture, impacted stone, or other blockages, try a different type of guidewire. Hydrophillic wires generally work best for this.

- When doing retrograde pyelograms, mixing diluted contrast with lidocaine jelly or plain lubricant will increase its viscosity while keeping its radio-opacity and help keep the contrast in the renal pelvis longer, if that is desired.  Stir the two together slowly and carefully to avoid air bubbles.

- If ureteral strictures are found, it is better to leave a double-pigtail stent for a few weeks rather than use mechanical or balloon ureteral dilators.

- To minimize radiation exposure, the use of static, pulsed X-ray pictures is recommended instead of live, continuous exposures.  Use of the "Last image hold" feature is also recommended.

- Always use the minimum amount of radiation exposure necessary.

- Always take a scout film before injecting any contrast. (Stones move and it serves as a good reference.)

- Remember to flush the ureteral catheters to eliminate air bubbles.

- Never do "blind basketing".

- It is recommended that the dangler thread on double-pigtail stents not be cut or removed until the stent is in its final position.  Once the thread is cut, further positional adjustment as well as replacement is much more difficult.

- Never vigorously pull, push or twist any instrument in the ureter or renal pelvis.  It may not be possible to repair the damage later.

- Avoid aspiration through the ureteroscope as it will cause more bleeding.

- If it becomes difficult to see clearly due to bleeding, use the high pressure irrigation flow and just be patient.

- If the stone size has been misjudged when basketing, do not hesitate to use the laser to fragment or vaporize it.

- A laser should always be available when doing ureteroscopy for urinary stones.

- Don't waste time basketing very tiny stones.  Anything smaller than the shaft of the basket or guidewire can probably be left behind.  However, in the case of infectious stones, try to basket and remove everything you can.

- If contrast bypasses an obstructing stone, it should be possible to pass a guidewire beyond it.

- Very distal stones may not require initial retrograde pyelography that can inadvertently push stones further proximal.

- Impacted stones can sometimes be gently nudged proximally by a catheter or the tip of the ureteroscope, but this must be done carefully.  If unsuccessful, limited laser lithotripsy can be done but only sufficiently to place a guidewire.

- Be particularly careful when advancing the ureteral access sheath as it can easily damage the ureter or renal pelvis.  It can easily progress more proximal further than expected unless its position is carefully monitored.  Use fluoroscopy for optimal positioning,  never advance the ureteral access sheath without the dilator inserted and only with a guide wire in place.

- Be familiar with all the controls on the ureteroscope and use them. Most flexible ureteroscopes will flex the tip upwards and down when the calices and stones are generally left or right. Reusable scopes typically have an adjustment so the shaft can be rotated 90 degrees right or left to facilitate caliceal examination and entry.  Disposable ureteroscopes usually lack this adjustment and will need to be rotated more by hand to the left or right as needed which can be somewhat awkward.

- High-pressure irrigation is one of your most important and useful tools. High flow rates will promote visualization, ureteroscope advancement and ureteral dilation, but may also push the stone proximally.  High pressure can also cause a calyceal rupture and promote bacteremia. In the renal pelvis, too much flow can cause the stone to jump around and move from one calyx to another. Therefore, in the kidney, use the minimal amount of irrigation flow necessary for visualization.  You can also briefly use higher irrigation flow rates to jiggle a stone around so it can be captured by the stone basket.

- Lasering of stones creates a dust cloud.  To maintain visibility, use the irrigation at the lowest flow rate sufficient to maintain vision.

- Most stone baskets will retract (move closer to the ureteroscope) when being closed.  To avoid this, advance the stone basket at the same rate as the assistant is closing it.  This will close the basket around the stone without retracting the basket.

- No matter how bad the ureter looks after ureteroscopy, it will almost certainly heal just by leaving a double-pigtail stent and waiting sufficient time; usually 4-6 weeks.  A follow-up ultrasound is recommended in such cases to identify "silent" hydronephrosis.

- Always discuss the availability of 24-hour urine testing for stone prophylaxis with the patient and document this in the medical record.

- Keep track of all double-pigtail stented patients as the urologist is responsible for their removal even if the patient does not return for their post-operative visit.

Surgeons are reminded of the immortal words attributed to famed endourologist, Dr. Arthur Smith, who said: "When the going gets tough, the tough leave a double-J stent and go home!" Nothing is as bad as having to deal with a serious, avoidable complication such as a complete ureteral avulsion from the renal pelvis. Experienced surgeons will not hesitate to leave a double-pigtail stent and return another day to finish a ureteroscopy in which they encounter difficulty with ureteral narrowing, visualization, infection, bleeding, or other significant difficulties. This is good advice for all who perform ureteroscopy.