The musculoskeletal structures found in the popliteal fossa form its boundaries. The fossa has the shape of a rhombus or diamond and is made up of the following musculoskeletal structures.

- **Superomedial:**The semimembranosus and semitendinosus muscles form the superomedial aspect of the fossa. The semimembranosus is the most medial of the hamstring muscles and functions to extend the hip and flex the knee as well as assist in medial rotation of the knee. The semitendinosus muscle is superficial to the semimembranosus and is the middle of the three hamstring muscles. Not surprisingly, it gets its name because of the long tendinous nature of its structure and assists in the same mechanism as the semimembranosus muscle.

- **Superolateral:**The biceps femoris forms the superolateral portion of the popliteal fossa and has two functioning heads. The long head is part of the hamstring muscles while the short head is not included in this description. Both structures participate in knee flexion, while the long head additionally assists in hip extension.

- **Inferomedial:**The medial head of the gastrocnemius forms the inferomedial border of the fossa. It assists the lower leg in plantarflexion at the ankle and knee flexion when contracted.  Along with the lateral head of the gastrocnemius and soleus, it forms the calf muscle.

- **Inferolateral:**The lateral head of the gastrocnemius and the plantaris muscle forms the inferolateral border of the popliteal fossa. Both contribute to plantarflexion of the ankle. The lateral gastrocnemius head also contributes to knee flexion. The plantaris muscle is notably the longest tendon in the body and is not found in every human being.