A broad range of injury severity exists in facial nerve trauma due to the various mechanisms by which injuries may be produced. Temporal bone fractures tend to cause crush injuries that evolve over the course of hours to days, and sometimes even weeks, although they certainly can, in rare cases, result in transection of the nerve and immediate hemifacial paralysis.

The Seddon scale is simpler, and focused primarily on implications for management, while the Sunderland scale characterizes the extent of injury with respect to the microanatomy of the nerve involved. At its most basic, the functional unit of a motor nerve is the axon, which is the long filament that connects the cell body, located in the pons, to the motor end plate at the neuromuscular junction. The motor axons of the facial nerve, of which there are approximately 6,000, are insulated in myelin produced by Schwann cells.

**Seddon Classification**

Neurapraxia: a localized conduction block with focal demyelination and no Wallerian degeneration - complete recovery is expected.

Axonotmesis: a variable amount of axonal injury with Wallerian degeneration and an intact epineurium - synkinesis may occur in more severe cases.

Neurotmesis: complete nerve transection with Wallerian degeneration - flaccidity will persist unless the nerve is repaired.

**Sunderland Classification**

- Class I: equivalent to Seddon's neurapraxia - complete recovery is expected,

- Class II: mild axonotmesis in which the endoneurium remains intact, but Wallerian degeneration occurs - complete recovery is expected.

- Class III: moderate axonotmesis in which the endoneurium is disrupted and Wallerian degeneration occurs, but the perineurium remains intact - mild to moderate synkinesis is expected.

- Class IV: severe axonotmesis in which the endoneurium and perineurium are disrupted, and Wallerian degeneration occurs, but the epineurium remains intact - severe synkinesis is expected.

- Class V: equivalent to Seddon neurotmesis - flaccidity will persist unless the nerve is repaired.

To understand either of these classification systems, it is critical also to be familiar with the concept of Wallerian degeneration. Wallerian degeneration is the process by which axons and Schwann cells disintegrate and are removed in order to make room for regeneration of a new axon.

In cases of nerve transection, the gold standard treatment is primary repair of the epineurium, which effectively converts a Sunderland class V injury into a class IV injury. Regardless, the injury remains severe, and any facial nerve injury of Sunderland class III or higher will likely result in synkinesis due to the disruption of internal neural architecture. In Sunderland class I and II injuries, the epineurium - the membrane that surrounds the myelin covering the axon - is preserved; with this membrane intact, the affected axons will regrow back to their original motor endplates, and complete recovery should occur. Sunderland class III-V injuries involve progressively greater degrees of disruption of the internal neural architecture, with correspondingly greater potential for misdirection of regenerating axons and resulting aberrant reinnervation. This aberrant reinnervation may take the form of involuntary movements accompanying voluntary movements and/or greater resting tension in the affected muscles; these symptoms are termed "synkinesis." Unfortunately, there is no way to correlate a clinical or laboratory examination with the Sunderland classification, making precise prognostication of functional recovery difficult. Electroneuronography, which is a type of evoked electromyography, can be used to tell the difference between neurapraxia and anything more severe, but cannot provide more anatomical detail than that.

Beyond the issue of the severity of the nerve injury itself, there remains the question of what risk factors and mechanisms of injury are likely to produce facial nerve trauma. For temporal bone fractures, the amount of force and the vector with which it is applied are the primary determinants of the type of injury sustained and whether or not facial paralysis will result. The Ulrich classification of temporal bone fractures was suggested in 1926 and describes the orientation of the fracture relative to the petrous ridge of the temporal bone.

Transverse fractures (approximately 20%) run perpendicular to the long axis of the petrous ridge and often straight through the labyrinthine capsule. They are often caused by force-directed anteroposteriorly, such as a motor vehicle accident. These fractures tend to originate near the jugular foramen or foramen magnum and extend into the middle cranial fossa. Consequently, these fractures commonly result in sensorineural hearing loss, which may result from transection of the cochlear nerve, damage to the labyrinthine structures, or stapes footplate injury. They are associated with perilymphatic fistula (with nystagmus away from the fractured side) and facial palsy in 50% of cases.

In this scheme, temporal bone fractures are categorized based on whether or not they spare or disrupt the bone of the otic capsule. Otic capsule-sparing fractures (approximately 95%) tend to result from laterally-directed blows to the skull and are only associated with facial paralysis in about 6% of cases. Otic capsule-disrupting fractures only account for 5% of temporal bone fractures; however, up to half of these injuries will result in facial paralysis.

In the case of extratemporal facial nerve trauma, the edematous nerve is unlikely to become compressed and can therefore maintain its perfusion. With extratemporal injuries, even delayed paralysis will likely present within a matter of several hours to a few days. Within the temporal bone, however, even comparatively minor facial nerve insults can result in edema that progresses very slowly over the course of days to weeks before reaching a point at which perfusion is compromised, and nerve function is impaired.

From the cerebellopontine angle, where the facial nerve exits the pons, to the stylomastoid foramen, where it exits the skull, the facial nerve takes a wandering course through the temporal bone. It enters the bone through the internal auditory meatus, along with the cochlear and vestibular nerves, occupying the anterosuperior position within the internal auditory canal, where it travels for 8 to 10 mm before separating from the other nerves and arriving at the labyrinthine segment. Here, it enters the Fallopian canal and makes its first turn, or "genu," at the geniculate ganglion, where the greater superficial petrosal nerve is given off to provide parasympathetic innervation to the lacrimal gland and the mucous glands of the nose and palate. In the ~4 mm long labyrinthine segment, the overall diameter of the bony canal narrows to approximately 0.7 mm, its narrowest portion, and therefore the area most likely to be affected in temporal bone fractures.

The tympanic or "horizontal" segment follows, roughly 9 to 10 mm in length, where the facial nerve courses superior to the stapes footplate within the middle ear and may occasionally be incompletely covered by bone, rendering it vulnerable to otological pathologies, such as infection or barotrauma. Finally, the nerve turns again at its second genu to travel inferiorly through the mastoid cavity, where it gives off the chorda tympani nerve to provide taste sensation to the anterior two-thirds of the tongue; this portion is known as the mastoid or "vertical" segment, and it is 11 to 12 mm long, ending where the nerve passes through the stylomastoid foramen.

After exiting the skull, the main trunk of the facial nerve turns anteriorly to enter the parotid gland, where it divides into the main extratemporal branches at the "pes anserinus," so named because the separation of branches resembles the foot of a goose. These branches serve as the division between the superficial and deep lobes of the parotid gland. From superior to inferior, the branches are the frontal (which controls the muscles of the forehead and upper eyelid), the zygomatic (which controls the muscles of the eyelids and midface), the buccal (which controls the muscles of the midface and mouth), the marginal mandibular (which controls the depressors of the lower lip), and the cervical (which controls the platysma and some depressors of the lower lip as well). Branching patterns and control of specific muscles vary somewhat between individuals, but the facial nerve branches run deep to the superficial musculoaponeurotic system of the face and the temporoparietal fascia of the scalp as well as deep to all the mimetic muscles other than the mentalis, buccinator, and levator anguli oris. Additionally, the facial nerve innervates the auricular muscles, the stapedius muscle, the stylohyoid muscle, and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle.

As mentioned above, in some patients, the facial nerve is anatomically susceptible to barotrauma, which is a comparatively uncommon occurrence. Case reports have been published detailing the stories of a handful of patients who have suffered acute facial paralysis due to SCUBA diving or traveling at high altitudes in an airplane or a car driving through a mountain pass.