BMI is calculated by weight (kg)/height (m^2). Another way to calculate BMI is weight (lbs)/height (in^2) x 703. It should be noted that BMI is a poor indicator of obesity. A flexible tape measures the Waist Circumference (WC) around the iliac crests in a horizontal plane. WC varies with ethnic background. A high WC for BMI value of 25 TO 35 indicates an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus type II.

Weight is classified based on BMI as underweight, normal, overweight, obesity class I, obesity class II, and obesity class III. The classes of obesity with their corresponding BMI values are enlisted in Table 1.

Obesity Class

BMI (kg/m^2)

Underweight

< 18.5

Normal

18.5-24.9

Overweight

25-29.9

Obesity Class I

30-34.9

Obesity Class II

35-39.9

Obesity Class III

>40

Table 1: Obesity classes and their corresponding BMI values

The disease risks in adults increase with increasing waist circumference and the obesity class. For instance, men with WC > 102 cm (40 in) and women with WC > 88 cm (35 in) who are overweight have a high risk to develop the obesity-associated disease, compared to an extremely high risk in adults who fall under the obesity class III.

**Limitations of BMI**

There are some limitations to the use of BMI for the diagnosis of obesity. Firstly, an anthropometric value co-relates height and weight and does not directly estimate adipose tissue mass. Lean body mass and water contribute to body weight, so BMI has poor approximation for individual-specific fat mass. BMI overestimates adipose mass in edematous patients and athletes with increased muscle mass and underestimates adiposity in old age patients with sarcopenia. Therefore, BMI alone cannot accurately identify excess adiposity and diagnose overweight or obese patients in all cases.

Due to these reasons, BMI is only used as a screening tool. BMI values are clinically evaluated based on history and physical examination to determine excess adipose tissue mass for an actual diagnosis. Patients should be evaluated for certain factors that can affect the relationship between BMI and adiposity. The quantification of adipose fat mass and body composition is useful in diagnosing and responding to therapy in some patients and is done through clinically available tools such as plethysmography techniques (bioelectric impedance, air displacement) or dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). A poor reflection of the distribution of body fat is the second limitation of BMI. There is a non-uniform distribution of fat depots all around the body, indicating the difference in disease risk.

The visceral adipose tissue that surrounds vital organs contributes significantly to the pathophysiology of cardiometabolic disease. Similarly, abnormal fat accumulation in muscle and hepatocytes cause a worsening of insulin resistance and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, respectively. Cardiometabolic disease is the underlying pathophysiological process in both metabolic and vascular diseases. The most crucial initial event is insulin resistance which progresses to metabolic syndrome or pre-diabetes, and finally to diabetes mellitus type 2 or cardiovascular disease, depending upon patient characteristics. Hence, the distribution of fat and overall adipose tissue mass has a role in disease outcomes in patients with obesity. It signifies the importance of waist circumference in the measurement of abdominal fat accumulation.

Finally, BMI does not estimate the degree to which excess adipose tissue adversely affects the health of individual patients in terms of morbidity and mortality. The presence and severity of complications show how the degree of excess adiposity affects individual patients' health. In contrast, if we want to improve patients' health with obesity, the goal of therapy in obesity is to halt and treat complications resulting from obesity. This approach is followed by the complications-centric approach of obesity management exercised by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE). AACE evidence-based guidelines stress weight loss with the primary objective of preventing and treating complications to improve health compared to the single focus of degree of weight loss alone. Table 2 outlines the limitations of BMI in diagnosing and evaluating obesity.

Table 2. Limitations of BMI in diagnosis and evaluation of obesity

1. BMI caters for height and weight but does not measure adiposity directly. BMI requires individual interpretation with attention to the following characteristics

- Age

- Gender

- Muscularity

- Volume status – edema, dehydration, ascites

- Sarcopenia

- Large tumors (leiomyosarcoma uterus)

- Pregnancy

- Lipodystrophy

- Muscle mass loss (denervation, myopathy)

2. BMI does not estimate the location or distribution of fat

- Intracellularly in hepatic and muscle tissue

- Extracellularly within tissues (i.ei 'marbling')

- Around organs (mesenteric, pericardial, perinephric)

- Subcutaneously vs. intra-abdominally

- Adipose tissue depots (omentum, gluteal)

- Brown vs. white fat

3. BMI does not estimate the extent to which excess adiposity affects the health of patients that depends upon the risk, presence, and severity of complications resulting from obesity