Patients with atrial tachycardia can be asymptomatic or symptomatic. If asymptomatic, the patient’s arrhythmia will be found incidentally on an EKG or any rhythm recorder. Patients who present symptomatically may complain of dizziness, palpitations, dyspnea, lightheadedness or chest pain. The patient’s atrial tachycardia could be a manifestation of an underlying condition. Patients must be worked up for underlying pathologies. For example, multifocal atrial tachycardia is most commonly elicited by an underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (60%). The hypoxemia and increased bronchodilator use, which in turn causes increased catecholamine release, is thought to initiate multifocal atrial tachycardia.

When encountering a patient with atrial tachycardia, it is essential to get a thorough medical history. It is vital to ask about any cardiac surgery or procedures. Make a note of any family history of cardiac conditions or sudden death. Also, review the patient’s current medications as well any over the counter supplementation. Finally, ask about any illicit drug abuse, alcohol abuse or environmental or workplace exposures.

A thorough physical exam is required to work up and rule out other possible triggering conditions. Accurate vitals are essential to determine if the patient is hemodynamically stable. Cardiac reviews such as an EKG and an echocardiogram are crucial in identifying the source of the arrhythmia and establishing the sites of structural heart defects precipitating the malady.