**Mechanism**

**Carpal Instability Dissociative (CID)**

Instability between bones inside a single carpal row is termed as CID. It may involve either the proximal or distal carpal rows, with the former being more common. It is classified into two types.

- Scapholunate (SL):

- Most common CID instability pattern
- The scapholunate ligamentous complex and dorsal intercarpal ligaments stabilize this joint from distraction, torsion, and translation.
- Wrist extension, ulnar deviation, and carpal supination are the most common mechanisms of injury.
- Scapholunate dissociation leads to the scaphoid flexing palmarly and the lunate flexing dorsally.
- The main causes of SL instability are SL dissociation which may be an isolated or combined ligamentous injury or a displaced scaphoid fracture.
- Manifested radiologically as dorsal intercalated segment instability (DISI)

- Luno-triquetral (LT):

- Lunotriquetral ligament, radio-lunate ligaments (both volarly and dorsally), and dorsal intercarpal ligaments play a key role in this joint stability.
- However, LT ligament disruption is the main reason for this instability.
- The radiological manifestation is as a Volar intercalated segment instability (VISI) pattern.
- Wrist hyperextension or extension, as well as radial deviation, may cause LT ligament injury.

**Carpal Instability Nondissociative (CIND)**

CIND does not have a specific distinction between proximal and distal carpal rows. Instead, it involves the whole carpal row, expressed at either the radiocarpal joint, the mid-carpal joint, or both. The pattern and anatomy are not well understood, with no specific classification or treatment.

It consists of two types:

- CIND-VISI

- The three bones of the proximal carpal row rotate from flexion to extension when a typical wrist deviates from a radial-deviated to ulnar-deviated posture.
- This motion is maintained by extrinsic ligaments (triquetral-hamate-capitate ligament, dorsal radio-triquetral, and the anterolateral scaphotrapezial ligament) and intrinsic ligaments (ulno-lunate and lunotriquetral).
- Flexor carpi ulnaris and extensor carpi ulnaris play their role in moving the proximal row from flexion to extension.
- Palmar CIND develops when these underlying structures fail due to rupture, dispersion, and increased elasticity.
- The entire proximal row remains in flexion throughout the movement until the triquetral-hamate joint engages and the proximal row extends with a clunk.

- CIND-DISI

- Attenuation of the Dorsal intercarpal ligament, long radio-lunate, radioscaphocapitate ligament, and Scapholunate ligament (Intrinsic) results in dorsal subluxation of the capitate.
- The dorsal subluxation occurs with the Ulnar deviation of the wrist.

**Carpal Instability Complex (CIC)**

There are combined patterns of injury between CID and CIND. There is damage or laxity to both volar and dorsal ligaments. The proximal row clunks into extension with ulnar deviation just like VISI-CIND. Furthermore, extremes of ulnar variance induce dorsal capitate subluxation, which is similar to dorsal CIND.

**Adaptive Carpus Instability**

The carpal ligaments are not usually broken or attenuated, but the dorsal tilt of the malunited distal radius and compensatory dinner fork extension of the proximal row reduce the distances between their origins and insertions. Therefore, Soft ligaments are unable to prevent capitate dorsal translation and distal carpal row.

**Perilunate Dislocation**

Peri-lunate dislocations are caused by damage to the surrounding balancing structures, such as fractures and articulation or ligament disturbances.

- Intrinsic: scapholunate and lunotriquetral ligaments

- Extrinsic ligaments (palmar): e.g., radio-lunotriquetral, radio-scapholunate, and ulna-lunate are the main stabilizing structures.

The lunate retains its articulated position with the distal radius while the surrounding carpal bones dislocate dorsally. Alternatively, the lunate can dislocate in the volar direction into what is known as the Poirier room, though this is uncommon.

**Distal Radial-ulnar Joint (DRUJ) Instability**

The volar/dorsal radioulnar ligaments and triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) provide stability to the distal radioulnar joint. Painful pronation and supination following wrist trauma along with positive piano sign indicate distal radio-ulnar joint instability.