**Abducens Nucleus and Nerves**

The abducens nucleus comprises motor neurons and interneurons. Projecting from the nucleus, the motor axons of CN VI travel through the tegmental and basal areas of the pons and exit the brainstem at the pontine-medullary junction. The axons then proceed rostrally and pass through the cavernous sinus located around the sella turcica, which holds the pituitary gland. From the cavernous sinus, the abducens nerve fibers project through the superior orbital fissure and supply the lateral rectus muscle in the ipsilateral eye. The lateral rectus muscle allows the eye to turn outward toward the ear (abduction).

Interneurons in the abducens nucleus cross and project rostrally through the contralateral medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) and then synapse with the oculomotor nucleus (CN III) in the midbrain. The oculomotor nerve fibers innervate the medial rectus muscle and allow the eye to turn inward toward the nose (adduction). The association of CN VI and III coordinates horizontal eye movements. For example, the right abducens motor nerve innervates the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle to abduct the right eye, while its interneuron travels through the contralateral MLF to control the adduction of the left medial rectus muscle. The synchronized contraction of the contralateral medial rectus and ipsilateral lateral rectus muscles allows both eyes to look to the right. Based on the location of a lesion along the pathway, different eye movement disorders can be observed, including lateral gaze palsy and one-and-a-half syndrome.

**Facial Nucleus and Nerves**

The facial nerve (CN VII) comprises two components - motor and intermediate (also commonly known as nervus intermedius) nerves. The motor root carries somatic motor fibers to the muscles of facial expression, stapedius, posterior belly of digastric, and stylohyoid. The intermediate nerve, which is not part of the facial colliculus, carries taste, parasympathetic, and somatic sensory fibers. Both motor and intermediate axons exit the brainstem and enter the inner ear through the internal acoustic meatus along with the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). The two constituents of CN VII then sharply turn and form a bend known as the geniculate ganglion in the cranial cavity.

**Intermediate Nerve**

The intermediate facial nerve fibers do not loop around the abducens nucleus but travel through the internal acoustic meatus and meet the facial motor nerve at the geniculate ganglion. The intermediate nerve is composed of parasympathetic and sensory nerves.

Parasympathetic fibers:

The superior salivatory nucleus, which is in the pons, sends preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to the submandibular or pterygopalatine ganglion. After projecting from the superior salivatory nucleus, some parasympathetic fibers reach the geniculate ganglion and proceed anteriorly as the greater petrosal nerve. The greater petrosal nerve joins the sympathetic called the deep petrosal nerve, and together they create the nerve of the pterygoid canal, which is also known as the vidian nerve. In the pterygopalatine fossa, only the parasympathetic nerve of the vidian nerve synapses with the pterygopalatine ganglion. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers proceed from the ganglion and innervate the lacrimal glands and mucous glands of the oral and nasal cavities.

The rest of the preganglionic parasympathetic fibers arising from the superior salivatory nucleus travel as part of the chorda tympani nerve. The chorda tympani nerve joins the lingual nerve of the trigeminal nerve (CN V) and continues to travel until it synapses with the submandibular ganglion. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers innervate the submandibular and sublingual salivary glands. Although the lingual nerve travels with the chorda tympani, it does not synapse with the submandibular ganglion. It is responsible for carrying general sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue.

Sensory fibers:

The rostral nucleus of the solitary tract, which resides in the medulla, receives taste sensory fibers from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The chorda tympani, which also delivers preganglionic parasympathetic fibers, is responsible for carrying taste (special sensation) from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue.

The auricular branches of CN VII innervate the external ear and tympanic membrane and carry general somatic sensation to the spinal nucleus of CN V located in the medulla. The general somatic afferent fibers from the external ear and tympanic membrane pass through the stylomastoid foramen.

**Motor Nerve**

The motor nerve fibers are responsible for forming the facial colliculus by projecting from the facial nucleus and looping around the abducens nucleus. After forming the geniculate ganglion in the cranial cavity, the nerve to the stapedius muscle arises from the motor nerve and travels in the middle ear to innervate the stapedius muscle. The rest of the motor branches exits the skull through the stylomastoid foramen. The nerve to the posterior belly of digastric and stylohyoid muscles arises before the facial nerve projects to the parotid gland. The temporal, zygomatic, buccal, mandibular, and cervical divisions are the nerves to the five major muscles of the facial expression. Contracting these muscles are essential for expressing a variety of emotions. Damage to the facial nerve after it passes through the stylomastoid foramen results in a lower motor neuron lesion affecting the ipsilateral side of the face.