The diagnostic tests for detection of viable myocardial tissue are of prime importance as they can assess myocardial viability and contractile reserve and therefore hold potential for complete or partial reversibility of LV contractility and myocardial function if revascularization can be achieved in time. In such cases, they can have a positive outcome in terms of long-term patient survival.

These tests should be sensitive, specific for myocardial tissue, widely available and preferably non-invasive.

- Echocardiography: End-diastolic wall thickness = 0.6 cm is considered incompatible with functional recovery.

- Dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE): Transthoracic 2D Echo following inotropic stimulation by low-dose dobutamine is used to test, non-invasively, the contractile reserve of the dysfunctional myocardium.

- Tissue Doppler echocardiography (TDE): This technique uses strain rate imaging (SRI) to obtain an estimate of LV viability, and when used in combination with DSE, the sensitivity greatly increases.

- Doppler assessment of mitral inflow pattern: Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of LV diastolic function indicates that the degree of myocardial viability may correspond proportionally with the early diastolic deceleration time (DT). A DT > 150 milliseconds is considered a good prognostic factor for revascularization.

- Stress redistribution single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) or FDG-PET is also an option, though dobutamine echocardiography has a slightly better predictive value.

- Cardiac MRI: Gadolinium is the contrast agent, and absence of enhancement suggests viable myocardium that would respond favorably to revascularization.

- Myocardial contrast echocardiography (MCE): Stunned myocardium appears to have a homogenous contrast, showing normal blood flow with intact microcirculation. MCE in addition to providing information about LV contractility can also identify dysfunctional but perfused myocardium.

- Endocardial electromechanical mapping is another new modality used for diagnosis of stunned myocardium by assessing the amplitude of endocardial electrical signals. This data is correlated with wall motion studies to assess areas of reversible ischemia.