Treatment is highly dependent on stage. Patients with limited-stage SCLC are candidates for curative-intent radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Patients with extensive-stage disease are treated with chemotherapy with radiation (RT) reserved for select candidates and palliation.

**Limited Stage**

While the majority of patients present with locally advanced disease, a small minority may present with T1-2N0 disease. These patients may be candidates for lobectomy with mediastinal sampling or dissection. If surgery demonstrates mediastinal nodal involvement, adjuvant chemoradiation is indicated. If they are not surgical candidates, stereotactic ablative body therapy (SABR) may be employed. Adjuvant cisplatin-based systemic therapy typically follows both local approaches.

The remainder of limited stage patients is treated with concurrent chemotherapy and radiation. Cisplatin and etoposide is the current standard of care. The addition of radiation to chemotherapy significantly increases local control and overall survival. The early incorporation of RT with CT has been shown to further increase overall survival compared to late incorporation. Prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) is indicated for patients with a complete or partial response to therapy. PCI significantly increases overall survival and decreases the incidence of brain metastases.

**Extensive Stage**

The mainstay of therapy for patients with the extensive stage is systemic chemotherapy. Patients who have a complete or partial response to therapy can be evaluated for consolidative thoracic RT. This therapy has been associated with an increase in overall survival and is typically well tolerated. PCI is also indicated for ES and has been associated with an increase in survival with a decrease in brain metastases incidence. There is currently no role for the addition of consolidation radiation to limited volume metastatic sites.

Novel agents for SCLC are currently under investigation and include immunotherapies and targeted therapies previously approved for NSCLC and other malignancies. Immunotherapies include immune checkpoint inhibitors Nivolumab (PD-1 inhibitor antibody), Pembrolizumab (anti-PD1 antibody), Ipilimumab (CTLA-4 inhibitor antibody). Targeted therapies in clinical trials include Rovalpituzumab tesirine (Delta-like protein three antibody-drug conjugate).