Many classification systems have been developed to stage ulcerations for more efficient evaluation and treatment. The two leading classifications are the Wagner and Meggitt and the University of Texas ulcer classification systems.

In the Wagner and Meggitt classification, grade 0 has intact skin with a hyperkeratotic lesion or bony deformity. Grade 1 has a superficial necrotic or viable base ulcer with granulation tissue. Grade 2 extends to deeper structures like the bone, ligament, tendon, or deep fascia with no osteomyelitis or abscess. Grade 3 has osteomyelitis or deep abscess. Grade 4 has gangrenous forefoot changes, and grade 5 indicates a complete foot involvement with no healing.

The University of Texas classification includes four grades (0-3) and four stages (A-D). Grade 0 stage A is a pre- or post-ulcerative lesion completely epithelialized (non-ischemic, non-infected), stage B indicates infection, stage C indicates ischemia, and stage D indicates both. Grade 1 stage A is a superficial wound without tendon, capsule, or bone involvement (non-ischemic, non-infected), stage B indicates infection, stage C indicates ischemia, and stage D indicates both. Grade 2 is a capsule- or tendon-penetrating wound (non-ischemic, non-infected); stage B indicates infection, stage C indicates ischemia, and stage D indicates both. Grade 3 is a bone- or joint-penetrating wound (non-ischemic, non-infected), stage B indicates infection, stage C indicates ischemia, and stage D indicates both.