Historically, malnourishment was considered the most pressing medical problem in society. Fortunately, social programs, charitable organizations, improved technology, and increased availability of pre-packaged foods in developed societies have made nutrition readily accessible. Notwithstanding, the relative improvement of availability has ushered in a fundamental shift in population health, replacing caloric deficit with caloric excess.

We now see increased body mass index (BMI), expanding waistlines, and an increasing prevalence of comorbid chronic medical conditions led by obesity. Obesity is considered a multifactorial, progressive, and chronic systemic medical problem which can often be complex and relatively difficult to treat.

From a clinical perspective, patients are aware of their need to lose weight and have likely been told by previous healthcare providers to "take charge" of their weight loss. Unfortunately, there have been little-to-no non-surgical strategies to ensure successful and sustainable weight loss until recently. Emerging research has reinforced that the simplest way to ensure successful weight loss over the long term is a graded caloric restriction strategy and physical exercise deployed over several months using monitored compliance. Fundamentally, humans are "creatures of habit." Breaking the reward-feedback loop associated with eating is paramount to controlling dietary habits.

Achieving this control requires understanding the complex behavioral elements of obesity. One must first begin at the molecular level by discussing how food becomes storable energy and how storable energy becomes fat.

**Molecular and Physiological Processes Associated With Fat Storage and Energy Utilization**

Food consumption must undergo a rigorous and elaborate digestion process to break down into nutrients used for essential bodily functions. At its core, the fundamental building blocks for all cells in our body rely on fats, carbohydrates, and proteins, which we collectively call macronutrients (macros).

Simplistically put, digestion exists in 3-phases: the cephalic phase, the gastric phase, and the intestinal phase. These phases have complex stimulatory/activating and inhibitory hormones that work together to achieve proper food degradation.

In the cephalic phase, sight, smell, and the mere thought of food activate an innate biological reflex. The oral cavity is the location for the mechanical and early enzymatic breakdown of food. The cephalic phase activates salivary glands to produce saliva, which contains lingual lipase and amylase, beginning the process of digestion. This reflex response is triggered by the cerebral cortex acting on the hypothalamus and medulla oblongata, sending signals to the vagus nerve to stimulate gastric juices. This action of pre-signaling will activate and prime the gastrointestinal tract in preparation for the meal. The gastric phase begins upon entry of masticated food into the stomach.

A feedback loop is activated when stretch receptors within the stomach activate a vaso-vagal reflex to trigger the vagus nerve, further stimulating gastric secretory activity. The gastric lumen is an intricate set of epithelial cells with specific secretory activity. These cells protect the stomach lining and assist in secreting enzymes to aid digestion. The intestinal phase arrives when partially digested foods mixed with gastric juices enter the small intestine, where the systemic absorption of macronutrients begins.

The outlined digestion process breaks down carbohydrates starting in the mouth to their absorbable form (monosaccharides) in the small intestine. Fats become reduced to fatty acid chains and monoglycerides by bile salts secreted from the liver and lipase from the pancreas. Finally, protein is broken down into amino acids by pepsin released from the stomach and various other protein degrading enzymes released from the pancreas.

The fate of monosaccharides, fatty acids, and amino acids depends on the person's energy requirements; if one is in the fed state, the metabolic pathway shifts towards energy storage. Conversely, the metabolic pathway shifts towards oxidizing macronutrients for immediate energy consumption if in the fasting state. Through differing metabolic pathways, monosaccharides, fatty acids, and amino acids can produce acetyl-CoA, which can enter the Kreb cycle and eventually generate energy through oxidative phosphorylation via the electron transport chain in the form of ATP.

Glycogen, primarily stored in the liver, can readily raise serum glucose through glycogenolysis. However, the glycogen storage used is depleted within 12 to 18 hours while in the fasting state. Due to this limitation, the liver possesses the tools to convert non-carbohydrate precursors into glucose, called gluconeogenesis. This process can take place in the liver or cortex of the kidneys and can use precursors such as glycerol (from fatty acids), lactate (from anaerobic metabolism), and glutamine/alanine.

The entire process outlined above works through a delicate balance of hormone regulation. Leptin is a hormone stored in fat cells, and ghrelin is stored in the enteroendocrine cells of the gastrointestinal tract. Leptin suppresses food intake and is considered anorexigenic. Ghrelin stimulates the hunger reflex centrally at the level of the hypothalamus and is deemed to be orexigenic. Ghrelin is believed to be the primary hormone responsible for ushering in the cephalic phase of digestion.

However, existing research has only begun to understand the complex role of these hormones in obesity. For example, subjects with obesity tend to have elevated leptin levels and reduced levels of ghrelin, which is paradoxical to our understanding of the function of these two hormones. However, similar to type 2 diabetes mellitus and insulin, it is postulated that patients with obesity are leptin resistant, but the precise mechanism of obesity induction is yet to be fully elucidated.

**Genetic Factors**

The induction of obesity is multifactorial, drawing from genetic, environmental, behavioral, physiological, social, and cultural factors. The possibility of hereditary variables in persons with obesity has been shown by studies comparing adiposity in twins, adoptees, and their parents (biological vs. adoptive) and within families. Studies imply that 40 to 70% of an adult's BMI is inherited.****

Adolescents with one obese parent have a three- to a fourfold higher chance of becoming obese.

The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO) gene (located on Chr. 16) are found to contribute to the development of diabetes indirectly.

Another gene commonly implicated in monogenic childhood obesity is the MC4R, which encodes the melanocortin-4 receptor. The MC4R gene is associated with hyperinsulinemia and increased weight gain in infancy.

**Socioeconomic and Environmental Factors**

Epidemiological data has analyzed various geographical factors that may contribute to obesity. Social/cultural factors profoundly influence patients' dietary habits and behaviors. As a result, patients can often have an unhealthy understanding of a proper dietary regimen.

Obesity prevalence is lowest among individuals with the highest income and education, irrespective of race and ethnicity. In urban locations throughout the United States, a diet built entirely on fast-and-prepackaged foods is not uncommon. Much of the discrepancy can be due to the patient's lack of awareness of what foods contribute to chronic obesity.

In addition, healthy food options are often cost-prohibitive in urban locations. Due to recent global events, the cost of groceries has sky-rocketed, worsening this disparity in healthy food availability. Low-to-middle income families will turn to cheaper calorie-dense and nutrient-poor options to make ends meet during difficult financial times. In combination with increased stress, socioeconomic factors will play a pivotal role in likely worsening the obesity pandemic across the globe. The worsening of obesity will exacerbate the high rate of chronic, obesity-related conditions, increasing the burden on our already stressed healthcare system.

Advertising that promotes obesity-inducing foods targets specific racial and socioeconomic groups differently. An isolated example of this effect was observed with outdoor food and beverage advertisement density in Sacramento, Los Angeles, New Orleans, Philadelphia, Austin, and New York. Geographical areas with low-income African-American and Latino populations were found to have a higher density of unhealthy food and beverage advertisements in those populations at the most significant risk for developing obesity.

Another factor leading to the higher prevalence of obesity is the high cost of healthy food items. Thus the prevalence of obesity differs across US communities, in contrast to blacks, who had the greatest prevalence (50%) of obesity in the United States, and non-Hispanic Asian adults (17%) had the lowest prevalence.****This is probably tied to the social determinants of health, such as access to exercise, a wholesome diet, and general health information.

Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (Pickwickian syndrome) results from diminished ventilatory drive and capacity related to obesity. It is defined as the presence of awake alveolar hypoventilation characterized by daytime hypercapnia (arterial PaCO2 greater than 45mmHg). Its prevalence is largely unknown but based on previous studies and is estimated to be between 20 to 30% of obese patients.

**Prenatal and Childhood Factors**

Childhood and infancy experiences may predispose to adult obesity. High maternal BMI, high gestational weight gain, gestational diabetes, and maternal type II diabetes may all predispose to adult obesity and metabolic disorders in offspring. By modifying gene expression, maternal obesity may influence the brain regions involved in body weight regulation.

These epigenetic modifications, which may be the consequence of an increase in maternal nutrition supply to the developing fetus, promote increased hunger and fat accumulation in children. Children with obesity are five times more likely to be obese in adulthood.

Even though additional data is required to determine the impact of limiting the availability of nutrient-poor/high-sugar goods in schools on obesity, some studies have shown a net-positive result.

**Weight and Adulthood Factors**

Between the ages of 20 and 65, most adults acquire weight steadily. Therefore, the probability of becoming overweight (BMI 25 kg/m^2) or obese (BMI 30 kg/m2) during one's lifetime is substantial. The energy imbalance responsible for the rise in obesity over the previous 30 years is estimated to be 100 kcal/day, illustrating that even a small daily positive energy balance may lead to clinically considerable weight gain over time. Weight rises until age 65. After that, the average weight loss is 0.65 kg/year.

This is partly owing to a loss in muscle mass (sarcopenia), whereas fat mass increases throughout old age, resulting in a reduced correlation between BMI and fat mass.

**Dietary Factors**

Over the last seventy years, there has been a major shift in the global food environment, with more people having access to processed, high-calorie foods. US Department of Agriculture (USDA) statistics on dietary energy supply shows that the average daily calorie consumption has risen from 2398 kcal/day/person in the 1970s to 2895 kcal/day/person in the 2000s. This increase in caloric consumption alone can explain the rise in obesity rates seen over this period.

Additionally, the USDA statistics show that Americans consume less fruit, vegetables, and dairy than is advised while consuming more fat, sugar, meats, and grains. The Western Diet is a colloquial term used to describe a diet high in processed foods, such as refined sugars and red meats, which may be excessively salty and sugary. This diet has been adopted primarily in America but has recently begun spreading into parts of Europe and Asia. In general, this diet type is associated with chronic inflammatory states, which are precursors to several chronic diseases such as diabetes, atherosclerosis, and chronic kidney disease.

Eaton et al. described a 'discordance hypothesis' which postulates that the western diet is the primary driver of increasing BMIs due to a mismatch between calories consumed and calories burned.

Hunter-gatherers in our primitive human species would expend a tremendous amount of calories hunting, transporting, and preparing food. However, in our society now, very little energy is expended procuring high-calorie foods, which contributes to our natural tendency to store adipose tissue.

**Physical Activity Factors**

Physical activity accounts for the greatest variation in total energy expenditure. Reduced regular physical activity and increased sedentary behavior have been linked to an increased risk of obesity.****

Furthermore, occupational and physical activity has decreased in the United States during the last half-century. Half of the American workforce was fairly active in 1960, but by 2010, over 70 percent were either sedentary or reported little physical activity. This resulted in a decrease in work-related energy expenditure of 140 kcal/day for men and 120 kcal/day for females, which further explains the increasing prevalence of obesity. Adults with physical or mental disabilities are more likely to be obese; those with reduced lower-extremity mobility are at the greatest risk.

**Sleep Factors**

Epidemiological studies demonstrate substantial and persistent relationships between reduced nocturnal sleep duration, nightshift employment with the development of obesity, and other metabolic disorders.

There has been an increase in nightshift employees who spend more time sedentary and less time physically active, resulting in decreased energy expenditure and an increase in the likelihood of obesity. Insufficient sleep also causes the activation of brain regions involved with food reward increasing food consumption, particularly high-fat meals. Thus, adequate sleep and sleep pattern are crucial for lowering adiposity as well as a number of other metabolic ailments.

**Medical Factors**

Hypothyroidism: Hypothyroidism causes weight gain by reducing basal metabolic rate, thus leading to increased adiposity; however, the weight gain is usually modest and improves with treatment.

Cushing syndrome: The increased levels of glucocorticoids in Cushing disease stimulate 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 in visceral fat and increase its lipogenic capability leading to adiposity. It is characterized by progressive central adiposity involving the trunk and abdomen, fat accumulation on the face and neck, and muscle wasting in the extremities. Cushing syndrome may result from the excess intake of steroids over a long period (iatrogenic/overdose).

Diabetes is often managed by the use of intensive insulin therapy and home glucose monitoring. Tight control of blood glucose is considered critical in preventing the vascular complications of the condition. However, insulin therapy itself is associated with weight gain.

Hypothalamic obesity: Hypothalamic obesity is uncommon and may result from damage (tumor, irradiation, surgery, or elevated intracranial pressure) to the ventromedial or paraventricular area of the hypothalamus or the amygdala, which regulates metabolic information about nutrient storage and food availability. Damage to the ventromedial hypothalamus results in hyperphagia and decreased energy expenditure, leading to obesity. It might be associated with additional symptoms such as headache, nausea, or blurring of vision.