The NPDB was created by Congress with the intent to increase patient safety, combat health care fraud, and improve medical care due to the rising amount of Medical Malpractice Litigation. Additionally, the purpose of the NPDB was imposing restrictions on medical health professionals who were deemed incompetent or had a performance that is detrimental to another community from crossing State lines. The NPDB also was an attempt to encourage professional review by peers.

The laws governing the NPDB are:

- Section 1921 (Passed in 1987) permitting the Federal Government to collect information about licensure sanctions on physicians, health care entities, and dentists.

- Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 to add the language "any negative action or finding" from entities such as peer review organizations, private accreditation entities, or state licensure regulators.

- Modified Regulations for Section 1921published in Federal Register on January 28, 2010, to create a national control program to oversee fraud and abuse by health care entities and clinicians.

The NPDB is not meant to be the sole avenue of verification method of a clinician's credentials and solely a system to aid in determining if a more extensive investigation should take place. An example of where this is applicable is a medical malpractice settlement, which will be displayed in the NPDB; however, settlements of medical malpractice can be made for a variety of different practical reasons and may not be representative of a physician lacking competence or engaging or conduct that did not meet the standard of care. Additionally, one of the critical issues of the NPDB is maintaining the confidentiality, accuracy, and security of the database that is regulated by 45 CFR Part 60. To protect the security and confidentiality of the information, the NPDB  ensures that sensitive financial and personal information is protected from unauthorized users.