Just as in the setting of ACS, emergent fasciotomies must be performed in a patient presenting with AECS. Otherwise, CECS is typically managed nonoperatively for a one- to three-month duration, and surgical management may often be delayed and/or electively performed after having a discussion with the patient (or athlete) regarding the ideal timing given the athletes current sport-specific requirements.

Conservative management consists of rest, activity modification, stretching, orthotics, and physical therapy, but these measures are generally ineffective.

- NSAIDs

- Botulinum toxin injections

- Limited efficacy

- Gait training

- Diebal et al. published two case series of patients with CECS prospectively treated with a gait training optimization program focusing on forefoot strike patterns
- One study analyzed 10 study participants, concluding that none of the ten subjects required surgery at 1-year post-intervention.

In refractory cases, or following at least a multiple month trial of nonoperative management modalities, operative management is discussed, keeping in mind the patient/athlete's expectations for return to baseline activity and/or sport.

Open fasciotomy is the predominant technique. However, other minimally invasive endoscopic techniques are also options.

In general, for the lower leg:

- Dual incision technique

- Lateral
- Anterior and lateral compartment access for release
- 12 to 15 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus
- Caution to protect/avoid the SPN


- Medial
- Superficial and deep posterior compartment access for release
- Release at the middle of the tibia along the posterior border