When assessing a woman for the presence of Braxton Hicks contractions, there are some key questions to ask. Her response to these questions will assist the healthcare provider to differentiate Braxton Hicks contractions and true labor contractions.

- How often are the contractions? Braxton Hicks contractions are irregular and do not get closer together over time. True labor contractions come at regular intervals, and as time goes on, they get closer together and stronger.

- How long are the contractions? Braxton Hicks contractions are unpredictable. They may last less than 30 seconds or up to 2 minutes. True labor contractions last between 30 to less than 90 seconds and become longer over time.

- How strong are the contractions? Braxton Hicks contractions are usually weak and either stay the same or become weaker and then disappear. True labor contractions get stronger over time.

- Where are the contractions felt? Braxton Hicks contractions are often only felt in the front of the abdomen or one specific area. True labor contractions start in the midback and wrap around the abdomen towards the midline.

- Do the contractions change with movement? Braxton Hicks contractions may stop with a change in activity level or as the woman changes position. If she can sleep through the contraction, it is a Braxton Hicks contraction. True labor contractions continue and may even become stronger with movement or position change.

During the physical assessment, the provider may palpate an area of tightening or a "spasm" of the uterine muscle, but the presence of a uterine contraction in the uterine fundus is not palpable. The woman will be assessed for the presence of uterine bleeding or rupture of the amniotic membrane. An examination of the cervix reveals no change in effacement or dilatation as a result of the Braxton Hicks contractions.