Giardiasis is a very common parasite in the tropics and for the most part, can be prevented. The key is to educate the traveler going to these areas. Besides the physician, the nurse and pharmacist play a key role in the education of the public in preventing this infection. Emphasis has to be placed on personal hand hygiene. In addition, one should avoid drinking water from the local streams, drinking only bottled or boiled water and washing all food thoroughly. Because there is a high risk of transmission of the parasite after anal/fecal contact, the importance of hand hygiene after changing diapers and defecation cannot be emphasized enough. Finally, the pharmacist should educate the public that prophylactic drug treatment while traveling is not recommended as this can lead to a build-up of drug resistance.

Outcomes

The majority of patients who acquire giardiasis have an excellent outcome. In most people the infection is associated with mild or no symptoms. Even those who develop symptoms recover in 5-7 days. Mortality is rare but can occur in infants and the elderly. While the use of antibiotics has improved outcomes, there is evidence of drug resistance in many parts of the globe. Plus, if the environmental conditions are not altered, then reinfection is not uncommon. There are reports that chronic infection with giardia in children may lead to failure to thrive. In others, symptoms that resemble irritable bowel syndrome may persist for several years after the infection.