Management of BPSD involves choosing an appropriate setting, treating discomfort, implementing non-pharmacological interventions, and then only, if needed, conducting systematic trials of evidence-based pharmacological therapies. Unless patients are endangering themselves or others, interventions should begin only after establishing a baseline by identifying and quantifying target symptoms, as described above.

**Choose an appropriate setting:**The first step in management is to decide on the proper setting for treatment and address safety issues. Patients with delirium are often best managed in a hospital to facilitate medical evaluation because parenteral medications may be required. Referral to a geropsychiatry unit is appropriate for medically stable patients who are endangering themselves or others (aggression with injury or capacity to cause injury, refusing fluids or basic hygiene, suicidal behavior), especially if pharmacotherapy has been refused or is ineffective. Pending transfer, patients who are dangerous to self or others require monitoring with one-on-one observation, and treatment with antipsychotic medications will usually be necessary, following a risk/benefit discussion with their surrogates or guardians.

**Treat discomfort:**Before any BPSD-specific interventions, all patients should be assessed and treated for causes of discomfort (e.g., pain, constipation, urinary retention, is the environment too warm/cold/loud), as described above, and treated appropriately.

**Non-Pharmacological Interventions for BPSD**

The next step in management is implementing non-pharmacological interventions, which may be sufficient alone for mild BPSD, and should always accompany any pharmacotherapy. Geriatrics organizations and experts advocate the use of non-pharmacological interventions for BPSD. However, a meta-analysis of 10 randomized controlled trials in patients with moderate to severe dementia found no benefit, except for music therapy in reducing overall BPSD and massage therapy in reducing depression.

**Caregiver training:**However, this meta-analysis excluded interventions focused on caregiver training, which is effective in both reducing a range of BPSD as well as improving caregiver well-being.

**Other non-pharmacological approaches:**While non-pharmacological interventions other than caregiver training and music therapy have not been consistently effective for overall BPSD in randomized, controlled trials, they may benefit individual patients, and unlike medications, rarely have adverse effects. Some of these include aromatherapy, bright light therapy to reduce circadian disturbances, massage, multisensory stimulation, and reminiscence therapy, in which patients are engaged in reviewing their past via conversation, photographs, or music.

**Pharmacologic Interventions for Agitation and Aggression**

Psychotropic medications are frequently used to treat BPSD, although the side effect burden is high, and benefits are typically modest. Wandering and repetitive vocalizations rarely respond to pharmacotherapy and are best addressed with non-pharmacological measures. Pharmacological approaches will differ based on the nature and severity of the symptoms. The primary focus of clinical trials has been on symptoms of agitation, aggression, and psychosis since these are typically the most problematic and distressing manifestations of BPSD.

**Empiric treatment of pain:**Painful conditions are present in at least 49% of patients with dementia, but only 20 to 40% of patients with dementia receive analgesics, compared to 60 to 80% of similar patients without dementia; this is believed to relate to both under-reporting by patients and under-recognition by clinicians.

**Antipsychotics:**Second-generation antipsychotics (primarily risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, and aripiprazole) are the mainstay of treatment for agitation and aggression, although, in a systematic review of 16 meta-analyses of randomized, controlled trials of these agents, the effect sizes (differences between treatment and placebo) were typically quite small for risperidone, olanzapine, and aripiprazole, ranging between 0.15 to 0.30 in most studies, and quetiapine generally did not differ from placebo. Adverse effects including extrapyramidal symptoms, cerebrovascular events, somnolence, urinary tract symptoms, and death were higher in the antipsychotic group as a whole, and worsening confusion was common with quetiapine and olanzapine.

Starting and maximum doses of antipsychotics for BPSD are as follows: aripiprazole 2 mg daily and 15 mg daily, respectively; olanzapine 2.5 mg daily and 10 mg daily; quetiapine 12.5 mg twice daily and 100 mg twice daily; and risperidone 0.25 mg twice daily and 1 mg twice daily. Doses can be increased in small increments every two weeks if there is an insufficient improvement, based on prospective ratings from caregivers. Due to their potential to worsen motor symptoms, clinicians should avoid using antipsychotics other than quetiapine, pimavanserin, and clozapine in Lewy body dementia and dementia associated with Parkinson's disease. In the United States, pimavanserin is approved by the Food and Drug Association for the treatment of psychosis related to Parkinson's disease, although it carries the same black box warning as other antipsychotics.

**Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs):**Due to the adverse effects associated with antipsychotics, other medications have undergone research for the treatment of agitation and aggression. A 2011 meta-analysis demonstrated that the SSRI antidepressants citalopram and sertraline were associated with improvement in these symptoms, with a rate of adverse effects similar to placebo, although trazodone was not effective.

**Other pharmacotherapies:**The combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine, which has approval in the U.S. and Europe for pseudobulbar affect, was studied in a single randomized trial, with modest benefit for agitation but significant adverse effects, especially falls.

**Pharmacologic Interventions for Depression and Apathy**

While depression and apathy are the most common BPSD, fewer studies have examined outcomes of pharmacotherapy.

**Depression:**A meta-analysis of 10 studies of various antidepressants for treatment of depression in dementia showed no difference from placebo on the primary outcome measure (scores on depression rating scales) for antidepressants as a group or any individual agent; although there was a benefit for SSRIs (but not other antidepressants) regarding numbers of responders and remitters, the quality of this evidence was lower. Patients receiving antidepressants had higher rates of adverse events and study drop-out.

**Apathy:**Methylphenidate may improve apathy, cognition, and functioning modestly, with minimal risk for adverse effects, but studies of cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine, and antidepressants have not demonstrated a benefit for apathy.

**General Approach to Pharmacotherapy for BPSD**

Given the limited overall benefits of pharmacotherapy, a systematic approach to implementing and evaluating BPSD is critical. Except for urgent situations involving safety, there should be an established, clear baseline regarding the frequency and severity of target behaviors. Medications should be given an adequate trial of at least four weeks at the maximum recommended dose before concluding they are ineffective. To avoid prematurely abandoning a potentially effective strategy, educating and supporting caregivers is a vital component of this process. Caregivers should understand that change is often so gradual that it may not be noticeable until comparing recent behavior diaries to those from 3 to 4 weeks prior. If an intervention (especially a medication) is truly ineffective after an adequate trial, it should be discontinued, and the lack of benefit documented.

For agitated behaviors, once uncomfortable symptoms have been treated, environmental triggers removed, and non-pharmacological interventions implemented, pharmacotherapy should start with citalopram or sertraline; if this is not effective, the next step would be adding risperidone or aripiprazole, unless the patient has Lewy body dementia or Parkinson's disease. For these cases, the clinician can add an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor if the patient is not already receiving one; if they are already taking an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, pimavanserin or quetiapine can be options. Despite the lack of high-quality evidence for effectiveness, many clinicians will trial quetiapine in patients with Lewy body dementia or Parkinson's disease. A common error with quetiapine is inadequate dosing; doses up to 200 mg/d are useful in patients with re Parkinson disease without any adverse motor effects. Trials of antipsychotic tapering should take place every 3 to 6 months (sooner if adverse effects emerge). If an antipsychotic is insufficiently beneficial, an alternative antipsychotic can be tried using a cross-titration, but olanzapine should generally be avoided due to its anticholinergic effects and lower benefit overall. Finally, prazosin or dextromethorphan-quinidine are potential therapies. At each step, re-evaluation and attention to environmental factors and non-pharmacological interventions are necessary. Severe agitation or aggressive symptoms usually require immediate initiation of antipsychotic therapy to bring symptoms under control, but this should not obviate the need to implement other interventions concurrently or to attempt discontinuation when the patient stabilizes. For depression, pharmacotherapy should begin with citalopram or sertraline, with consideration of adding methylphenidate if there is a limited response after an adequate trial of the antidepressant. If symptoms do not respond, discontinue the medication.

**Treatment-Refractory Patients**

Neurostimulation therapies may have a role in refractory patients. While randomized, controlled trials have not found any benefit from transcranial direct current stimulation, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation was beneficial in a majority of studies, with minimal adverse effects.