# Introduction

Medical students and residents are expected to manage several critical events following training, but they are often ill-equipped to do so because of limited clinical experiences in the diagnosis and management of many such conditions. Simulation-based training can be utilized across multiple medical specialties and is essential to every didactic curriculum to model critical events. One of the tenets of healthcare education is to develop teaching and evaluation techniques that allow instructors to gauge a trainee’s performance in settings that reflect clinical practice. Standardized patients (SPs) have often been utilized to assess the history and physical examination skills for medical students and graduate physicians.

# Function

Simulators were first introduced in the aviation industry in the 1920s so pilots could receive standardized flight training without putting travelers’ lives at risk.

Adverse clinical events in healthcare commonly occur due to interpersonal communication breakdown, systems errors, and lack of coordination between patient care teams. These realizations have largely lead to the emergence of the CRM field.

# Issues of Concern

Debriefing is essential for the trainee to have a comprehensive and successful encounter in a simulation scenario. Debriefing refers to facilitated reflection in the process of experiential learning. Below are some facilitator guided debriefing tools that educators have described. “Debriefing with good judgment” refers to a three-phase conversational structure consisting of reaction, analysis, and summary. The learner is afforded an initial “reaction” to explore his/her emotional response to the simulation encounter. The analysis phase focuses on what happened during the simulation and why the learner performed the way they did. The summary phase focuses on participants describing what they learned and how this knowledge can be applied to future patient care scenarios.

Promoting Excellence and Reflective Learning in Simulation, also known as PEARLS,

High fidelity medical simulation should be a close approximation to clinical practice and is most successful when feedback is provided directly during and after the learning experience.

# Curriculum Development

Previously, in the critical care environment, training methods for skills teaching commonly utilized an apprenticeship technique. With this approach, an experienced teacher modeled the correct technique for performing a specific skill and then evaluated the trainee, also known as "see one, do one, teach one." This model is now obsolete. The constructivist learning theory suggests learners gain knowledge based on their personalized experiences. Trainees’ clinical knowledge becomes solidified, and instructors can highlight key learning points during the simulation.  Participants should be made to feel supported and respected, with the instructor encouraging nonjudgmental and open discussion. In addition to constructing and effectively executing simulation scenarios, debriefing is crucial to help learners identify gaps in knowledge, pre-conceived attitudes, and emotional reactivity that can contribute to performance deficiencies. Scaffolding refers to an effective debriefing session that guides learners to think through their actions and reactions, allowing the integration of simulation sessions with previous experiences.

The Kirkpatrick model for evaluating the effectiveness of training programs can be utilized to ascertain the utility of simulation for learner assessment and ongoing quality improvement (QI) of intensive care practice. Kirkpatrick’s hierarchy serves as a classification tool to communicate the level of learning outcome for each trainee.reaction and refers to participants’ perception of an educational intervention. Level two is known as learning, and measures participants’ acquisition of skills, knowledge, and change of attitudes in a non-clinical setting. Evaluation during such training should demonstrate knowledge. Level three is behavior, which measures a learner’s behavioral changes, attitudes, skills, and knowledge from the training setting to a professional practice setting. Level four, referred to as results, measures the effect of learners’ skill acquisition through training on patient outcomes.

# Clinical Clerkships

Meaningful assessment of learners is provided by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) through entrustable professional activities (EPAs) and milestones.

Psychologist K Anders Ericsson originated deliberate practice (DP), which refers to simulation oriented interventions that create and refine a trainee’s knowledge, skills, and attitudes.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

The three primary sources for simulation evaluation are observational ratings of trainee performance, trainee responses, and haptic sensors.

The various simulation modalities available to an educator include human patient simulators, task trainers, SPs, and virtual reality/augmented reality. Task trainers represent one body part or structure and are useful for high-volume basic skills training. These are less expensive than the purchase of a full mannequin, easy to operate and allow repetition of specific skill sets. Disadvantages of task trainers include the frequent need for replacement, maintenance of parts due to high utilization, and a limited focus of training. Full human patient simulators include full-body mannequins of various sizes, race, sex, and age, and can be either high or low fidelity. While low fidelity mannequins are static, more cost-effective, and allow the practice of a specific skill, they lack realism and are unable to be utilized to gauge interpersonal skills. High-fidelity mannequins are more realistic in terms of their bodily functions, vital signs, and hemodynamic parameters, and are manipulable by an instructor. They are, unfortunately, more expensive to purchase and maintain, and require professional training and knowledge for successful operation.

SP’s are live actors that portray a role or specific medical condition. These actors can adapt or adjust to the learner’s level of expertise, and physical assessment skills are honed on a live person. The SP can also provide individualized feedback to the trainee. Unfortunately, such actors are expensive, may find it challenging to recruit and train, and may present logistical scheduling issues. Virtual reality (VR) or augmented reality simulation is a computer-generated three-dimensional interactive environment that provides an immersive effect for the learner.

Simulation-based mastery learning is a rigorous approach to competency-based education that involves learners taking a pretest, receiving timely instructor feedback following a simulation activity, and achieving a minimum score on a posttest. Implementation of mastery learning can be logistically challenging as it requires flexibility in both educator time and simulation space and equipment. In a randomized study of training for thoracentesis, internal medicine residents had fewer clinically significant pneumothoraces and no hemothoraces if they engaged in mastery learning versus those who trained traditionally.

# Continuing Education

Healthcare simulation is commonly utilized to improve technical ICU skills, including specialty training utilizing prosthetic lungs to teach mechanical ventilator management and the use of simulators in training of point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS).

# Clinical Significance

Simulation-based medical education reduces risk to patients and trainees, improves learners’ confidence and competence, increases patient safety, and leads to reduced future health care costs. A reliable healthcare system should have a firm commitment to a culture of safety and leadership committed to continual process improvement. Effective QI processes require interdisciplinary team preparedness, with simulation serving as an ideal tool so that members can learn to prevent adverse events, or expeditiously manage them after they occur. A common area of focus for QI relates to communication errors during the handoff between teams or during a shift change. Simulation has successfully been used to prepare for effective handoff, and to diminish hierarchy-related medical errors.

Simulation is not used as a replacement for didactic or clinical learning but as an important adjunct. The aviation and aerospace industries have utilized simulation for decades, and it also frequently works in high-risk professions, including the military, nuclear power plants, business, and medicine. Experiential learning is defined as an active process whereby a trainee constructs knowledge by linking novel information with previous understanding.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Simulation allows the polishing of vital nontechnical skills such as teamwork, situational awareness, task management, and decision making in a controlled and safe environment. The ultimate goal of such tasks is to increase patient safety and improve patient outcomes. The International Network for Simulation-based Pediatric Innovation, Research, & Education (INSPIRE) has established a collaborative process to examine the effects of healthcare simulation, including studies to evaluate the effect of resuscitation training on improving the performance of a code team during cardiac arrest, among others.

Simulation has lead to vast improvements in the clinical training of medical students, residents, and junior faculty. Improved patient outcomes commonly occur with higher fidelity simulation.

Simulation is now utilized for systems assessment and identifying latent safety threats in high-risk environments.