**Complications in Prosthetic Care**

Prosthesis usage is not without associated complications. One of the most notable complications is that of choke syndrome.  This syndrome is characterized by venous outflow obstruction due to a socket that is too snug and is more common in lower extremity prostheses. In the acute phase, the skin over the stump site becomes red and indurated and may result in an "orange-peel" appearance. The chronic phase may result if the constriction is not resolved and may result in hemosiderin deposits and venous stasis ulcers.

Dermatologic problems are common in this patient population. Contact dermatitis may result and Is most commonly caused by liners, socks, and suspension mechanisms. Treatment involves removal of the offending agent and symptomatic treatment with topical diphenhydramine or steroid creams. Painful scarring may result as a complication of the surgical amputation but may be exacerbated by prosthetic wear. It is important to ensure an appropriate prosthetic fit. Additionally, amputees can massage and lubricate the scar to alleviate pain and improve scar healing. Finally, an inappropriate fit may also lead to excessive sweating and cyst formation. Again, it is important to ensure a properly fitted prosthetic to avoid these complications.

Amputees may also experience what has been termed as a painful residual limb. This pain can be generated from heterotopic ossification at the bony amputation site, excess bony prominences, a prosthesis with a poor fit, neuroma formation at the site of nerve transection, and insufficient soft tissue coverage of the stump site. Bony-related pain generators are caused by excessive pressure at that site and can be treated with surgical excision if necessary. Poor-fitting prostheses can cause friction between the skin and the prosthetic socket and need to be refabricated. It is also important to consider the unstable residual limb in patients who did not have a myodesis performed at the time of amputation. Also, this would be much more difficult to treat.

**Energy Requirements of Gait**

It is important to consider the energy requirements of amputees who wish to continue ambulating with a prosthesis. In some cases, the increased metabolic demand can so much that it limits a patient's ability to ambulate after a lower extremity amputation. Transtibial amputations increase energy consumption relative to a normal non-amputee by an average of 25%. Bilateral transtibial amputations increase energy expenditure by 20% to 40%. Unilateral transfemoral amputations increase expenditure by 60% to 70%, while bilateral transfemoral amputations increase expenditure by over 200%. It is important to note that the average increase in metabolic demand is much higher in amputations secondary to vascular etioligies compared to those of traumatic injuries.