**Non-Syndromic Hearing Loss**

Non-syndromic hearing loss accounts for the majority of hereditary hearing loss, with over 70 loci identified in its pathogenesis.

- Autosomal recessive SNHL, where a mutation in both alleles is required to cause disease phenotype, is the most common form of non-syndrome hearing loss accounting for 75 to 80% of cases. Autosomal recessive deafness tends to be prelingual in onset, constant in nature, and severe.
- Connexin 26 (DFNB1) is the most common non-syndrome autosomal recessive locus, accounting for 30 to 40% of all cases of deafness.

- Autosomal dominant SNHL only requires one allele to be mutated to cause the disease phenotype. It tends to be post-lingual in onset, progressive, and milder.

- X-linked inheritance acts as a recessive trait in females who require mutations in both X alleles to cause disease phenotype. However, since males only have one X-chromosome, it behaves more as a dominant trait and manifests at a disproportionally higher rate in men than women. Five loci and three genes have been mapped for the X-linked form.

- Mitochondrial disorders are inherited via mutations of the mitochondrial DNA and are only passed from mother to child. Seven loci and several gene point mutations have been identified for the mitochondrial form. The A1555G mutation in 12S rRNA is believed to predispose to aminoglycoside-induced deafness in addition to non-syndromic hearing loss.

**Syndromic Hearing Loss**

Syndrome hearing loss is associated with a constellation of other clinical deficiencies and organ system involvement. There are over 400 syndromes associated with hearing loss. Thus, the diagnosis of hearing impairment in a child should prompt a thorough investigation to rule out a syndromic disorder. The severity of hearing loss can vary across different syndromes, ranging from mild impairment to profound loss. Similar to non-syndromic deafness, syndromic hearing loss can also be inherited in an autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, X-linked, and mitochondrial fashion.

**Autosomal Recessive Syndromic Hearing Loss**

- Pendred Syndrome is the most cause of syndromic hearing loss, accounting for 10% of all cases of hereditary hearing loss. Pendred syndrome is caused by a mutation in the gene SLC26A4, which codes for the protein pendrin, an anion transporter. Patients present with SNHL, bilateral enlarged vestibular aqueducts or Mondini dysplasia, and euthyroid goiter.

- Usher syndromes are a common cause of autosomal recessive syndromic hearing loss and the most common syndrome affecting both hearing and vision, accounting for 50% of all deafness-blindness cases.
- USH1 has profound bilateral deafness and severe vestibular dysfunction at birth. Retinitis pigmentosa becomes apparent before age 10.
- USH2 has moderate to severe hearing loss at birth with normal vestibular function and retinitis pigmentosa that manifests later in the teenage years.
- USH3 has normal to near normal vestibular function and progressive hearing loss. Retinitis pigmentosa manifests later in the teenage years.

- Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) has SNHL and prolonged QTc intervals (>500 ms). There is a predisposition for syncope from ventricular tachyarrhythmias, most notably torsades de pointes. A similar syndrome, Romano-Ward syndrome, lacks SNHL. The genetic cause of JLNS is due to genes KCNQ1 and KCNE1, which encode subunits of potassium channels in cardiac and auditory tissue. Thus, children diagnosed with sensorineural hearing loss should also be screened with an EKG to assess for prolonged QTC intervals.

- Miller syndrome is very rare at 1 per 1,000,000 live births. It is characterized by craniofacial anomalies, limb anomalies, and conductive hearing loss due to middle ear abnormalities.

- Nager syndrome consists of facial and limb malformations, ear anomalies, and sensorineural hearing loss.

**Autosomal Dominant Syndromic Hearing Loss**

- Branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome has a constellation of branchial arch, otologic, and renal defects and affects about 2% of profound hearing loss in children. BOR can cause sensorineural, conductive, or mixed hearing and can cause abnormalities in the external, middle, or inner ear. Patents can have preauricular pits, microtia, ossicular malformation, or cochlear hypoplasia.

- Waardenburg syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 40,000 live births and consists of SNHL and abnormal pigmentation of the eyes, skin, and hair. Patients can have the classic “white forelock” and iris heterochromia.

- Goldenhar syndrome (hemifacial microsomia) is predominantly inherited sporadically, although rarely, it can present in an autosomal dominant manner. It has an incidence of 1 per 5000 to 25000 live births and presents with anomalies of the face and ears with hearing loss encompassing both conductive and sensorineural ranging from mild to severe.

- CHARGE syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 8,500 to 10,000 live births and is defined by coloboma, hearing anomalies, atresia choanalis, stunted growth, genitourinary malformations, and anomalies of the ear. Hearing impairment can occur from a range of anomalies, including stenotic external auditory canal, Mondini dysplasia, hypoplasia, agenesis of the auditory nerve, ossicular chain anomaly, and absence of middle ear structures.

- Stickler syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 7,500 to 9,000 live births and is most commonly due to mutations in the COL2A gene responsible for type II collagen formation. It is characterized by flattened facies, myopia, cleft palate, macroglossia, arthritis, scoliosis, and mitral valve prolapse. Hearing loss can be conductive due to stapes fixation or sensorineural due to collagen defect in the organ of Corti.

- Treacher Collins has an incidence of 1 per 50,000 live births and has abnormalities of the face, eyes, and ears. 40 to 50% of children have conductive hearing loss or high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss.

- Apert syndrome occurs in 1 in 65,000 to 88,000 live births and is characterized by craniosynostosis, frontal bossing, syndactyly, and vision and hearing impairment. Patients often have bilateral conductive hearing loss from middle ear effusions or ossicular chain fixation. Sensorineural hearing loss can occur from cochlear dysplasia.

- Crouzon has an incidence of 1 in 50,000 live births with craniosynostosis, high forehead, lagophthalmos, and hearing impairment. 30% of patients have conductive hearing loss from external ear malformations, middle ear effusions, ossicular chain dysplasia, and oval window anomalies. Sensorineural hearing loss is rarely seen.

- Saethre-Chotzen syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 250,000 to 500,000 live births with brachycephaly, vertebrae anomalies, and short statures. Hearing loss is usually conductive with anomalies of the external auditory canal, stapes ankylosis, ossicular chain fixation, and middle cavity anomalies.

- Townes-Brocks syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 250,000 with anus imperforatus, external ear anomalies, and thumb anomalies.

**X-Linked Recessive Syndromic Hearing Loss**

- Alport syndrome is secondary to anomalies in type IV collagen resulting in SNHL, nephritis, and ocular defects. Since type IV collagen is a significant component of the basement membrane, its mutation can lead to hematuria from glomerular basement membrane involvement. Ocular manifestations include anterior lenticonus, perimacular flecks, and corneal lesions. It is predominantly inherited in an X-linked recessive manner via gene COL4A5, which encodes the a5 chain of type IV collagen.

- Mohr-Tranebjaerg syndrome presents with post-lingual SNHL, dystonia, spasticity, dysphagia, and optic atrophy. It is similar to Friedreich’s ataxia without cardiomyopathy.

- Mitochondrial-Inherited syndromic hearing loss often presents with bilateral, high-frequency hearing loss. Syndromes include MELAS syndrome (mitochondria encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes), Kearns-Sayre syndrome, and MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers).