The differential diagnosis of CAIS includes disorders of androgen biosynthesis or Leydig cell dysfunction, Mullerian agenesis, mixed gonadal dysgenesis, etc. Defects in testosterone synthesis can be the result of a defect in any of the enzymes in the pathway of testosterone synthesis or dysfunction of the LH receptor. Women with Leydig cell dysfunction are 46, XY genotype, who lack pubertal development and have hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Mullerian agenesis (Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome) is included in the differential in a female who presents with primary amenorrhea, absent uterus, and blind vaginal pouch.

The differential diagnosis of PAIS may be extensive, given the variable genotypic and phenotypic presentations. The most common differentials to consider are the disorders of androgen synthesis, as mentioned above, along with disorders of gonadal dysgenesis. 46, XY women with a uterus present with gonadal dysgenesis. Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (also termed chromosomal disorder of sex development [DSD]), as the name suggests, is associated with a mosaic 45, X/46, XY karyotype and the presence of a single descended gonad. It presents with a dysgenetic testis on one side and a streak gonad on the other. Partial gonadal dysgenesis has a 46 XY karyotype and is characterized by the presence of müllerian structures but decreased testosterone and anti-müllerian hormone (AMH) and or inhibin B production. The phenotypic variability of partial gonadal dysgenesis is from genital ambiguity to an under-virilized male.