Treatment of spine osteoarthritis includes conservative management, pharmacological interventions, and invasive procedures. The various treatment modalities get determined by the etiology of the osteoarthritis, duration of the patient's pain, neurological symptoms, and physical exam findings. The American College of Physicians Clinical Guidelines Committee (ACPCGC) guideline helps direct clinicians in managing low back pain. The committee's goal is to avert unnecessary costs associated with non-evidence-based management of low back pain.

One of the most beneficial traditional therapy techniques is exercise therapy.

Additionally, physical therapy improves patient pain and function.

Diet and nutritional supplements also play a role in managing osteoarthritis and should be combined with exercise therapy.

Obesity is a risk factor for osteoarthritis; thus, weight management paramount.

Acetaminophen is a first-line treatment for low back pain.

Patients with chronic low back pain associated with osteoarthritis should be screened for depression and treated appropriately with cognitive behavioral therapy or antidepressants. Statin therapy also lowers the risk of developing osteoarthritis of the spine and prevents disease progression in patients with hyperlipidemia. Statin therapy exerts a chondroprotective effect and decreasing inflammatory cytokines.

Spinal manipulation is a viable treatment option for those with acute and chronic back pain. The clinical significance of the benefits of spinal manipulative therapy has been variable across studies and will require more research.

Invasive techniques in treating spine osteoarthritis include facet joint injections, epidural injections, acupuncture, medial branch nerve ablation, and surgical intervention.

Furthermore, a herniated disc with radicular pain, mild to moderate neurological deficits for greater than four to six weeks may require surgery. Spondylolisthesis with progressive or severe neurological deficits is also an indication for surgery. Back pain resulting in significant functional impairment and has lasted for more than a one-year duration warrants surgical intervention consideration.

Of the five studies that compared surgical treatment versus non-surgical treatment, one study found no difference in pain at the two-year follow-up appointment. The other four studies suggested surgical treatment consistently improved pain but not walking ability over different periods, and five to 18 percent of these patients suffered from unwanted side effects post-surgery. However, the studies were of low-quality evidence, and further research is needed to make clinical recommendations.

Cauda equina syndrome (CES) is a severe condition most commonly caused by a lumbar spine disc herniation in patients 31 to 50 years old. Most often, the disc herniation occurs between L4 and L5. Any space-occupying lesion, including spinal stenosis, cysts, infections, and tumors, can compress the cauda equina and should be on the differential diagnosis. CES is defined as having five characteristic features, including bilateral neurogenic sciatica, saddle anesthesia, bladder dysfunction, decreased anal tone, and sexual dysfunction. It is important to note that symptoms of CES can initially be subtle. Thus, a thorough history is paramount in guiding the diagnosis and treatment of this condition, which can be difficult in the setting of severe pain. However, clinical diagnosis is challenging. Even experienced clinicians have a 43 percent false-positive rate in the diagnosis of CES.

Nonetheless, it is essential to diagnosis this condition early in its course to improve prognosis and prevent residual neurological deficits and potential litigation. Gold standard imaging for diagnosis is MRI. Urgent surgical management is required if CES is present.