The primary aim of managing congenital vertical talus is to resume the normal functioning of the foot by achieving the correct anatomical alignment between the talus, calcaneum, and navicular bone. Non-invasive conservative management options include manipulation followed by serial casting.

In cases of congenital vertical talus role of early casting is sporadic with unpredicted mixed outcomes, unlike in congenital talipes equino varus, where early casting is associated with successful outcomes.

The preferable age group for surgical management is below two years.

Children below the age of 2 years are usually managed by open reduction of the talonavicular joint, which can be performed using either single-stage or two-stage surgery. If a two-stage surgery is being performed, the first stage usually includes the reduction of the talonavicular joint and lengthening of the extensor tendons, the tibialis anterior tendon. The second stage of surgery includes the lengthening of the peroneal tendons and correction of the equinus contracture through the lengthening of an Achilles tendon and release of the posterior ankle and subtalar soft tissues.

However, nowadays, most surgeons prefer a single-stage procedure due to fewer complications like avascular necrosis of the talus bone. There are basically three main components to the one-stage procedure. The initial first step is to achieve the reduction of the talonavicular joint. The second step is to lengthen the peroneals and toe extensors. The final third step is to correct the equinus contracture of the ankle by lengthening the Achilles tendon and releasing the subtalar and ankle joint capsules.