Amsler grid is an important simple tool to detect or monitor macular diseases.

Metamorphopsia- Macropsia is denoted by the widening of the small squares compared to the nearby small squares. The parallel lines seem to be curved away from each other at this area. In the area of micropsia, the parallel lines seem to be drawn towards each other.

Scotoma- Merriam Webster dictionary defines scotoma as 'a spot in the visual field in which vision is absent or deficient.' A scotoma is surrounded by an area of the normal field of vision. A scotoma may be absolute (absent visual recognition of that area in spite of increasing the stimulus intensity) or relative (the stimulus presented at the scotoma becomes visible if stimulus intensity is increased). In Amsler grid, the relative scotoma appears as a veil partially obscuring the smaller squares and may be of different shapes. Such scotoma may be better appreciated if the illumination of the grid is reduced. Scotomas may be positive (something like spot or haze or smoke obscures central vision) or negative (the patient is unaware of scotoma unless tested).

Amsler grid home monitoring has various limitations including:

- Suprathreshold stimulus

- No monitor for fixation- stability of fixation is not monitored.

- No quantification of metamorphopsia

- Not interactive

- Scotoma detection and mapping may be suboptimal

- Need for good near vision to discern the grids

- Poor repeatability of scotoma

- Low sensitivity for detection of peripheral changes due to the crowding effect of the peripheral lines

- Poor compliance

The modifications of the Amsler chart include:

- Threshold Amsler chart- The effective luminance of the white on black Amsler Grid may be lowered by placing a cross polarizing lens in front of the eye

- The sensitivity of the Amsler grid may also be improved with the use of red grids.

- A Modified Amsler Chart with 'a grid of black lines on a white background measuring 12 × 12 cm with grid squares of 2 × 2 cm' has been reported by Shinoda and colleagues.

- Sine Amsler chart

- Morphision