The distribution of lesions is the most important clinical feature of seborrheic dermatitis, with lesions occurring in areas where the skin is rich in sebaceous glands, especially on the scalp and face. ISD is generally asymptomatic, but atopic dermatitis frequently coexists. On the other hand, pruritus is common in ASD, especially with scalp lesions, and patients regularly report burning, but there is usually no history of atopic dermatitis. Seborrheic dermatitis characteristically demonstrates folliculocentric salmon-colored papules and plaques with a fine white scale, and a yellowish crust often described as a greasy scale-crust. It may present in one or more locations, with less scaling on flexural surfaces, and with lesions whose margins tend to be poorly defined.

The mildest form of SD is a non-inflammatory variant commonly referred to as pityriasis capitis or sicca.

**Adult SD:**

The face, scalp, and chest are the sites most commonly involved in ASD, with around 88%, 70%, and 27% of cases developing lesions in these areas, respectively.

Psoriasis requires differentiating from seborrheic dermatitis in adults. It is characterized by indurated red papules and plaques that have a sharply defined margin and a loose, silvery lamella scale. The nails may show psoriatic changes, and the Auspitz sign is positive. The existence of sebopsoriasis as a separate clinical entity has come into dispute.

**Infantile SD:**

ISD usually appears in the second week of life and tends to last 4 to 6 months. It can present in the facial distribution of ASD, the diaper region, the skin creases of the neck, and the axillae. The rash is usually not itchy or painful, and the infants look content, but parents may be distressed. It is generally mild and self-limiting. A common presentation known as cradle cap refers to as an adherent yellowish scale-crust that arises on the crown and front of the scalp, developing from a bran-like scale, serous ooze, and a greasy crust, to create a firm mass that may progress to involve the whole scalp.

Pityriasis amiantacea may be present in ISD. It represents a set of clinical findings that may occur in older infants or young children but is not specific to seborrheic dermatitis. Typically, there are thick, silvery or yellow scales enveloping scalp hairs and binding them in tufts and can also be present in scalp psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, and tinea capitis. Atopic dermatitis is important in the differential diagnosis of ISD. It tends to be pruritic and prone to weeping and typically occurs on the face and limb flexures (elbow and knee) and spares the trunk. The child tends to be upset by the rash, and scratch marks are a common finding.