Aspirin has had multiple metanalyses, which suggest that aspirin reduces the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events in patients who have diabetes without cardiovascular disease while also causing a trend toward higher rates of bleeding and gastrointestinal complications.

The most common side effect of aspirin is gastrointestinal upset ranging from gastritis to gastrointestinal bleed.

**Hypersensitivity**

Hypersensitivity to NSAIDs is common among the general population. The rate is about 1% to 2%. Symptoms could be as mild as a simple rash to angioedema and anaphylaxis. In patients with asthma or chronic rhinosinusitis, the prevalence of these allergic symptoms could be as high as 26%. If this is accompanied by nasal polyps and inflammation of the respiratory tract with eosinophils, it is called the aspirin triad. NSAID-exacerbated respiratory disease (NERD) is a new term associated with this syndrome due to upper and lower respiratory mucosal inflammation.

**Reye Syndrome**

Reye syndrome, named after the Australian pathologist Dr. R.D. Reye was first described in 1963. It is a rare but fatal condition with an estimated mortality rate of between 30% to 45%. It is a form of encephalopathy secondary to fatty changes in an otherwise healthy liver. The clinical vignette of Reye syndrome constitutes a viral upper respiratory tract infection in children and concomitant administration of aspirin for the treatment of fever. It is thought that mitochondrial injury secondary to the preceding viral illness is the first hit to both the liver and the brain. Aspirin or similar compounds provide the second hit completing the syndrome. The incidence has dramatically decreased due to better awareness and the use of acetaminophen to manage fever in children instead of aspirin.

Even though the association between aspirin and Reye syndrome exists, some authors argue that at the time of diagnosis, salicylate levels were not routinely checked, biopsies were not obtained, and genetic/inborn errors of metabolism were not ruled out.

**Intracerebral Hemorrhage**

Aspirin increases the risk of intracranial bleeding (RR = 1.65; 95% CI, 1.06 to 5.99) versus placebo.