The quadratus lumborum (QL) muscle is an integral part of the thoracolumbar fascia, a myofascial system that covers the posterior area of the human body, involving part of the lower and upper limbs. The QL muscle is flattened and has a quadrangular shape; along with the multifidus and erector spinae muscles, the QL helps to create an antagonist force compared to the muscles of the abdomen.

The quadratus lumborum muscle involves the 12th rib (internal surface) and the transverse processes of the lumbar bodies of L1-L4, while it comes from the iliac crest (inner lip) and the iliolumbar ligament.

**Anatomy**

QL comprises three layers with muscle fibers that have different vectors.

- The superficial layer is a thin layer comprising iliocostal muscle fibers (from the iliac crest to the ribs) and iliothoracic (from the iliac crest to the lateral area of the vertebral body of T12) which fibers have a tendinous or even muscular termination.

- The intermediate layer comprises lumbocostal muscle fibers (from the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae to the 12th rib). They are muscle fibers that vary significantly in size, direction, and thickness.

- The posterior layer consists of lateral iliocostal fibers and medially from iliolumbar fibers (from the iliac crest, connecting to the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae). The iliocostal muscle bundles may involve the thoracolumbar fascia, inserting themselves with their tendon endings. This layer is thicker in the caudal area and more tapered in the rostral portion.

Given the arrangement of the highly variable QL muscle fibers, it is not possible to recognize a precise pattern of orientation.

Generally, the QL muscle is located medially to the aponeurosis of the transverse abdominal muscle.

**Function**

The anatomy texts describe the quadratus lumborum muscle as an extensor of the lumbar spine, a stabilizer of the lumbar area, capable of tilting laterally and capable of acting as an inspiratory accessory muscle. A cadaver study has raised many doubts about the action of QL. During the extension, the QL exerts a force of 10 N, compared to 100 N and 150 N of the erector spinae muscles and the multifidus.

The QL is positioned laterally, but despite its position during a lateral tilt of the trunk, it exerts only a force of 10 N. QL participates with less than 10% of the force required for a coronal inclination.

The force exerted by the musculature of the erector spinae and multifidus in the lumbar vertebrae is about 1800 N and 2800 N, respectively. QL exercises only 200 N, and as such, it does not appear to play a significant role as a lumbar stabilizer muscle.

Regarding its accessory inspiratory muscle function, due to the mobility of the last rib, QL will not be capable of transmitting the contractile force towards the diaphragm.

It seems likely that QL could act as a crossroad of the forces exerted by the neighboring muscles, influencing the vectors of the different tensions produced, thanks to its strategic position and the entropic scheme of its fibers.

The lateral arcuate ligament of the diaphragm rests on the QL, and, probably, this relationship could help the respiratory muscle: QL could act as a pivot.