Testicular torsion is a surgical emergency that almost always presents to the emergency department. The disorder is usually managed by an interprofessional team.

The first person to encounter the patient is the triage nurse who must be familiar with the symptoms of the disorder. Time is of the essence and the nurse should be aware of torsion and quickly admit the patient and quickly notify the ED physician. The ED physician should consult with a radiologist for the appropriate test and at the same time consult with the urologist. The nurses should prepare the patient as if he will be going for surgery by keeping the child NPO and having all the blood work completed.

IF the testing confirms torsion, the urologist is usually required to perform the surgery. The nurse should educate the family and the patient about the potential complications, including loss of the testis and infertility. The nurse should ensure that the patient is administered no food or drink by mouth and have the patient prepared to go for urgent surgery. More importantly, the nurse should avoid giving any pain medications until the patient has been seen by the urologist- or the pain medication will mask the symptoms and delay the diagnosis. Only through a systemic approach to diagnosis and treatment, is the salvage of the testis a possibility.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes of testicular torsion depend on when the patient presents to the ED and how quickly the diagnosis is made and treatment is undertaken. Delays in diagnosis and treatment always lead to testicular atrophy. About 20-40% of cases of testicular torsion result in an orchiectomy. The risk of losing a testis is much higher among African Americans and younger males. For those who present within the first 6 hours of symptoms, the salvage rate is nearly 100% but this number quickly drops to less than 50% if the delay in seeking help is more than 12-24 hours. More importantly, when the testis is fixed by orchiopexy, there is also a potential for future torsion.