Treatment is supportive care with adequate hydration and nutrition intake. Amifostine, an organic triphosphate, has been studied and shown to act as a radioprotector. It is thought that this medication acts as an antioxidant to neutralize the free-oxygen radicals produced during ionizing radiation. A study performed to look at the effects of amifostine in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer showed improvement of swallowing dysfunction but no effect on reducing rates of esophagitis in severe cases. Another potential radioprotectant, glutamine, has been associated with reduced rates of esophagitis. A small prospective study in non-small cell lung cancer patients showed 49% reported no esophagitis when treated prophylactically with glutamine powder. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and other drugs have been studied but have not proven effective.

Dietary modification in the form of soft, bland diets is typically used along with the removal of irritant foods such as alcohol, spicy foods, and very hot or cold foods. Frequent, small meals also help. Nutritional support may be needed, using supplements, intravenous hydration, electrolyte correction, and total parenteral nutrition. Analgesia is typically needed, using topical or systemic methods. Prophylactic antifungal therapy is indicated due to the increased risk of thrush.

If a stricture is present, then dilatation may be required. However, complications like aspiration and perforation are also potential problems.

There are reports of the use of stents to relieve long strictures.