Treating migraines in an emergency department, urgent care center, or outpatient clinic may not be optimal as the environments of these may be chaotic. Noise, light, smells, discomforts of being outside of one's own home can negatively contribute to the quality and quantitative pain level of one's migraine. Optimizing the patient's environment, coordination with the interprofessional healthcare team and appropriate follow-up/reassessment can help improve the patient's experience and response to treatment. (Level 5)

Monitoring includes assessing migraine relief response, adverse effects, and consideration of alternative medication usage if the initial treatment does not adequately relieve or reduce the frequency of migraines. Of note, dexamethasone (10 to 25 mg IV or IM) can be used as an abortive adjunct to reduce the risk of early headache recurrence.

Neurology should initiate and manage migraine preventive medications. For preventive medications, patients should keep a diary of headache recurrence and quality. Specialty trained nurses, pain management, and neuroscience are often involved in care, monitoring patient compliance, therapy progress, answering patient questions, and reporting and charting all findings for the team. These nurses administer treatments, monitor patients, report responses to the team, and provide patient and family education. Pharmacists review all prescribed medications, check for interactions, and also provide education. With interprofessional cooperation and communication, migraine treatment will be more effective. (Level 5)