**Adverse Effects**

The most common side effects are gastrointestinal. These include nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting. Other common side effects include insomnia, muscle cramps, fatigue, and anorexia, which are more common with higher doses. These side effects are mild and transient in most patients, lasting up to three weeks and usually resolving even with continued use.

- Donepezil can cause bradycardia and heart block in patients with or without known underlying cardiac conduction abnormalities because of its vagotonic properties. In addition, there are reports of syncopal episodes with the use of donepezil.

- Other less common cardiovascular side effects include hypertension, edema, EKG abnormalities, and hypotension.

- Donepezil can cause weight loss in about 5% of patients. Incidence is higher with higher doses.

- Like other cholinesterase inhibitors, donepezil can cause nightmares due to enhanced activation of the visual association cortex during REM sleep. However, dosing donepezil in the morning can reduce the frequency of nightmares.

- There are rare reports of cases of neuroleptic malignant syndrome with donepezil.

- Rhabdomyolysis is a rarely reported adverse event with the use of donepezil.

**Drug interactions**

- Donepezil has synergistic effects with other cholinesterase blocking agents like neostigmine and physostigmine.

- Donepezil may prolong the effects of depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents like suxamethonium.

- Donepezil may increase the risk of bradycardia with beta-blockers like carvedilol, metoprolol, atenolol, and propranolol.

- CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 inducers like phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, rifampin, and dexamethasone may reduce levels of donepezil by increasing its rate of elimination.

- Theoretically, inhibitors of CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 like ketoconazole and quinidine can inhibit the metabolism of donepezil, but its clinical significance is unknown.