The exact etiology of carotidynia is unknown.

In 1988, the International Headache Society (IHS) classified carotidynia as a headache if it was associated with one of the following features:

- Pain, swelling or increased pulsation on applying pressure

- Exclusion of structural causes of carotid pain

- Neuralgia of head and neck with self resolution in less than 14 days

- Pain on one side of the neck with possible radiation to the head

However, in 1994, Hill and Hastings asserted that carotidynia is a "painful symptom rather than a disease" referable to migraine, viral pharyngitis, or luminal carotid disease in the majority of cases.

Although previously classified as a migraine, it was finally removed from the classification of headaches by the IHS in 2004 after much controversy. It is now believed that carotidynia is not a migraine but part of a vague neck pain syndrome. Modern imaging techniques have revealed it to be an inflammation of the vascular adventitia, thus the term transient perivascular inflammation of the carotid artery (TIPIC) syndrome has been adopted recently. Fay syndrome is not classified as a vasculitis, because carotidynia involves only vascular adventitia, whereas vasculitis involves the inflammation of all layers of the vessel wall. Moreover, vasculitis affects vessels throughout the body, whereas carotidynia only involves the carotid artery, and the remainder of the body vessels are unaffected.

Catotidynia, as a syndrome, can be associated with other forms of extracranial vascular headaches.****and high altitude travel.