**What is Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM)?**

Transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy is caused by the deposition of an abnormally folded protein called transthyretin. Transthyretin is a naturally occurring protein in the human body that helps transport the thyroid hormone in the bloodstream.

This abnormally folded transthyretin protein can get deposited in different organs and tissues in the body, including nerves, heart, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract.  Abnormal buildup of transthyretin amyloid protein in heart muscle stiffens it, eventually developing congestive heart failure.

**Are There Different Types of ATTR-CM?**

There are two types of ATTR-CM: Hereditary (hATTR-CM) and wild type (wATTR-CM).  hATTR-CM is a genetic disease caused by a genetic mutation in the transthyretin gene. wATTR-CM is an aging disease where normal transthyretin protein becomes structurally unstable and gets deposited in the heart. hATTR-CM can occur in younger age (50s to 60s), whereas wATTR usually occurs in older age (late 70s to 80s).

**What Are Some Common Clinical Symptoms of ATTR-CM?**

Patients may develop heart failure, which can present as reduced exercise capacity, shortness of breath, and swelling in the legs. Patients may have a recurrent exacerbation of shortness of breath and difficulty breathing requiring frequent emergency room and hospitalization. Atrial fibrillation is often seen. Patients often have lightheadedness, dizziness, and loss of consciousness due to slow heart rate and brief heartbeat pauses. This may be due to slow heart rate and transient pauses of the heartbeat. Patients often report intolerance (low blood pressure, postural hypotension) to traditional medications used for heart failure management, including beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers.

**Is There Any Treatment Available for ATTR-CM?**

Few new drugs and treatment strategies have emerged in recent years, and many are still under clinical review. However, in  2019, the US FDA has approved Tafamidis for clinical use in ATTR-CM. Tafamidis is an oral medication that is used in once a day formulation. Tafamidis can prevent further disease progression but unfortunately cannot reverse the disease process. Therefore early identification and treatment of ATTR-CM are advised.