The retina is a complex neuronal structure, and patients with retinal disease frequently present with difficult-to-diagnose causes of vision loss. Given this challenge in identifying the etiology of disease within the retinal infrastructure, an interprofessional team approach is essential for providing sufficient patient care. Patients with acute onset vision loss commonly present to the emergency department, where nurses, as the first point-of-contact, will triage the patients according to the severity and acuity of symptoms. For concerning conditions in the setting of indeterminate clinical diagnosis, medical professionals, including physicians and nursing staff, routinely order extensive and expensive testing, the majority of which returns unremarkable. In turn, patients are instructed to follow up with an outpatient ophthalmologist. Typically, this will involve a standard eye examination by a comprehensive ophthalmologist. However, these preliminary diagnostic tests largely detect structural abnormalities, which are not always consistent with clinical presentation. In turn, patient diagnoses may be mistaken for a benign condition and, in some cases, presumed to be malingering. When the cause of vision impairment remains undefined, despite extensive medical workup, neuro-ophthalmology is the field to which clinicians often turn.

Considering a broad differential is important to distinguish retinal dysfunction from similar-appearing causes since the choice of therapy depends on the underlying etiology of the disease process. Electroretinography, in conjunction with clinical findings, provides invaluable data for patient management while avoiding unnecessary testing. Transparent communication and care coordination between nurses, physicians, and ophthalmologists, including subspecialists, are essential for deriving a correct diagnosis and therapeutic decision-making with proper management thereafter. [Level 5]