Application of the halo vest immobilizer (HVI) is an interprofessional team-guided procedure, requiring at least 3 individuals, including a clinician, nursing staff, and/or physician assistants/residents. Before the procedure is initiated, the clinician must designate each assistant's roles, thus eliminating any confusion as to what is expected from each other. All interprofessional team members need to exercise open communication and collaborative activity to ensure the best possible outcomes for this procedure.

During HVI applications, It is critical that all team members understand basic principles of sterile technique and how to maintain a sterile field, as it is required for aspects of this procedure (halo ring and pin placement). Before the procedure, patient information regarding age and past medical history must be obtained, as it has been reported that patients with advanced age (older than 65 years) and cardiopulmonary complications are at higher risk for complications with HVI.

An interprofessional team that provides an integrated approach in managing the maintenance of HVI application is important in first recognizing complications early and preventing them from producing morbidity and mortality. In a recent prospective cohort study evaluating 239 patients treated with HVI following cervical spine trauma, the rates of mortality and pneumonia complications were relatively low. Elderly populations (older than 65years) did not represent an increased risk of pneumonia or death; however, there were a substantial number of minor complications between all age groups. Minor complications comprised a total of 121 of the 239 patients. The most common minor complications being the loss of cervical alignment, which occurred in 164 trauma patients, and pin site infections, which occurred in 12% of the patient. However, as shown by this studies' relatively low mortality and pneumonia rate, it confirmed that responsiveness and awareness of these minor complications could help prevent the further development of morbidities and reduce mortality, especially when a team-based approach is applied with these patients.

To help prevent the more common minor complications, such as pneumonia and pin site infections, incentive spirometer and Pin site care must be performed daily, respectively. This can be ordered by the provider and performed by trained nursing staff. If such complications are suspected, medical professionals such as pulmonologists and infectious disease physicians must be consulted to prevent further morbidity and progression. To prevent pin loosening, spine providers and or residents must check the torque of all pins 24 hours after the initial application, followed by every three weeks thereafter.