Renal scintigraphy requires coordination and interprofessional communication between radiologists, nuclear medicine physicians, nuclear medicine technologists, and the treating physicians and/or surgeons so as to provide well done and appropriate studies.

A review of the patient's history and physical examination and prior diagnostic studies are necessary to help plan the type of nuclear scanning that may be needed to be performed. The clinical note requesting such an exam should indicate the clinical question that needs to be answered. The interpreting radiologist/nuclear medicine physicians should review all available clinical, radiological, and laboratory data as well as current medications before performing the study. Special attention must be made for any patient with a history of fluid restriction, reduced urine volume, or current use of diuretics since these situations can affect the nuclear scan and its interpretation.

Renal scintigraphy (like all nuclear medicine exams) requires cooperation between the pharmacist, nuclear medicine technologist, nurses, registered radiology assistants as well as a radiologist or nuclear medicine specialist for proper radiotracer administration and image timing.

The above statements regarding renal scintigraphy are part of standard radiographic practice. (see ACR–SPR practice parameter for the performance of renal scintigraphy).

Radiation safety is the responsibility of all involved staff. The radiation dose in diagnostic procedures should be maintained as per the “as low as reasonably achievable” (ALARA) principle. A practice guideline was developed in 2010, by an expert panel including pediatric radiologists, nuclear medicine physicists, as well as nuclear medicine specialists and nuclear medicine technologists to optimize radiation doses for children.

Radiation safety is crucial in managing all patients. Though nuclear scanning procedures are not actually performed in pregnant patients, the agents are associated with minimal fetal radiation dosages (a few mSv).

The results of renal scintigraphy should be properly communicated to the patient's physician (see ACR practice parameter for communication of diagnostic imaging findings).