# Continuing Education Activity

Mediastinitis refers to inflammation or infection that involves the mediastinum, the cavity within the thorax that is bordered by the pleural sacs, the thoracic outlet, and the diaphragm. There are multiple etiologies that can cause mediastinitis. Since many vital structures lie within the mediastinum, the disease process is life-threatening and requires emergent intervention and treatment. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of mediastinitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in providing comprehensive care to these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiologies of mediastinitis.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with mediastinitis.
- Outline the treatment considerations for patients with mediastinitis.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by mediastinitis.

# Introduction

Mediastinitis is inflammation or infection of the mediastinum. The mediastinum encompasses the space within the thoracic cavity, bordered by the pleural sacs laterally, the thoracic outlet superiorly, and the diaphragm inferiorly. Within the mediastinum are many vital structures: the heart, the great vessels, the trachea, mainstem bronchi, esophagus, phrenic nerve, vagus nerves, and the thoracic duct. Although mediastinitis is uncommon, it should be included in the differential diagnosis, as any infection involving the structures stated previously is considered life-threatening and requires immediate treatment.

There are multiple etiologies of mediastinitis. Three subtypes will be discussed here, including postoperative mediastinitis, descending necrotizing mediastinitis, and fibrosing mediastinitis. In the modern world, the most common of the three is postoperative mediastinitis, followed by descending necrotizing mediastinitis. These two subtypes are typically acute and follow a more fulminant time course. The least common of the subtypes, fibrosing mediastinitis, is a more chronic and indolent process.

# Etiology

Mediastinitis can be caused by various pathologies that breach the integrity of the mediastinal structures, including iatrogenic, traumatic, or infectious causes. In regards to fibrosing mediastinitis, this is an inflammatory process that starts within the mediastinum.

There are many causes of mediastinitis, too numerous to cover in this review. Although this review will not go into great detail, it is important to note that a common cause of mediastinitis is tracheal or esophageal rupture, such as after an endoscopic procedure, Boerhaave syndrome, and foreign body aspiration. Other causes associated with mediastinitis include direct traumatic injury, the spread of pulmonary infection, and pancreatitis, though rare.

Postoperative mediastinitis refers to mediastinitis in the setting of postsurgical procedures. It is most commonly related to sternotomies and thoracic surgeries. It is thought to be caused by the intraoperative introduction of infection or from infection of the surgical wound that seeds into the mediastinum. It has also been referred to as post-sternotomy mediastinitis or deep sternal wound infections.

Descending necrotizing mediastinitis involves the spread of infection from a head or neck pathological processes such as neck abscess, Ludwig angina, and other dental infections. Commonly, odontogenic or pharyngeal sources cause inflammation via the fascial planes affecting the posterior mediastinum.

The exact etiology that causes fibrosing mediastinitis is still not adequately researched. Although believed to be idiopathic, there has been speculation that it is associated with both infectious and noninfectious processes. Of the potential infectious causes, histoplasmosis and tuberculosis have been frequently described in the literature as linked to an immune-mediated hypersensitivity reaction. The non-infectious causes described often include sarcoidosis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and Riedel thyroiditis.

# Epidemiology

The exact incidence and prevalence of total mediastinitis cases and descending necrotizing mediastinitis and fibrosing mediastinitis are not yet documented. Postoperative mediastinitis has a relatively low incidence, ranging from 0.3% to 5%, with an average of 1% to 2% at most facilities.

# Pathophysiology

Mediastinitis is due to a breach in the mediastinal structures from an inciting incident, including direct injury or secondary to an acute infectious process. Postoperative mediastinitis has been linked to intraoperative contamination, although infectious spread can occur postoperatively from an infected surgical wound, into the mediastinum. The majority of cases are caused by gram-positive bacteria, particularly Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococcus, accounting for 60% to 80% of cases. Infection linked to S. aureus is frequently due to intraoperative contamination from the surgeon or surgical staff who are carriers or endogenously from the patient’s nares. Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus are common occupants of the skin flora, thus allowing it to infect surgical wounds. Although S. aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus are the most common causes, other gram-positive bacteria, gram-negative bacteria, and, rarely, fungi are causative agents.

Descending necrotizing mediastinitis is the spread of a pharyngeal, odontogenic, or cervical infection that proceeds down into the mediastinum. The infection can spread to the deep fascial planes and into the mediastinum, most commonly into the posterior mediastinum. Cellulitis, abscesses, sepsis, and necrosis may occur throughout this fulminant course.

Although the exact pathophysiology of fibrosing mediastinitis is unknown, it has been shown to have multiple variants, a granulomatous and non granulomatous form. These can then be divided into diffuse or focal distributions.

# History and Physical

People presenting with acute mediastinitis will be ill-appearing. They may complain of dysphagia, chest pain, fever, and respiratory distress. It is crucial to get a thorough history, including recent surgeries or infections, past medical, travel, and social history, to evaluate risk factors for the development of mediastinitis.

When evaluating a person for postoperative mediastinitis, important risk factors such as diabetes, obesity, smoking, renal failure, and an immunocompromised state should be documented. Additionally, obtaining surgical history is critical as patients with longer surgical times, repeat thoracic surgeries, or excessive cautery may have a higher predisposition to developing postoperative mediastinitis. The physical exam in patients with symptoms concerning mediastinitis will often be positive for sternal instability, wound discharge, pain, and tenderness. If a patient has an unexplained slow postoperative recovery, mediastinitis should be on the differential. Patients can present with mediastinitis up to a year after surgery or even longer, but the majority of cases are within 30 days of the surgery.

If descending necrotizing mediastinitis is suspected, these patients will have a head or neck infection that was not adequately treated that then spread to the mediastinum. In addition to the symptoms previously mentioned, these patients may experience dyspnea, cervical, or thoracic pain with crepitus and erythema noted on physical exam.

Fibrosing mediastinitis has a more insidious progression; therefore, many patients may be asymptomatic initially. When patients are symptomatic, common presenting symptoms include cough, shortness of breath, pleuritic chest pain, recurrent lung infections, hemoptysis, fever, or weight loss.

# Evaluation

When suspecting mediastinitis, patients should have a prompt primary assessment of the airway, breathing, and circulation. If necessary, resuscitative measures should precede labs and imaging. Once a patient is stabilized, obtaining critical imaging is the next step to evaluate for the diagnosis. A chest radiograph can be helpful if signs of mediastinal widening or pneumomediastinum are present; however, they often do not adequately portray the extension of the disease process.

Postoperative mediastinitis may be difficult to assess with imaging due to the physiologic postoperative changes that are often identified in radiographic studies. After 14 days of surgery, the sensitivity and specificity of computed tomography greatly increase.

Laboratory studies for acute mediastinitis can present with leukocytosis, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), and procalcitonin. Blood cultures should also be sent, particularly in those with suspected postoperative mediastinitis as bacteremia is a common feature of the disease.

Fibrosis mediastinitis most commonly manifests as an infiltrative mass on computed tomography that distorts the mediastinal fat planes and extends into the surrounding mediastinal structures. It can be diffuse or localized to one area. Additionally, it can present as calcifications on imaging, notably when mediastinitis is associated with histoplasmosis. Frequently, the localized mass is in the hila, paratracheal, or subcarinal areas.

# Treatment / Management

Generally, an interprofessional approach is fused for the treatment of acute mediastinitis with a focus on early initiation of antibiotics and surgical debridement.

As the exact pathogenesis for fibrosing mediastinitis is unknown, the treatment course lacks a standardized regimen.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several differentials should be considered in the workup of mediastinitis. A few that should be included, but not limited to, are:

- Coronary artery disease and acute coronary syndrome

- Pulmonary embolism

- Pneumothorax

- Aortic dissection

- Cellulitis

- Localized infection in the head or neck

- Tumor or mass

# Prognosis

Postsurgical and descending necrotizing mediastinitis are both associated with high morbidity and mortality if not treated early. They are both considered life-threatening conditions with descending necrotizing mediastinitis having a mortality of 20% to 40%, despite current treatments.

Comparatively, there is a better prognosis for fibrosing mediastinitis, with unilateral involvement shown to have better outcomes than bilateral involvement.

# Complications

As the mediastinum is composed of many vital organs and structures, there are an array of complications that require prompt intervention. Complications may include:

- Pericarditis

- Recurrent pneumonia

- Sepsis

- Obstructed airway

- Severe bleeding or hemoptysis

- Cor pulmonale

- Multiorgan failure

- Complications from surgical treatment or debridement

# Consultations

Although consultations vary depending on the subtype of mediastinitis, possible consultants include, but not limited to:

- Thoracic surgeon

- Infectious disease specialist

- Dentist

- Intensivist

- Anesthesiologist

- Otolaryngologist

- Radiologist

# Deterrence and Patient Education

There are few measures during and after the surgery which can reduce the incidence of mediastinitis post-operatively. These include:

- Complete aseptic technique during surgery

- Secure hemostasis carefully

- Prophylactic intranasal mupirocin to Staphylococcus aureus carriers will reduce the risk of surgical site infection postoperatively

- Proper closure of the sternum

- Topical application of bacitracin ointment on sternotomy to reduce the risk of mediastinitis after cardiac surgery

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Mediastinitis is a rare but life-threatening disease that requires emergent intervention. When it is suspected, the prompt inclusion of necessary consults is crucial, particularly for a cardiothoracic surgeon. Other consultants, as mentioned earlier in the review, are also important in providing thorough care. Early broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initiated with prompt imaging, typically a CT scan.

The most important aspect of improved outcomes is prevention. For surgeries, evaluation for risk factors and attempts to modify for a more favorable outcome is helpful. Most crucial are sterile techniques and the prevention of contamination during surgery. Prophylactic antibiotics have also been shown to be helpful.