Both the United States Navy and Australian protocols have been used extensively and offer a significant chance of improvement in symptoms and resolution of symptoms, but all in-water recompression techniques share similar limitations. In all cases, careful evaluation of the diver to determine the diver’s suitability for return to the water must be made. Divers who are paralyzed or have an alteration of their mental status should generally not be recompressed in the water due to the potential for drowning. Divers should always have a tender enter the water with them who is capable of rescuing the injured diver should their DCS progress to include paralysis. A sufficient amount of oxygen should be available to complete the treatment, with a suitable reserve to ensure that the diver can be fully treated and egress the water safely. Thermal protection also is important, as the diver may already be cooled from the dive prior to the injury. Diver cooling sufficient to change perfusion of tissues increases the probability of DCS

A significant concern for all in-water recompression protocols is that they involve the use of pure oxygen at 30 FSW (almost 2 ATA), greatly increasing the possibility of an oxygen-induced seizure. Technical divers often use a maximum of 1.6 ATA partial pressure of oxygen (ppO2) for a safe oxygen limit underwater during planned decompression, whereas recreational divers usually prefer a more conservative limit of 1.4 ATA. At 2 ATA, the risk of seizure, especially if the diver is actively exercising, is considerable enough that a full face mask would be preferable. While a seizure due to oxygen itself is typically brief and not believed to be harmful in and of itself, loss of the breathing apparatus from the airway and subsequent drowning is the predominant concern. There have been a number of documented deaths from in-water oxygen toxicity-induced seizures over the years. It is for this reason that a full face mask should be considered standard equipment for in-water recompression in that it affords some (though not complete) airway protection. Training in the use of full-face masks, particularly in the clearing of full face mask floods, dealing with motion-induced nausea and emesis, and transitioning to a traditional mask and demand regulator is highly desired before attempting to use one in an emergency. Few recreational, technical, or scientific divers have this experience, putting them at increased risk during attempted recompression should anything go wrong at depth. It is further recommended to tether the diver and use a weighted down the line to tightly control buoyancy and prevent an inadvertent increase in depth while helping reduce the stress of the situation.

Recompression in the water should only be considered with the following resources:

- Adequately trained divers, both the stricken diver and the tender

- The availability of enough oxygen to complete the treatment with adequate reserve

- The availability of a safe in-water site to conduct the recompression

- The availability of equipment such as full face masks (communications are desirable but can be accomplished with hand signals and slates), diver tethers, and a downline at a minimum

- Adequate thermal protection for the diver and tender

- Diver evaluation to ensure there are no contraindications to going in the water (clinical hypothermia, paralysis, altered mental status, or cardiopulmonary instability)

- Divers with urinary retention or abdominal pain should be recompressed with care, as these symptoms often herald worsening spinal decompression sickness, which can progress to paralysis. Conversely, these are the divers who may benefit most from in-water recompression.