The main approaches to the treatment of panic disorder include both psychological and pharmacological interventions. Psychological interventions consist of cognitive-behavioral therapy. As an added benefit in patients with a panic disorder that also has concomitant comorbid medical conditions, there are components of their therapeutic regimens which may also secondarily improve their respective medical illnesses. Breathing training is a method of reducing panic symptomatology by utilizing capnometry biofeedback to decrease the number of episodes of hyperventilation. Several of these slow breathing techniques have been shown to benefit patients with asthma and hypertension. Hyperventilation reduction can help patients with cardiovascular disease. Anxiety and stress-reduction techniques can lower adverse outcomes in cardiovascular illness by decreasing sympathetic activity.

Antidepressants and benzodiazepines are the mainstays of pharmacologic treatment. Among the different classes of antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are recommended over monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants. SSRIs are considered the first-line treatment option for patients with panic disorder. In patients with co-existing conditions or where the patients are having severe symptoms, it is preferred that a benzodiazepine such as alprazolam is used until the anti-depressants take effect. In patients with substance use disorder and panic disorder, it is recommended that gabapentin, and mirtazapine is used.

Because of the risk of suicide, some patients may need inpatient monitoring until the symptoms have subsided.