Colesevelam is part of the drug class known as bile acid sequestrants. While overall, very effective and safe to use as a nonsystemic approach to lower cholesterol, tolerability and compliance issues are not uncommon. Colesevelam has the lowest rate of side effects associated with its use, but it still shares the same side effects as the rest of the drugs in its class. Due to the mechanism of action and causing increased bile acid in the gastrointestinal tract, the predominant side effects are gastrointestinal. Symptoms like constipation, diarrhea, gas, as well as nausea, abdominal pain, and weakness are common. Patients have also noted muscle pain to be a side effect of colesevelam.

Colesevelam may decrease the bioavailability of many drugs, including but not limited to: amiodarone, oral corticosteroids, cyclosporine (systemic), estrogen derivatives, progesterone, oral contraceptives, ezetimibe, glimepiride, glipizide, glyburide, leflunomide, lomitapide, loop diuretics like furosemide, thiazides, methotrexate, mycophenolate, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, olmesartan, phenytoin, pravastatin, niacin, propranolol, raloxifene, tetracyclines, levothyroxine, ursodiol, oral vancomycin, warfarin and fat-soluble multivitamins A, E, D, K. If these drugs are on the treatment regimen of the patient, monitor therapy or consider therapy modification. These drugs require administration either one to two hours before or four hours after colesevelam administration (see product information of the medications mentioned above).