Detailed history and physical examination by an experienced clinician can lead to an appropriate diagnosis. Neurologic examination should be normal other than the presence of motor or vocal tics. History or exam findings that would raise concern for a different diagnosis include a change in the child’s cognition, tics occurring while the child is asleep, or constant movement. The Yale Global Tic Severity Scale is the gold standard validated instrument that is used in most Tourette studies and can be used in the clinic. It is important to evaluate for evidence of comorbid conditions as well, including ADHD, OCD, anxiety disorder, or other behavioral problems. Often, these are quite disruptive for the child’s social functioning. Treatment of these conditions can indirectly lead to a reduction in tic frequency and severity.

Currently, there is no specific laboratory or genetic test available to diagnose Tourette Syndrome. Brain MRI or CT scan is typically normal. Recent MRI studies recently have shown subtle reduced caudate volume in patients with GTS, and the degree of this volume loss correlates to OCD symptoms. However, these results were obtained by rigorously detailed measuring, and the techniques are not currently available to most community-based providers.

Even when children seem to have tics under good control at school or in other social environments, they may be expending a considerable amount of mental effort to do so. This can interfere with their ability to concentrate on lessons or fully participate in conversations. Asking questions to gauge this mental aspect can help a provider have a clearer understanding of how disruptive GTS is for the patient.