Most cases of arteriovenous fistulas in the past were treated conservatively in wartime and, later on, were surgically managed if needed.

**Indications for Treatment**

- Hemodynamic instability, availability of a surgical team, injury to adjacent tissue, and unsuccessful endovascular repair are all indications for open surgical intervention on a fistula.

- In traumatic fistulas, failure of spontaneous regression within two weeks indicates repair.

- Congenital fistulas are typically repaired when they present due to sequelae in later life, as many may remain asymptomatic until adulthood.

- Hemodialysis fistulas that are no longer functioning, no longer needed, have endured multiple attempts at salvage, or fail to mature should be considered for ligation.

- Other important indications of surgical repair of AVFs are hemorrhage, pain with ischemia, congestive cardiac failure, Limb-size inequality, nonhealing ulcers, and functional impairment.

**Endovascular Management**

- It is the preferred method of management for AVFs.

- The first endovascular repair was done in 1992 by Parodi of a traumatic subclavian AVF; a covered stent was used.

- The advantages of endovascular repair include rapid recovery, less post-operative pain, and less disability compared with the open approach.

- Coils, stent-grafts, covered stents, cyanoacrylate glue, are among the options for closing the fistula.

- Stent grafts are used to exclude the fistula while preserving the essential artery and vein; coils can be used when there is a low risk of complication to embolizing essential vessels. Endografts designed for larger vessels, such as the aorta or iliac vessels, can be used similarly. Stent graft patency rates at a one-year range between 88 and 100%.

- Complications involved with placement of covered stents include arterial dissection or rupture, migration of the device, or embolization. In a review of patients with traumatic AVFs, the most common reason for the failure of the endovascular intervention was the inability to advance the guidewire.

- The patient may also develop intimal hyperplasia at the placement site of the stent or subacute thrombosis, leading to occlusion and distal ischemia. If the patient does develop venous thrombosis, anticoagulation should be initiated and continued for six months.

- Embolization can be advantageous for complex AVFs with multiple feeding and draining vessels. Deep-seated or intra-organ and adjacent to critical anatomy, AVFs are much more amenable to endovascular management than open surgery.

- Contraindications to endovascular management include contrast allergy.

- In the treatment of AVFs, many sclerosing agents, including injectible absolute ethanol, can be administered. They may carry a risk of necrosis of the surrounding tissue. So they should be used with caution.

**Open Surgery**

- It is an option for repair when endovascular management fails.

- In addition to the need for surgical exposure of the fistula and increased risk of bleeding, high morbidity is associated with an open approach, including venous stasis, limb (or distal) ischemia, limb loss, venous thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism.

- Repairs can be made via autogenous (usually saphenous vein) grafts, synthetic grafts, venous ligation (diameter dependent), bypass, or complex reconstruction involving one or more of the above.

- Limitations for using the saphenous vein autologous graft include needing a vein of 3-8 mm, no lower extremity venous insufficiency, and no thrombophlebitis of the vein.

- Conservative management is an option if no symptoms or complications exist or if the AVF is expected to be self-limited.