**Epidural Hematoma**

Epidural hematomas occur when blood dissects into the potential space between the dura and inner table of the skull. Most commonly this occurs after a skull fracture (85% to 95% of cases). There can be damage to an arterial or venous vessel which allows blood to dissect into the potential epidural space resulting in the epidural hematoma. The most common vessel damaged is the middle meningeal artery underlying the temporoparietal region of the skull.

**Subdural Hematoma**

Subdural hematoma has multiple causes including head trauma, coagulopathy, vascular abnormality rupture, and spontaneous. Most commonly head trauma causes motion of the brain relative to the skull which can stretch and break blood vessels traversing from the brain to the skull. If the blood vessels are damaged, they bleed into the subdural space.

**Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**

Subarachnoid hemorrhage most commonly occurs after trauma where cortical surface vessels are injured and bleed into the subarachnoid space. Non-traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage is most commonly due to the rupture of a cerebral aneurysm. When aneurysm ruptures, blood can flow into the subarachnoid space. Other causes of subarachnoid hemorrhage include arteriovenous malformations (AVM), use of blood thinners, trauma, or idiopathic causes.

**Intraparenchymal Hemorrhage**

Non-traumatic intraparenchymal hemorrhage most often occurs secondary to hypertensive damage to cerebral blood vessels which eventually burst and bleed into the brain. Other causes include rupture of an arteriovenous malformation, rupture of an aneurysm, arteriopathy, tumor, infection, or venous outflow obstruction. Penetrating and non-penetrating trauma may also cause intraparenchymal hemorrhage.