As with any other case of acute overdose, initial management involves stabilizing airway, breathing, and circulation. Given rapid gastrointestinal absorption, decontamination should is a consideration if the patient presents early.  Monitoring and treating arrhythmias, electrolyte imbalances, measuring the digoxin concentration and definitive care, which includes administering digoxin-specific antibody fragments, are the cornerstone steps in managing acute overdoses.

**Gastrointestinal Decontamination**

Activated charcoal administration is possible if the patient presents within 1 to 2 hours of acute ingestion, provided the patient is alert and is protecting the airway. Multidose activated charcoal can also be a consideration since both digoxin and digitoxin undergo enterohepatic circulation. The dose is 1 mg/kg orally that can be repeated every 2 to 4 hours up to four times. This regimen reduces the serum concentration of CAS by preventing enterohepatic circulation. Cholestyramine and colestipol may also help in decreasing the gastrointestinal reabsorption of digoxin, as a result of their steroid-binding capacity.

**Antidotal therapy with Digoxin-specific Antibody Fragments**

Early recognition of CAS toxicity and expeditious administration of digoxin antibody fragments is vital in managing acute overdoses. The indications for administration of antibody fragments include:

1) Life-threatening dysrhythmias.

2) Potassium of over 5 mEq/L in acute ingestions.

3) Non-digoxin cardioactive steroid toxicity.

4) Chronic digoxin toxicity with arrhythmias, altered mental status, or significant GI symptoms.

5) Digoxin levels over 10ng/ml 6hrs post-ingestion or 15 at any time during the course.

Asymptomatic patients with an elevated digoxin level is not an indication for starting antibody fragment.

The dose of DigFab to be given depends on the availability of information regarding how much digoxin the patient ingested and if the digoxin levels in the blood are available.

a) If neither the quantity ingested nor the digoxin levels are available, an empiric dose of 10 vials of digoxin immune fab is an option. In children, five vials are permissible. In very small children, be cautious of volume overload.

b) If the quantity ingested is known but not the levels, the number of vials of DigFab can be calculated by the following formula:

Number of vials = Dose ingested (in mg) x 1.6

c) If the levels of digoxin are known, then the number of vials to be given is derived by the following formula:

Number of vials = [(serum digoxin concentration in ng/mL) (patient's weight in kg)]/ 100

When using the formulae to calculate the number of vials, round up the result to the nearest whole number.

When CAS other than digoxin and digitoxin is the toxin concerned, the empiric administration of 10 vials for adults and five vials for children is the recommended therapeutic approach.

**Electrolyte Imbalances**

Hyperkalemia is an indicator of the severity of CAS toxicity. Both hyper and hypokalemia may potentiate digoxin toxicity. Hyperkalemia itself does not cause death, and its correction does not improve survival. Anti-hyperkalemic measures, including insulin/dextrose administration, require judicious use to avoid hypokalemia. Anti hyperkalemic measures along with digoxin immune fab can lead to hypokalemia as the reactivated Na-K-ATPase pump will draw the potassium into the intracellular compartment.

If hypokalemia exists, this needs to be corrected early as hypokalemia further exacerbates digoxin toxicity. Patients with hypokalemia may have underlying hypomagnesemia that needs repletion. Calcium administration for hyperkalemia had been traditionally discouraged in digoxin toxicity for concerns of "stone-heart."

**General Management**

If Fab fragments are not immediately available, symptomatic bradycardia or bradyarrhythmia may are treatable with atropine (0.5 mg IV in adults; 0.02 mg/kg IV in children, minimum dose 0.1 mg) and hypotension can be treated with intravenous fluids. Lidocaine and phenytoin may be useful for the management of ventricular tachyarrhythmias secondary to cardioactive steroids.

Volume depletion secondary to GI losses decreased oral intake, or concomitant use of diuretics can decrease the renal clearance of digoxin and lead to toxicity. Correction of the volume deficit by judicious fluid depletion, improving oral intake in patients with poor oral intake, and reviewing the patient's medications that can contribute to volume depletion (diuretics, laxatives, etc.) are important steps in the management of the condition.

**Disposition**

All patients with signs and symptoms of digoxin toxicity should be admitted to the hospital with continuous cardiac monitoring. Those with lethal arrhythmias, unstable vitals, or clinically significant comorbidities require admission to an intensive care unit.

Serial digoxin and potassium levels should be checked along with EKG monitoring to identify arrhythmias. The frequency of EKG monitoring should be more often if there are abnormalities.

Cardiac monitoring for at least 6 hours is the recommended interval for patients who have suspected CAS toxicity but are otherwise asymptomatic with a normal exam and labs. If repeat digoxin levels are down-trending, and the clinical course is improving, they may be safely discharged with follow-up instructions.