**Medications used for stress testing diagnosis include all of the following.**

**Adenosine**

Adenosine acts on the coronary arteries through specific activation of the A2A receptor and causes them to dilate.

- Activation of the A1 receptor results in decreased atrioventricular conduction and reduces heart rate.

- Activation of A2A receptors in vascular smooth muscles in blood vessels such as in coronary arteries causing vasodilation

- Activation of the A2B and A3 receptors in bronchial beds can also result in bronchospasm.

Dose:

The dose of adenosine used during a pharmacologic stress testing is 140 mcg/kg/min, and it is given continuously for 6 minutes duration. The radioactive material is normally given at 3 minutes, and then adenosine is kept infusing for 3 more minutes. There is an additional methodology in which adenosine is given for 4 minutes as a continuous infusion, and its effects and outcomes are comparable to the continuous infusion lasting for 6 minutes.

Limiting caffeine intake:

Methylxanthines such as theophylline or caffeine, block adenosine binding due to antagonistic action at A2A receptors and can reduce the coronary vasodilation effects of adenosine. Therefore, it is recommended to discontinue consumption of caffeine-containing medications, foods, or beverages for at least 12 hours and ideally 24 hours before adenosine stress testing.

Contraindications:

- Adenosine is contraindicated in patients with reactive airway disease with significant wheezing

- Patients with a history of advanced conduction abnormalities, including 2nd or 3rd-degree atrioventricular block in the absence of a permanent pacemaker.

- Patients with a history of abnormalities in the sinus node in the absence of a permanent pacemaker

- Systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mmHg

- Poorly controlled blood pressure with systolic blood pressure significantly higher (over 200 mmHg at rest).

- Caffeine intake in the previous 12 hours

- Known hypersensitivity to adenosine

- Patients with acute coronary syndrome or unstable angina or who experienced a myocardial infarction less than 1 week ago.

**Dipyridamole**

Dipyridamole was the first vasodilator used for myocardial perfusion stress testing. It is an indirect coronary artery vasodilator. It increases the tissue levels of adenosine by preventing the intracellular reuptake of adenosine by inhibiting enzyme adenosine deaminase prolonging its vasodilator effect and increasing adenosine blood levels.

Dipyridamole increases coronary blood flow to 3.8 to 7 times than baseline. The alpha half-life (the initial decline following peak concentration) is approximately 30 to 45 minutes. The beta-half life (the terminal decline in plasma concentration) is approximately 10 hours. It is metabolized in the liver to glucuronic acid conjugate and excreted in the bile.

Dipyridamole dose:

The dose of dipyridamole is 0.142 mcg/kg/min, or 0.57 mcg/kg.

Side effects of dipyridamole:

- The incidence of atrioventricular (AV) block with dipyridamole is less than that observed with adenosine (2%).

- Chest pain is seen in 20% but is nonspecific and not necessarily indicative of the presence of CAD.

- Minor side effects include headache, dizziness, nausea, hypotension, and flushing.

Contraindications:

- Patients with bronchospastic lung disease with ongoing wheezing or history of significant reactive airway disease should not undergo dipyridamole stress testing.

- Uncontrolled hypertension (systolic pressure of over 200 mmHg or a diastolic pressure of over 110 mmHg)

- A systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mmHg.

- Known hypersensitivity to dipyridamole.

- Caffeine intake in the previous 12 hours

- Second- or third-degree atrioventricular block without a functioning pacemaker.

**Regadenoson**

Regadenoson is another direct coronary artery vasodilator, which is a selective A2A agonist. The affinity with which regadenoson binds with A2A is 10 times greater than its affinity to bind with the A1 receptor and even weaker affinity to bind with A2B and A3 receptors. Regadenoson produces maximal hyperemia quickly and maintains it for an optimal duration that is more practical for radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging. Regadenoson's simple, rapid bolus administration in all patients, regardless of weight and short duration of hyperemic effect, has greatly simplified the method of stress testing as compared to adenosine and dipyridamole. It is the most commonly used currently due to lesser side effects and easier to perform.

Regadenoson dose:

As mentioned earlier, the dosing of regadenoson is not weight-based like other vasodilators. The dose of regadenoson normally used is 0.4 mg, which is available only in a prefilled 5-ml syringe. The dose is immediately followed by a saline flush. The radiotracer is administered 10 to 20 seconds later, immediately followed by another saline flush.

Contraindications:

- Regadenoson is considered contraindicated for patients with second- or third-degree AV block or sick sinus syndrome.

- Allergic response in the past to the agent

- Hypotension with systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg.

- Poorly controlled blood pressure with systolic blood pressure significantly higher (greater than 200 mmHg at rest)

- Patients who received dipyridamole in the last 2 days should also avoid regadenoson stress testing.

- Patients with acute coronary syndrome or unstable angina or who experienced a myocardial infarction less than 1 week ago

- Caution is advised in patients with reactive airway disease with wheezing

Reversal of vasodilator effects:

In patients who suffer from undesirable effects from pharmacologic stress testing agents, caffeine is given generally to counteract the effects. The use of caffeine in reversing the side effects is more beneficial in dipyridamole and regadenoson due to longer duration of action as compared to adenosine. Aminophylline can be used for more threatening side effects.

**Dobutamine**

Dobutamine is an inotropic agent that can be used for myocardial perfusion stress testing.

Dobutamine, like exercise, increases myocardial oxygen demand and evokes ischemia if there is insufficient perfusion to the affected myocardium that can be seen on stress echocardiography or nuclear imaging.

Beta-blockers should be held 24 hours before the dobutamine stress test due to the opposite antagonistic action.

Dobutamine dose:

Dobutamine is given as an infusion as an incremental dose beginning at 5 or 10 mcg/kg/min for 3 minutes. It is increased to 20, 30, and then 40 mcg/kg/min, also for 3-min intervals, for a maximum of 12 minutes or until the target heart rate is achieved. Radiotracer is injected at peak heart rate with dobutamine infusion continuing for one minute following tracer injection. The half-life of dobutamine is 2 to 3 min.

Indications:

- Dobutamine is a secondary pharmacologic stress agent that is recommended only in patients who cannot undergo an exercise stress test and also have contraindications to pharmacologic vasodilator stress agents such as high degree AV block or reactive airway disease (if regadenoson is not available).

Contraindications:

- Patients with acute coronary syndrome or unstable angina or who experienced a myocardial infarction less than 1 week ago

- Hemodynamically significant left ventricular outflow obstruction.

- Atrial tachyarrhythmias with an uncontrolled ventricular response

- Hypertension (systolic blood pressure over 200 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure exceeding 110 mmHg)

- Aortic dissection

- Known hypersensitivity to dobutamine