When planning therapeutic radiation for a patient with an implanted pacemaker, the status of the device requires monitoring by a healthcare provider who specializes in monitoring the pacemakers. Moreover, the radiation oncologist should assess the radiation dose to be received by the device in that particular case.

If the malfunction of the device is due to lead dislodgement, the management depends on the timing of the event related to the timing of the implantation of the device, the severity of the dysfunction, the clinical situation of the patient,  and the location of the displaced lead (atrial or ventricular). Reopening and reinstating the lead is a good management option in early displacements as the chances of fixation of the lead by the fibrous endocardial reaction are very low. Thus, allowing the manipulation of the lead.

On the other hand, if the displacement of the lead is late, lead manipulation might not be an option. In such cases, introducing the lead in the heart chamber where the displacement has occurred is a good management plan if lead extraction is not possible. This new lead cancels the effect of previously displaced lead in that chamber.

The best treatment of pacemaker dysfunction involves an interprofessional team of primary care clinicians, emergency medicine clinicians, cardiologists, cardiac surgeons, and cardiac nurses. Each of these disciplines needs to understand the function of pacemakers, be able to identify potential issues with pacemaker function, and engage in open information sharing with other team members to preclude adverse events and improve patient outcomes in those patients with pacemakers. [Level 5]

Different problems can arise during anesthesia, surgery, or ICU management of patients with cardiac implantable electrical devices (CIED). These problems include ventricular tachyarrhythmias, asystole, hypotension, and bradycardia.