Early activation of the trauma system is imperative; in the optimal scenario, the trauma surgeon is present at the bedside when the patient arrives. The patient should be brought to the trauma/resuscitation bay if available. Depending on the staffing and procedures of the receiving hospital, the emergency department and/or trauma surgery team may perform the early evaluation and management of the patient.

The clinical stability of the patient determines the evaluation of the penetrating groin injury. Pelvic radiographs are obtainable in the trauma bay or emergency room; locations of external wounds should be labeled with radiopaque marker to allow for visualization on X-ray. Hemodynamically unstable patients should be taken directly to the operating room for operative evaluation and management of ongoing hemorrhage or concurrent traumatic injuries. Patients with hard signs of vascular injury (expanding hematoma, pulsatile bleeding, bruit, thrill, pulse discrepancy, or evidence of ischemia) should also receive urgent/emergent exploration and management. Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma guidelines suggests forgoing vascular imaging in the setting of hard signs of injury.

The hemodynamically stable patient without hard signs of vascular injury should undergo a detailed vascular exam, and ABIs should be obtained. If the vascular exam is normal and ABIs are greater than 0.9, no further vascular imaging is required. Conversely, soft signs of vascular injury (nonexpanding hematoma, persistent non-pulsatile bleeding, report of prior pulsatile bleeding, neurologic deficit), or an ABI less than 0.9 warrant CT angiography or conventional arteriography.

Additional imaging modalities should be considered based upon the location of the injury and the suspected trajectory. Contrast CT of the abdomen and pelvis is warranted to evaluate for intraabdominal injuries; addition of rectal contrast can increase detection of colonic or rectal injuries. Delayed CT sequences and CT cystogram/urogram are useful tools for evaluation of the genitourinary system.