**I. Girls:**

- 
**Ovarian Cysts**

Functioning follicular cysts are the most common cause of precocious pseudo puberty in girls. Functional follicular cysts secrete estrogen and can present as premature breast development. Vaginal bleeding may also occur after cysts degenerate.

- 
**Ovarian Tumors**

Ovarian tumors such as granulosa cell tumors, Sertoli/Leydig cell tumors, Leydig cell tumors, and gonadoblastoma can all result in precocious puberty. Granulosa cell tumor is the most common sex cord tumor in girls and is associated with excess estrogen production, which can lead to isosexual precocious puberty. On the other hand, gonadoblastoma, Leydig cell tumors, and Sertoli/Leydig tumors lead to excess androgen production and can present with contrasexual precocious puberty.

**II. Boys:**

- 
**Leydig Cell Tumors**

Leydig cell tumor is the most common testicular sex cord-stromal tumor and is associated with excess testosterone production. This condition commonly presents with asymmetric testicular enlargement and precocious puberty between the ages of six and ten years in boys.

- 
**Human Chorionic Gonadotropin-Secreting (hCG) Tumors**

Excess hCG production from testicular tumors (embryonal cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma) and ectopic sites (pineal gland, mediastinum, liver, retroperitoneum) can lead to isosexual precocious puberty in boys.

- 
**Familial Male-limited Precocious Puberty (FMPP)**

Familial male-limited precocious puberty is a rare condition that can cause isosexual precocious pseudopuberty in boys. It presents in boys as young as two years of age with precocious puberty, symmetric testicular enlargement, and positive family history of precocious puberty in male relatives.

**III. Boys & Girls:**

- 
**Primary Hypothyroidism**

Long-standing untreated primary hypothyroidism can present as precocious puberty in boys and girls. Girls affected by this condition present with early breast development, and galactorrhea, followed by vaginal bleeding. "Van Wyk and Grumbach syndrome" refers to the combination of primary hypothyroidism, precocious puberty, delayed bone age, and ovarian cysts in girls. In boys, primary hypothyroidism may cause premature testicular enlargement.

- 
**McCune-Albright Syndrome**

McCune Albright Syndrome is a rare condition that can present with irregular café au lait spots, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, and precocious pseudopuberty in girls. Estrogen overproduction in this condition leads to early breast development, vaginal bleeding, recurrent follicular cysts, and accelerated bone growth. At times, vaginal bleeding may precede the onset of breast development. McCune Albright syndrome can also present with endocrinopathies such as thyrotoxicosis, Cushing's syndrome, gigantism, or acromegaly.

- 
**Adrenal Pathology**

Excess adrenal production of androgens can occur secondary to congenital adrenal hyperplasia or adrenal tumors and present with isosexual precocious puberty in males and contrasexual precocious puberty in females. Excess androgen production in congenital adrenal hyperplasia can occur due to a deficiency in either 21-hydroxylase or 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency. At times, adrenal tumors may secrete estrogen only, or both estrogen and androgens.

- 
**Exogenous Sex Steroids/ Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals**

Inadvertent exposure to androgen, estrogen, or endocrine-disrupting chemicals from exogenous sources can lead to precocious puberty in both genders and gynecomastia in males.