The key to preventing benzodiazepine toxicity is the education of the healthcare worker about sound prescribing habits. Many cases of benzodiazepine overdose have occurred because high doses of the drugs have been prescribed for trivial complaints. The nurse and the pharmacist should also educate the patient on drug safety. The patient should be told to abstain from alcohol and illicit drugs while taking benzodiazepines. Further, any patient with an intentional overdose should be referred to a mental health counselor prior to discharge. The pharmacist must always check the database to ensure that the patient is not obtaining multiple prescriptions from other pharmacies. Medical providers and pharmacists must always be suspicious of patients who present with stories of lost prescriptions or repeat prescriptions. Before dispensing any benzodiazepine, the pharmacist should educate the patient on the dose, side effects, and duration of usage. If the pharmacist suspects the liberal prescribing of such drugs by any healthcare worker, then a report should be made to the local DEA office. Only through diligent and safer prescribing habits can the problem of benzodiazepine toxicity be decreased.

**Outcomes**

When benzodiazepines are ingested alone, they are rarely associated with a poor outcome, but when they are ingested with other agents like alcohol, opiates, or other sedatives, there is a risk of morbidity and even death. All benzodiazepines can cause apnea, but the risk is highest with alprazolam. With the availability of flumazenil, the risk of death is low. These drugs are good sedatives, but they also have a risk of addiction and tolerance. Many people remain addicted to benzodiazepines because of empirical prescribing by healthcare workers.