The management of tracheal stenosis requires a multidisciplinary team of otolaryngologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, anesthesiologists, intensivists, respiratory therapists, speech therapists, and nursing staff.

Preoperative evaluation of the tracheal lesion through radiographic imaging and direct bronchoscopy is critical to determine the lesion's location, resectability of the tracheal segment, and need for release maneuvers. Patients must undergo cardiopulmonary clearance to ensure they can tolerate an extended operation.

Intraoperatively, clear communication between the otolaryngologists and anesthesiologists during airway surgery is critical, especially during key portions of the surgery when the airway is entered and manipulating the ventilator circuit. Cardiothoracic surgery must be on standby in the event the lesion is in the distal tracheal or require intrathoracic release maneuvers.

In the postoperative period, the patient is kept in the ICU for airway monitoring. Frequent pulmonary toilet management by respiratory therapists is necessary for patient comfort and safety. Any activities that increase straining, such as changes in breathing, swallowing, worsening dysphagia, nausea, must be monitored by the nursing staff and reported immediately. Early evaluation by speech therapy is recommended to initiate proper swallowing exercises and voice control. Before discharge, the patient is educated by the nursing staff to avoid heavy lifting, straining, and activities that place too much burden on the anastomosis. Close follow up with the otolaryngologist with flexible bronchoscopies can ensure early diagnosis of restenosis or other airway complications.