Many contraindications to nitrous use are relative and may vary based on the provider. These include:

- **Critically ill patients:**Nitrous oxide inactivates methionine synthase via oxidation of the cobalt in vitamin B12 and may lead to megaloblastic anemia. This enzyme is essential for vitamin B12 and folate metabolism and plays a role in DNA and RNA synthesis and the synthesis of other substances. In otherwise healthy patients, the impact is subclinical. However, this may lead to neurologic or hematologic consequences in critically ill patients and should be avoided.

- **Severe cardiac disease**: Methionine synthase is also required to convert homocysteine to methionine, and elevated serum homocysteine levels are associated with an increased risk for adverse coronary events. The clinician should avoid using nitrous oxide in severe cardiac disease, but further studies are needed to determine the actual impact.

- **The first trimester of pregnancy:**Due to the above-referenced impact on B12 and folate metabolism, nitrous use is not recommended in the first trimester of pregnancy.

- **Pneumothorax, small bowel obstruction, middle ear surgery, and retinal surgeries create an intraocular gas bubble:**Nitrous oxide is 30 times more soluble than nitrogen. Nitrous oxide diffuses more rapidly into closed spaces than nitrogen can diffuse out, leading to increased gas volume and pressure within closed spaces. Thus nitrous oxide is contraindicated in pneumothorax, small bowel obstruction, middle ear surgery, and retinal surgeries involving the creation of an intraocular gas bubble. In laparoscopic cases, nitrous oxide can accumulate in the pneumoperitoneum, and some avoid its use.

- **Severe psychiatric disorders:**Nitrous oxide can cause dreaming and hallucinations and should be avoided in patients with severe psychiatric disorders.

- **Pulmonary hypertension:**Nitrous oxide can increase pulmonary artery and wedge pressures via sympathetic stimulation, and clinicians often avoid it in patients with pulmonary hypertension.

- **Head and neck procedures with cautery use:**While nitrous oxide is non-flammable, it supports combustion, and its use should be avoided in these procedures.

- 
**Impaired consciousness**