The incubation period is typically 4 to 18 days following exposure to Borrelia. The symptoms of relapsing fevers are characterized by the abrupt onset of fever and chills, often accompanied by malaise, arthralgias, myalgias. Other symptoms occurring early include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The patient is extremely exhausted accompanied by confusion. A petechial rash on the skin and mucous membranes if often seen.

Hepatic tenderness is the most common sign(60% of the patients). 40% of patients can have signs of meningism. Epistaxis and subconjunctival hemorrhage are more common compared to hemoptysis and retinal bleeds. Hepatic dysfunction and jaundice, enlargement of the spleen and liver may also occur.

Neurological issues like limb paralysis, cranial nerve palsies, mononeuritis multiplex, and focal convulsions are comparatively more frequent in tick-borne disease.

An increased risk of mortality is attributed to cerebral hemorrhage and myocarditis.

After the resolution of the first episode, which typically lasts one week, patients will experience several recurrences of fever that are shorter and less severe. Episodes occur every five to ten days and may persist for several cycles before resolution. In an epidemic or louse-borne relapsing fever, there are typically only one or two episodes of fever. However, in endemic, tick-borne relapsing fever, three to seven recurrences may occur before the resolution of symptoms.

Relapsing fever is associated with an increased risk of abortion and stillbirth in pregnant women.