The optimal treatment of patients with mood disorders requires the involvement of various health care professionals comprising of family physicians, nurses, psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers with the strong cooperation of family and support groups. This formulates an integrated care team. Most of the time, the first contact of the patient is a family physician. Patients feel more comfortable discussing their personal matters with family physicians when confronted with a crisis and are unable to cope with the situation. Therefore, the family physician plays a key role in understanding the severity of the symptoms, formulating a diagnosis, and concluding whether a specialist psychiatry referral is required. Patients with moderate to severe mood symptoms with or without active suicidal ideation need a psychiatric referral.

A mental health case manager (mental health care nurse) appointed by the mental health care team often in community mental health settings is important in cases of severe mood disorders to coordinate patient care. All health care providers involved in the management of the patient need to be notified of the current treatment plan regularly while the patient is admitted to an in-patient psychiatric unit in the event of a crisis. Outpatient treatment records must be sought from psychiatrists and outpatient providers and completed discharge summaries with a detailed plan of care during psychiatric admission. Psychiatric medications should be sent to outpatient providers prior to discharge from in-patient units.

The psychiatrist plays an important role in the decision making and treatment plan of the patient, but an overall effective response is seen when the different professionals involved in the patient care work as a collective team. Positive treatment response requires regular communication between the psychiatrists, family physicians, social workers, nurses, case managers, and pharmacists in both in-patient and outpatient settings.