Clobazam is one of the newer generation antiepileptic medications introduced into the market with an FDA indication for add-on therapy for LGS. This approval came after the results from the Phase III randomized control trial in 2011. American Academy of Neurology (AAN) published practice parameters on the use of antiepileptic drugs (AED) for adult and pediatric epilepsy patients with LGS, which concluded that based on 2 class II study data suggests clobazam is probably effective for LGS.

It is worth noting that the efficacy of clobazam was dose-dependent in the trial, and the highest dose tried was 40 mg/day. Thus, one clinical pearl from the results was that since escalating the dose from 10 mg twice daily to 20 mg twice daily resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in seizure frequency, higher doses (up to 60mg/day) may be beneficial if tolerated.

Clobazam has also proven its efficacy in treatment-resistant adult focal epilepsy (TRAFE), as 3 class III studies (small patient population and mixed epilepsy types) showed greater seizure frequency reduction compared to placebo, but with higher side effects as mentioned above.

Using clobazam for its indications (both approved and otherwise) requires an interprofessional team approach because, as with any benzodiazepine, there is a risk associated with its use. This team includes the prescribing clinician or mid-level practitioner, the nursing staff, and the pharmacist. The pharmacist should verify dosing, perform a drug interaction check, and report any concerns to the prescriber. Nursing is in the best position to answer patient questions, counsel on dosing and adverse effects, and monitor these adverse effects, also informing the clinician f any issues present. The team should communicate regarding drug interactions, adverse effects, and therapeutic effectiveness to provide optimal patient care while minimizing adverse events. [Level 5]