Sickle cell anemia is a persistent chronic disorder with no cure. Patients develop recurrent vaso-occlusive crises because of the clogging of tiny capillary vessels,, most especially in the bones. Apart from the sickling of the cells, other cells interact to cause more adhesion of the red blood cells,, including inflammatory cells and platelets. This phenomenon also occurs in multiple organs in the body,, including the chest, heart, lungs, abdomen, kidneys, and extremities. Because of the repeated attacks, organ damage can occur due to ischemia. The first presentation of sickle cell crisis in an infant is usually dactylitis with swelling of both the hand and foot, hence the name hand-foot syndrome. The dorsum of the hands and foot are very painful and swollen. Infants may also show signs of anemia such as conjunctiva pallor, jaundice, and poor capillary bed refill.

The only cure for this disorder is a hematopoietic stem cell transplant. This curative therapy, unfortunately, can lead to some complications and sometimes death, so it is only available for patients with severe sickle cell who have complications including stroke, recurrent vaso-occlusive crisis, recurrent transfusion, renal damage, and other complications. To reduce these complications and increase the availability of stem cell transplants to patients with sickle cell, researchers are now working on gene therapy. Bone marrow transplant in Patients with sickle cell has been around for over two decades, and it has helped improve the quality of life of patients. Although this intervention is not yet perfect because of the post-transplant complications, it should still be offered to patients to cure this debilitating disease.