Three fundamental treatment approaches may be considered for postherpetic neuralgia. The first is prevention, which focuses on identifying populations at risk for contracting HZ and administering a vaccine. The second is early recognition and treatment of an acute HZ infection, as delay may increase the chance of developing PHN. The third approach is symptom management of PHN via multimodal medication regimens and interventional procedures. The evidence regarding the efficacy of these methods is mixed but rapidly evolving, and certain approaches appear to be more successful than others. Prevention is advocated by many because, once established, PHN can be refractory to treatment, with a substantial number of sufferers achieving only a temporary and/or modest reduction in symptom severity despite multimodal therapy.

PHN is notoriously difficult to treat for many reasons. Complete resolution of symptoms is rare. A 2014 study concluded that less than half of patients with PHN achieve significant symptom reduction.

Traditional non-invasive treatments include oral and topical medications. The American Academy of Neurology (AAN), Special Interest Group on Neuropathic Pain (NeuPSIG), and European Federation of Neurological Societies (EFNS) all recommend an oral tricyclic antidepressant (TCA), pregabalin, and the lidocaine 5% patch as first-line therapies.

There are several other pharmacologic modalities to consider. Multiple studies have confirmed the short and long-term efficacy of the lidocaine 5% patch.

Other medication classes include non-TCA antidepressants and NMDA antagonists, but limited evidence supports their usefulness. For example, larger studies involving SNRIs (serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) and SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) have not shown better outcomes than TCAs, and both classes possess concerning side effect profile, though typically less severe than TCAs.

There are anecdotal reports that ketamine may prove beneficial, and a few small studies support this finding, but long-term data and large-scale studies are non-existent. Lidocaine infusions have also been considered. One double-blind study in 1999 showed that an intravenous lidocaine infusion provided clinically significant short-term pain reduction in patients with PHN.

Invasive therapies include botulinum toxin injections, sympathetic blockade with local anesthetics, epidural/intrathecal injections, and spinal cord stimulation. Botox injections are simple to perform and have a limited side effect profile.