Flibanserin is a new pharmacologic agent for treating premenopausal women with acquired, generalized hypoactive sexual desire disorder. When using a new medication, it is imperative to educate clinicians, patients, and other interprofessional healthcare team members regarding its use, indications, and possible adverse events to improve healthcare outcomes and limit adverse outcomes.

Interprofessional team members should be aware of the contraindications and possible drug interactions that can be associated with flibanserin use. Patients should be educated on abstaining from alcohol use and other depressants during treatment with flibanserin. Furthermore, patients should be advised on possible medication adverse events, as discussed above. Additionally, a thorough medication review should be performed by members of the healthcare team to identify any of the medications discussed above that may interact with flibanserin.

Patient education should also include the importance of bedtime dosing to prevent hypotension and syncope. The lack of long-term trials and data warrants continued monitoring of patients taking flibanserin and continued medical education for professionals and patients alike to recognize any new data and evidence regarding long-term treatment outcomes and potential adverse events.

It is also imperative that the healthcare team recognize barriers to prescribing flibanserin to ensure the patient receives the most optimal and individualized treatment for HSDD. Some of these barriers include the high cost, possible medication interactions, and adverse effects specific to the individual. The availability of flibanserin, along with non-pharmacologic therapies, will enhance the treatment options for premenopausal women that are affected by hypoactive sexual desire disorder.