A patient with exotropia should undergo a detailed physical and ocular examination. The crucial clinical evaluation points in any patient with exotropia should include the following:

- **Visual acuity**– It is imperative to record the visual acuity or fixation patterns using age-appropriate methods. Any anisometropia or amblyopia should always be ruled out.

- **Cycloplegic refraction**- should ideally be repeated every six months in any patient presenting squinting eyes.

- **Corneal reflex/Hirschberg tes**t should assess the ocular alignment at 1/3 meter, 6 meters, and far distance.

- **Cover test**– should be done to assess eyes' alignment following breakage of fusion. This also needs to be done at 1/3 meter, 6 meters, and far distance.

- **Prism cover test**– prism bar cover test should be performed in all cardinal positions of gaze and for both near and distance. It is essential to look for lateral gaze incomitance or any associated A or V pattern. Lateral gaze incomitance is diagnosed when there is a 20% reduction in squint angle in the lateral gazes.

- Measurement of squint should also be done at a far distance beyond 6 meters. At times a larger angle of deviation may be detected when tested at a far distance.

- **Binocular single vision (BSV)**– Should be assessed for distance and near separately with worth four dots test. BSV should be repeated at each visit and documented, as it might worsen over time.

- **Stereopsis –**Should be tested during the phoric phase. A progressive decline significantly in the distance stereopsis is an early indication for surgical intervention.

- An occlusion test is essential when the patient presents with an intermittent exotropia that is present only for distance or a distance deviation that exceeds near deviation by 15 prism diopters or more. In this test, one eye is occluded for a minimum of 45 minutes duration, and the squint measurements are repeated using the prism bar cover test. 18929306 If the post occlusion near the angle of deviation increases markedly, this is labeled as simulated divergence excess exotropia. If the near deviation remains unchanged, this is labeled as true divergence excess exotropia. This helps in differentiating between true and simulated divergence excess.

- +3 diopter spherical lens test – In this test, the exodeviations for near are measured with and without a +3 diopter spherical lens placed in front of the exotropic eye while using an accommodative target, and the AC/A ratio can be estimated. The AC/A ratio predicts how a patient will respond to plus lenses should a surgical overcorrection result.

- **Fusional amplitudes**– Convergence and divergence amplitudes should be measured. Most patients with intermittent exotropia have good convergence amplitudes for near and poor to good amplitudes for distance. Divergence amplitudes are normal in these patients.