Subacute infective endocarditis is a lethal disorder if not treated. Healthcare professionals, including the nurse practitioner, dentist, pharmacist, primary care provider, internist, and cardiologist, should be familiar with the latest ACA and AHA guidelines on prophylaxis of patients at risk for IE. Prophylaxis against IE is not recommended in patients at risk of IE for other non-dental procedures, such as a transesophageal echocardiogram, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, or cystoscopy, in the absence of active infection. In addition, for patients who have undergone coronary artery bypass graft surgery, antibiotic prophylaxis is not needed for dental procedures, as there is no increased risk of long-term infection. Similarly, antibiotic prophylaxis is not needed for dental procedures for patients with coronary artery stents.

Subacute bacterial endocarditis (IE) is an infection that is a rare event and a challenge to diagnose. If the diagnosis is made early, outcomes are improved. All healthcare team members should be diligent in considering the possibility of IE in at-risk patients, as early treatment will improve outcomes. As mentioned above, subacute bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis requires close monitoring and communication, and follow-up monitoring requires coordination between clinicians, specialists, nurses, specialty-trained nurses, dentists, and pharmacists. An interprofessional team approach for the patients will translate to better patient outcomes, maximize efficacy and minimize adverse drug reactions. [Level 5]