Before posterior nasal packing, a patient with epistaxis should be appropriately resuscitated and managed according to the Advanced Trauma Life Support protocol. The patient should have a patent airway, be hemodynamically stable with good intravenous access, and fluid resuscitation should be commenced if any signs of shock or hypovolemia are present. A complete blood count, type and crossmatch, and coagulation panel should be drawn, and the patient must be asked about antiplatelet or anticoagulant use. Anticoagulation should be reversed if clinically appropriate. Likewise, hypertension should be corrected if it is possible to do so without compromising cerebral perfusion. A thorough medical history should be taken, and a physical examination will help determine the severity and likely site of bleeding.

The patient should be sitting upright with the head extended in a "sniffing position." Using a Yankauer suction tip, the nose should be gently suctioned to remove clots. A topical anesthetic/vasoconstrictor spray should be applied, or alternatively, a dental roll or cotton wool ball soaked in the solution and placed in the nostril. The nose should then be examined again for any obvious anterior bleeding points. The oropharynx should also be examined for fresh bleeding, and the patient should have an emesis basin ready.

If at this point no anterior bleeding is seen and a posterior source of bleeding is suspected, or if cautery and/or anterior nasal packing has failed to achieve hemostasis, posterior nasal packing should be performed. Posterior packing is extremely uncomfortable for patients; it requires thorough analgesia and potentially also intravenous sedation. Cardiac monitoring and continuous pulse oximetry should be performed during the procedure and while the posterior pack is in place.