Get a chest x-ray to determine the extent of the aspiration. With sufficiently large aspirations, it may become necessary to perform bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage to clear as much macroscopic material as possible. Perform a swallow evaluation and barium swallow study on any patient at risk for aspiration by a speech therapist. The patient should be made NPO until evaluated. In young children and some adults, this is done under fluoroscopy. Dietary alterations, such as thickened liquids or pureed diets, can help patients with functional swallowing disorders.

The blood gas can provide details about oxygenation and pH status. In addition, lactate levels can be used as a marker of shock.

Levels of electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine can be used to assess renal function and fluid status. The CBC may reveal leucocytosis, anemia, and thrombocytosis.

The value of sputum culture and gram stain is limited because of contamination. Blood cultures are often not positive and not useful for initial management.

The chest x-ray is important as it can provide information on the patient's position when aspiration occurs. The right lower lobe is the most common site for aspiration because of its vertical orientation. Individuals who aspirate while upright may have bilateral lower lobe infiltrates. Those lying in the left lateral decubitus position may have left-sided infiltrates. The upper lobe is classically involved when the patient aspirates in the prone position. This is often seen in alcoholics. Some patients may develop a parapneumonic effusion, which can be aspirated for culture and gram stain.

CT scan is not routine but may be required if the patient is not improving and there is suspicion of empyema or a cavitary lesion with necrosis.

Bronchoscopy is usually indicated in chemical pneumonitis when food or foreign material has been aspirated. The technique can also help retrieve samples for culture and can detect any bronchial obstruction.