# Continuing Education Activity

Ebstein anomaly is a rare congenital heart disease that involves the apical displacement of the tricuspid valve with adherence of the septal and posterior leaflets to the myocardium and "atrialization of the inlet portion of the right ventricle". It is usually accompanied by tricuspid regurgitation, right ventricular failure, and arrhythmias. Clinical manifestations range from asymptomatic to severe, depending on the degree of tricuspid valve displacement and severity of regurgitation, the effective right ventricular volume, and the associated malformations (i.e., pulmonary valve stenosis, atresia, atrial septal defect, etc.). Arrhythmias are common and protracted due to the likelihood of having accessory pathways, in addition to having right atrial dilatation. Symptomatic patients can present with cyanosis, congestive heart failure, and arrhythmias, with exertional dyspnea being common in older patients. This activity reviews the pathophysiology and presentation of Ebstein's malformation and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of Ebstein anomaly.
- Review the clinical presentation of a patient with an Ebstein anomaly.
- Outline the approach to the management of patients with Ebstein anomaly, including the indications for non-surgical and surgical intervention.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by Ebstein anomaly.

# Introduction

Ebstein anomaly is a rare congenital abnormality involving the tricuspid valve and the right ventricle (RV),

- Apical displacement of the tricuspid valve

- Adherence of the septal and posterior leaflets to the myocardium

- Apical displacement and dilatation of the tricuspid annulus

- Dilatation of the "atrialized" portion of the right ventricle

- Redundancy, fenestrations, and tethering of the anterior leaflet

Associated cardiac defects commonly include a secundum atrial septal defect and a variable degree of RV outflow tract obstruction. Some newborns may present with functional, or anatomical pulmonary atresia (both are ductal-dependent lesions). Less commonly associated cardiac defects include ventricular septal defects, tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries, and atrioventricular canal defects.

Atrial tachycardia such as atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, or ectopic atrial tachycardia can occur in 25% to 65% of patients. In addition, 10% to 45% of patients have accessory pathways, frequently multiple, which increase the risk of protracted arrhythmias that can produce cardiac failure and sudden cardiac death.

# Etiology

Ebstein anomaly is thought to be associated with chromosome 15q duplications, thought to be involved in the embryological development of the heart in utero. There are case reports suggesting a possible association of Ebstein anomaly with chromosome 11q rearrangements. Others have shown an association between Ebstein malformation and mutations in the MYH7 gene, which is frequently associated with cardiomyopathies. Ebstein has also been associated with mutations in the NKX2-5 gene, which is a cardiac transcription factor responsible for the association between atrial septal defects with atrioventricular conduction defects. The NKX2-5 gene has also been associated with tetralogy of Fallot.

Another known association of Ebstein anomaly is the teratogenic effect of Lithium. Case-control and cohort studies in the 1970s and 1980s of pregnant women taking Lithium demonstrated a risk of Ebstein anomaly in <2% of their newborns.

# Epidemiology

Ebstein anomaly accounts for 0.3% to 0.6% of all congenital heart defects.

There is a higher incidence of recurrence in the offspring of affected women (6%) than that seen in the offspring of affected men (0.6%).

# Pathophysiology

**Anatomic Abnormalities**

The main pathophysiological abnormality of Ebstein anomaly is the failure of delamination of the tricuspid valve leaflets from the interventricular septum in utero.

The RV becomes split into two portions: the "atrialized", and the "functional" RV. The "atrialized" RV is where the TV inflow should normally be, extending from the undisplaced tricuspid annulus to the "functional" RV. The atrialized RV receives the regurgitant flow from the tricuspid regurgitation and becomes dilated along with the right atrium. The functional RV can be very small and may consist of just the RV outflow tract in cases of severe apical displacement of the septal and posterior leaflets of the tricuspid valve.

More than 80% of patients with Ebstein anomaly also have a secundum atrial septal defect or a patent foramen ovale

Ebstein anomaly can be associated with conduction system abnormalities thought to be due to compression of the atrioventricular node by the septal leaflet, with disruption of its function. Accessory pathways are common, and about one-third of patients have more than one accessory pathway.

**Functional Abnormalities**

The faulty coaptation of the tricuspid leaflets as a result of their anatomic displacement and tethering abnormalities leads to tricuspid regurgitation. The degree of tricuspid regurgitation is determined by the severity of the apical displacement of the posterior and septal leaflets, by the abnormality of the anterior leaflet attachments, and by the integrity of the leaflets themselves.

# Histopathology

The degree of tricuspid leaflet failure of delamination can vary from mild to absent delamination. The surgical pathology of patients who underwent tricuspid valve replacement has shown that tricuspid leaflets in Ebstein anomaly are usually large, irregularly shaped, thin, transparent, and have abnormal insertion points secondary to short chordal attachments, or have direct myocardial insertion. The septal leaflet can often have a fibrous ridge, and leaflets can have muscularized portions as well.

There is also an atypical Ebstein anomaly whereby the displacement of the septal and posterior leaflets is less than 8 mm/m^2; the anterior leaflet is typically normal, and there is less severe tricuspid annular dilation, no abnormalities of the subvalvular apparatus, and no "atrialization" of the right ventricle.

Surgical pathological studies of mitral valves in patients with Ebstein anomaly have shown primary mitral valve defects in some patients involving the mitral orifice, leaflets, papillary muscles, and cords. About half of the mitral abnormalities were noted to have functional significance.

# History and Physical

Ebstein anomaly displays a spectrum of clinical manifestations with variable age at presentation. Most cases present in infancy or childhood but a significant percentage of patients present in adulthood.

The most common physical finding in neonates and infants is cyanosis, present in about 50%.

Studies suggest that slightly over half of adult patients with Ebstein anomaly experience palpitations, with tachyarrhythmias being the first presenting clinical manifestation in almost 40% of those newly diagnosed with Ebstein anomaly.

Sudden cardiac death due to ventricular arrhythmias has been reported with an 8.6% 50-year cumulative incidence from birth.

# Evaluation

**Electrocardiogram**

Findings on electrocardiogram include:

- Right bundle branch block (RBBB)

- Delta waves due to pre-excitation from the accessory pathway

- Tall P waves that suggest right atrial enlargement

- First-degree AV block is observed in approximately 42% due to intra-atrial conduction delay resulting from right atrial enlargement as well as from structural abnormalities of the atrioventricular conduction system

- Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, most commonly atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia; but also atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and atrial tachycardia

**Cardiothoracic Imaging**

Chest radiography usually shows cardiomegaly with right heart enlargement, giving the cardiac silhouette a globular appearance. An increased cardiothoracic ratio from right atrial enlargement can also be present.

Echocardiography is the imaging study of choice to evaluate Ebstein anomaly. The first echocardiographic criteria to detect Ebstein anomaly is the apical displacement of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve greater than 8 mm/m^2 in the apical 4-chamber view. The mitral valve annulus is used to calculate the hinge point of the nondisplaced tricuspid septal leaflet.

Echocardiographic assessment of the RV size and function can also be difficult using traditional methods. Typically, only a qualitative assessment based on ventricular function and septal motion is used to evaluate the RV. RV strain can also be used to evaluate RV function. Transesophageal echocardiography can aid in better visualizing the tricuspid leaflet anatomy and the characteristics of the color Doppler jet. It can also be of great utility for surgical planning. Transesophageal echocardiography is usually superior to transthoracic echocardiography in detecting intracardiac shunts.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can also add valuable information regarding tricuspid leaflet anatomy and is superior to echocardiography in assessing RV function because it allows quantifying RV ejection fraction (this appears to correlate well with echocardiographic RV strain measurements).

Cardiac computed tomography is another modality used to assess RV ejection fraction and tricuspid valve anatomy and can be used for periprocedural imaging of coronary anatomy prior to surgical intervention on the tricuspid valve.

# Treatment / Management

**Medical Management**

In infants, the mainstay of treatment is supportive to help reduce pulmonary vascular resistance and hypoxemia. In symptomatic infants with either heart failure or cyanosis, inhaled nitric oxide can help reduce pulmonary vascular resistance.

Heart failure symptoms are treated with loop diuretics and guideline-directed medical therapy. Patients with supraventricular tachyarrhythmias can be managed with rate-control medications such as beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, or if ineffective, class I or III antiarrhythmic such as procainamide (class I), or sotalol or amiodarone (class III) to treat paroxysmal atrial fibrillation when present. However, most of these patients usually need definitive ablative therapy for supraventricular arrhythmias

**Surgical Management**

Newborns with Ebstein anomaly are usually observed initially, as the PVR decreases. If surgery is required, a systemic to-pulmonary artery shunt is commonly used to relieve cyanosis and secure adequate pulmonary and systemic circulations. Due to high periprocedural mortality surgery is usually delayed and avoided in newborns unless they meet specific indications.

Indications for surgery in neonates with Ebstein include:

- Right heart failure due to severe tricuspid regurgitation

- A cardiothoracic ratio > 80%

- Severe cyanosis with dependency on PGE1

- Mechanical ventilation dependency

In children and adults with Ebstein, indications for surgery include:

- Heart failure symptoms

- Evidence of RV dysfunction or progressive RV dilatation

- Evidence of paradoxical emboli

- Arrhythmias refractory to medical treatment

- Cyanosis with saturations < 90%

- Severe tricuspid regurgitation

Surgical therapy consists of tricuspid valve repair along with patch closure of the atrial septal defect. For atrial arrhythmias in these patients, catheter ablation carries risks of paradoxical emboli, given the high incidence of interatrial shunts. As a result, the recommendation is to undergo a surgical bi-atrial Maze procedure while getting surgical repair of the tricuspid valve.

Multiple surgical approaches have been described for the treatment of Ebstein anomaly. The da Silva cone reconstruction, which is the currently preferred surgical approach in young children and adults, consists of mobilizing the anterior and posterior leaflets from their anomalous attachments, rotating the detached edges of these leaflets clockwise, and suturing them to the septal edge of the anterior leaflet at the level of the tricuspid valve annulus.

**Catheter Interventions**

In patients whose tricuspid valve is still functional and thus, are not candidates for surgical valve repair but have a secundum atrial septal defect amenable to transcatheter device closure, and/or tachyarrhythmias due to atrial tachycardia or supraventricular tachycardia, can be treated in the cardiac catheterization laboratory.

**Prophylactic Management**

Infective endocarditis antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for patients with Ebstein anomaly and cyanosis and following surgical repair with prosthetic cardiac valves; prior to dental procedures.

Experts suggest using oral anticoagulation for patients with Ebstein anomaly and atrial fibrillation or evidence of paradoxical embolus.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Congenital tricuspid atresia**- Can be differentiated from Ebstein anomaly by the absence of apical displacement of the septal and/or posterior leaflets, no annular dilation, presence of thickened leaflets with rolled edges as well as foreshortened and fused chordae, and no "atrialization" of the RV.

**Uhl's anomaly**- Patients with this anomaly have congenital absence of RV myocardium that leads to RV failure. It is frequently associated with pulmonary atresia, RV aneurysm, and thrombi. There is no apical displacement of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. The major similarity is the RV and right atrial dilation, making it hard to distinguish from Ebstein anomaly.

**Aberrant tendinous tricuspid valve chords with tethering of the leaflets**- Aberrant tendinous tricuspid chords produce impaired leaflet mobility, which results in incomplete coaptation of the tricuspid valve leaflets with severe regurgitation. This is a very rare congenital heart defect.

Other cyanotic congenital heart conditions whose presentation can mimic Ebstein anomaly include transposition of the great arteries, tetralogy of Fallot, pulmonary atresia, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, and total anomalous pulmonary venous return. Echocardiography allows correct diagnosis.

# Prognosis

The main predictors of mortality include the degree of tricuspid displacement, the amount of tricuspid regurgitation, and the duration and degree of RV dysfunction.

In unoperated patients, it is estimated that survival declines significantly during follow-up, with survival at a 1-year follow-up of 86% and decreasing to 41% at a 20-year follow-up.

The Celermajer index is an established score that uses echocardiography to predict mortality. It is measured as the ratio between the area of the right atrium and the atrialized RV to the combined area of the functional RV, the left atrium, and the left ventricle at end-diastole. The higher the grade, the higher the mortality.

- Grade 1 (ratio less than 0.5) has a mortality of 0%.

- Grade 2 (ratio of 0.5 to 0.99) has a mortality of 10%.

- Grade 3 (ratio of 1.0 to 1.49) has a mortality of 4%.

- Grade 4 (ratio greater than  1.5) has a 100% mortality.

The SAS (Simpson Andrews Sharland) score is another prognostic score that uses as a weighted model to predict mortality. The cardiothoracic ratio, the Celermajer index, pulmonary valve flow, duct flow, and left-right ventricular ratio are graded 0,1,2 points each to generate a score. In studies, a score of 5 predicted 100% mortality, and a score of less than or equal to 3 predicted 91% survival.

# Complications

The most common complications as a result of Ebstein anomaly include:

- Heart failure, from right ventricular to biventricular

- Intractable atrial and/or atrioventricular arrhythmias

- Paradoxical emboli

- Sudden cardiac death due to ventricular arrhythmia

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Ebstein anomaly is a rare congenital heart defect with no apparent cause. Mild forms are asymptomatic. It can present as early as in fetal life and as late as early adulthood. Disease severity varies across a broad spectrum from newborns who do not survive beyond infancy to asymptomatic adults diagnosed incidentally in the sixth and seventh decades of life.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The majority of infants with Ebstein anomaly come to attention soon after birth. These infants need NICU monitoring, and hence, the ICU nurse must be familiar with the management of congenital heart disorders. While some infants have an isolated heart anomaly, others may also have involvement of other organ systems, and hence appropriate consultations are required. Once the diagnosis is made, surgery is usually required. Post-surgery, these children usually require close monitoring for an extended period until all the pacing wires and chest tubes have been removed and the child is breathing without the aid of a mechanical ventilator.

As the Ebstein malformation varies in severity, some patients reach adulthood with a few or minimal symptoms, which appear late as worsening dyspnea with or without cyanosis during exercise, and arrhythmias from atrial flutter/fibrillation or atrioventricular reentry tachycardia via accessory pathways, which are common in these patients. Patient management for CHF, cyanosis, and arrhythmias requires an adult-congenital cardiologist and a pediatric and congenital electrophysiologist. Worsening tricuspid regurgitation might necessitate surgery. Other forms of imaging such as cardiac MRI or cardiac CT might be required especially when transthoracic echocardiography is challenging. Transesophageal echocardiography might be needed for further tricuspid valve assessment, especially before surgery. It has been acknowledged that pediatric patients with congenital heart disease should undergo neurodevelopmental or neuropsychological evaluation and treatment and that older pediatric and adult patients with congenital heart disease should be evaluated and treated for depression and anxiety to enhance their academic, behavioral, and psychosocial functioning.