According to the Revised Atlanta Classification, the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis requires meeting at least 2 of 3 criteria:

- A lipase or amylase level is three times the normal's upper limit.

- Abdominal pain is consistent with pancreatitis.

- Abdominal imaging is consistent with acute pancreatitis.

Establishing the underlying etiology of acute pancreatitis includes initial evaluation followed by laboratory evaluation. The critical element of the first assessment of suspected acute pancreatitis involves a detailed history which includes symptoms of gallstone disease or evidence of gallstone disease on imaging, unexplained weight loss or new onset of diabetes, history of alcohol abuse, medication use, prior surgical procedure or trauma, history of hypertriglyceridemia or hypercalcemia, history of autoimmune disease or family history of recurrent acute pancreatitis.

Laboratory evaluation of patients with acute pancreatitis should include routine tests, e.g., serum triglyceride, serum calcium, liver biochemical tests, additional genetic testing in patients with strong family history, and imaging studies, including abdominal ultrasound for assessment of choledocholithiasis and bile duct dilatation. A chest radiograph is usually obtained in moderate to severe cases to evaluate for pleural effusions, indicating the higher severity of the disease with higher mortality. In some instances where the diagnosis is equivocal, but pancreatitis is still suspected, performing computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast is recommended to establish or rule out the diagnosis. CT is also performed in cases where the patient has failed to improve or worsen despite adequate fluid resuscitation over 48 hours to determine the presence of necrosis. The table below summarizes the detailed evaluation of a patient with suspected acute pancreatitis.

Gallstone diseaseAlcohol abuseMedication useHistory of weight lossNew onset diabetesPrevious surgery or traumaHypertriglyceridemia or hypercalcemiaAutoimmune diseaseGenetic causes

FeverTachycardiaEpigastric tenderness or palpable mass in the epigastric areaJaundiceCullen's signTurner's sign

When no cause for pancreatitis is forthcoming with the above evaluation, consultation with a gastroenterology specialist is often necessary for further evaluation with magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). As MRCP is non-invasive, there is no perioperative risk, and it does not require contrast but lacks sensitivity for detecting biliary stones less than 3 mm and chronic pancreatitis. For this reason, preference is given to EUS. If MRCP and EUS are unavailable, then computed tomography with pancreatic protocol is selected. Diagnostic endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is not routinely done and is reserved for endotherapy for patients with abnormal findings on MRCP/ EUS.