**Sciatic Nerve**

The sciatic nerve innervates the posterior thigh, including the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and the ischial aspect of the adductor magnus which allow for knee flexion and hip adduction. Via the tibial nerve, the sciatic nerve innervates the muscles of the posterior leg, including the flexor hallucis longus, flexor digitorum longus, tibialis posterior, popliteus, gastrocnemius, soleus, and plantaris and the sole of the foot, including. The common peroneal nerve innervates the muscles of the anterior and lateral leg, including tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus, fibularis tertius, fibularis longus, and fibularis brevis.

**Superior gluteal nerve:**

Innervates the gluteus medius, gluteus minimus, and tensor fascia lata. The gluteus medius and minimus function together to abduct the hip, internally rotate the flexed hip, and externally rotate the extended hip. The tensor fascia lata flexes, medially rotates and abducts the hip while also externally rotating the leg at the knee.

**Inferior gluteal nerve:**

After exiting the pelvis, the inferior gluteal nerve immediately pierces into the only muscle it innervates, the gluteus maximus. The gluteus maximus externally rotates and extend the thigh at the hip joint. It attaches to the iliotibial tract laterally to support the extended knee.

**The nerve to internal obturator and superior gemellus muscles:**

As the name implies, this nerve innervates the internal obturator and superior gemellus muscles. The internal obturator is responsible for abducting the thigh and externally rotating the extended thigh. It is a major stabilizer of the hip during walking. The superior gemellus helps with externally rotating the thigh.

**The nerve to quadratus femoris and inferior gemellus muscles:**

The quadratus femoris externally rotates and adducts the thigh. The inferior gemellus is an external rotator of the thigh.