Although lupus nephritis does have associated morbidity and mortality, the prognosis of LN relies on which WHO histopathology class it specifically meets. Class 1 (minimal) and class 2 (proliferative mesangial) share a good long-term prognosis. As lupus nephritis progresses and advances different classes, the prognosis worsens. Class 3 has a poor prognosis. Class 4 has the poorest prognosis. Prognosis also depends on how early therapy is initiated. The earlier the therapy is started in the disease course the better the disease outcome is.

Over the past four decades, alterations in the treatment of lupus nephritis have significantly improved both renal impairment and overall survival. During the 1950s, the 5-year survival rate among patients with lupus nephritis was close to 0%. The subsequent addition of immunosuppressive agents such as intravenous (IV) pulse cyclophosphamide has led to documented 5- and 10-year survival rates as high as 85% and 73%, respectively.

Mortality associated with lupus nephritis in patients with end-stage renal disease has declined significantly in the past few decades. The mortality rate per 100 patient-years reduced from 11.1 in 1995-1999 to 6.7 in 2010-2014. Cardiovascular disease-related deaths declined by 44% and deaths due to infection declined by 63%.

Nephrotic syndrome may result in edema, ascites, and hyperlipidemia, increasing the risk of coronary artery disease and thrombosis. The reports from one study show that patients with lupus nephritis, specifically early-onset lupus nephritis, are at greater risk of developing morbidity from ischemic heart disease.