In some patients infected with onchocerciasis, there is coinfection with Loa loa, another parasite that is predominantly seen in the west and central Africa, where Onchocerca volvulus also exists. Loa loa infection contributing to the heavy burden of microfilariae.

Because of the possibility of severe adverse effects following ivermectin treatment in areas of co endemicity, epidemiological surveys have been advocated.Loa loa microfilariae before ivermectin is distributed for onchocerciasis control in areas where loiasis is endemic.

The Mazzotti reaction, which was first described in 1948, is a potentially life-threatening allergic response seen in patients with onchocerciasis patients, who are on microfilaricidal treatment with diethylcarbamazine (DEC).

DEC, however, is no longer in use for the treatment of onchocerciasis. Clinical features of this Mazzotti reaction typically occur within 7 days of treatment with DEC and includes hypotension, fever, adenitis, urticaria, arthralgia, malaise, eosinophilia, tachycardia, edema, abdominal pain, and elevated liver enzymes.

The Mazzotti reaction is the basis of the Mazzotti test, which is a test for onchocerciasis using an oral test dose of DEC (50 to 100 mg). This results in an acute rash in 2 to  24 hours from the death of microfilariae in the skin. This test can now be done with the DEC delivery via a skin patch (OCP-patch) and gives a more localized skin reaction.

To manage a Mazzotti reaction, administration of low dose dexamethasone, i.e., 3 mg/day, commenced after the beginning of the reaction modifies the progression of the Mazzotti reaction without interfering with the microfilaricidal effect of DEC. Pretreatment with low dose dexamethasone before commencing DEC therapy has been found to prevent the development of the Mazzotti reaction and reduces the microfilaricidal activity. Therefore, it is recommended that low-dose steroids be used in conjunction with DEC, at the onset of a Mazzotti reaction. Steroids should be tapered rapidly.

It is important to mention that serious neurological adverse events have been rarely observed with the use of ivermectin in the treatment of onchocerciasis. This adverse event has not been entirely explained by concomitant high burden loiasis infections.