In general, patients that present with first-degree or second-degree Mobitz type 1 AV block do not require treatment. Any provoking medications can be removed, and patients can be monitored on an outpatient basis. However, patients with higher degrees of AV block (Mobitz type 2 AV block, 3rd degree) tend to have severe damage to the conduction system. They are usually at a much greater risk of progressing into asystole, ventricular tachycardia, or sudden cardiac death. Hence, they require urgent admission for cardiac monitoring, further evaluation, consideration of a backup temporary cardiac pacing on a case-to-case basis, and eventually the insertion of a permanent pacemaker.

Use of an urgent or emergent temporary transvenous pacemaker should not be a "knee jerk" reaction to the presence of a second-degree, high grade or third-degree AV block. It should be considered after a careful evaluation of the risk-benefit ratio in clinical settings, consideration of hemodynamic stability (as gauged by the evaluation of systolic blood pressure and the degree and duration of patient's clinical symptoms), level of AV block and presence of the type of escape rhythm.

Complications are very common in patients treated with placement of a temporary transvenous pacemaker. The complications are not just related to the implant itself but also related to the care post-implant including the change of position of the lead, change of capture threshold, pacer malfunction, faulty programming and/or battery depletion of the pacer box. Complications may also be related to accidental extraction of the lead by the patient. The use of a temporary pacer should be kept to the shortest duration possible in order to avoid patients' risk of immobility, infection, thromboembolism and risk of cardiac perforation. The potential complications must be kept in mind as sometimes the risk-benefit ratio may significantly outweigh justifying its potential use.  European Task force guidelines and other expert consensus usually strongly leans towards  the fact that temporary transvenous pacing should be avoided as far as possible and the treatment time should be kept as brief as possible [19].

Based on the European Guidelines and a Wide Expert Consensus

1. Temporary transvenous pacer should not be used routinely as a knee-jerk reaction in AV block and preferably used as a last resort when response to positive chronotropic drugs such as isoproteronol, epinephrine or low-dose dopamine is insufficient.2. Temporary transvenous pacing should be ideally limited to cases of : (i) high-degree AV block without a stable escape rhythm (ii) life-threatening bradyarrhythmias, that may occur during interventional procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention, or, rarely, in acute settings such as acute myocardial infarction, drug toxicity or in a condition with a concomitant systemic infection where permanent pacing device should ideally be delayed until clearance of infection. For example, patients with a stable blood pressure and a persistent junctional escape rhythm or even a persistent ventricular escape rhythm or those with a subacute onset can be monitored carefully on telemetry. 3. If the indication for permanent pacing is definitely established, every effort should be made to implant a permanent pacer as soon as possible. The general expert notion is that routine implantation of a temporary pacer before a permanent pacer may increase the risk of complications such as device infection of a permanent implant, other risk of possible complications related to two invasive procedures instead of one and also potentially increases risk of cardiac perforation especially in cases with extended delay between temporary pacer and permanent pacer lead implantation.