The treatment of periodontal disease involves a step-wise approach beginning with more conservative options. The initial phase of treatment for all forms of periodontitis is a professional dental cleaning, which includes scaling of the teeth, and root planning to remove dental plaque and calculus found both above and below the gum line. A major part of this dental cleaning is the oral hygiene instruction given by the dental professional to the patient to improve their at-home oral hygiene routine. Following the completion of the cleaning appointment, the patient should return to the dentist for a reevaluation of the periodontal condition, which involves an examination that observes the state of the periodontium, and measures probing depths to see if the disease process was arrested. If the resolution of the condition can be confirmed, the patient should return to the dentist for regularly scheduled cleanings as periodontitis is a chronic disease that can reactivate if given the proper environment

The most important management of the periodontal disease is the treatment of risk factors.

Inadequate oral hygiene is one of the key initiators of periodontal disease. Prevention of poor oral hygiene practices involves the promotion of proper self-performed oral hygiene as well as professional maintenance at regular intervals depending on the individual patient’s risk. The self-care recommended uses a three-step daily regimen that includes brushing, flossing, and rinsing. Referral to a dentist for professional cleaning and scheduled follow-up to monitor the progression of the disease is also recommended

Another major modifiable risk factor that must be addressed is tobacco smoking. Tobacco smoking has not only been shown to significantly increase the risk of developing periodontal disease but is also associated with a more severe disease course, and a significantly lower response to periodontal therapies. The link between smoking and periodontal disease decreases with smoking cessation

Diabetes mellitus has well-documented links to periodontal disease; it may enhance the destruction seen in periodontitis. Additionally, poor glycemic control is linked to increased disease progression. Uncontrolled glucose levels are associated with higher mortality if the patient has severe periodontal disease. Therefore, the management of diabetes mellitus and prediabetes mellitus may be required to improve the outcomes of periodontal therapy

In cases of persistent periodontal disease that is refractory to non-pharmacologic therapies, antibiotics can be administered both locally and systemically, depending on the severity of the disease.

Chlorhexidine gluconate is a common antimicrobial compound used in adjunction to mechanical periodontal therapy. It is generally administered as a mouth rinse, but can also be used as a gel, varnish, and subgingival chip. Using chlorhexidine, in addition to regular toothbrushing, can lead to a reduction of dental plaque build-up and thus can be very beneficial in the treatment of chronic periodontitis. There is a relatively new advancement in pharmacotherapy for periodontal disease. It is a chlorhexidine gluconate chip that is inserted into the periodontal pocket following completion of cleaning and provides long-term, sustained-release of chlorhexidine gluconate into the affected area

Another option is an adjunctive antimicrobial compound used following mechanical periodontal therapy. It is composed of minocycline hydrochloride microspheres that are placed into the surrounding pockets following mechanical debridement. Its effect is similar to the chlorhexidine chip in that it effectively reduces dental plaque build-up

Although rare, systemic antibiotics are sometimes indicated, such as in the case of persistent deep periodontal pockets. The most common antimicrobial agents prescribed include:

- Tetracyclines

- Penicillins

- Macrolides

- Quinolones

- Cephalosporins

- Nitroimidazole compounds

These pharmacological agents vary in modes of action and can be prescribed to patients with a range of susceptible microorganisms, including those with antibacterial resistance. Additionally, these agents can be prescribed alone or in combination to expand their use further

More severe cases of periodontal diseases should be referred to a periodontist. In addition to the modalities described above, periodontal surgery may be required to effectively clean a periodontal pocket and/or attempt to regain bone and attachment that has been lost from the destructive disease process.