Posterior dislocations commonly are associated with severe pain and muscle spasm; therefore, procedural sedation is frequently administered. Intra-articular injections of Lidocaine or Bupivacaine have also been used as an adjunct to pain management to aid in the reduction. Closed reduction is accomplished with in-line traction on the affected arm, which lies internally rotated and adducted. The traction along with gentle, anteriorly-directed manipulation of the humeral head, will help guide it into the glenoid sulcus. Counter-traction can be applied with a sheet around the affected axilla. Forceful external rotation should be avoided as this can put undue stress on the proximal humerus, leading to fracture. The successful reduction is evident when a "clunk" is felt as the joint is reduced, pain is relieved, and range of motion allows the patient to place the palm of the injured arm on the opposite shoulder. If unsuccessful, orthopedic consultation is indicated for closed reduction, and at times, open reduction.

Once reduction is accomplished, reassess the neurovascular status. Post-reduction radiographs are useful for confirmation and documentation of successful reduction and diagnosis of any injuries occurring during the reduction procedure. Patients should have their shoulder immobilized with a sling or shoulder immobilizer in external rotation and slight abduction for a few weeks.  Early orthopedic follow-up is necessary to ensure proper healing, early range of motion, and rehabilitation.

In cases that are diagnosed late or are more chronic, orthopedic consultation is indicated because these patients often require semi-elective open reduction and internal fixation or even arthroplasty. Early operative repair may decrease the incidence of recurrence as well.