# Continuing Education Activity

Pterygium is a common ocular surface disorder. There is a lack of consensus among ophthalmologists about the optimal medical and surgical management of pterygia. Recurrence is the most common complication after pterygium excision. This article emphasizes the evaluation, the steps, recurrence rate, and complications after pterygium removal with various methods. It reviews the role of an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of pterygium.
- Summarize the clinical features of pterygium.
- Outline the differential diagnoses of pterygium.
- Explain the role of interprofessional collaboration to improve the outcomes of patients with pterygium.

# Introduction

Pterygium is one of the common ocular surface disorders. From two Greek words, the word "pterygium" has been derived: (pteryx) meaning wing and (pterygion) meaning fin. Sushruta was the first to describe it in 1000 BC, the first recorded ophthalmic surgeon.

# Etiology

The various known risk factors are immune mechanism, genetic predisposition, and chronic environmental irritation, which include UV (ultraviolet) rays, hot and dry weather, wind, dusty atmosphere, and the period of exposure to such conditions. However, the most common is the increased time of exposure to UV rays of the sunlight, followed by chronic eye irritation from dry and dusty conditions.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence rates are different in various parts of the world. It is highest in the “pterygium belt” described by Cameron, which lies between 37° north and south of the equator. The prevalence of pterygium was stated to vary widely from 0.3 to 29 percent in the world. In India, the prevalence ranges from 9.5 to 13%.

The predominance of pterygia on the nasal side in the interpalpebral zone is speculated to result from the following mechanisms:

- Light passes through the cornea medially, concentrating on the nasal limbus region, while the nose shadow decreases the strength of light transmitted to the temporal limbus.

- Longer temporal upper lid eyelashes and outer two-third bowing of these lashes filtering light falling on temporal conjunctiva and cornea.

- The natural flow of tears is from the temporal to the nasal side towards the punctum, and any amount of dust that reaches the conjunctival sac irritates the nasal conjunctive further.

- Since there are two anterior ciliary arteries on the nasal side while there is only one on the temporal side, any irritant may result in increased nasal hyperemia.

Males work outdoors much longer than females, so it has been shown that pterygium is found more often in males compared to females.

# Pathophysiology

UV rays cause the insufficiency of the limbal stem cells of the cornea. It causes activation of the tissue growth factors, which further lead to angiogenesis and cell proliferation. The limbal stem cells are damaged by the UV rays that cause conjunctivalization of the cornea, and the cornea is invaded by aggressive fibroblasts**.**UV radiation may cause mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene, resulting in the abnormal pterygial epithelium.

Recent studies have indicated that human papillomavirus could also be involved in the pathogenesis of the pterygium.

It was also hypothesized that a pterygium might represent a region with a localized limbal stem cell deficiency, resulting in a conjunctive invasion of the adjacent cornea.

**Recurrent Pterygium Pathophysiology**

Pathophysiology of recurrence is the reactivation of the inflammatory process, which is present in the primary form. Sometimes the surgical trauma serves as an enhancer of the inflammatory response. Proliferative cytokines and growth factors (including vascular endothelial growth factor or VEGF) can increase after surgery if the limbal stem cells remain activated, and fibroelastic tissue is also involved.

# Histopathology

Microscopically, pterygium is considered to be composed of elastotic fibro-vascular tissue. Leaving the top, mostly, the pterygium is covered by conjunctival epithelium. Extensions of fibrous tissue are seen on the top of pterygium, and as the head encroaches on to the cornea, the Bowman’s layer gets involved and is fragmented. The fibrous connective tissue fills these cavities. Histopathological hallmarks of chronic inflammation can also be seen. There is the presence of lymphocytic infiltration consisting of plasma cells, mastocytes, and T-lymphocytes.

# History and Physical

Patients often present with the symptoms of irritation in the eye, lacrimation, foreign body sensation, cosmetic blemish, and various functional problems, which include diminution of vision and difficulty in the fitting of contact lens.

Detailed history including age, sex, occupation, exposure to irritants like sun, smoke, and dust should be taken. Any previous treatment history and family history of pterygium are to be asked. General physical examination and systemic examination to exclude the presence of collagen-vascular or mucocutaneous disorders should be carried out.

History should be taken to classify the pterygium into (a) primary pterygium (b) recurrent pterygium.

Old textbooks define malignant pterygium as a recurrent pterygium with symblepharon formation and restrictions of ocular movements. However, pterygium is a non-malignant condition and must be differentiated from malignant conditions like ocular surface squamous neoplasia (OSSN) by clinical features, impression cytology, and/or histopathology.

# Evaluation

Comprehensive ocular examination, including visual acuity, extraocular movements (EOM), and anterior segment evaluation is to be done. Detailed refraction should be done to note down the amount and type of astigmatism.

Dry eye should be ruled out by conducting Schirmer’s test or tear film break-up time.

Pterygium should be evaluated under the following criteria: location, size, vascularity, extent, and area of corneal involvement [chord at limbus and extent of corneal encroachment from limbus is measured using Castroviejo’s calipers] can be carried out by oblique illumination by torchlight and further substantiated by slit-lamp examination. The presence or absence of Stocker’s line is noted.

A pterygium has three parts:

- Cap - At the leading edge, which is distinguished by a halo-like avascular zone

- Head - peripheral to the cap

- Body - the main part of the pterygium communicating with the bulbar conjunctiva

Pterygium may be classified into:

- Progressive: thick, fleshy, vascular, progressively encroaching towards the center of the cornea.

- Atrophic: Thin, attenuated, poor vascularity, stationary

# Treatment / Management

There is a lack of agreement among ophthalmologists on optimal pterygia management in both medical and surgical terms. Medical care is given to relieve the patient from the inflammatory symptoms and reduce the persistent discomfort that persists. Throughout the years, medical treatment for pterygium made use of relatively benign agents such as bile and urine and more toxic agents such as lead-acid, mercuric lanolin, radiotherapy, thiotepa, 5-fluorouracil, and more recently, mitomycin C in a search for a safe and effective therapy.

Medical treatment in modern times includes lubrication with artificial tear drops or decongestants to provide short-term comfort and a slight improvement in cosmetics. Topical NSAIDs, eye drop loteprednol, brings added comfort. Vasoconstrictive agents minimize redness and enhance the appearance and add antihistamines to the decongestant drops to help prevent the effect of histamine associated edema and itching.

However, surgical treatment remains the preferred option. Operation with pterygium was mentioned as far back as 1000 B.C. In patients with pterygium, the reasons for surgery are decreased vision due to visual axis encroachment, chronic pain, persistent inflammation, abnormal astigmatism, restrictive ocular motility, and cosmesis.

The patient was prepared to lie recumbent on an operating table during Susruta's surgical operation, and the pterygium was loosened and irritated by sprinkling powdered salt into the eye.

Few examples of past surgeries include Celsus's procedure (Rome—50 A.D.), which used a thread with a sawing motion to separate the pterygium from the ocular tissues toward the pupil. Paul's operation (Paulus Aegineta, Eye Surgeon, Greece, 7th century) used a small hook to seize the pterygium.

Many surgical techniques have been used since past to present, though none is universally accepted because of variable recurrence rates. In most of the studies, it has been seen that 90% recurrences occur between the first and the third month.

Pterygium surgery has always remained a concern for the operating surgeon because of its recurrence and cosmesis post-surgery.

Grading of the cosmetic results after pterygium surgery was done in the study conducted by Prabhasawat et al. which is as follows:

- Grade 1: Appearance of the operated site is not different from the normal appearance

- Grade 2: Some fine episcleral vessels are seen in the excised area extending up to but not beyond the limbus and without any fibrous tissue

- Grade 3: Additional fibrous tissues are seen in the excised area that does not invade the cornea

- Grade 4: A true recurrence with fibrovascular tissue invading the cornea is seen

Hirst, in his study, graded the cosmetic results post-surgery into 6 grades, which is as follows:

Normal: Eye, which is quiet and white with no abnormal vasculature, conjunctival changes, or corneal opacities.

Excellent: Eye in which a white opacity in the cornea is visible.

Good: Eye in which there may or may not be a white corneal opacity, but where the eye exhibits some conjunctival vascular injection, not only nasally at the possible pterygium site but also temporally, suggesting nonsurgical attribution.

Fair: Eye in which conjunctival vascular changes i.e., injection or plexus, is present only at the nasal surgical site.

Poor: Eye in which there are not only nasal conjunctival vascular abnormalities but also a spectrum of other conjunctival changes, from simple scarring to puckering nasally.

Upgradeable: Eye, where the nasal area is out of focus, making a true grading difficult.

Regardless of the problem of recurrence of pterygium, various surgical methods have been described for the removal.

**Avulsion Technique**

The bulbar conjunctiva at the edge of the scleral portion of pterygium is incised with Westcott scissors, and this portion is freed from the underlying sclera by blunt dissection. The freed portion of the pterygium is then grasped with toothed forceps and torn from the cornea, and a second forceps grasps the perilimbal tissue away to give counter traction. Residual tissue is scraped from the - corneal surface with a beaver blade, and the surface is then polished with a diamond burr. The recurrence rate (23% to 75%) is similar to other techniques for primary removal.

**Simple excision technique**has a recurrence rate of 30 percent to 100 percent.

**The Bare Sclera Technique**

This method was described by D'Ombrain in 1948.

Verma et al. reported the recurrence rate as 48% when applied together with the bare sclera technique on the cases with recurrent pterygium and around 3% with the use of intraoperative mitomycin C.

In the 1960s, radiotherapy with strontium 90 application was used commonly and did reduce the recurrence rate to a range of 6.4% to approximately 12%. However, it was not realized until decades later that there was an unacceptable rate of scleromalacia of 13%, pain, and even secondary endophthalmitis. Although these published series do not seem to favor bare sclera resection alone, this technique is still in use both for therapeutic and research purposes. It is difficult to rationalize the use of these agents for a disease that can be successfully treated with extremely low complication rates with a conjunctival autograft when the reason for their use is speed and simplicity only.

**Primary Closure**

Head and mid-body of the pterygium are excised. It is followed by a tenonectomy. Tenonectomy is extended beneath the conjunctiva to the adjacent rectus muscle. Relaxing conjunctival incisions are created around the limbus, both superiorly and inferiorly. The conjunctiva is then primarily and carefully closed.****The uncommon recurrences (2.1 percent) happened only in 2 cases of wound contamination and in 15 cases of wound dehiscence.

**Transplantation of the Head of the Pterygium**

The hypothesis is that the pterygium's head is the source of its development. In the procedure defined by Mc Reynolds,

**Stocker**described a method of conjunctival z-plasty for primary closure.

**Conjunctival Autograft**

It was first done by Kenyon et al. in 1985.

The use of autologous blood fibrin can be used as an alternative as fibrin glue is costly, and it has the risk of causing infection. Autologous blood fibrin is a synthetic tissue adhesive prepared from a donor plasma, and it was first described for pterygia surgery by Cohen in 1993.

Complications seen with this technique are corneoscleral dellen, graft edema, epithelial cysts, suture granuloma, flap retraction, and necrosis.

**Conjunctival Rotational Autograft (CRA)**

Spaeth first described the advantage of CRA over other graft techniques, namely the preservation of normal conjunctiva in other non-affected areas.

**Limbal Conjunctival Autotransplant (LCAT)**

It is probably the most common procedure to be combined with bare scleral pterygium removal, where the bare area is covered with conjunctiva removed from another area of the bulbar surface.

Limbal conjunctival autograft contains approximately 0.5 mm of limbal and peripheral corneal tissue. A better anatomic and functional result will be achieved by including limbus epithelium in the conjunctival graft, and thus, the barrier function in the limbus will have been ensured once again, and the pterygium recurrence will be minimized.

- The **superior conjunctival autotransplant**has been used widely since the early 1980s and has been associated with a recurrence rate of approximately 2% to 12%, very few complications, and none associated with loss of all vision but is a lengthier and more complex procedure.

- The **inferior conjunctival autotransplants**result in 3.3% to 5.25% recurrence rates with either no recurrence or regrowth of more than 1.5 mm onto the cornea.

The important causes for recurrence after LCAT are cross-graft recurrence, outflanking, reproliferation of previously unexcised pterygial tissue, and transformation of the epithelial graft into the pterygial tissue.

**Limbal Stem Cells Transplantation**

This procedure seems likely to enable the epithelialization of the peripheral cornea, the limbus, and also the neighboring denuded sclera by the corneal epithelium. Maybe the limbal region can then benefit from circumferential migration of limbal cells. Limbal stem cells are not needed to preserve a phenotypically stable limbus until the underlying tissue threatens it.

**Amniotic Membrane Grafting**

It is also used to avoid the recurrence of pterygium. However, the exact mechanism which confers its beneficial effect on the amniotic membrane has not yet been established. Due to their anti-inflammatory properties, their encouragement of epithelial development, and their suppression of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), these grafts are believed to facilitate healing and minimize recurrence levels and fibroblast proliferation. The amniotic membrane controls the cytokine rates and growth factors. It presents benefits in wide-area lesions or in situations such as wounds in which conjunctival grafts can not be done, and even in patients for which no transplant can be conducted afterward in terms of glaucoma surgery. Unfortunately, levels of recurrence differ greatly between current research, somewhere between 2.6 percent and 10.7 percent for primary pterygia and as high as 37.5 percent for recurrent pterygia.

Postulating that the reduced risk of recurrence could be attributed to mitomycin or tenonectomy, and not the amniotic membrane, would appear reasonable. A distinct value of this procedure, though, is the protection of the bulbar conjunctiva.

**Lamellar or Penetrating Keratoplasty**

In cases of recurrent pterygium, there is significant residual scarring and thinning of the cornea. In these scenarios, tissue from the lamellar corneal graft can be used. It helps remove thin, or scarred corneal parts. Corneal trephine (normally 8 mm) is used after superficial excision to incise the limbus to a depth of 0.3 mm. The host bed is then dissected, and then a smooth surface is created. The defect is filled with a 0.4 mm thick fresh donor button, sutured in place with interrupted 10-0 nylon. In the study carried out by Laughrea PA and Arentsen JJ, recurrence occurred in three of ten cases.

**Adjuvant Treatments**

To prevent a recurrence, these treatments are performed along with surgical treatments to prevent the recurrence. They can be combined with all the surgical methods.

**Cautery**

Since the growth of the blood vessels at the operation site leads to the recurrence of a pterygium, some people have recommended the intensive use of intraoperative cautery, particularly at the limbus, to improve the pterygium's surgical removal. With this approach, however, there is no data available about the risk of recurrence. Excessive cautery can trigger the development of hypertrophic scar tissue, scleral thinning, and necrosis.

**Laser Therapy**

The use of the **Argon**laser may be done in postoperative cases. 50µm spots are applied to early neovascular fronds to minimize conjunctival epithelial damage.

**The excimer**laser was used to ablate irregularities in the bare scleral surface after pterygium excision. The recurrence rate was 91% (20 cases) at 1 year.

**MMC (Mitomycin C)**

Because of its potential to suppress fibroblasts, it was used as an adjunctive therapy. MMC is an alkylating agent, which prevents the synthesis of DNA. By inhibiting DNA synthesis, this results in the death of cells triggered by the failure to fix the alkylation-caused genotoxic injury. DNA synthesis inhibition results in a reduction in the number of mitoses, particularly when MMC comes into contact with cells that are in the cell cycle's late G1 and early S stages. It can be administered locally or in the form of eye drops before or after pterygium surgery. The delivery of the injection directly on the pterygium has the advantage of preserving the corneal endothelium and epithelium.

Subconjunctival injection enables a more effective dosage to be administered to the patient's eye. The application of sponges directly on the sclera during surgery with MMC doesn't have the same efficacy. Its action to prevent the recurrence of pterygium occurs by inhibition of fibroblast proliferation in the episcleral region. The minimum acceptable and successful dosing rates, however, are yet to be established. MMC may be used in different ways, including the intraoperative application of MMC directly to the scleral bed following excision with pterygium, and postoperative use of topical MMC eye drops. Kunimoto et al. originally used MMC for the first time as a topical treatment postoperatively, but it caused detrimental complications.

Topical MMC use after pterygium surgery was popularized in the USA by Singh et al.

**Thiotepa**

It is an alkylating agent comparable to nitrogen mustard. It inhibits mitosis and division within the rapidly multiplying tissues. After excising the pterygium, it is used for 6–8 weeks in a frequency of four times a day, in the form of a drop in 0.05 % concentration. The recurrence rates have been reported to be between 0 and 28 %.********Ngoy et al.

**Fluorouracil**

This is a pyrimidine analog that interferes with deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA) synthesis and inhibits fibroblast proliferation, thus acting as an anti-metabolite.

**Topical Monoclonal Antibodies Against Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (anti-VEGF)**

****More recently, the use of topical monoclonal antibodies against vascular endothelial growth factors (anti-VEGF) has been advocated as an adjunctive therapy postoperatively, either in drop form or as sub-conjunctival injections. VEGF level in the pterygium tissue was found to be higher than normal conjunctiva. This suggests the fact that the use of anti-VEGF drugs during the treatment could be effective. Ranibizumab and bevacizumab, as the anti-VEGF drugs, are applied to the eye. In a meta-analysis, topical bevacizumab was relatively safe, associated only with an increased risk of the subconjunctival hemorrhage, but it had no significant effect on preventing pterygium recurrence.

**Radiotherapy**

High-energy, beta-emission radioactive substances are used in this technique. The radiation suppresses fibroblast proliferation. Ruthenium 106 and Sr 90 are more commonly used as radioactive substances. Radiotherapy is one of the oldest methods used as adjuvant therapy in the treatment of pterygium. In this technique, after the excision of pterygium, the radioactive plaque is sutured on the sclera and is kept there until the desired dose is reached. The radiotherapy can be given in different regimens and dosages as described in the literature. The recurrence rates reported in the literature vary between 0 and 50 %.

**Tenon's Layer Excision**

In the 1980s, Barraquer introduced the concept that removal of Tenon's layer may be important in reducing the recurrence rate after pterygium removal.

In the currently described method of excision, this area of Tenon's layer is excised no matter what it is thickness.PTERYGIUM technique, results in a low recurrence rate with this procedure.

**P.E.R.F.E.C.T. [pterygium extended removal followed by extended conjunctival transplantation]**

This methodology produces an exceptional outcome, with a recurrence rate close to zero and a reasonable complication rate, according to Lawrence W. Hirst.

There is tacking of the graft to the sclera without regrowth of the layer of Tenon or vascularization under the graft. There is limited concealment of the upper and lower wounds under the lids. It is possible because of the large size of the graft and intensive postoperative steroid administration.

**P.E.R.F.A.M.T. (pterygium extended removal followed by amniotic membrane transplantation)**

H. Liu et al. conducted extensive removal of pterygium with thorough removal of Tenon's layer as in P.E.R.F.E.C.T.

Allam WA published a study in 2016 on recurrence and complications of P.E.R.F.E.C.T. for primary pterygia in Europe.

In 2017, Cornelius carried out an independent analysis of the efficacy of P.E.R.F.E.C.T. for pterygium removal in avoiding recurrence after pterygium surgery.

# Differential Diagnosis

While evaluating a case of pterygium, the following conditions should be ruled out:

**Pseudo-pterygium**

It is a fold of bulbar conjunctiva which is attached to the cornea. It is an inflammatory reaction where adhesions are formed between bulbar conjunctiva and cornea. A 'probe' test can be performed where the probe can be passed beneath the tissue in pseudo-pterygium but not in pterygium. It can appear in any quadrant of the eye and is non-progressive in nature.

**Pinguecula**

It is a yellowish colored growth on bulbar conjunctiva close to the limbus. It is said to be a deposit of fat, protein or calcium. It is commonly found nasally. The patient is usually asymptomatic but may present with mild redness and foreign body sensation when inflamed.

**Nodular Episcleritis**

A discrete area of inflammation in episcleral tissue is seen, which is elevated. Only vascular congestion may be present in cases of simple episcleritis. If phenylephrine 2.5% is instilled, there will be blanching of the superficial episcleral vascular network. Usually, this condition is mildly painful, unlike pterygium.

**Marginal Keratitis**

It is an inflammatory disease of the peripheral cornea. Stromal infiltrates with the breakdown of the epithelium, and ulceration is seen. Infiltrate on the corneal surface is separated from limbus by a clear zone.

**Phlycten**

It is a result of delayed-type immune reaction leading to nodular inflammation of the conjunctiva.

**Conjunctival carcinoma in situ/ Bowen epithelioma**

It is a rare presentation. It presents as a gelatinous-appearing mass.

**Ocular surface squamous neoplasia (OSSN)**

# Staging

Various grading systems have been studied to grade the extent of pterygium preoperatively.

The simplest method is to measure the length of the fibrovascular stroma of pterygium, which over-hangs the cornea.

Verma et al. gave the classification based on the size of pterygium being measured from the limbus.

- Grade 1: 0-2 mm

- Grade 2: 2-4 mm

- Grade 3: >4 mm

Tan et al. gave a morphological classification of pterygium based on its transparency under the microscope.

- Grade T1: consists of atrophic pterygia, whose episcleral blood vessels which are present under the body of pterygium are clearly visible

- Grade T2: consists of intermediate pterygium which has characteristics between atrophic and fleshy pterygium

- Grade T3: consists of fleshy pterygia with episcleral vessels completely obscured

According to Sejal Maheshwari, the grading is as follows

- Grade I: pterygium between the limbus and a point midway between the limbus and the pupillary margin (temporal pupillary margin for temporal pterygium, and nasal pupillary margin for nasal pterygium)

- Grade II: head of the pterygium is present between a point midway between the limbus and the pupillary margin

- Grade II: pterygium that crosses the pupillary margin

# Complications

Various complications of pterygium surgery can be divided into intra-operative complications and postoperative complications.

Intraoperative complications include excessive bleeding, injury to the medial rectus muscle, wide excision of the pterygium, button-holing of graft, thick graft, loss of orientation of the graft, smaller harvested graft, and perforation of the globe with the suture needle.

The main postoperative complication is RECURRENCE.

Other postoperative complications include graft edema, dellen, persistent epithelial defects, pyogenic granuloma, symblepharon, graft necrosis, graft retraction, epithelial inclusion cysts, subconjunctival hematoma, sub-conjunctival fibrosis, corneoscleral thinning, sutural granuloma, etc.

Scleral necrosis, infectious scleritis, severe secondary glaucoma, and iritis are the complications associated with adjunctive use of MMC and beta radiations.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with pterygium should be informed about the chances of recurrence after surgery. Postoperative mitomycin drops or steroid strops should be strictly used under the supervision of the surgeon. Unsupervised use may lead to the melting of the cornea or sclera, resulting in loss of vision and may even result in medicolegal suits. In elderly patients, OSSN may masquerade as pterygium, and histopathological examination of such tissue is important in ruling out OSSN.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of pterygium still remains an enigma. Literature is full of a variety of surgical procedures with variable success rates. However, the recurrence of pterygium still remains the most inexplicable complication. 90% recurrences occur between the first and the third month. Recurrent pterygium cases are more difficult to handle than the primary pterygium, and it is of great importance to determine the treatment method with the lowest recurrence rate. Prompt referral by primary care providers to ophthalmologists is needed. A coordinated effort between physicians, optometrists, nurses, and pharmacists can benefit patients. [Leve 5]