The treatment and management of schizophrenia is a multi-dimensional process that involves the coordination and participation of various healthcare practitioners, including psychiatrists, nurses, pharmacists, social workers, and other associated healthcare workers, operating as a coordinated interprofessional team. An alliance between these disciplines is essential to provide the best possible outcome because schizophrenia is a complex disease that necessitates an interprofessional approach to treatment. Because there is no cure for schizophrenia, treatment aims to reduce the symptoms that patients experience. The initial goal is to manage any acute and exacerbated psychotic episodes, where pharmacological treatment plays an important role.

Upon proper management of acute symptoms, the other components of schizophrenia, which involve an entire spectrum of psychological, behavioral, and social elements, require attention. Thus, pharmacotherapy is only one aspect of this multi-dimensional paradigm to treat individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia. Treatment of schizophrenia should consider psychological and/or psychosocial therapies and/or other strategies that improve the patient's quality of life, prevent relapse, and manage residual cognitive and behavioral symptoms once the initial symptoms are under control. This approach is especially crucial because pharmacological treatments often cannot address all aspects of the disease.

Therefore, healthcare professionals such as psychologists, social workers, and therapists play an essential role in the treatment process. Current guidelines by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) indicate the need for individualized pharmacological approaches based on the patient's personal preference, clinical response, and adverse effects.