**History**

Clinical presentation is typically acute and severe unilateral neck pain and/or a headache. Minor neck trauma often precipitates the pain. The pain is typically in the occipital-cervical area of the neck or head. Often the trauma is minor in nature.

Neurological symptoms are often delayed and may not be present at all. However, 70% of patients will have some type of neurological deficit which may present late

Lateral medullary syndromes (Wallenberg Syndrome) and cerebellar infarctions are the most common location for strokes. Wallenberg Syndrome is defined by sensory deficits affecting the trunk and extremities on the opposite side of the infarction and sensory deficits affecting the face and cranial nerves on the same side as the infarction. When neurological symptoms are present, dizziness, ataxia, dysphagia (cranial nerves 9 and 10), disequilibrium, unilateral hearing loss, dysarthria, diplopia, and vertigo are the predominant symptoms.

Extracranial dissections often have a bruit present. The bruit has even been reported on the contralateral side secondary to increased collateral blood flow. What often distinguishes this type of patient from those with cerebellar infarctions secondary to atherosclerotic disease is the age of the patient and the presence of pain. When the dissection is intracranial, a subarachnoid hemorrhage is present 50% of the time. This group of patients has severe neurological symptoms a much worse prognosis than those with extracranial dissections.

**Physical Exam**

- Nystagmus

- Truncal ataxia

- Ipsilateral loss of taste (hypogeusia), horner syndrome, impairment of proprioception and fine touch

- Contralateral impairment in thermal and pain sensation in the extremities

- Tongue deviation to the side of the lesion

- Internuclear ophthalmoplegia