Myoglobinuria occurs due to excess myoglobin in the blood resulting from the damage to the cell membrane of myocytes. It can be caused by a direct injury that damages the cells. The intracellular contents, including myoglobin, enters the bloodstream. Alternatively, this damage to the cell membrane can be a result of metabolic disturbances.

In the case of metabolic factors, the damage to myocytes occurs mostly due to the lack of ATP. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is critical to the myocytes, and its levels should be maintained above a certain level to keep the cell viable. The common substrates for ATP production are glycogen and triglycerides. Therefore, any defect in the metabolism of these substrates leads to rhabdomyolysis, especially when the person is involved in ATP requiring activities like strenuous exercise.

In addition to the release of myoglobin, during this process of cell death, the myocytes can accumulate large amounts of fluid, which can lead to hypovolemia as well.

After cell death, other intracellular contents like creatine kinase (CK), phosphate, and potassium are also released into the blood along with myoglobin, which can lead to electrolyte abnormalities, the most important of which is hyperkalemia as it can lead to cardiac rhythm abnormalities if not corrected appropriately.

Myoglobin, normally circulating in the blood, is mainly bound to haptoglobin and alpha2- immunoglobulin. However, at levels higher than 0.5 to 1.5 mg/dL, the haptoglobins are saturated, and the excess free myoglobin is filtered by the glomerulus.

Although small amounts of myoglobin are normally filtered and quickly excreted by the kidneys, the large amount of myoglobin can damage the kidneys and even cause acute renal failure.

- Renal vasoconstriction as the damaged myocytes sequester fluid and lead to hypovolemia, which activates the renin-angiotensin system leading to renal vasoconstriction.

- Heme protein, especially myoglobin, has a direct toxic effect on renal tubules, especially on the proximal tubules.

- Excessive myoglobin can interact with Tamm-Horsfall protein in the distal tubules and result in cast formation in the presence of acidic urine. It leads to tubular obstruction.