According to the American College of Cardiology/European Society of Cardiology recommendations, the management of MR is determined by the severity and pathology of the disease.

For primary MR, mitral valve surgery is recommended for symptomatic patients with chronic severe primary MR (stage D) and LVEF greater than 30% or in asymptomatic patients with LV dysfunction (left ventricular end-systolic dimension >=40-45 mm) and/or LVEF <60%) (I B). Primary treatment of primary MR is surgical repair, and percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair is considered for patients who are poor surgical candidates. Several other guideline recommendations for primary and secondary MR exist and are best referred to in the guideline statements.

Surgical correction or percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair can be considered for secondary MR. The European guidelines recommend that percutaneous edge-to-edge procedure may be considered in patients with symptomatic severe primary MR who fulfill the echocardiographic criteria of eligibility and are judged inoperable or at high surgical risk by the heart team, avoiding futility (IIb C).

Surgical correction of secondary MR has not shown improved survival, while percutaneous edge-to-edge repair improved quality of life and survival in patients with heart failure and moderate to severe MR who remained symptomatic despite optimal medical management. As transcatheter aortic valve replacement becomes more popular, devices for transcatheter mitral valve replacement are being developed as future therapeutic options.