Asymptomatic Bartholin cysts do not require further treatment. Bartholin cysts or abscesses that are spontaneously draining may be managed conservatively with sitz baths and analgesics.

Although no modality of treatment, surgical or conservative, has been shown to be superior to any other in terms of recurrence rate,

Allergy history should be obtained before beginning the procedure as the Word catheter stem is composed of latex, and marsupialization is the procedure of choice in those with latex allergies.

Although this is not a sterile procedure, a mask with a face shield and a gown are recommended.

Incision and drainage with Word catheter is performed by first cleaning the region with povidone-iodine and anesthetizing the location where the incision will be made with 3 mL of 1% lidocaine. A small, approximately 3 mm, vertical incision should be made with a #11 scalpel along the mucosal surface of the labia minora to avoid obvious scarring and to reduce the risk of Word catheter displacement. Purulent discharge evacuated may be sent to the lab for cultures, and biopsy may also be performed at this time. Word catheter is then inserted with the balloon tip sitting within the abscess cavity. Inflate the balloon tip with 3 to 5mL of saline water. For comfort and to reduce the chance of displacement, the external portion of the Word catheter is pushed into the vagina. Word catheters should be left in place for at least 4 weeks for appropriate drainage and tract epithelization.

Incision and Drainage with Word catheter placement may be attempted a second time for recurrent Bartholin abscess with the addition of antibiotics. Antibiotics should cover staphylococcal, specifically methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, and streptococcal species as well as enteric gram-negative aerobes, including Escherichia coli. Antibiotic choices include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole alone, amoxicillin-clavulanate plus clindamycin, or cefixime plus clindamycin. Referral to gynecology for marsupialization may also be considered at this time.

Marsupialization is performed by a gynecologist in the operating room, and for this reason, incision and drainage with Word catheter placement is usually attempted first. Marsupialization is performed by creating a 2-cm incision lateral to the hymenal ring, everting the edges with forceps, and suturing the edges onto the epithelial surface with interrupted absorbable sutures.

Other less common procedures include silver nitrate ablation,