Patellofemoral arthritis is a broad term that reflects osteochondral degeneration of the joint space. The arthritis is typically a combination of degeneration of the articular cartilage, termed chondromalacia, as well as abnormal biomechanical tracking of the patella within the trochlear groove which is most often in the lateral patellar facet.

Compared to the medial and or central facets, the lateral facet is most often overloaded. This is associated with lateral malalignment of the patella within the trochlear groove. Valgus knee alignment, dysplasia of the patella or trochlea, and malrotation of the tibia can all accelerate this phenomenon and the development of patellofemoral arthritis. The direction of the force vector of the quadriceps muscles and knee extensors can also overload the lateral patellar facet. Degeneration of the patellofemoral joint can develop secondary to abnormal stressors on the patella caused by patella alta, increased Q-angle combined with secondary myofascial mechanical disruption, atrophied vastus medialis obliquus combined with the loss of function of the lateral retinaculum, or deficiency of the medial patellofemoral ligament.

Intra-articular fractures of the patella and trochlea caused by micro- or macro-trauma is a risk factor for developing arthritis. Other contributors include patella instability, osteo- or inflammatory arthritis, overweight or obesity, and genetic quality of the cartilage. Trochlear dysplasia is identified radiographically in three out of four cases of isolated patellofemoral arthritis. Some studies suggest that the patellar cartilage is less stiff and thus more compressible compared to other areas of articular cartilage. Whether this reduces or increases the likelihood of the development of patellofemoral arthritis is unclear.

The Q angle is the line measured from the ASIS to the center of the patella and from the tibial tubercle to the center of the patella. Researchers have shown that a normal Q angle evenly distributes pressure across the patella. However, increased Q angle, also termed valgus malalignment, shifts pressure to the lateral facet. This is thought to lead to an increased risk of patellar subluxation or dislocation and subsequent patellofemoral arthritis. Laxity or tearing of the medial patellofemoral ligament, often in association with subluxation or dislocation, has been shown to contribute to patellofemoral instability and subsequent patellofemoral arthritis.