The vaginal epithelium is a hormone responsive non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. With estrogen production, you see the maturation of the cells with a thickening of the mucosa. The normal vaginal flora of reproductive-age women includes multiple aerobic, facultative anaerobic and obligate anaerobic species. Anaerobes dominate aerobes 10:1. The bacteria are symbiotic with the host and are alterable depending on the vaginal microenvironment.

**Normal Vaginal Flora**

**Gram-positive Aerobes:**

- 
Lactobacillus

- 
Diphtheroids

- 
Staphylococcus aureus

- 
Staphylococcus epidermidis

- Group B Streptococci

- 
Enterococcus faecalis

- Staphylococcus spp

**Gram-negative**

Aerobes:

- 
Escherichia coli

- Klebsiella species

- Proteus species

- Enterobacter species

- Acinetobacter species

- Citrobacter species

- Pseudomonas species

**Anaerobic gram-positive cocci**

- Peptostreptococcus species

- Clostridium species

**Anaerobic Gram-positive bacilli**

- Lactobacillus species

- Propionibacterium species

- Eubacterium species

- Bifidobacterium species

- Actinomyces israelii

**Gram-negative**

Anaerobes

- Prevotella species

- Bacteroides species

- Bacteriodes fragillis species

- Fusobacterium species

- Veillonella sspeciesp

**Candida**

The function of vaginal bacterial colonization is not clear. The flora produces lactic acid and hydrogen peroxide that inhibit pathogenic bacteria.

**Vaginal pH**

The composition of the vaginal flora is responsible for the pH of the vagina. With estrogen comes the production of glycogen from the vaginal mucosa. The glycogen is the nutrient necessary for many vaginal ecosystem species seen in reproductive age women, including Lactobacilli. The glycogen is metabolized to lactic acid contributing to the normal vaginal pH of 3.8-4.2. This acidity suppresses the overgrowth of infectious organisms such as Mobiluncus, Prevotella, and Gardnerella vaginalis.

In pre-pubertal girls and post-menopausal women, the lack of estrogen leads to a deficiency of glycogen and thus a paucity of lactic acid-producing flora. The normal pre-pubertal and post-menopausal vaginal pH is 6 to 7.5. Females can be more prone to infections at these times when the only commensal flora is mainly of skin origin, but infections are still more common in reproductive years.

Changing any element of the vaginal ecology can alter the population characteristics of the vaginal bacteria. Changes in hormonal status, as previously mentioned with estrogen, can greatly shift the makeup of the flora. Menses can act as a nutrient base for some bacterial species leading to their overgrowth, but there is no clear evidence that this is associated with pathogens or infection. Broad-spectrum antibiotic use can lead to alteration of the vaginal bacterial flora leading to Candida species overgrowth. Douching and unprotected vaginal intercourse can increase pH as well.