Providers should monitor patients on dopamine agonists for any signs and symptoms of CNS depression, orthostatic hypotension, or electrolyte imbalance. Patients should be closely monitored by clinicians and the collaboration of all interprofessional healthcare team members, especially during the titration period. Baseline complete blood count with differential, liver function test, BUN/Cr should be obtained before starting the medication, and cardiovascular evaluations are necessary. Patients treated with dopamine agonists might not be aware of the symptoms of orthostatic hypotension. The clinician should consult with a pharmacist on the appropriateness of the agent selected correct dosing and have the pharmacist check for drug interactions on the patient's medication profile.

Because falls in the elderly can cause injuries, serious complications, and even death, patient education is necessary for the healthcare team. Nursing staff can be a crucial resource for answering medication dosing and administration questions, alerting patients to possible adverse effects, and serving as an access point to the prescriber. Abnormal obsessive behaviors such as gambling and hypersexuality may occur in patients who did not exhibit these behavioral problems before initiating dopamine agonist therapy. Patients may not report these changes in behaviors due to embarrassment. A psychological evaluation by the healthcare team is the recommendation for patients under dopamine agonist therapy. These examples demonstrate the necessity for interprofessional teamwork when prescribing dopamine agonist medications. [Level 5]