Despite being over a hundred years since the discovery of T. gondii, researchers have not been able to establish a standardized regimen for the treatment of congenital toxoplasmosis. There are numerous opinions regarding the drug regimens and the duration of the treatment.

Most medications work against the actively dividing tachyzoites and do not work against encysted bradyzoites. The most commonly used treatment regimen in confirmed and probable cases of congenital toxoplasmosis is a combination of pyrimethamine, a sulphonamide (sulphadiazine or sulphadoxine) and folinic acid for 1 year.T. gondii are azithromycin and atovaquone. However, more research is needed to determine its efficacy.  If diagnosed prenatally, then the mother should be treated immediately before the delivery. Spiramycin is recommended to mothers with acute Toxoplasma infection to prevent transplacental transmission.

Asymptomatic infants with positive serology or newborn screening receive treatment for 3 months. Some experts recommend adding steroids to this regimen when the CSF protein is high or severe chorioretinitis affecting vision. Steroid therapy continues until the disappearance of protein in CSF or resolution of chorioretinitis.

The infants must be followed with frequent neurodevelopmental, ophthalmologic, and hearing assessments to evaluate the response to therapy and to identify any late sequelae.

The long duration of treatment is associated with adverse medication effects such as severe bone marrow suppression resulting in neutropenia, worsening kidney function, and allergic reactions. These infants should have frequent blood count monitoring, along with periodic liver and renal function tests.