The Prescription Drug Marketing Act (PDMA) is an amendment of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act that was enacted on April 22nd, 1988. The primary goal of the PDMA is to establish a legal framework for the safe and effective distribution of prescription drugs. In addition, the PDMA was implemented to prevent the sale of compromised, expired, counterfeit, poorly labeled, and sub potent prescription drugs. The introduction of the PDMA was based on the growing presence of wholesale markets outside of legal distribution channels for prescription drugs, also known as the "diversion market."

Specifically, the PDMA mandates prescription drugs manufactured within the US and exported abroad are no longer eligible for reimportation back into the US unless deemed by the drug's manufacturer. Importation is defined as the arrival of goods from outside countries into the United States. Importation of prescription drugs is legal if prescription drugs are purchased abroad for personal use or if a manufacturer purchases drugs produced in FDA-approved foreign facilities. In contrast, reimportation is defined as the return of previously exported products abroad back into the US.

In addition to regulating the reimportation of prescription drugs, the PDMA restricts the sale of drug samples only to licensed providers who directly request them, as well as distribution channels specifically listed in the law. The law also encourages wholesale distributors to become authorized distributors of record (ADR), which involves a written agreement authorizing a wholesaler to sell a particular drug. Lastly, the PDMA also outlines steps for hospitals for returning prescription drugs to the manufacturer/wholesaler as long as hospitals document that the drugs were either received, returned, or destroyed.