Most cases of spondylolisthesis are asymptomatic.

Severe slips are uncommon, and deformity rarely progresses beyond Meyerding grade II (see Evaluation chapter).

Typical history and examination findings in symptomatic cases involve:

**History**

- Child participating in back hyperextension activities (gymnastics, football, weight lifting), most common age at presentation is 4 to 6 yrs old.

- In adults insidious onset of axial back pain exacerbated by physical activity, periodic exacerbations that vary in intensity and duration

- L5 radicular symptoms (in severe slips), including weakness of the extensor hallucis longus

- Bladder and bowel dysfunction (including cauda equina syndrome in extreme cases)

- Neurologic claudication secondary to spinal canal stenosis (buttock and leg pain worse with walking but improving with leaning forward or sitting)

**Examination Findings**

- Pain with back hyperextension. Hyperextending the lower back while standing on one leg is termed the "stork test."

- Limitation of lumbar spine flexion and extension

- Increased popliteal angle

- Gait alteration with abductors weakness (L5) (pelvic waddle)

- Flattened lumbar lordosis or kyphosis of the lumbosacral junction

- Palpable step-off of the spinous process

- Hamstring tightness (in extreme cases walking with hips and knees flexed- due to vertical orientation of the sacrum causing pelvic retroversion and compensatory lumbar hyperlordosis + shortened stride and lurched posture)

- "Heart-shaped" buttocks in severe cases of significant lumbosacral kyphosis and sacral retroversion (sacrum becoming more vertical in orientation and moving away from the head of the femurs).

- Straight leg raise test may be positive.

- Scoliosis may be present - this may be secondary to pain.

Listhetic crisis (rapid progression of symptoms). Common during a growth spurt or increased physical activities with bilateral pars failure.

- Severe back pain aggravated by extension and relieved by rest.

- Neurologic deficit

- Hamstring spasm - walk with a crouched gait