The medical treatment for acute angle-closure glaucoma aims to decrease the intraocular pressure by blocking the production of aqueous humor, increasing the outflow of aqueous humor, and reducing the volume of the aqueous humor.

Initial medical therapy includes a combination of the following medications:

- Intravenous acetazolamide 500 mg to block the production of aqueous humor.

- Intravenous mannitol 1 to 2 grams/kg can be given (if there is no contraindication) to rapidly reduce the volume of aqueous humor.

- Topical beta-blocker (timolol 0.5%) one drop to block the production of aqueous humor.

- Topical alpha 2-agonist (apraclonidine 1%) one drop to block the production of aqueous humor.

- Topical pilocarpine 1% to 2% one drop every 15 minutes for two doses once intraocular pressure is below 40 mm Hg to increase the outflow of aqueous humor. This is not effective at higher pressures due to pressure-induced ischemic paralysis of the iris.

Intraocular pressure needs to be checked every hour.

Definitive treatment is peripheral iridectomy after the acute episode subsides. Laser iridectomy is the treatment of choice. Surgical iridectomy is indicated when laser iridectomy can not be accomplished. Iridectomy relieves the pupillary block as the pressure between the posterior and anterior chamber approaches zero by allowing the flow of aqueous humor through a different route. Iridectomy should be as peripheral as possible and covered by the eyelid to avoid monocular diplopia through this second hole in the pupil.