An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to family planning and contraceptive care can help achieve the best possible outcomes. If the patient wants to develop a plan regarding their fertility and their desires to achieve or prevent a pregnancy, consultation should be made with physicians and community nurses who can monitor the patient and make referrals as needed. An interprofessional team can address some complications in relation to the patient's ability to access birth control and primary health care to optimize the patient's fertility plan. If the patient gets pregnant, the importance of community nurses and obstetric care providers working together as a team to provide care, monitor the patient and ensure a healthy pregnancy cannot be understated. Social workers are imperative in ensuring that the patient has adequate support to care for the baby during pregnancy and after birth.

Collaboration, shared decision making, and communication are all key elements to achieve the best possible outcome. The best standard care that follows an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation should aim at a women-centered approach. Women should be provided with written information leaflets about the various available contraception methods, and the interprofessional team must ensure that women and their families are fully supported during their decision making process about the best method that suits them. The preferences, beliefs, and values of women and their families should be respected at all times. [Level 5]