**Clinical Imaging**

In clinical imaging, as per the manufacturer’s labeling, there are no adverse reactions or contraindications to the use of Xe-133 gas. There are none known metabolism effects. There are no known significant drug-drug interactions. The drug is listed as pregnancy risk factor C in which animal reproduction studies have demonstrated an adverse effect on the fetus; however there are no adequate and well-controlled trials in humans, but the potential benefits may indicate the use of the drug in pregnant women in spite of potential risks. While the Xe-133 gas excretion in breast milk is not known, the manufacturer does recommend the substitution of formula feedings due to the potential for adverse reactions to breastfeeding infants.

**General Anesthesia**

When used for anesthetic purposes, xenon is associated with many advantages although disadvantages must be also reported.

**Advantages**

**Xenon anesthesia seems to be associated with:**

- a more stable intraoperative blood pressure, and lower heart rate through both the preservation of sympathetic tone and modulation of the autonomic heart balance. The result is an important cardioprotective effect due to an overall improvement of the myocardial oxygen supply-demand ratio

- neuroprotective properties under normal surgical conditions and also when brain tissue is injured and during ischemia and hemorrhage

- renal protection as xenon preconditioning protects against renal ischemic-reperfusion damage via hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF-1alpha) activation and via miR-21 target signaling pathway

- no effects on coagulation, platelet function, or the immune system

- no effects on hepatic function

- a safety profile in individuals with susceptibility for malignant hyperthermia

- fast anesthesia induction

- faster emergence from anesthesia than volatile agents. Of note, early studies suggested that there is no positive correlation between the anesthesia lasting and the emergence times

- no teratogenic or toxic effects to the fetus

- no detrimental ecological effects

**Disadvantages**

- The hypnotic effect of xenon requires a mixture with 30-37% oxygen.

- Xenon can provoke a higher incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (up to 45% of cases).

- Poor efficacy in preventing postoperative delirium.

- Diffusion into closed spaces (caution in those with pneumothorax, or ileus).

- Increased pulmonary resistance (the gas in oxygen composes a high-density mixture increasing Reynold’s number), although the clinical consequences in those with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or morbid obesity is uncertain.

- High costs. probably, the development of newer ventilators that operates in a closed-circuit, rebreathing mode to minimize the loss of xenon can reduce costs favoring, in turn, the diffusion of the technique.