ASB and acute cystitis are treated with antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic choice can be tailored based on organism sensitivities when available from urine culture results. One-day antibiotic courses are not recommended in pregnancy, although 3-day courses are effective.

Recently evidence has developed suggesting a link between the use of sulfa derivatives and nitrofurantoin and congenital disabilities when these medications are prescribed in the first trimester. These studies have had limitations; however, it is currently recommended to avoid the use of these medications in the first trimester when alternatives are available.

If Group B Streptococcus  (GBS) is noted on urine culture, patients should receive intravenous (IV) antibiotic therapy at the time of delivery in addition to indicated treatment for ASB or UTI. This is to prevent the development of early-onset GBS sepsis which may occur in the infants of women who are colonized with GBS.

Pyelonephritis in pregnancy is a serious condition usually requiring hospitalization. Once an evaluation has been completed, treatment consists primarily of directed antibiotic therapy and IV fluids to maintain adequate urine output. Fever should be treated with a cooling blanket and acetaminophen as needed. Commonly, second or third generation cephalosporins are used for initial treatment. Ampicillin and gentamicin or other broad-spectrum antibiotics are alternatives. Patients should be monitored closely for the development of worsening sepsis.