One such mutagen is radiation. Photons of light from the ultraviolet portion of the electromagnetic spectrum are high-energy particles, and if they collide with DNA in specific locations, they can cause pyrimidine dimers, which is when two adjacent thymine or cytosine bases become covalently linked, which distorts DNA, making normal genetic activity impossible. Luckily this distortion, or lesion, can be recognized by a repair enzyme that will initiate nucleotide excision repair. A nuclease enzyme can spot the problem and snip out a section of the DNA strand containing the lesion. Then polymerase puts new bases in the gap, and ligase seals it up, correcting the error; this is why UV light from the sun can be harmful; it may cause mutations like pyrimidine dimers. X-rays and gamma rays can cause mutations too since they are also high-energy photons.

Other mutations involve modifications to a single base, caused by chemical mutagens like oxidizing agents. For example, guanine can be oxidized to become 8-oxoguanine, or oxoG, and because of the difference in orientation and functionality, oxoG does not pair with cytosine as a normal G does, it pairs with adenosine instead. If this error goes uncorrected and the opposite strand is a template for replication, once again the polymerase will have no way of knowing that this A was supposed to be a C. So instead of the G that ought to go on the complementary strand, it will put a T and the mutation is no longer fixable.

Other such modifications arrive in the way of alkylating agents, which add things like methyl groups to existing bases, which will interfere with replication and transcription. These types of mutations do not cause kinks in the DNA strand like thymine dimers do so they are not recognized in the same way that nuclease enzymes operate; they instead get recognized by glycosylase enzymes that will initiate base excision repair. This correction is different from nucleotide excision repair in that the enzyme specifically recognizes the mutant base, pulls that nucleotide out of the helix and removes the base by snipping the glycosidic bond, which is why the enzyme is called a glycosylase. Then polymerase and ligase do their jobs to put things back together. There is a different glycosylase for each kind of mutation of this variety, and they are all constantly scanning DNA for errors. So these are a few examples of the types of damage that can occur in DNA, and while there are many more; most of them fall into one of these categories according to the kind of enzyme that performs the repair. Some enzymes can perform mismatch repair, ones that do nucleotide excision repair, and others that do base excision repair, and there are over 100 different types of DNA repair enzymes in every cell in our body, keeping constant vigil over the sacred genetic code.