**Acute Compartment Syndrome**

Acute compartment syndrome can result from trauma, blunt force injury, or reperfusion after acute interruption of flow to muscles in the crural compartment. Swelling after these insults can cause muscle ischemia because the muscles in these compartments are highly bound by the tough crural fascia. Thus, making it difficult for the muscles to expand in the face of injury. With the expansion of the muscles, there is compression of the artery and can result in ischemic injury. Nerves can also be compressed causing loss of neuromuscular function. Compartment syndrome is a surgical emergency and requires a fasciotomy. Time to fasciotomy is the single best prognostic factor for acute compartment syndrome.

**Chronic Compartment Syndrome**

Chronic compartment syndrome results from excessive exercise, causing pain and swelling. Chronic compartment syndrome can occur in any of the 3 compartments from increased pressure in the compartment. The increased pressure occurs from an increase in blood flow and muscle mass from excessive exercise. As a result, arteries can be compressed.

**Anterior Tibial Artery Occlusion**

Occlusion of the anterior tibial artery has been reported secondary to embolic, thrombotic, and atherosclerotic conditions. This condition can lead to severe ischemia to the lower limb that may necessitate amputation. This can also result in ischemia to the common peroneal nerve, which would lead to a foot drop. In most cases, anticoagulation and lifestyle modifications can be used to avoid amputation.