Sudden onset neurological deficit requires emergent neuroimaging. An initial non-contrast head CT scan is preferred in an acute setting as it is readily available, quick, and useful to rule out life-threatening conditions such as intracerebral bleeding or herniation and clear the patient for possible intervention.

CT scan seldom identifies lacunar ischemic insult within the first 24 hours due to its small size. If seen, lacunar strokes are ill-defined hypodensities on CT scans unless there is a hemorrhagic component to the acute stroke. A hyperdensity of a large artery on non-contrast head CT indicates the presence of a thrombus inside the arterial lumen or vessel calcification. Early infarct signs on non-contrast CT include loss of gray-white differentiation and focal hypoattenuation of brain parenchyma. These details are difficult to read in small subcortical strokes. Chronic lesions may appear as hypodense foci.

CT angiogram of the head and neck can also be done. This can show a filling defect consistent with a thrombus blocking a specified vessel. It may also show arterial narrowing, and extensive vessel disease, like in the carotid arteries, which may be a source of an embolus or the middle cerebral artery features consistent with an atheroma. Neurovascular imaging modality is essential to determine the presence of large artery occlusion as it helps determine the need for catheter-guided thrombolysis.

MRI is a superior imaging modality in acute and subacute settings to detect lacunar infarction. In the acute stage, the MRI diffusion-weighted image (DWI) has the most diagnostic accuracy. MRI-DWI helps to differentiate between acute and chronic infarction.

In cases where a neck angiogram is not done, carotid ultrasound helps diagnose an atherosclerotic narrowing of the extracranial carotid artery. The risk of stroke is higher in patients with severe carotid artery stenosis (CAS). The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force considers 70%-99% of carotid stenosis clinically significant. Carotid artery intervention is recommended in clinically significant lesions.

Extensive embolic workup, including echocardiography and vascular imaging evaluation, is very low yield in cases of lacunar strokes.

Other immediate tests to be performed include blood glucose levels, electrocardiogram, complete blood count including platelets, troponin, prothrombin time, and international normalized ratio (INR), activated partial thromboplastin time, and a complete metabolic panel and lipid panel. These tests are helpful in the assessment of underlying stroke risk factors.