The clinical presentation of pituitary tumors is classically divided into functional (secreting) and non-functional (nonsecretory) tumors. In general, functional tumors present earlier as a result of symptoms related to the physiologic effects of the excess hormones they secrete.

Structures that are commonly compressed by pituitary tumors resulting in symptoms include the optic chiasm, the cavernous sinus, and the third ventricle. Mass effect on the optic chiasm due to tumor growth superiorly through the diaphragma sella commonly presents as bitemporal hemianopsia and may also cause a decrease in visual acuity. Cranial nerves within the cavernous sinus include the oculomotor nerve (III), trochlear (IV), first and second divisions of the trigeminal nerve (V1, V2), as well as abducens nerve (VI). If a pituitary tumor exerts a mass effect on the cranial nerves in the cavernous sinus, it may result in ptosis, diplopia, or facial pain. Occlusion of the cavernous sinus itself may result in chemosis and ptosis. If the third ventricle is involved, the mass effect may result in obstructive hydrocephalus. Larger pituitary tumors, such as macroadenomas, may produce non-specific symptoms, such as headaches, potentially due to increased intrasellar pressure. Invasive pituitary tumors may infrequently present with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea.

**Symptoms Related to Hormone Oversecretion**

- Prolactin: Oversecretion of prolactin may cause impotence in men. In females, over-secretion of prolactin can cause amenorrhea-galactorrhea syndrome.

- Growth hormone (GH): Produces gigantism in prepubertal children. In adults, it presents as acromegaly.

- Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH): Overproduction of ACTH results in Cushing's disease, which presents with a constellation of findings that is not limited to but includes hypertension, cutaneous purple striae, reduced libido in men and women, atrophic skin with easy bruising, depression, generalized muscle wasting, and weight gain, which is characterized by centripetal fat distribution in addition to fat deposition in the upper thoracic spine, supraclavicular fat pad with a round face and slender extremities.

- Thyrotropin (TSH): Secondary hyperthyroidism, which may present with symptoms of hyperthyroidism such as sweating, intolerance to heat, diarrhea, and weight loss, among others.

- Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and/or luteinizing hormone (LH): Oversecretion of the gonadotropins typically does not produce a clinical syndrome. Oversecretion of FSH may produce ovarian hyperstimulation in women of reproductive age, causing ovarian cysts in addition to amenorrhea and galactorrhea.

Symptoms related to the underproduction of pituitary hormones may be caused by compression of the normal pituitary gland by large pituitary tumors. The order of sensitivity of compression in which pituitary hormones become depressed is GH, gonadotropins (FSH & LH), TSH, ACTH, and prolactin. The order may be remembered by the mnemonic **G**o**L**ook**F**or**T**he**A**denoma**P**lease.

Pituitary apoplexy can occur due to the rapid expansion of a pituitary tumor from necrosis or hemorrhage; any characteristically presents with headache, neurologic deficit, and/or endocrinologic deficit. In contrast to the typical situation with pituitary tumors, pituitary apoplexy more commonly presents with ophthalmoplegia rather than visual pathway deficit.