Uterine imaging measures the length, depth, and width of the uterus. Length is measured from the fundus to the external cervical os in the mid-sagittal plane. Depth: anteroposterior diameter is measured in the same plane, perpendicular to the line of uterine length. Uterine width is measured in the coronal plane of the uterus. Cervix is measured in the midsagittal plane and transverse plane.

Cervical length is measured from internal to external os. Myometrium is assessed for any deviation from normal echotexture and any mass lesion. Various parasagittal and transverse images through the uterus are documented. In the case of multiple leiomyomas, the largest two are measured in three planes.

Endometrial thickness is measured perpendicular to the long axis of the uterus in a midsagittal plane, including both the anterior and posterior endometrial lining, excluding the hypoechoic sub-endometrial zone. In the case of fluid collection, it should be excluded from measurement. Any endometrial thickening, mass, or cystic changes should be measured and documented. Color Doppler and pulsed ultrasound may be more informative. IUD, if present, should be mentioned and assessed for its appropriateness of location.

A coronal view of the uterine fundus is taken to evaluate the adnexa, and the probe is angulated laterally towards the broad ligament. Iliac vessels could be identified in the longitudinal plane, and adnexa can be imaged medially to them. Ovaries are measured in 3 orthogonal planes. Follicles are counted, measured, and documented.

Any cystic, solid, or abnormality in the vasculature is documented. The adnexal mass should be assessed for its origin. If on the movement of the transvaginal probe or abdominal wall, if the mass moves with the ovary, it is of ovarian origin. If it doesn't move with the ovary, it is para ovarian, tubular or uterine in origin. This differentiation is important in the day-to-day diagnosis of tubular ectopic pregnancy and hydrosalpinx. Dynamic imaging by giving pressure to the abdominal wall also helps to displace the bowel. Doppler helps to differentiate malignant from benign masses and adnexal cysts from parametrial vessels.

Evaluation of the vaginal cuff and bladder wall before a hysterectomy is a good practice. Cul-de-sac is assessed for any fluid or mass.

**Sonohysterosalpingography**

Ultrasound is a very useful screening tool to identify endometrial cavity lesions and the causes of infertility. Sonohysterosalpingography (Saline Infusion Sonohysterography-SIS) is a sonography technique to determine the patency of fallopian tubes and is a more comfortable procedure than conventional hysterosalpingography.

Sonohysterosalpingography is a completely radiation-free technique in which saline is infused inside the uterine cavity through the cervix using a self-retaining intracervical insertion of foley's catheter. Saline is infused, and the free flow of saline through the fallopian tube and its exit in the peritoneal cavity is visualized by sonography which confirms the patency of the fallopian tube. (See Figure 1: SIS showing patent fallopian tube) It helps differentiate any endometrium occupying lesions like thickened endometrium, endometrial polyp, and submucosal fibroid.