**Regulation of Energy Expenditure**

The body maintains a set point for weight and fat mass, known as adiposity, by regulating food intake and energy expenditure.

Three major components of energy expenditure (TEE–total energy expenditure) as illustrated above in a schematic diagram.

**REE**–resting energy expenditure or basal metabolic rate (BMR). It includes sleeping energy expenditure and arousal-related energy expenditure. BMR is the biggest component of total energy expenditure, alluding to the largest energy expenditure required to maintain the human body. Basal metabolic rate is determined by age, sex, body composition, and genetic traits. Fat-free mass is the strongest predictor of resting metabolic rate. Roughly 5% of BMR is utilized to maintain arousal. Environmental and internal body temperature also affect BMR. The thyroid hormone is one of the essential hormones regulating BMR, among others. The sympathetic nervous system also modulates basal metabolic rate.

Harris and Benedict equation  for calculating BMR

Men: 88.362 + (13.397 x weight in kg) + (4.799 x height in cm) - (5.677 x age in years )

Women: 447.593 + (9.247 x weight in kg) + (3.098 x height in cm) - (4.33 x age in years )

**The thermogenic effect of food**–on average, 8 to 10% of total energy consumed is used to process food. It also varies based on the food composition(carbohydrate 5 to 10%, fat 0-3%,protein 20 to 30%.)

**Physical activity-induced energy expenditure**–this is the most variable component of energy expenditure. It combines energy expenditure from voluntary exercise and spontaneous activity, including non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT) (e.g., walking to work). The energy expenditure from physical activity varies from 15% in a very sedentary person to 50% in a highly active subject. NEAT is proportionate to spontaneous activity (e.g., fidgeting). It is likely regulated by orexin via its action in the hypothalamus. Therefore, individuals with higher NEAT may be at a lesser risk of weight gain.