The standard ABCs (airway, breathing, and circulation) apply to CO-poisoned patients as well. Supplemental oxygen is the cornerstone of treatment. It is important to note that standard peripheral pulse oximeter devices cannot differentiate COHb from oxyhemoglobin and hence oxygen saturation (SpO2) will not show any abnormalities on the monitor.

Typically, an arterial blood gas sample with a co-oximetry analysis is the most useful initial step. The carboxyhemoglobin level is reported in this analysis. This number should not be the foundation upon which the treatment plan is built however because COHgB levels are loosely associated with symptoms, and there is no direct correlation between COHgb levels and the severity of the symptoms or the risk of mortality and morbidity. COHb levels above 3% to 4% in non-smokers and 10% in smokers are typically considered outside of normal limits. It is agreed that levels greater than 20 in adults indicate a significant poisoning, and levels greater than 15 in children are considered significant. The take-home point is to treat the patient, not the number.

Other assessments such as a complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, BUN, creatinine level, and baseline troponin should be assessed. ECG should be checked for any signs of ischemia. New ischemia on ECG is indicative of severe CO poisoning. Chest radiographs should be ordered as well. CT of the head is not required; however, CO poisoning can manifest as globus pallidus hemorrhage, therefore, it may be useful.