Hydrops fetalis is mainly found in any condition that increases the rate of fluid transudation from the vascular compartment or delay in lymphatic return to the circulation. This is mainly due to the developmental defects in the microcirculation and lymphatic system. Hypoxia is another consequence of both immune and non-immune hydrops fetalis. Hypoxia results in an increase in catecholamines, a decrease in hepatic and renal blood flow because of the redistribution of blood to the brain, heart, adrenals, and ductus venosus. This causes the renin-angiotensin system's activation, an increase in the anti-diuretic hormone, and a decrease in albumin. These mechanisms elevate central venous pressure and lead to a decreased return of lymphatic flow into the systemic circulation and further complicate the loss of intravascular volume, resulting in severe and progressive edema in the fetuses.

Although the pathophysiology of non-immune hydrops fetalis is not completely understood, it often results from various mechanisms depending on the underlying cause. Decreased ventricular filling during diastole is the most common mechanism of NIHF in tachyarrhythmias. In contrast, increased central venous pressure resulting from increased right heart pressure is mainly seen in cardiac tumors and subendocardial fibroelastosis. Obstructed lymphatic drainage in thoracic and abdominal cavities results from masses like cystic hygroma, increased capillary permeability, and decreased osmotic pressure in congenital infections and nephrosis. Hence, the management should mainly focus on reversing the underlying diseases.