**History:**A thorough history of the patient that includes any preexisting systemic bone disease, neoplasia affecting the bone, arthritis, collagen vascular disorders, and temporomandibular joint dysfunction must merit consideration. The nature of the injury and any additional fracture's presence is assessable by the type and direction of the causative traumatic force. The vehicular accidents tend to have a larger magnitude of the force that may result in multiple, compound, comminuted mandibular fractures compared to assaults that may result in a single, simple, nondisplaced fracture.

**Physical:**Intraorally, a change in occlusion may be apparent on physical examination. There may be anesthesia, paresthesia, or dysesthesia of the lower lip. This change in lower lip sensation generally occurs in displaced body fractures that are distal to the mandibular foramen (along with the distribution of the inferior alveolar nerve) and not seen in nondisplaced mandible fractures.

In general, the common signs of a body fracture include laceration in the gingiva, step defect in the occlusion, and/or ecchymosis in the floor of the mouth. Ecchymosis in the mouth floor is a pathognomonic sign of a mandibular body fracture. The examiner should note the mobility in the fracture. To do so, use both hands to manipulate the mandible by placing the thumb on the occlusal surface of the teeth and fingers on the inferior border of the mandible. Then slowly and carefully, pressure should be placed between the two hands.

Extraorally, there may be a change in facial contour due to loss of external mandibular form and skin abrasion. A body fracture often results in a flattened appearance of the lateral aspect of the face. On palpation of there is a loss of the mandibular body. An unfavorable fracture should be suspected. The anterior face may get displaced in the forward direction, resulting in elongation. In such cases, the anterior mandible becomes displaced in the downward direction. Other findings include lacerations, hematoma, and ecchymosis.