Intrinsic hand muscles originate and insert from the bones, ligaments, and fascia of the hand. These muscles primarily produce fine motor movements. These muscles are divided into thenar, hypothenar, and adductor compartments.

The **thenar muscles**are a group of three muscles that act on the thumb. These muscles form the bulge on the palmar surface of the thumb and palm, called the thenar eminence. The largest of the three muscles,**opponens pollicis**, originates at the tubercle of the trapezium and inserts at the lateral margin of the metacarpal of the thumb. It permits the thumb to perform opposition which is the motion of reaching across the palm towards the little finger, by flexing and medially rotating the metacarpal on the axis of the trapezium. The**abductor pollicis brevis**muscle is positioned anterior to the opponens pollicis and is the primary muscle providing the act of opposition. It originates at the tubercles of the scaphoid and trapezium and inserts at the lateral aspect of the proximal phalanx of the thumb. Abductor pollicis brevis also acts by drawing the thumb away from the midline, which is the action of abduction for all muscles. The**f****lexor pollicis brevis**originates at the tubercle of the trapezium via the deep head, and the associated flexor retinaculum via the superficial head, and inserts at the base of the proximal phalanx of the thumb. These three muscles are all innervated by the recurrent branch of the median nerve. The flexor pollicis brevis receives dual innervation with fibers from both the median and ulnar nerves. The superficial head is innervated by the median nerve while the deep head is innervated by the ulnar nerve.

The **hypothenar muscles**act on the little finger and form a bulge on the medial palmar surface, called the hypothenar eminence, which is less prominent then the thenar eminence. The**opponens digiti minimi**originates at the hook of hamate and associated transverse carpal ligament and inserts at the ulnar side of the fifth metacarpal. Contraction of the opponens digiti minimi draws the small finger radially, reaching across the palm by flexion and supination, thus performing opposition. The action of the opponens pollicis and opponens digiti minimi allow for the thumb and the little finger to touch.**Abductor digiti minimi**originates from the pisiform bone and the tendon of flexor carpi ulnaris and inserts at the ulnar base of the proximal phalanx of the small finger. Contraction of this muscle allows for abduction, just as the abductor pollicis brevis muscle directs the thumb away from the midline.**Flexor digiti minimi brevis**originates at the hook of hamate and the transverse carpal ligament and inserts at the base of the proximal phalanx of the small finger.**Palmaris brevis**originates at the transverse carpal ligament and inserts on the skin of the medial palm. It permits the wrinkling of the skin on the palmar surface of the hand and protects the ulnar nerve. The ulnar nerve innervates all muscles of the hypothenar compartment.

The **adductor pollicis**muscle occupies the**adductor compartment**. The adductor pollicis muscle originates from two places, the oblique and transverse heads. The oblique head originates at the capitate, second and third metacarpals, and inserts at the ulnar base of the proximal phalanx of the thumb. The transverse head arises at the third metacarpal and also inserts at the medial aspect of the proximal phalanx of the thumb. The ulnar nerve provides innervation. This muscle allows for the adduction and flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joint.

If you make the shape of an L by straightening your second through fifth fingers, via the extension at the proximal interphalangeal joints, and flexion at the metacarpophalangeal joints, you are using muscles of the hand called **lumbricals**.

The interossei muscles act by adducting and abducting the fingers. The mnemonic PAD and DAB helps to remember the actions of each muscle. The "P" in PAD stands for the **palmar interossei**. Interossei muscles on the palmar surface adduct the fingers, bringing them towards the midline. The "D" in DAB stands for**dorsal interossei**. The dorsally placed interossei permit abduction of the phalanges, moving them away from the midline. The second and third letters of PAD and DAB stand for the direction of finger movement. The dorsal interossei originate from the adjacent sides of two metacarpals. They insert at the extensor hood and proximal phalanx of each phalange. There are three palmar interossei, which each originate at the medial or lateral surface of the 2nd, 4th, and 5th metacarpals and insert at the base of digits 2-4 and the extensor hood of each finger.

The extrinsic muscles of the hand originate in the forearm and are located on the anterior and posterior aspect of the forearm, with flexors positioned anteriorly and extensors posteriorly. These muscles perform the gross movements of the hand and wrist.

The extrinsic muscles of the hand are defined by a proximal origin with an insertion on the hand. The muscles can be grouped by anatomy and function. The muscles included in the anterior forearm with insertion on the hand can be further divided into superficial, intermediate, and deep groups. The majority of the muscles in the group are flexor muscles. The superficial group includes the **flexor carpi radialis**,**palmaris longus**, and**flexor carpi ulnaris**. The flexor carpi ulnaris is innervated by the ulnar nerve while both the flexor carpi radialis and palmaris longus are innervated by the median nerve. Each of these muscles allows for the flexion of the wrist. The flexor carpi ulnaris aids in the ulnar deviation of the hand and is opposed by the flexor carpi radialis that allows for the radial deviation of the hand. The intermediate group includes the**flexor digitorum superficialis**. This muscle is innervated by the median nerve and allows for flexion of the wrist, MCP, and PIP joints of digits 2-5. The deep group includes the**flexor digitorum profundus**and**flexor pollicis longus**. The flexor digitorum profundus has a mixed innervation. The 2nd and 3rd digits receive innervation from the median nerve while the 4th and 5th digits receive innervation from the ulnar nerve. The muscles flex the DIP joints for digits 2-5. The flexor pollicis longus is innervated by the median nerve and flexes the wrist, MCP, and IP joint of the thumb.

The posterior forearm is divided into superficial and deep muscle layers. The majority of muscles in the group are extensor muscles. The superficial layers include the **extensor carpi radialis longus**,**extensor carpi radialis brevis**,**extensor digitorum**,**extensor digiti minimi**, and**extensor carpi ulnaris**. This group of muscles aid in the extension of the wrist; extension of the MCP, and IP joint of digits; and adduction and abduction of the wrist. The deep group includes the**abductor pollicis longus**,**extensor pollicis longus**,**extensor pollicis brevis**, and**extensor indicis**. This group of muscles aid in the extension of the wrist; abduction and extension of thumb; and extension of the 2nd digit.