Due to the aging process, even a well-functioning older patient can deteriorate rapidly due to any 1 or a combination of issues. The development of any new signs or symptoms in the elderly can be due to the adverse effects of medication. Hence, medication reconciliation and avoidance of polypharmacy are important in every visit or each transition of care.

Sensory issues such as vision and hearing impairment can also lead to functional decline and masquerade as mood changes and cognitive impairment. So, patients with suspicion of such symptoms should be assessed for vision and hearing impairment. Urinary incontinence (UI), osteoporosis, and arthritis can all lead to functional decline by limiting older patients' mobility. It is important to get detailed history to diagnose the type of UI and provide appropriate treatment based on UI type. Appropriate nutrition and preventative health, use of safe medication, and surgical options like knee replacement can significantly improve the health of patients who have osteoporosis and arthritis. Early recognition of cognitive decline, including dementia, insomnia, and mood disorder, could provide an opportunity to begin behavioral and medical therapy early in the course of the disease with the possibility to reverse or at least arrest the disease progression.

Older patients make the largest share of health care consumers at present. However, due to multiple issues, it can be overwhelming for providers to address all of these. The use of various standardized tools can help alleviate confusion and discrepancy in assessing older patients. It is important to address such issues on a rollover basis during each clinic visit to improve outcomes for this vulnerable population.