Cardiac rehabilitation consists of three phases.

**Phase I: Clinical Phase**

- This phase begins in the inpatient setting soon after a cardiovascular event or completion of the intervention. It begins by assessing the patient's physical ability and motivation to tolerate rehabilitation. Therapists and nurses may start by guiding patients through non-strenuous exercises in the bed or at the bedside, focusing on a range of motion and limiting hospital deconditioning. The rehabilitation team may also focus on activities of daily living (ADLs) and educate the patient on avoiding excessive stress. Patients are encouraged to remain relatively rested until the completion of treatment of comorbid conditions or postoperative complications. The rehabilitation team assesses patient needs such as assistive devices, patient and family education, as well as discharge planning.

**Phase II: Outpatient Cardiac Rehab**

- Once a patient is stable and cleared by cardiology, outpatient cardiac rehabilitation may begin. Phase II typically lasts three to six weeks though some may last up to up to twelve weeks. Initially, patients have an assessment with a focus on identifying limitations in physical function, restrictions of participation secondary to comorbidities, and limitations to activities. A more rigorous patient-centered therapy plan is designed, comprising three modalities: information/advice, a tailored training program, and a relaxation program. The treatment phase intends to promote independence and lifestyle changes to prepare patients to return to their lives at home.

**Phase III: Post-cardiac Rehab**

- This phase involves more independence and self-monitoring. Phase III centers on increasing flexibility, strengthening, and aerobic conditioning. Patients receive encouragement towards maintaining an active lifestyle and continue the exercise. Outpatient visits to physician specialists are recommended to monitor cardiovascular health and medication regimens, promote healthy lifestyle changes and intervene when necessary to prevent relapse.

There is also a presurgery phase, where the patient starts cardiovascular rehabilitation. A small number of studies demonstrate that the post-surgical pathway is better tolerated by patients.