There are two forms of guanylate cyclase; one is a transmembrane receptor for natriuretic peptides, and the other is a soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC), a receptor for nitric oxide. Nitric oxide and natriuretic peptides indirectly increase phosphokinase G (PKG) levels through sGC by activating guanosine triphosphate to cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). The phosphokinase G causes cellular hyperpolarization and cardiac muscle relaxation. In patients with cardiovascular risk factors, the endothelium-generated reactive oxygen species decrease the nitric oxide levels and inactivate the sGC by removing the heme group from sGC leading to decreased PKG and impaired muscle relaxation resulting in stiffness. The transforming growth factor-beta produced by monocytes led to the conversion of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, ultimately leading to collagen formation and stiffening of cardiac muscle.

The treatment of heart failure with nitric oxide generators is shown to have clinical benefits but is limited by the development of tolerance. Also, the reactive oxygen species decreases the sensitivity of soluble guanylate cyclase to nitric oxide. The soluble guanylate cyclase stimulators act by nitric oxide independent enhancement of soluble guanylate cyclase activity along with increased sensitivity of sGC to endogenous nitric oxide.

Vericiguat stimulates soluble guanylate cyclase that activates the cGMP pathway independent of nitric oxide involvement. It also sensitizes soluble guanylate cyclase to nitric oxide by stabilizing nitric oxide binding to the binding site. In other words, vericiguat restores the cyclic guanosine monophosphate under low nitric oxide conditions and oxidative stress.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: The bioavailability of vericiguat is 93% when taken with food. Food increases AUC (area under the curve-  total drug exposure across time) of vericiguat.

Distribution: Vericiguat has high plasma protein binding (98%) and is primarily bound to albumin. The average volume of distribution(Vd) is approximately 44 Liters.

Metabolism: Vericiguat is metabolized primarily by glucuronidation via UGT1A9(uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase) and UGT1A1 to form an inactive metabolite. The Cytochrome P450 system is responsible for <5% metabolism of vericiguat.

Excretion: The half-life is 30 hours in patients with heart failure. Clearance is approximately 1.6 L/h. Vericiguat is excreted primarily in urine as an inactive metabolite(53%). Vericiguat is also excreted as an unchanged drug in feces(43%).