An interprofessional team approach to erythema ab igne that includes clinicians, specialists (particularly dermatologists), and nursing staff is recommended. Erythema ab igne is a preventable skin dermatosis, and the importance of patient education is critical in preventing disease progression. Most of these patients will present to the primary care provider or nurse practitioner. Nurses can counsel the patient on preventative measures and coordinate with pharmacy consult in those instances where medication is necessary. Accurate record-keeping by all interprofessional care team members will ensure that everyone on the case has the same accurate patient data; this is another aspect of communication between team members. The interprofessional approach will yield the best results with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5]

Heating pads and water bottles are commonly used to manage chronic pain and can potentially lead to the development of erythema ab igne. Clinicians should be aware of the presentation of erythema ab igne and other mimicking conditions such as livedo reticularis, cutis marmorata, and physical abuse. Providers should be aware of the risks for malignant transformation in areas of repeated heat exposure. Furthermore, a careful history should be obtained to rule out other systemic symptoms that could be indicative of other more serious pathologies causing the patient’s chronic pain. Long-standing erythema ab igne in the presence of other secondary changes such as ulceration or hyperkeratosis should prompt a dermatologist referral for biopsy and further management.