Cardiac imaging is a robust yet essential part of cardiovascular medicine. The development of magnetic resonance imaging, plain chest radiography, echocardiography, and CCT provides clinicians with many tools to evaluate cardiac pathology. Choosing the optimal modality has proven difficult at times as all methods possess specific limitations and indications while sharing many overlapping characteristics.

**Predicting CAD-related Events**

CAC has been linked to atherosclerosis for decades. CCT provides clinicians with a fast, less cumbersome, more patient safe method for risk stratification of asymptomatic high-risk patients for CAD. Computer software then evaluates the CAC volume and density, providing data points for prognostic tests, most notably the Agatston Method, as discussed above.

CAC used in conjunction with Risk Stratification tools-

- Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis CAC (MESA CAC) has demonstrated the efficacy of CAC scores by incorporating the patient's CAC into its demographic database. Including the CAC in the cardiovascular event prediction model provided by MESA proved CAC to be a dominant predictor in CHD as well as all-cause ASVCD outcomes.

- Compared to the Agatston reporting system alone, CAC Data and Reporting System (CAC-DRS) has been shown to provide better prognostic stratification regarding CHD, CVD, and all-cause mortality. This risk stratification takes into account the CAC as well as the number of coronary vessels involved.

- Using CAC as a re-classification tool in the Framingham Risk Score has shown benefit for intermediate-risk patients. Roughly 60% of atherosclerotic coronary events occur in low to intermediate-risk patients according to the Framingham risk. The addition of a patient's CAC increases the accuracy of this stratification too substantially.

- CAC risk stratification has been shown to direct the clinician with data to support starting an asymptomatic patient on aspirin or statin in all three of the methods discussed.

CAC as an independent predictor of future CAD-related events-

- According to the ACCF/AHA consensus report of 2007, the following relative risk (RR) ratios for CAD-related events were calculated according to isolated CAC scores in asymptomatic patients.

- CAC 100 to 400, RR 4.3; CAC 401 to 999, RR 7.2; CAC >1000, RR 10.8

**Predicting CAD Degree of Stenosis**

A recent study demonstrated CAC to be an accurate predictor of the coronary arterial degree of stenosis via histological evaluation of post-mortem coronary arteries. This study showed CAC to be an effective tool in identifying a patient's degree of coronary arterial stenosis.

**Prosthetic Valvular Dysfunction (PVD) Evaluation**

The initial evaluation of a suspected PVD is done via transthoracic echocardiography or transesophageal echocardiography. Given the broad differential, these modalities can be limited, especially in the setting of an acoustic shadow. Furthermore, CCTA has been shown to allow clinicians to accurately evaluate peri-prosthetic windows allowing optimal viewing to rule out a peri-valvular thrombus or pannus.

**Structural Cardiac Abnormalities**

A recent study demonstrated the ability of CCTA to demonstrate accurate ventricular dimensions/curvature. These findings were directly correlated with RV dimensions found on cardiac MRI. When compared to TTE, echo findings of ventricular dysfunction were correlated with enlarged ventricular dimensions on CCT.

**Cardiac Imaging for Patients with Metallic Implants**

Cardiac MRI is preferred over CCTA for the evaluation of coronary congenital anomalies.[5] Patients with cardiac devices/metallic implants must undergo CCTA for such evaluation.