Localized prostate cancer represents a paradox in that when left untreated, and it is generally associated with a good prognosis. However, because prostate cancer is a common cause of cancer-related mortality, there is usually significant patient anxiety once the diagnosis is confirmed. All standard treatments carry risks of adverse events that might negatively impact on short, medium, or long-term quality of life. As such, the clinical approach to managing localized prostate cancer must take into account not only the disease features, such as stage, grade, and volume of cancer detected, but also patient co-morbidities, life-expectancy, and priorities.

The optimal management of localized prostate cancer starts with discussion by a multidisciplinary team (MDT) consisting of radiation oncologists, medical oncologists, urologists, histopathologists, radiologists, and specialist nurses. Each brings their own expertise and knowledge of the patient to help determine which treatment options are appropriate for an individual.

There is evidence that a shared decision-making (SDM) environment leads to better self-perceived quality of life and less treatment regret for patients with prostate cancer, although the impact on long-term oncological outcomes is uncertain. SDM is a process whereby clinicians collaboratively help patients to reach evidence-informed and value-congruent medical decisions. SDM takes time and relies on physician empathy and excellent communication skills. The role of the physician is to draw attention to the natural history of prostate cancer as slow-growing cancer to reduce anxiety. It is important to reassure the patient that time spent discussing the pros and cons of the various approaches is time well-spent.

The standard approaches to localized prostate cancer include a monitoring strategy, radical surgery, radiation therapy (brachytherapy or external beam), and emergent focal therapies.

**Monitoring**

Natural history studies suggest that the majority of men, particularly elderly men, diagnosed with localized prostate cancer, die with their disease rather than of it, reflecting competing hazards associated with aging. Although many cases do not progress, there does appear to be a true progression rate over the years of follow-up. Both grade and volume of the disease are predictive of progression to locally advanced and metastatic disease. As such, monitoring strategies are most suited to elderly men, low-risk disease, or to selected intermediate-risk disease with careful counseling and close follow-up. Two broad approaches to monitoring are generally described.

**Conservative Palliative Strategy**

Often termed ‘**watchful waiting,’**this modality is most commonly offered to elderly, frail, asymptomatic men.  It is anticipated that disease progression in the remaining lifetime of the man is unlikely to cause a clinically significant problem. In addition, the morbidity/ mortality associated with radical treatment does not justify the anticipated benefits in longevity. Treatment in the form of primary androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) may be offered to control symptoms as and when they occur or if there is evidence of metastatic disease. The aim is remission, which occurs in around 80% of cases, rather than ‘cure.’ This approach has been called into question due to improvements in life-expectancy, treatments, and imaging modalities. Additionally, evidence now demonstrates significantly improved survival when radiotherapy is added to ADT for patients who previously would have received ADT alone.

**Deferred Curative Strategy**

Often termed ‘**active surveillance**’ this approach is aimed at reducing overtreatment for prostate cancer that is unlikely to progress in the man’s lifetime. Regular follow up using a combination of biomarker repeat assessment (typically serum PSA), imaging findings (interval and mp-MRI), clinical evaluation (symptoms/ DRE), and repeat biopsy are offered. A commonly used protocol (NICE guidance, UK) is:

- First-year - PSA test every 3 to 4 months

- At 6 and 12 months – clinical review, DRE

- 12 months- interval mpMRI

- Subsequently - 6 monthly PSA with yearly DRE in subsequent years

Repeat biopsy is utilized where there are discordant findings between biomarkers and imaging. Radical treatment is offered if evidence of disease progression is present, or if the patient requests it.  Large randomized controlled trials, such as the ProtecT trial, have demonstrated no detriment to 10-year survival from offering active surveillance over primary radical treatment. The trade-off for the patient is an increased risk of disease progression against the adverse effects of radical treatment.

Recent evidence has demonstrated survival benefit from radiotherapy plus ADT in men who would have been traditionally assigned to watchful waiting when they progress to locally advanced disease. This calls into question the distinction between active surveillance and watchful waiting.  For instance, although the risk-benefit analysis at initial presentation with the localized disease might be considered unfavorable in an asymptomatic man with co-morbidities, progression to a more advanced stage (e.g., T3 disease from T2) could act as a trigger for a more radical approach. This is in line with deferred curative treatment. As such, the key to successful monitoring of localized prostate cancer rests on thorough clinical evaluation and an honest appraisal, with the patient, of goals and priorities.

**Surgical Management – Radical Prostatectomy**

Radical prostatectomy can be open (ORP), laparoscopic (LRP), or robotic-assisted (RARP). ORP is the traditional method, whilst LRP and RARP are increasing in popularity. As RARP becomes more available, conventional LRP has been overtaken. Patients with high-risk cancer should also undergo extended pelvic lymph node dissection. Nerve-sparing RP reduces the risk of subsequent urinary and sexual dysfunction. The risk of post RP incontinence increases with age, with 75yrs being the most common cut-off in most centers. There is currently a lack of evidence demonstrating the superiority of any specific method of RP for mortality, cancer recurrence, or postoperative complications, although LRP and RARP are likely to lead to shorter hospital stays and fewer blood transfusions.

**Radiation Therapy**

**External-beam Radiation Therapy (EBRT)**

Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for EBRT delivery as it allows targeted radiation delivery to the prostate gland with less toxicity to surrounding organs. Side effects of radiotherapy are gastrointestinal toxicity, genitourinary toxicity, and secondary malignancy. Acute proctitis and cystitis commonly resolve following treatment completion.

Hypofractionation (>2Gy/day) reduces treatment time and improves resource utilization without compromising tumor control, reoccurrence, and side effects when compared to traditional fractions (1.8-2Gy/day). Hypofractionated IMRT is commonly 60Gy delivered in 20 fractions.

Androgen-deprivation therapy is commonly used as an adjunct to EBRT in intermediate and high-risk prostate cancer. In localized prostate cancer, this is generally short term (6 months). In high-risk patients, particularly where there might be early T3 extension, ADT might be prolonged for up to 3 years. The safety of such neoadjuvant use of ADT has recently been questioned as there is evidence of significant cardiovascular side effects. The current trend is to aim to reduce the duration of exposure to ADT to as short a period as possible and indeed avoid it altogether in men at particularly high risk of CV adverse effects. The impact of these changes on oncological outcomes has not been thoroughly explored.

**Brachytherapy**

This is the implantation of radioactive seeds into the prostate. It is used for primary treatment in a low risk and low volume intermediate-risk localized prostate cancer. It can also be used as an adjuvant to EBRT in high volume intermediate-risk and high-risk cancer.

Brachytherapy can be divided into low dose rate (LDR) and high dose rate (HDR). In LDR brachytherapy, radioactive seeds release their radiation over a few months and remain in the prostate permanently. In HDR, a radioactive source is delivered into the prostate during a single visit to the hospital and then removed; this is then most commonly combined with a subsequent course of external beam radiotherapy (brachytherapy boost).

Brachytherapy commonly causes urinary side effects such as urinary retention, incontinence, and the requirement for transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). It also causes erectile dysfunction in up to 40% of patients.

**Emergent Focal Therapies**

The radical treatment for prostate cancer is associated with significant detriment to the quality of life, for example, incontinence, reduced sexual function, and radiation toxicity. Increased sophistication of prostate imaging has allowed for the rapid emergence of focal therapies such as focal laser ablation, high-intensity focal ultrasound (HIFU), irreversible electroporation (IRE), photodynamic therapy (VTP), and focal cryotherapy. These are used to ablate the dominant tumor in the prostate with a view to achieving tumor control whilst reducing the adverse events of treatment. Of these, cryotherapy and HIFU are probably the most available.

As yet, studies for these treatments are confined to short and intermediate-term follow-up. They appear to have a vastly lower rate of high-grade complications. However, the long-term oncological results are uncertain, particularly given a relatively high-rate of residual/ recurrent cancer on repeat biopsy. At present, promising as the results appear from the perspective of preserving the quality of life, they should only be offered as part of a clinical trial.