The muscles of the anterolateral wall consist of five large, paired muscles. Beginning laterally and most superficially, the external oblique muscles are the first muscular layer originating from the fifth to twelfth ribs and inserting at the linea alba, pubic tubercle, and anterior half of iliac crest. It is responsible for compressing the abdominal viscera and the movement of the trunk by flexing and rotating. The fibers of the external oblique run inferomedially. In contrast to the external oblique, the internal oblique runs superomedially from the thoracolumbar fascia, anterior two-thirds, or iliac crest to the inferior borders of the tenth-twelfth ribs, linea alba, and pectin pubis via the conjoint tendon. It supports abdominal viscera and has minimal movement responsibility. The transversus abdominis muscle originates on the internal surfaces of the 7th to 12th costal cartilages, thoracolumbar fascia, iliac crest, and lateral third inguinal ligament to the linea alba. Its main function is to compress the abdominal viscera. The fibers run horizontally. Then the rectus abdominis is the major flexor of the trunk. It also stabilizes and controls the tilt of the pelvis. Its origin is the pubic symphysis and crest; it then runs superiorly to the xiphoid process and the fifth to seventh costal cartilages. There is also a small muscle called the pyramidalis that is absent in 20% of the population. It lays at the inferior rectus abdominis and is responsible for tensing the linea alba.