Complete blood count (CBC) and complete metabolic panel (CMP) are usually checked in all patients with suspected intracranial hypertension to evaluate for infection, anemia, and electrolyte abnormalities. The initial evaluation should include a head computed tomography (CT) scan. CT scan findings of cerebral edema such as compressed basal cisterns and midline shift are predictive of elevated ICP. However, the absence of these findings does not rule out intracranial hypertension. A head MRI is more accurate than a head CT in evaluating elevated ICP and looking for potential etiology. Bedside ultrasonography also can be used to measure the diameter of the optic nerve sheath to determine intracranial hypertension. However, this study is limited by operator skill and not frequently used. A lumbar puncture (LP) may sometimes be needed for diagnosis. However, it should be delayed until neuroimaging, especially in those with suspicion of impending herniation. When LP is performed, in addition to measuring opening pressures, CSF should also be tested for infection and other potential etiology. Invasive measurement of ICP is definitive for diagnosis and improves the provider’s ability to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP). There are four main anatomical sites used for clinical measurement of intracranial pressure: intraventricular, intraparenchymal, subarachnoid, and epidural. A ventriculostomy catheter is the preferred device for ICP monitoring and can be used even for therapeutic CSF drainage to lower ICP. When ventricles cannot be cannulated, intraparenchymal devices using microsensors and fibreoptic transducers may be used. Subdural and epidural monitors are not as accurate as ventriculostomy and parenchymal monitors.