In the past, the treatment of anal cancer was surgical resection utilizing the anterior-posterior approach. This treatment was curative in 50% of cases and was associated with significant morbidity. The current treatment modality for localized anal cancer is chemotherapy and radiation. The treatment of anal cancer, akin to many other malignancies, is dependent on the stage of disease at presentation. Tumors that are less than 2 cm with no lymph node involvement and are well-differentiated (T1N0, stage I) are treated with local excision. If adequate negative margins are attained, patients are usually observed. Conversely, if tumors are stage I (T1N0) but are poorly differentiated or are at a higher stage but not metastatic (poorly differentiated T1N0, T2-T4, and N0, or any T and N positive), are treated with chemotherapy and radiation. The regimen most widely used currently is mitomycin-C (12 mg/m intravenous (IV) bolus on day one), fluorouracil (1000mg/m/day IV continuous infusion over four days, during the first and last week of radiation), and radiation (total dose 45 Gy). This regimen afforded patients a 46% reduction in the risk of local failure. The expectation for patients is a complete response rate (CR) in 70% to 80% of cases with an overall five-year survival rate of greater than 65%. A large randomized phase III trial that involved 682 patients compared the regimen above to an intensified regimen consisting of induction with cisplatin and fluorouracil followed by cisplatin, fluorouracil, and radiation. The latter regimen did not show superiority, and in fact, the five-year local-regional recurrence rate, distant metastatic rate, and cumulative rate of colostomy favored the mitomycin-C regimen. Thus, in clinical practice, the established regimen is mitomycin-C, fluorouracil, and radiation. However, if mitomycin-C is contradicted, then cisplatin, fluorouracil, and radiation can be used. Patients presenting with inguinal lymph node involvement can receive additional radiation therapy to the area or lymph node dissection, although the latter is rarely used.

Post-treatment surveillance and assessment of local response are paramount after the therapy with chemoradiation. Anal cancers regress slowly over many weeks after the chemoradiation, sometimes up to 26 weeks following therapy.