Adrenergic drugs are a broad class of medications that bind to adrenergic receptors throughout the body. These receptors include: alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-1, beta-2, beta-3. Adrenergic drugs will bind directly to one or more of these receptors to induce various physiologic effects. Some drugs indirectly act at these receptors to induce certain effects.

Adrenergic drugs must be classified based on the specific receptors they bind. Direct-acting drugs, which are the primary focus of this article, include vasopressors, bronchodilators, and other drugs.

The major effects of agonist binding depend on their adrenergic receptors.

- Alpha-1 receptor: Smooth muscle contraction, mydriasis

- Alpha-2 receptor: Mixed smooth muscle effects

- Beta-1 receptor: Increased cardiac chronotropic and inotropic effects

- Beta-2 receptor: Bronchodilation

- Beta-3 receptor: Increased lipolysis

Examples of adrenergic drugs which selectively bind to alpha-1 receptors are phenylephrine and oxymetazoline. Selective alpha-2 receptor drugs include methyldopa and clonidine. The key beta-1 selective drug is dobutamine. Lastly, beta-2 selective drugs are bronchodilators, such as albuterol and salmeterol.

Adrenergic drugs can also be non-selective and bind to a combination of adrenergic receptors. Norepinephrine binds to the alpha-1, alpha-2, and beta-1 receptors. Dopamine binds to the alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-1 receptors, and also dopamine receptors. Epinephrine binds to all of the adrenergic receptors. These drugs bind to more adrenergic receptors when administered at higher doses, i.e., they can lose selectivity.

The following are key clinical indications of various adrenergic drugs:

**Selective Drugs**

**Alpha-1 Receptor Agonists**

- Phenylephrine: FDA-approved as a decongestant and vasopressor. It has utility in cases of hypotension due to shock, such as septic shock.

- Oxymetazoline: FDA-approved as a decongestant and to treat rosacea. A patient with ptosis of the right eye caused by myasthenia gravis was treated with one eye drop of oxymetazoline (0.1%).

**Alpha-2 Receptor Agonists**

- Methyldopa: FDA-approved for hypertension and gestational hypertension.

- Clonidine: FDA-approved for treating hypertension and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Non-FDA-approved indications include sleep disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, restless leg syndrome, hot flashes associated with menopause, and other illnesses.

- Dexmedetomidine: This drug is indicated for sedation in the intensive care unit and does not cause respiratory depression. It causes an arousable state of sedation which is helpful during brain tumor surgery and implantation of deep brain stimulators because the patient is able to respond to neurological tests.

**Beta-1 Receptor Agonists**

- Dobutamine: Indicated for the treatment of cardiogenic shock and heart failure.

**Beta-2 Receptor Agonists**

- Bronchodilators: Indicated for treating obstructive lung disease, such as asthma.

**Beta-3 receptor Agonists**

- Mirabegron: This agent is indicated for treating overactive bladder, e.g., urinary incontinence and frequency. It is also indicated to treat pediatric (greater or equal to 3 years old) neurogenic detrusor overactivity.

**Non-Selective Drugs**

- Norepinephrine: Indicated for the treatment of shock and hypotension

- Epinephrine (Adrenaline): Indicated for the treatment of cardiac arrest, anaphylaxis, and croup

- Dopamine: Indicated for the treatment of hypotension, bradycardia, and cardiac arrest.

- Isoprenaline: Indicated for treating bradycardia and heart block

Many of these medications, especially the non-selective ones, are used in critical care and emergency settings. They are referred to as vasopressors. Side effects depend on the specific agent. However, changes in heart rate and blood pressure are the most common side effects.

Indirect-acting adrenergic drugs increase endogenous concentrations of norepinephrine and epinephrine through various mechanisms. Hence, their side effect profiles are similar to those seen with vasopressors.