There have been multiple theories proposed for the presumed pathophysiology of TTHs, but the exact pathophysiology is unknown. Myofascial trigger points have been implicated in the possible pathogenesis of TTH. Trigger points are specific areas, usually located at the level of skeletal muscles, that when pressed may be painful and elicit pain in specific areas of the body. The pericranial musculatures are the presumed trigger points for the TTHs. Excessive pericranial muscle contractions may lead to ischemia and the release of noxious substances, such as substance P, that may lead to further pain. Over time, these trigger points may be latent, meaning radiate pain only with palpation, or active, which causes constant pain.

There is also a hypothesis that autonomic dysfunction may also play a role in the pathophysiology of TTH, especially due to sleep disturbance. Sleep loss can lead to an increase in fatigue that can lead to a greater sympathetic overdrive, which would subsequently worsen or cause a headache. TTHs may also occur due to dysfunction within the brain's cortical matter. The trigeminal nucleus caudalis contains the nociceptive pathways of the face, which transmits pain signals to the ventral posteromedial thalamus. When stimulated with a molecule known as orexin, the nociceptive pathways within the trigeminal nucleus caudalis become inhibited. With inconsistent sleep, researchers postulate that the release of orexin becomes reduced, and therefore, less blocking of the trigeminal nucleus caudalis results in headaches.

There is also a role for NO-mediated mechanisms for a chronic tension-type headache. Part of this is due to the treatments, which have shown that the inhibition of NO is effective in the treatment of a chronic-tension-type headache. This area is under further investigation at this time.