Anal atresia should be suspected clinically at birth during routine postpartum evaluation or shortly thereafter when the newborn fails to have a bowel movement within 24 hours after birth (i.e., failure to pass meconium). Patients may present with abdominal distension. Sometimes meconium may emerge from fistula in the perineum or from the urethra.

A thorough examination of the perineum should take place at birth, and after 24 hours. These may reveal a lack of anal opening or a small depression (called an anal pit). The presence of a small orifice, not at the normal position of the anus, may indicate a perineal fistula. This defect is usually present anterior to the anal sphincter complex. There may be a fistula to the genitourinary tract if stool is noted coming out of the urethra or vagina instead of the anus. However, it may take more than 24 hours for the fistula to reveal itself because significant pressure is needed to force meconium through the fistulous opening. Examination of urine is essential in male newborns to look for evidence of meconium. In a female child with ARM, close inspection of the vestibule (the area between the labia) is necessary. The normal vestibule has two openings, urethra anteriorly and vagina posteriorly. The presence of a single opening indicates persistent cloaca, and the presence of three openings indicates a vestibular fistula. The presence of two openings in the vestibule with absent anus indicates an underlying rectovaginal fistula or a blind-ending rectum. Patients with high anorectal malformations may have a flat "bottom" or flat perineum, and absent midline gluteal fold. These indicate underdeveloped musculature in the perineum or sacral deformities, and such patients tend to have associated poor prognosis for achieving bowel control.

Patients with anorectal malformation have a high incidence of associated anomalies, and examination should be done to detect these.