Cephalosporins have low toxicity and are generally safe. The most common adverse reactions from cephalosporins are nausea, vomiting, lack of appetite, and abdominal pain.

The less common adverse reaction includes:

**Hypersensitivity Reaction**

A hypersensitivity reaction to cephalosporin is infrequent and is more common in first and second-generation cephalosporins. Common allergic reaction to cephalosporin includes rash, hives, and swelling. Rarely will the hypersensitivity reaction result in anaphylaxis. Patients who are allergic to penicillin might show a hypersensitive reaction to cephalosporins as well. This cross-reactivity is more common in first and second-generation cephalosporins because they have R-groups more similar to penicillin G. Third generation and beyond show minimal cross-reactivity.

**Drug-induce Immune Hemolytic Anemia (DIIHA)**

The proposed mechanism of action of DIIHA is that the drug binds to the red blood cell membrane; this causes no harm to the red blood cell itself or the patient. However, if the patient starts making IgG antibodies against the drug, the antibody will bind to the red blood cell. The immune system will react with the abnormal red blood cell resulting in hemolysis. Cefotetan and ceftriaxone are the two cephalosporins most likely to cause DIIHA.

**Disulfiram-like Reaction**

Cephalosporins containing a methyltetrazolethiol side chain can inhibit the aldehyde dehydrogenase enzyme resulting in the accumulation of acetaldehyde. Cefamandole, cefoperazone, and moxalactam are the most common cephalosporin to present with this reaction.

**Vitamin K Deficiency**

Certain cephalosporins can inhibit vitamin K epoxide reductase, preventing the production of the reduced(active) vitamin K. Therefore, there is a decreased synthesis of coagulation factors, and the patient is predisposed to hypoprothrombinemia.

**Increase Nephrotoxicity of Aminoglycosides**

There are reported cases of drug-induced nephrotoxicity when patients take cephalosporin and aminoglycosides in combination, but other factors often cloud the evidence. Therefore, the synergistic nephrotoxicity of cephalosporin and aminoglycoside is not to be completely understood.

**Pseudomembranous Colitis**

Pseudomembranous colitis is often associated with the use of clindamycin and ampicillin. Cephalosporin use is also a common cause of pseudomembranous colitis, especially third-generation cephalosporins.