There is no cure for this disease; however, symptoms can be managed. Perhaps most important is evaluation and creation of a patient's support system. As the disease progresses, the patient will need specialized caregiving. Nutrition management is important, due to difficulty swallowing. Tetrabenazine has been approved for treatment of chorea.

**Medical Care**

The majority of patients are treated with neuroleptics, which block dopamine receptors. Other drugs that are used include GABaergic agents like valproate, clonazepam, and gabapentin. Both minocycline and CoQ10 have shown promise in animals. Chorea that occurs following heart transplant may respond to steroids, and plasmapheresis may shorten the course of chorea in patients with rheumatic fever. For the most part, drugs only reduce the chorea in a few patients, and they also have potent adverse effects.

**Surgery**

In the past decade, deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been developed and may provide some benefit to some patients with chorea. Anecdotal reports indicate that in selected patients, the procedure does work and reduces chorea. DBS is done by placing electrodes in the globus pallidus internus. However, DBS is still an experimental surgical procedure. It does not work in all patients with chorea, and the procedure is associated with a number of complications.

Neural cell transplantation is another experimental procedure which has been used to treat a few patients with Huntington chorea, but the improvement has not been seen in all patients.