As the name suggests, the “glyco-” prefix refers to galactose or a uronic sugar (glucuronic acid or iduronic acid) attached to an aminoglycan, or amino sugar (N-acetylglucosamine or N-acetylgalactosamine). Variations in the type of monosaccharides and the presence or absence of modification by sulfation results in the different major categories of GAGs, including hyaluronic acid, heparin/heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate/dermatan sulfate, and keratan sulfate. The molecular structure of each of the major categories appears below.

**Hyaluronic Acid**

Hyaluronic acid (HA) has the simplest structure of all GAGs and does not require additional sulfation of functional groups in the Golgi apparatus as do the other GAGs. Instead, the structure consists of sequentially bound glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine residues.

**Heparan Sulfate/Heparin**

Heparan sulfate (HS) and heparin (Hep) contain repeating disaccharide units of N-acetylglucosamine and hexuronic acid residues. The hexuronic acid residue glucuronic acid is seen in heparan sulfate, while iduronic acid is present in heparin. Sulfation of the various hydroxyl groups or the amino group present on the glucosamine compound of HS/Hep determines its ability to interact with various proteins, cytokines, and growth factors, and ultimately its bioactive function.

**Chondroitin Sulfate/Dermatan Sulfate**

Chondroitin sulfate (CS) and dermatan sulfate (DS) are similar in structural composition to HS. Their disaccharide repeat consists of N-acetylgalactosamine and hexuronic acids – iduronic acid in DS and glucuronic acid in CS. They are tethered to a PG protein core via the same serine residue and tetrasaccharide linker as HS.

**Keratan Sulfate**

Keratan sulfate (KS) contains the disaccharide repeat consisting of galactose and N-acetylglucosamine. Sulfation patterns may be present on either unit of the disaccharide repeat of KS with increased frequency on the N-acetylglucosamine residue. As previously mentioned, KS is the only sulfated GAG that is not connected to the PG protein core by a tetrasaccharide linker compound. Instead, the subtypes of KS including KSI, KSII, and KSIII each use a unique mechanism for PG protein core linkage. KS type I GAG chains are tethered to a PG protein core by a complex glycan structure utilizing an asparagine amino acid link. KS type II chains are predominantly found in cartilage and utilize an N-acetylgalactosamine link via a serine or threonine residue. KS type III is most frequently noted in brain tissue and uses a mannose linker to the protein core via serine or threonine residues.