While mucocutaneous lesions are the hallmark of Behcet disease, the most severe manifestations are uveitis, large vessel, and neurological involvement.

**Aphthae**

Oral ulcers occur in 97% to 99% of patients with Behcet disease, often representing the initial clinical feature. Lesions are usually painful, recurrent, and multiple and may involve the soft palate, hard palate, buccal mucosa, tongue, gingiva, lips, and tonsils. More than 90% of oral ulcers heal without scarring.

Genital lesions are seen in more than 80% of patients with Behcet disease. These lesions are also recurrent, although, in contrast to oral lesions, more than 70% of genital lesions heal with scarring. Genital ulcers occur on the scrotum (90%) in males and the vulva or vagina in females.

**Cutaneous Manifestations**

Several cutaneous manifestations of Behcet disease have been described. Erythema nodosum-like lesions on the lower extremity are common. Behcet disease-related erythema nodosum lesions show a more vasculitic component compared to erythema nodosum, which is idiopathic or from other causes.

A positive pathergy reaction characterized by the formation of erythematous papules or pustules 24 to 48 hours after needle insertion is thought to be very specific for Behcet disease.

**Ocular Manifestations**

More than 50% of patients with Behcet disease have eye involvement, although it is much more common in males and younger patients. Eye involvement is usually not the presenting feature of Behcet disease but usually occurs within the initial few years of diagnosis and is rare to occur late in the disease if not present earlier.

Uveitis that is relapsing, chronic, bilateral, and involves both anterior and posterior uveal tracts is common. Anterior uveitis causes erythema and photophobia, while posterior uveitis causes vision loss. Hypopyon-related uveitis is less common but very severe, as it almost always accompanies severe retinal disease. Retinal involvement with retinal vasculitis can be seen as a cause of blindness in these patients. Conjunctivitis and isolated anterior uveitis are rare.

**Musculoskeletal Manifestations**

Inflammatory, non-erosive, non-deforming arthritis is seen in 50% of patients with Behcet disease, more common in patients with acneiform lesions.

**Vascular Manifestations**

The involvement of arterial and venous tracts of all sizes is a hallmark of Behcet disease and can be seen in 25% of patients, more commonly in males. The most common vascular manifestation is superficial and deep thrombophlebitis of the lower extremities. Rarely, Budd-Chiari syndrome or vena cava obstruction may be seen. Embolism of these thrombi is rare as the inflammatory thrombi tightly adhere to the diseased endothelium. Arterial vasculitis may involve any sized artery and be accompanied by aneurysms or occlusions. Aortitis and vasculitis of the carotid, femoral, and popliteal arteries can be seen. Pulmonary artery involvement with aneurysm formation is unique to Behcet disease and is the leading cause of death in these patients.

**Neurological Manifestations**

Central nervous system involvement is seen in 5% to 10% of patients with Behcet disease, and 80% of it is parenchymal involvement, most commonly of the brainstem, that leads to cerebellar, pyramidal, and sensory signs and symptoms. The cerebrospinal fluid examination is sterile but may reveal elevated protein and/or cell count. Nonparenchymal involvement characterized by dural sinus thrombi is seen in 20% and leads to headaches and papilledema. Simultaneous parenchymal and nonparenchymal involvement, isolated cerebellar involvement, and cranial and peripheral nerve involvement are rare.

**Gastrointestinal Manifestations**

Mucosal ulcerations resembling the orogenital aphthae can be seen in the terminal ileum, cecum, colon, and esophagus. Extensive ulcerations, especially ileocecal lesions, may lead to perforation. Inflammatory bowel disease can present with similar gastrointestinal features in addition to extragastrointestinal features, including uveitis, erythema nodosum, oral ulcers, inflammatory arthritis, and pyoderma gangrenosum; and needs to be ruled out before confirming a diagnosis of Behcet disease.

**Other Systemic Manifestations**

Cardiac involvement has been reported, including pericarditis, myocarditis, endocarditis, coronary artery vasculitis, and coronary aneurysms. Renal involvement is rare and may include AA-amyloidosis and glomerulonephritis. Epididymitis can also be seen.