Glossectomy is commonly performed for the extirpation of malignant and precancerous (or "potentially malignant") oral cavity lesions. Other indications include excisional or incisional biopsy of tongue lesions of undetermined etiology, benign neoplasms of the tongue, obstructive sleep apnea, and macroglossia.

There are multiple approaches to performing a glossectomy. Three approaches to glossectomy discussed in this article include (1) transoral glossectomy, (2) glossectomy via lip-split mandibulotomy, and (3) glossectomy via transcervical pull-through.

Conceptually, transoral glossectomy is the simplest of the three approaches – it is the removal of tongue tissue through the mouth. It requires the least steps, and in the appropriate case, it is the "easiest" approach. It does, however, have limited posterior access and exposure. Because the overwhelming majority of glossectomies are done for cancer, access and exposure are key in achieving a microscopically margin-negative resection. The lip-split mandibulotomy gives the widest exposure, but it is the most time-consuming and carries more risk of complications. In the lip-split mandibulotomy, a sagittal osteotomy is performed to splay open or swing the mandible open to allow inferior displacement of the tongue for a transoral-transcervical exposure of the posterior tongue and pharynx. It requires mandible reconstruction after ablation is completed. Glossectomy via transcervical pull-through is a technique that releases the tongue into the neck through the floor of the mouth by opening the sublingual and submental compartments. It provides inferior displacement of the tongue for improved visualization of the posterior tongue. The exposure is less than the lip-split mandibulotomy approach because of the intact mandible, but since sagittal osteotomy is not performed, mandibular reconstruction is not needed.

Choosing the appropriate approach depends on several factors, including the size, depth, and location of the ablation. The TNM system is used for staging head and neck cancers. TNM is scored based on attributes of the tumor (T), cervical lymph node involvement (N), and distant metastasis (M). The Tumor (T) stage is scored as follows:

- Tis: Carcinoma in situ

- T1: Tumor is less than or equal to 2 cm with a depth of invasion (DOI) less than or equal to 5 mm

- T2: Tumor is less than or equal to 2 cm with DOI greater than 5 mm, or tumor is 2-4 cm with DOI less than or equal to 10 mm

- T3: Tumor is greater than 4 cm, or DOI > 10 mm

- T4: Advanced local disease and invasion into surrounding structures

- 
              
- T4a: Invasion of nearby structures such as the mandible, maxilla, or skin of the face
              
              
- T4b: Very advanced disease, characterized by involvement of the pterygoid plates, skull base, and/or carotid artery encasement

In general, smaller and shallower, Tis, T1, and T2 tumors lend themselves well to transoral resection alone. Larger tumors or tumors with significant depth, such as large T2 to T4a, are better addressed by either transcervical pull-through or lip-split mandibulotomy because of the improved access. T4b disease is unresectable, and surgery is usually contraindicated.

The location of the tumor is equally important in deciding the optimal surgical approach. The more anterior the ablation is, the more amenable it is to transoral resection. As more of the posterior tongue gets involved, exposure becomes a limiting factor. It is important to consider both the size and location of the ablation. For example, a larger tumor (T3) of the tongue tip or anterior half of the tongue may be amenable to resection by a transoral approach only. In contrast, a shallow, 3 cm T2 tumor of the posterior middle-third of the tongue that extends onto the tongue base may be difficult to remove by a transoral approach alone and may be assisted by a transcervical pull-through.

Other surgical factors must be considered for larger tongue resections. As discussed earlier, neck dissection is always considered in glossectomy due to the high rate of cervical lymph node metastases. In cases involving resection of the floor of the mouth, combined with submandibular triangle (IB) nodal dissection, reconstruction may be required to recreate the floor and separate the neck from the oral cavity to prevent fistula. Reconstruction may also be indicated to recreate form and function to a certain degree if a sufficient amount of tongue is resected. Both reconstruction and neck dissection requires transcervical approaches. It may be advantageous to perform an extended procedure if the neck is to be opened. The tumor might extend into the mandible and other compartments in the neck, such as the sublingual space, submental space, or other deep spaces in the neck, and may benefit from the exposure afforded by an extended approach.

Severe trismus is an obstacle to transoral glossectomy. Even with the administration of paralytics, if the jaw cannot be opened, lip-split mandibulotomy or transcervical pull-through may be indicated. Transcervical pull-through requires transoral mucosal cuts that might not be possible in very severe trismus cases. In patients with prior head and neck radiation, lip-split mandibulotomy carries the risk of osteoradionecrosis. If feasible, cervical pull-through may be favored over mandibulotomy due to the theoretical risk of osteoradionecrosis.

The most effective approach is the one that best facilitates a microscopically margin-negative resection. The "easiest" approach may not always be the fastest one; it may be the approach that requires the most additional steps for exposure with the highest risks of complication. The overall impression of weighing the risks and benefits of each approach will help determine the most effective approach.