Discerning the patient’s HIV history, such as the time of diagnosis, complications opportunistic or co-infections, medications they are on (ART or other chronic medicines), and comorbid illnesses, will help the provider better understand the patient’s overall medical situation. Regarding HIV, knowing the patient’s most recent CD4 count and viral load is very important to understand what type of AIDS-related illnesses they may be experiencing. However, often patients have yet to be diagnosed, have delayed testing, or could not make medical checkups or receive antiretroviral therapy. It is very helpful to find out who the patient’s primary and infectious disease providers are. Collaboration is often crucial to properly caring for this population of patients.

Knowing the details of the patient’s HIV history is important, but providers must be mindful that with ART, HIV patients are often presenting with other general medical problems if their CD4 count is adequate and not HIV or AIDS-specific illnesses. The history and physical examination, as well as the development of a differential diagnosis, should be focused on the patient’s chief complaint and symptoms while keeping in mind this may or may not be an HIV or AIDS-related condition during this encounter. The following will focus on HIV or AIDS-related illnesses, classified by the body system affected.

**Cardiac System**

HIV infection and ART likely contribute to increased cardiovascular disease in patients. Common presenting symptoms may include chest pain, shortness of breath, or fatigue. The examination should proceed as one would when assessing for acute coronary syndrome or valvular disease, palpating for chest wall pain, observing for jugular venous distension and peripheral edema, and auscultating for abnormal heart sounds, murmurs, or evidence of pulmonary edema. Cardiovascular AIDS-related illnesses could include purulent pericarditis or cardiac tamponade caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. If these conditions are suspected, observing for Beck’s triad of low blood pressure, jugular venous distension, and muffled heart sounds may confirm a compressive pericardial effusion.

**Pulmonary System**

Pulmonary complications of HIV and AIDS are likely the most often thought of and encountered in the clinical setting. HIV infection, even without AIDS, predisposes the individual to several infectious and non-infectious pulmonary problems. The most commonly seen would be upper respiratory tract infections and acute bronchitis. Non-infectious diseases could include Kaposi’s sarcoma and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, sarcoidosis, lung cancer, and emphysema. When evaluating the HIV or AIDS patient for pulmonary disease, observation should be made of the patient’s work of breathing, looking for signs of respiratory distress such as tripoding or posturing, tachypnea, retractions, or cyanosis. Auscultation may reveal generalized or focal adventitious lung sounds, which may aid in the diagnosis of the pulmonary problem.

**Oropharyngeal and Gastrointestinal System**

Complaints of the digestive tract may be unrelated to HIV or AIDS or due to opportunistic infections, malignancies, or complications of ART. HIV medications can cause pancreatitis, hepatic steatosis, or hepatotoxicity. HIV patients may also have co-infection with hepatitis B or C.  Patients with lower CD4 counts are more susceptible to these hepatobiliary problems and also acalculous cholecystitis. Commonly thought of complications of HIV or AIDS-defining illnesses are recurrent oral herpes simplex infection, Candida esophagitis, or Cryptosporidium diarrhea.

Historical information may include characterizing the presence, timing, location, and severity of pain and any associated symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, melena, hematochezia, or urinary symptoms. It would be useful to gain an understanding of the patient’s appetite and ability to swallow if esophagitis is suspected. Inspection of the oropharynx for lesions or ulcerations would be helpful if indicated by the patient’s presenting complaints. Further physical examination should focus on observation for the level of pain distress and abdominal distension, auscultation of bowel sounds, assessment for hepatomegaly, palpation, and localization of abdominal tenderness, rebound, or guarding. Stigmata of liver disease such as caput medusa, spider angiomas, jaundice, or gynecomastia may be seen with hepatic failure. If the patient is not immunosuppressed rectal examination may be indicated by symptoms or for evaluation of melena or hematochezia.

**Central Nervous System**

CNS-related problems may include meningitis, focal demyelinating lesions, or malignancies from immunosuppression. Presenting complaints could range from headaches, meningismus, altered mental status, vision changes, focal weakness, or seizures. History and physical should be directed based on the patient’s HIV status and a weighted differential considering the presenting complaints and symptoms. Infection should always be suspected; therefore, asking about the CD4 status, headache, fevers, sick contacts, and prophylaxis should be explored. For patients with headaches inquiring about the onset, activity at onset, severity, the course of pain, and particularly any worrisome associated symptoms such as fever, neck pain, or other neurologic symptom is necessary. If seizures or focal weakness occurred, the provider should obtain information regarding the timing, duration, severity, focality, or generalization of symptoms. Physical examination should be centered on a comprehensive mental status and neurologic examination. If meningitis is suspected, the provider should assess for nuchal rigidity. Ophthalmoscopy is indicated if there is any visual complaint. In particular, the fundoscopic exam may reveal the characteristic “pizza pie” findings of CMV retinitis with fluffy white perivascular lesions and surrounding hemorrhage.

**Oncologic Problems and Hematologic System**

Patients with HIV can experience anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia. Often ART is helpful in addressing these hematologic problems. ART and prophylactic medications can also cause bone marrow toxicity leading to derangements in blood counts. The patient will often present with concerns for abnormal bleeding or bruising when thrombocytopenic. Assessing for the presence and extent of petechia or purpura, as well as any sites of internal bleeding, should be performed. Leukopenic patients will have concomitant infectious symptoms, and their history and physical should be directed towards searching for the source of infection from the leukopenia. Anemia may present as weakness, fatigue, or shortness of breath. The provider should assess skin tone and conjunctiva for paleness.

AIDS-related lymphoma is the most commonly thought of advanced HIV oncologic complication. Primary CNS lymphoma is also encountered and related to co-infection with the Epstein-Barr virus. Systemic symptoms such as weight loss, fever, or night sweats may be discovered in addition to previously discussed neurologic complaints. Physical examination should focus on general appearance, mental status, and a comprehensive neurologic examination.

**Dermatologic System**

Acute HIV infection may present with a maculopapular or morbilliform rash. Oral ulcers or lesions may also be present, as well as molluscum contagiosum and human papillomavirus infection. The most common AIDS-related cutaneous manifestation is Kaposi’s sarcoma, a vascular neoplasm characterized by violaceous patches, nodules, or plaques. Disseminated fungal infections may present when the patient is severely immunosuppressed and mimics molluscum. History should focus on the timing of the cutaneous manifestation and how it relates to the patient’s HIV status, recent infections, ART or prophylaxis medications, and any other associated symptoms, particularly systemic, CNS, or gastrointestinal related.