Budesonide is used for various conditions affecting patients of all ages. It is prescribed by interprofessional team members such as physicians of different specialties, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners. The licensed providers must monitor the patients closely for treatment efficacy and systemic toxicity. Besides, they should counsel the patients at each visit, particularly the importance of treatment compliance, and clinicians should emphasize not to stop treatment abruptly.

If the patient is using budesonide for asthma, the importance of a rescue inhaler requires explanation. Nurses are the health professionals who see the patients immediately before discharge from the emergency room and floors. Therefore, this presents an excellent opportunity for them to educate the patients and family about budesonide treatment. This counseling must include a strict dietary restriction for grapefruit and abstinence of alcohol, as well as avoiding smoking, flame, and fire during and after administration of rectal foam as it is flammable. As most patients on budesonide treatment are under outpatient management, pharmacists also play a crucial role in the patient treatment management prescribed by the providers.

The pharmacists can provide education regarding techniques using new and old inhalers as well as rectal foam administration. Pharmacists should check for symptoms that may reflect potential adverse drug reactions, a drug to drug interactions, or even worsening of the underlying condition due to poor compliance. As the nasal spray is available over the counter also, pharmacists should ensure the patients use it properly. If pharmacists have any concerns, they should immediately communicate with the physicians. The collaboration and cooperation among the interprofessional team members improve the patient’s adherence to treatment regimen and outcome, patient satisfaction, and cost of community health care.