Valproate is available in different formulations such as immediate-release, enteric-coated, delayed-release (12 hours), and extended-release (24 hours) forms. It is also available in an intravenous formulation. Divalproex is an extended-release/delayed-release formulation. Therapeutic daily doses range from 15 to 60 mg/kg in children or 500 mg to 2 g in adults.

The liver metabolizes valproate through glucuronide conjugation.

Valproate is metabolized by beta and omega oxidation. In valproate toxicity, a greater degree of omega oxidation occurs, which increases the risk of hepatotoxicity, cerebral edema, and hyperammonemia. Metabolites such as 2-propyl-4-pentanoic acid (4-EN-VPA) may mediate hepatotoxicity, and 2-propyl-2-pentanoic acid (2-EN-VPA) may be responsible for cerebral edema, and propionic acid metabolites are responsible for hyperammonemia.

A recent meta-analysis showed that patients with genotype variants such as CYP2C9*3 and CYP2A6*4 affect the concentration of valproate. Hence it is advisable to adjust the dose in the scenario mentioned above to ensure efficacy and prevent toxicity.

Aspirin increases the levels of valproic acid by plasma protein binding competition. Liver disease is associated with decreased albumin concentrations. In hypoalbuminemia, free/unbound valproate concentration increases, although there is normal valproate concentration. An increase in unbound/free valproate correlates with a worse neurological prognosis. So it is crucial to measure unbound valproate concentration in patients having hypoalbuminemia.