Mammography is a low-dose x-ray modality for detailed imaging of the breast. It is the best population-based method for screening. It can demonstrate micro-calcifications less the 100 micrometers, which makes it capable of detecting lesions before they become palpable. Mammography can be done in two forms, screening and diagnostic. Those with a family or personal history of breast cancer require additional views in diagnostic/screening mammography.

Breast imaging reporting and data systems are used to guide the breast cancer diagnostic rule. It involves levels of categorization to interpret breast lesions in a standardized format among radiologists. However, the majority of screening mammograms show the absence of evidence of cancer on subsequent testing, 1% to 2% show abnormality requiring biopsy. The majority (80%) of these are benign lesions.

BI-RADS scoring:

- 0—Need more information. Another mammogram may be needed.

- 1—No abnormality. Continue routine screening.

- 2—Benign breast conditions, such as cysts. Continue with routine screening.

- 3—Something which is probably not cancer is detected. A repeat mammogram within the next six months.

- 4—Suspicious of cancer. May need a biopsy.

- 5—Highly suggestive of cancer. It will need a biopsy.

Digital mammography can be applied better to diagnose breast cancer in dense breasts. Tomosynthesis or 3D mammography may also be used, which improves the ability to find minutely sized cancers and decrease the probability of false positives.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) cost is higher than for mammography worldwide.

Thermography use is based on the fact of elevated breast skin temperatures overlying breast cancers.

Ultrasound is usually used to know more about the positive clinical examination or screening mammography on diagnostic fronts. It has limited use as a screening device due to various factors, including the inability to find micro-calcification and poor specificity.

Screening MRI is considered less specific, but more sensitive than mammography in high-risk women for detection of invasive cancers.

Annual mammography and MRI, and at times at 6 months duration, is needed for women with BRCA gene mutations, strong family history of breast cancer, and prior chest radiation therapy.