Coronoid fractures can be associated with other injuries of the arm and can be difficult to diagnose; for this reason, an interprofessional team is the best approach to managing this condition. Even though patients initially present to the emergency department, the orthopedic surgeon should be involved in the care.

The emergency department physician or nurse practitioner usually orders the initial X-rays but should not attempt treatment until receiving a radiologist's report and obtaining a consult from the surgeon. The pharmacy may be involved in the acute phase as pain control may be necessary, and the pharmacist should verify agent selection, dosing, and perform medication reconciliation and report back to the healthcare team any discrepancies. Following management by the orthopedic surgeon, the nurse practitioner and primary care provider may follow the patient. Functional motion, strength, and the ability to return to daily activities can experience significant improvement by physical and occupational therapy, who should keep the managing physician apprised of the progress with rehabilitation.  Whether in the postoperative setting or as a component of conservative treatment, rehabilitation is an essential factor when seeking the best possible outcome following a coronoid process fracture. Before returning to any sporting activity, the orthopedic surgeon should render a final consultation. Nursing staff will have involvement at every step of the way, from initial visits through surgery, and follow-up visits. They should report any unusual findings to the managing clinician as they find them — This type of interprofessional collaboration optimizes patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Open interprofessional communication and trust between patients, therapists, and physicians can improve outcomes and satisfaction.