During the depolarization of smooth muscle cells of blood vessels, there is an influx of calcium ions. The primary function of nimodipine is to block voltage-gated L-type calcium channels in their inactive conformation, avoiding this influx to prevent vasoconstriction. Nimodipine preferentially acts on cerebral blood vessels as it is lipophilic and can cross the blood-brain barrier.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- **Absorption:**Nimodipine is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, & peak concentrations are achieved within 0.5 to 1.5 hours. However, due to high first-pass metabolism, the bioavailability of nimodipine is approximately 13% after oral administration—simultaneous administration of breakfast results in decreased peak plasma concentration and lower bioavailability relative to fasting conditions.

- **Distribution:**The volume of distribution (Vd) of nimodipine varies from 0.94 L/kg to 2.46 L/kg. Nimodipine is approximately 95% bound to plasma proteins, primarily to alpha-acid glycoprotein. Accordingly, the distribution of nimodipine can be influenced by the concentration of alpha-acid glycoprotein.

- **Metabolism:**Nimodipine is extensively metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. Multiple inactive or less active metabolites have been identified.

- **Elimination:**The terminal elimination half-life of nimodipine is approximately 8 to 9 hours, but initial elimination is rapid (equivalent to a half-life of 1-2 hours); consequently, there is a need for frequent (every 4 hours) dosing. Nimodipine is excreted primarily as metabolites via the kidney, and less than 1% parent drug is recovered in the urine as an unchanged drug. Pharmacokinetic studies have documented the variability of nimodipine concentrations in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage.