The appropriate treatment for a Boxer’s fracture on initial presentation varies based on whether the fracture is open or closed, the degree of angulation, rotation, and other concomitant injuries. Due to the risk of infection from "fight bite," even very small wounds should be thoroughly irrigated, and there should be a low threshold for antibiotic treatment.

**Immobilization Alone**

For a Boxer’s fracture that is closed, not angulated, and not malrotated or otherwise displaced, splinting is used for initial immobilization. A Boxer’s fracture should be immobilized with an ulnar gutter splint. Alternatively, a pre-made Galveston splint or a custom orthosis may be used.

The hand should be positioned in the intrinsic plus position for splinting: mild wrist extension, 70 to 90 degrees of flexion at MCP joint, and slight flexion at the DIP and PIP joints. Flexion of these joints is important to prevent shortening of the collateral ligaments and subsequent loss of range of motion and functional impairment.

**Closed Reduction**

Closed reduction is required for a Boxer’s fracture with significant angulation greater than 30 degrees.

Analgesia options for the procedure include a hematoma block or an ulnar nerve block. Younger children or very anxious patients may require procedural sedation, but this procedure typically is tolerated well without sedation.

Closed reduction of a Boxer’s fracture is accomplished by using the “90-90 method.” The MCP, DIP, and PIP joints should all be flexed to 90 degrees. The clinician should then apply volar pressure over the dorsal aspect of the fracture site while applying pressure axially to the flexed PIP joint. This axial pressure to the PIP applies dorsal force to the distal fracture fragment. The clinician should be able to feel the reduction when it has been achieved. The injury should be immobilized with an ulnar gutter splint, and post-reduction films should be taken to assess for adequate reduction

**Surgical Referral**

Surgical referral is indicated for fractures that are open, severely comminuted, associated with neurovascular injury, and for fractures with any malrotation

**Follow-Up**

Boxer’s fractures should be sent for repeat radiographs within one week to assess alignment. Radiographs should be obtained every two weeks following, until clinical and radiographic healing are present, typically between four to six weeks. Even with the adequate reduction, some cosmetic deformity may persist, with loss of the normal knuckle contour. After a short period of immobilization, the passive and active range of motion exercises should be performed to alleviate stiffness of the MCP and PIP joints. Literature supports early mobilization of these injuries rather than prolonged immobilization