Considering the rising elderly population and chronic diseases also accruing with rising age, health care practitioners need to be more alert, vigilant, and tactful in managing many medications to treat many medical issues. This should be done by balancing the potential benefit to the risks of multiple medication use.

All patients should be surveyed by health care providers, including clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, in every visit encountered, whether inpatient, outpatient, or home visits. It should be coordinated among all the providers and patients or caregivers as well. It requires a knowledge of the complex chronic conditions of the patient and understanding the response to changes in drug therapy. Evaluation of the effects of adding or eliminating medication on other medications and chronic conditions should be done regularly.

There should be shared decision-making by the patient or the caregiver and the interprofessional healthcare team. The timely intervention will reduce the number of drugs, improve patient outcomes, safety, and satisfaction, and reduce the overall cost to patients and healthcare facilities. However, these strategies are just the guide to augment the clinical acumen of health care practitioners.

Interprofessional team members need to move forward from merely looking at guidelines for disease management but rather considering the patient’s holistic picture, co-morbid conditions, and goals and should focus on improving health status. American Geriatrics Society, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, and American Psychiatric Association also recommend assessing the need before adding new medications, reviewing medications regularly, and deprescribe when appropriate.