Traumatic brain injury is a hallmark injury of veterans and athletes. Most studies reviewed centered on these specific patient populations presenting difficulties in using results for the general patient population. Overall, mild TBI can have lasting effects on neurocognition despite the mild nature of the disease process. If symptoms of mild TBI persist for greater than 4 weeks, patients are diagnosed with PCS and require further intervention. The difficulty of identifying PCS is that symptoms of PCS are ubiquitous in the population and can be due to other causes such as psychiatric disorders, headache syndromes, and chronic pain syndromes as outlined in previous sections of this article. An interprofessional approach to the care of mild TBI patients and those that develop PCS is necessary for the care of these patients.

In a randomized control trial that looked at veterans returning to the workforce, the benefits of an online evaluation tool (CogSMART), supported employment to place veterans with varying degrees of mild TBI and comorbid psychiatric disorders in jobs of varying cognitive demand. The study demonstrated benefit with a rapid return to baseline and decreased prevalence of PCS in patients that used CogSMART with enhanced, supported employment when compared to groups that did not use CogSMART with enhanced, supported employment.

In veterans with comorbid psychiatric disorders, psychiatric care is necessary for a more rapid recovery of PCS symptoms. Specifically, treatment of PTSD is often required in patients with mild TBI to facilitate recovery. Patients that also suffer from chronic headaches and pain syndromes will require additional treatment from specializing physicians to facilitate the recovery. In athletes, reviews completed by sports trainers presented data that early exercise aided in the recovery of mild TBI and prevention of PCS. The benefit comes from the decreased incidence of depression, anxiety, and sleep-related symptoms by allowing the athlete safe return to exercise and conditioning.

In the prevention and treatment of PCS in patients that have suffered mild TBI, patient education is key to a successful recovery. Physicians should educate patients on returning to work or school with a resolution of symptoms at rest. Patient education should include that extended bed rest and delayed cognitive rest can lead to worse outcomes. Addressing patient comorbidities with treatment also helps patients return to baseline in most cases.