1. Skew Deviation: The perception of the earth-vertical (gravity) is mediated by the vestibulo-ocular pathway. Any lesion along this pathway, or in the cerebellum can lead to an erroneous estimation of gravity, and the body may perceive the head to be tilted, even when it is not. This results in a compensatory head tilt to the opposite side. In patients with skew deviation, the higher eye is elevated and incyclotorted, while the lower eye is depressed and excyclotorted (a consequence of the ocular tilt reaction). The underlying lesion can be due to ischemia, trauma, multiple sclerosis, abscess, or neoplasia.

Patients can be frequently asymptomatic or complain of vertical diplopia. The vertical diplopia in skew deviation does not alleviate with head tilt (unlike trochlear nerve palsy). Associated neurological features depend on the site of the lesion. The three-step test may fallaciously point towards a fourth nerve palsy. The Supine-Upright test is a very specific test that helps in differentiating between the two clinical entities. The vertical misalignment between the two eyes decreases by more than 50% on changing the patient's position from upright to supine in a skew deviation. This occurs due to a change in the position of the utricle and a reduction of the utriculo-ocular reflex.

2. Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO): Restriction of the inferior rectus may mimic a fourth nerve palsy in the other eye. Presence of proptosis, lid retraction, lagophthalmos heps in clinical differentiation. Radiologically, enlargement of the muscle belly with sparing of the tendon is seen in TAO.

3. Primary overaction of the Inferior Oblique muscle: These patients do not have primary position vertical deviation, subjective torsion, and the Bielchowsky's head tilt test is negative.

4. Myasthenia gravis: It can mimic cyclovertical muscle palsies, and suspected cases should be investigated accordingly. Clinically, an edrophonium test has been described.

5. Blow-out fracture of the orbit: Orbital blow-out fracture with entrapment of the inferior rectus muscle can result in a misleading three-step test. Infraorbital hypoaesthesia, enophthalmos, and findings on imaging help in arriving at the diagnosis.

6. Congenital torticollis: Patients with congenital palsy may have a head tilt and face turn from early childhood that may lead to a torticollis-like picture. Orthopedician may be the first person whom parents meet thinking it to be a musculoskeletal disorder. Thus both ophthalmologists and orthopedists must be aware of either entity as management is entirely different.