Evaluation of social anxiety disorder must include its diagnostic criteria as classified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Criteria include pronounced fear or anxiety around one or multiple social situations where a person is possibly exposed to the possible scrutiny of others. The person fears they will act a certain way that may be evaluated negatively. The social situation, for the most part, provokes anxiety or fear. The situations are either endured with anxiety or fear or avoided entirely. This fear or anxiety is disproportionate to the threat actually posed by the situation. The avoidance, fear, or anxiety lasts typically for at least 6 months and causes significant impairment or distress in an important area of functioning. The fear must not be attributable to the effects of a substance or medical condition or the symptoms of a different mental disorder.  Additionally, the anxiety, avoidance, or fear is excessive or unrelated if a separate medical condition is present. There is a performance only specifier if fear is restricted exclusively to performing or speaking in public.

A core feature of SAD is the fear of negative evaluation. Instruments that assess for SAD include but are not limited to Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN), Mini-SPIN, Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS), Liebowitz Self-Rated Disability Scale, Disability Profile, Brief Social Phobia Scale (BSPS), and Social Phobia Safety Behaviors Scale and Self Statements During Public Speaking Scale.