The majority of infants with Ebstein anomaly come to attention soon after birth. These infants need NICU monitoring, and hence, the ICU nurse must be familiar with the management of congenital heart disorders. While some infants have an isolated heart anomaly, others may also have involvement of other organ systems, and hence appropriate consultations are required. Once the diagnosis is made, surgery is usually required. Post-surgery, these children usually require close monitoring for an extended period until all the pacing wires and chest tubes have been removed and the child is breathing without the aid of a mechanical ventilator.

As the Ebstein malformation varies in severity, some patients reach adulthood with a few or minimal symptoms, which appear late as worsening dyspnea with or without cyanosis during exercise, and arrhythmias from atrial flutter/fibrillation or atrioventricular reentry tachycardia via accessory pathways, which are common in these patients. Patient management for CHF, cyanosis, and arrhythmias requires an adult-congenital cardiologist and a pediatric and congenital electrophysiologist. Worsening tricuspid regurgitation might necessitate surgery. Other forms of imaging such as cardiac MRI or cardiac CT might be required especially when transthoracic echocardiography is challenging. Transesophageal echocardiography might be needed for further tricuspid valve assessment, especially before surgery. It has been acknowledged that pediatric patients with congenital heart disease should undergo neurodevelopmental or neuropsychological evaluation and treatment and that older pediatric and adult patients with congenital heart disease should be evaluated and treated for depression and anxiety to enhance their academic, behavioral, and psychosocial functioning.