Pancrelipase, a combination of lipase, protease, and amylase, has benefited patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. The FDA-approved conditions that are associated with pancreatic insufficiency that may require supplementation with pancrelipase include chronic pancreatitis, obstructive pancreatic tumors, post-procedure loss of pancreatic tissue or ductal occlusion, insufficient mixing of chyme with pancreatic enzymes because of rapid gastric emptying, small bowel resection with inadequate secretion of cholecystokinin-pancreozymin and secretin, and lymph node dissection leading to decreased pancreatic stimulation. Also approved are genetic disorders including cystic fibrosis, Schwachman Diamond syndrome, hereditary hemochromatosis, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, celiac disease, and Crohn disease. There are also non-FDA-approved indications as well. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of administration, significant adverse effects, contraindications, monitoring, and toxicity of pancrelipase so providers can direct patient therapy to optimal outcomes in conditions where pancrelipase has benefit.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of pancrelipase.
- Summarize the approved and off-label indications for pancrelipase.
- Review the adverse event profile of pancrelipase.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients who can benefit from therapy with pancrelipase.