Neural Anatomy: A nerve is composed of axons and connective tissue and the associated blood supply. Axons may be myelinated or unmyelinated. The endoneurium, perineurium, epineurium form the connective tissue to support the axons. The endoneurium surrounds each axon. Several axons are group together as a fascicle which is surrounded by the perineurium. The epineurium groups multiple fascicles. This last external connective tissue has an internal component (epifascicular) that encases the fascicles and an external component (epineural), which encases the entire nerve proper. External to the epineurium, there is a loose connective tissue called the mesoneurium or perineurium, which supports the nerve and contains the blood supply.

Vascular Anatomy: The blood supply to the nerve is external to the epineurium. Extrinsic blood vessels join to form an anastomosing plexus of epineurial macro vessels. This anastomosing vasa nervorum penetrates the perineurium. Microvessels with non-fenestrated endothelium penetrate the endometrium and provide blood to axons.

Neurapraxia is induced by focal demyelination or ischemia. All the structures of the nerve, including the endoneurium, perineurium, and epineurium, remain intact. The mechanism usually involves crush, traction, ischemia, and less common mechanisms such as thermal, electric shock, radiation, percussion, and vibration.

Compression of a nerve can be acute or chronic. Compression at small openings and superficial nerve locations can damage the nerve and its blood supply. Scar tissue formation and inflammation can produce nerve entrapment.

As a consequence of focal demyelination or ischemia, the nerve will have a decrease in conduction velocity and an increase in the latency. Compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude evoked with stimulation above the injury is absent or markedly reduced, as compared with stimulation below the injury.

Neurapraxia had been studied in a rat model in which compression of 60 g/mm2  to the sciatic nerve produced a complete paralysis, which became normal in 14 days. An entire motor conduction block occurred if stimulated above the injured site, but below the compression site, remained normal. Wallerian degeneration signs were limited.