The pathophysiology of heart failure involves a maladaptive response during which the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) is activated. RAAS activation leads to vasoconstriction, hypertension, increased aldosterone levels, increased sympathetic tone, and eventually, cardiac remodeling, all of which are detrimental to the progression of the disease. ACEIs or ARBs play a major role in reducing morbidity and mortality due to heart failure by blocking these maladaptive elements.

Simultaneously, the natriuretic peptide system is also activated, hence the elevated BNP and NT-pro BNP seen in heart failure exacerbations. This compensatory mechanism leads to vasodilation, natriuresis, and diuresis. Consequently, the natriuretic peptide system decreases blood pressure (BP), lowers the sympathetic tone, and reduces aldosterone levels. The natriuretic peptide system functions antagonistically to the RAAS and has favorable effects on the pathogenesis of heart failure. Natriuretic peptides are broken down by an enzyme called neprilysin.

Sacubitril/valsartan is a combination product. Sacubitril is a pro-drug that, upon activation, acts as a neprilysin inhibitor. It works by blocking the action of neprilysin, thus preventing the breakdown of natriuretic peptides, which leads to a prolonged duration of the favorable effects of these peptides.

Valsartan is an angiotensin receptor blocker, and it works on blocking the RAAS system. However, because neprilysin breaks down angiotensin II, inhibiting neprilysin will accumulate angiotensin II. For this reason, a neprilysin inhibitor cannot be used alone; it must always be combined with an ARB to block the effect of the excess angiotensin II.

Another important substance broken down by neprilysin is bradykinin; neprilysin inhibition will also cause a build-up of bradykinin. Therefore, sacubitril cannot be used with an ACEI due to an increased risk of angioedema if ACEI and ARNI are used together or dosed in a short timeframe. When switching between ACEI and sacubitril/valsartan, the patient must undergo a 36-hour washout period to lower the risk of angioedema.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- ****Absorption:****Following oral administration, sacubitril/valsartan is broken down into sacubitril and valsartan. Sacubitril is metabolized to LBQ657. The absolute oral bioavailability of sacubitril is estimated to be ≥ 60%. The peak plasma concentrations(Cmax) of sacubitril, LBQ657, and valsartan are obtained at 0.5 hours, 2 hours, and 1.5 hours, respectively. Sacubitril and valsartan do not accumulate significantly at a steady-state (achieved in 3 days), but LBQ657 is accumulated by 1.6-fold. Food has no clinically significant effect on the absorption parameters of sacubitril or valsartan. Consequently, it can be administered with or without food.

- ****Distribution:****The mean apparent volumes of distribution of valsartan and sacubitril are 75 and 103 L, respectively. Sacubitril, LBQ657, and valsartan have high plasma protein binding (94% to 97%). LBQ657 crosses the blood-brain barrier to a small extent (0.28%).

- ****Metabolism:****Sacubitril is converted to LBQ657 by esterases. Valsartan is minimally metabolized (20%), and a hydroxyl metabolite is present in plasma at low concentrations (< 10%).

- ****Elimination:****After oral administration, 52% to 68% of sacubitril (as LBQ657) and approximately 13% of valsartan are excreted in the urine. 37% to 48% of sacubitril (as LBQ657) and 86% of valsartan are excreted in feces. Sacubitril, LBQ657, and valsartan have a mean elimination half-life (t1/2) of about 1.4 hours, 11.5 hours, and 9.9 hours.