- Holmes tremors are resting, kinetic tremors worsened by sustained posture, with slow frequency (< 4.5 Hz) and large amplitude.

- Etiology can be classified as vascular, traumatic, neoplastic, infectious, neuroimmunological, neuroinflammatory, or neurodegenerative.

- It is an extremely rare condition, with only 155 patients reported between 1904-2016.

- This tremor's pathophysiology is complex and requires multiple subcortical regions within the basal ganglia to be lesioned, including the dopaminergic nigrostriatal system, dentatorubro-olivary pathways, and the cerebellothalamic system.

- Clinical evaluation includes a thorough history, screening of risk factors, and a physical examination that shows a unilateral resting, intention, and postural tremor with low frequency and high amplitude affecting the extremity symmetrically, proximally more than distally.

- The Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale measures tremor severity. This scale is useful to determine appropriate medical or surgical treatment and measure the effectiveness of treatment through time.

- Differential diagnosis includes essential tremors, intention tremor, Parkinson's disease tremor (most common resting tremor), orthostatic tremor, physiological tremor, cerebellar tremor (typically of low frequency below 5 Hz, rest tremor is usually absent), and functional tremor.

- Pharmacological treatments include anti-epileptics (levetiracetam, topiramate), dopamine agonists, anticholinergics (trihexyphenidyl), benzodiazepines, and botulinum toxin injections.

- Surgical options for refractory cases include thalamic stereotactic ablation, gamma knife thalamotomy, deep brain stimulation to the GPi or thalamic VOP, VOA, or Vim.

- Prognosis depends on the Holmes tremor's etiology, with pharmacoresistant tremors responding relatively well to deep brain stimulation in multiple areas in the basal ganglia circuit.