With the establishment of the bloodborne pathogens standard, exposure risks have decreased. Globally, however, bloodborne infections remain a major ongoing occupational threat. Between 1991 and 2015, there were over 77,00 citations issued and a striking level of noncompliance, mainly in exposure control plans and recordkeeping.

Health care workers of all levels of training are at risk of occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens. Regardless of the level of training, there is significant variability in knowledge, training, and practices which is an ongoing concern. This variability contributes to an overall sense of occupational insecurity and a general lack of personal safety confidence.

Properly fitting PPE can reduce the risk of exposure, but there are many areas of uncertainty surrounding this area. For example, it is unclear which PPE combination provides optimal protection or the best way to don or doff PPE. It is also unknown what is the most effective training method to ensure the proper use of PPE.

Among the safety methods and training listed, the bloodborne pathogens standard mandates the HBV vaccine and vaccination series be made available to all workers who have a risk of occupational exposure. This mandate has resulted in an enhanced awareness of the risk, yet the vaccination rate is suboptimal.

Along with suboptimal vaccination, training, and adherence, under-reporting and subsequent management of occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens is a major concern.

As evident with the COVID-19 pandemic, the epidemiology of existing and emerging infectious diseases is a dynamic process. With keen awareness, as information of the disease entity accumulates, the recommendations and guidelines may frequently change with intra- and international variance. Employers of healthcare workers face substantial challenges. In the face of outbreaks, employers, and the multidisciplinary team of occupational health clinicians and safety professionals, are tasked with writing, revising, and reinforcing exposure control plans adjusted to these dynamically changing situations unique to the setting.