Air conduction hearing aid fittings to pediatric populations should be performed to evidence-based local, national, and international guidelines. Organizations such as the American Speech-language Hearing Association (ASHA) and British Society of Audiology (BSA) provide such detailed standards, which should be consulted alongside the following techniques below.

**1. Preparation**

- The child's audiogram should be entered into the fitting software to ensure that the correct hearing aid prescription is calculated for the patient. Additional information, such as gender and date of birth, should also be detailed as it may affect the prescription calculations of the gain/output target.

- Prescription choice: the appropriate prescription method should be chosen according to departmental protocol.

**DSL vs. NAL?**Desired Sensation Level method (DSL) was developed specifically for infants and young children to deliver a scientific and systematic amplification formula that would provide adequate speech audibility according to speech sensation level data from pediatric populations.

The fitting rationale from National Acoustic Laboratories (NAL), most recently NAL-NL2, aims similarly to increase speech audibility and overall loudness comfort but with a focus on speech tonality, localization, and naturalness of the sound.

- The chosen hearing aid should be connected to the software. Acoustic coupling (i.e., earmould), tubing, and venting should be selected as this will also affect the prescription of the target. The hearing aid should now have set the appropriate gain levels for the child.

- If hearing aid validation is being completed, real-ear measurement software and hardware should be prepared before the patient arrives.

**2. Counseling of the Family/Older Child and Orientation of the Device**

- Excellent counseling is crucial to encourage successful uptake and routine usage of a hearing aid device. Care should be taken to ensure that information on the following is available written and verbally for all families but tailored to the needs of the child:

- Benefits of the hearing aid in different listening situations

- Realistic expectations

- Optimal usage time

- Manipulation of the hearing aid controls

- Maintenance and cleaning of the hearing aid, including any additional equipment issued, such as a stetoclip, tubing puffer, battery charger, etc.

- Correct insertion

- Retention of the device

- How families can encourage good usage of the hearing aid

- Additional connectivity and listening device equipment such as FM systems, personal listening devices, connecting to a tablet or mobile phone, loop/T systems

**3. Validation of the Hearing Aid**

- For children who cannot subjectively report on the sound and loudness of the hearing aid, thorough validation is critical.

**REMs vs. RECDs**Real-ear-to-coupler difference measurements (RECDs) can be performed with minimal cooperation of the child, making it the best validation choice for hearing aid fittings on children under four years of age or for those who are unable to sit for extended periods, such as children with ADHD, autism, global developmental delay, etc.

It works by measuring the SPL of a broadband signal in a coupler and subtracting it from the SPL of the same signal in the ear canal of the child, thus deriving a difference value that can be added to the prescription formula. It enables precise fine-tuning verification of the hearing aid in the coupler of a test box while considering the acoustic properties of the patient's ear canal. The RECD depends on audiometric data measured via an insert transducer to ensure accurate conversion of the thresholds from their dBHL (decibel hearing level) measure to dB SPL (decibel sound pressure level) measure.

Real-ear measurements (REMs) similarly help the professional but provide a 'real-time' verification method of the hearing aid at the patient's ear level. This method, however, is reliant on specific conditions, such as a quiet room with minimal sound interference and a still and obliging child for around ten to fifteen minutes. Both methods allow professionals to inspect the hearing aid's match-to-target while considering the different effects of the ear canal volume on the sound intensity of the incoming signal. This is of particular importance where small children and infants are concerned, as failure to do so can result in over-amplification; due to the intensity of sound increasing when delivered to smaller ear canal volumes.

- RECDs

- First, measure the SPL of the broadband signal in the coupler by connecting the RECD tube to the coupler and running the signal. The display of this data will vary by the software manufacturer, but you should be able to visualize the intensity of the signal at different frequencies, often between 125 and 8000 Hz.
- Following this, measure the SPL of the signal in the ear canal of the child. To do this, connect the RECD tube to either the earmould tubing or insert the tip and insert the REM tube into the ear canal of the child. The depth will vary according to the child's age and is often standardized in practice guidelines. The earmould or insert tip can then be placed into the ear canal, and the signal ran again. For children, the RECD will be positive (i.e., over 0 dB) if we assume that the child's ear canal is smaller than a standard 2 cc coupler (which reflects a normal adult ear canal volume of 2 ml). If the RECD value is negative, it may highlight a poorly fitting or inserted earmould or insert tip. Often, the software will give you an expected RECD value according to the child's age, which allows the professional to assess the accuracy of their measurement.
- The RECD data can then be saved and will be added to the target calculation of the prescription formulae.

- REMs

- The child should be sitting adjacent to the stimulus source with instructions to sit quietly and still during the duration of the measurement.REUR (real ear unaided response): the REM tubes should be placed into the ear canal at the age-appropriate depth for the child and the broadband stimulus run. The value displayed is the SPL of the stimulus in the unaided ear. Often, there will be a peak response around the 3000 to 4500 Hz region, which reflects the resonant frequency of the outer ear.
- REOR (real ear occluded response): the earmould or slim tube should be carefully placed into the ear canal with the REM tube still in situ and undisturbed. When the broadband stimulus has run, the values should reflect the SPL of the signal with the ear now occluded. Depending on the nature of the acoustic coupling, these values demonstrate the level of occlusion achieved.
- REAR (real ear-aided response): the hearing aid can now be unmuted, and the international speech test signal (ISTS) can be run to view the aided response values of the hearing aid in situ against the prescription target for different input levels.

**4. Fine-tuning the Hearing Aid to Prescription**

- The ISTS: the international speech test signal was developed to provide a standardized and repeatable speech stimulus for hearing aid measurements. It encompasses the natural properties of speech and uses phonemes from six of the most widely spoken languages. The signal replicates the international long-term average speech spectrum (ILTASS), which can be shown as an overlay on most verification software when the REAR is run.

- For different input levels (mostly 50, 65, and 80 dB), the prescription target will appear, and the gain controls on the hearing aid software can be manipulated for the REAR to match.

- It is helpful during the fine-tuning process for all frequency compression and noise management features to be deactivated.

- Once the hearing aid gain matches prescription targets for the appropriate input levels, a maximum power output (MPO) can be run at 85 or 90 dB to ensure the hearing aid will not amplify over the uncomfortable loudness level of the child. This can be done through real-ear measurements or performed in the coupler.

**5. Subjective Verification of the Hearing Aid Output**

- All children, regardless of their ability to self-report, should be observed for loudness discomfort in the clinic. This can be achieved in different ways, such as presenting warble tones, clapping, or using noisemakers at high-intensity levels. Infants and non-verbal children can show eye-blinking where gain reaches uncomfortable levels. In these cases, the gain should be reduced at the discretion of the experienced clinician to increase comfort while avoiding under-amplification.

- For children who are communicative but cannot reliably verbalize their evaluation of the hearing aid sound, additional resources can be used to gauge satisfaction, such as pictorial loudness scales.

**6. Speech Test Evaluation of the Hearing Aid Fitting**

- Due to the critical objective of providing speech audibility, hearing aids should be evaluated post-fitting to quantify the child's aided access to speech.

- **Children under the age of 7 months**: this can be performed using aided cortical evoked potentials (CAEPs), although the research in this area is currently developing.

- **Children who can be tested via visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA)**: speech phonemes such as Ling-6 sounds can be played in the soundfield, and the aided child is assessed for speech audibility per visual reinforcement audiometry techniques. It is important to note that this evaluation method does not test intelligibility or discrimination but detection alone.

- **Speech testing for older children**: there is a wide range of available speech test materials that can be used to assess aided speech intelligibility, recognition, and discrimination and which are age-appropriate for the child. Care should be taken to observe phonemes consistently confused or poorly detected by the user. In these cases, additional fine tuning can be performed to increase the intensity of gain delivered at different frequencies to avoid overlapping the highest formant of a speech phoneme, which often results in consonant confusion.