Primary care physicians, pediatricians, and optometrists are the first to assess leukocoria, but diagnosis and management require the efforts of an interprofessional team. Early diagnosis and referral to an ophthalmologist are mandatory for a successful outcome. Inter-sub-specialty liaison between a general ophthalmologist, pediatric ophthalmologist, ocular oncologist, and a retinal surgeon is essential in a faster diagnosis and managing of the child as conditions like retinoblastoma are life-threatening in addition to being a vision-threatening disease. Siblings and parents should all be involved in care management as some of the conditions causing leukocoria are hereditary. Involving a geneticist early in care management helps in the genetic counseling of the parents. American Academy of Pediatrics has formulated recommendations for children with leukocoria.

- Pediatricians or other primary care clinicians should check the red reflex of all neonates, infants, and children before discharging them from their care.

- The result of the red reflex examination should be rated as normal if color, intensity, and clarity are the same in both eyes when checked simultaneously.

- All infants or children with altered Bruckner reflex or absent red reflex should be referred to a pediatric ophthalmologist immediately.

- The referring practitioner must communicate directly with the ophthalmologist and chart a plan for proper follow-up.

- Relatives of children with high-risk disorders like retinoblastoma, cataracts, glaucoma, and retinal dysplasia should be examined for red reflex and must be referred to a pediatric ophthalmologist.

- The pediatric ophthalmologist should examine for subtle retinal lesions when parents bring the children with a complaint of leukocoria.

Nurses will also play a crucial role in helping coordinate activities between clinicians and are valuable counseling resources for patients and their families. Pharmacists will contribute to the medical management of the condition, performing medication reconciliation, verifying appropriate dosing, and counseling parents on the proper administration of the drugs. Interprofessional communication and care coordination also include accurate and updated record-keeping of all interactions and interventions with the patient so that everyone on the care team has access to the same patient data. This approach to patient care will yield optimal outcomes with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5]