# Continuing Education Activity

Azilsartan is a medication used in the management and treatment of hypertension. It is in the angiotensin-receptor blocking (ARB) class of drugs. This activity outlines the indications, action, and contraindications for azilsartan as a valuable agent in treating patients clinically diagnosed with hypertension. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with hypertension and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the mechanism of action of azilsartan.
- Identify the indications for azilsartan therapy.
- Review the potential side effects, contraindications of azilsartan.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance appropriate clinical outcomes with azilsartan leading to optimal patient outcomes.

# Indications

Azilsartan, commercially formulated as azilsartan medoxomil, is an angiotensin-receptor blocking (ARB) agent. The drug is also commercially available as a combination therapy with chlorthalidone. Azilsartan received FDA approval in 2011 as an antihypertensive agent.

In preclinical and clinical studies, azilsartan has been shown to reduce blood pressure levels more dramatically than its precursors valsartan and olmesartan and is theorized to lower mortality rates and the onset of cardiovascular disease.

In patients with diabetes mellitus and hypertension, ARBs are effective in reducing blood pressure in addition to the other first-line agents.

# Mechanism of Action

ARB drugs target one of the critical elements of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). In the progression of the RAAS, angiotensin II binds to AT1 receptors, which are highly expressed in vascular tissues and the adrenal gland, causing significant vasoconstriction.

In addition to binding to AT1 receptors, angiotensin II binds to angiotensin II type 2 (AT2) receptors. The action of angiotensin II bound to AT2 receptors produces effects opposite of AT1 receptors, such as natriuresis, blood pressure-lowering, and reduction of vasoconstriction in the vasculature.

ARB drugs, such as azilsartan, provide an alternate and highly effective option in treating blood pressure involving the RAAS pathway. Many first-line options for antihypertensive treatment include ACE inhibitors, which come with associated side effects related to the ACE drug target (a dry cough, angioedema).

# Administration

Azilsartan comes in an oral tablet form as 40 and 80 mg tablets that are commercially available to be taken once daily, and it can be administered with or without food.

Azilsartan is formulated as its prodrug, azilsartan medoxomil. It absorbs rapidly in the gut, and biotransformation in the liver leads to the prodrug being hydrolyzed to its active metabolite, azilsartan, primarily by the enzyme CYP2C9.

# Adverse Effects

Overall, azilsartan is well-tolerated in most patients in terms of adverse effects. In a controlled, double-blind, randomized clinical trial comparing the efficacy of azilsartan medoxomil to the ACE inhibitor ramipril in 784 patients, the overall number of adverse events was reported to be much less frequent with azilsartan. Patients were started on a dose of 20 mg of azilsartan and 2.5 mg of ramipril once daily for two weeks, then were titrated up to dosages of 40 or 80 mg of azilsartan and 10 mg of ramipril for 22 weeks.

During the treatment period, dizziness and hypotension occurred more often with the azilsartan treatment groups, and cough, a class side effect commonly encountered with ACE inhibitors, occurred more frequently with the ramipril group (8.2% of participants).

Hypotension/orthostatic hypotension remained the most common adverse effect leading to discontinuation of azilsartan in placebo-controlled trials.

# Contraindications

As previously mentioned, azilsartan is an ARB in the same drug class as some older antihypertensives such as losartan and valsartan. Pregnancy is considered an absolute contraindication for all ARBs and other drugs that interfere with the RAAS system, such as ACE inhibitors and direct renin inhibitors. Azilsartan is a teratogenic antihypertensive drug; if taken during early pregnancy, the threat of congenital abnormalities rises substantially.****

Although there are no current clinical contraindications to azilsartan medoxomil therapy, it is not advisable to prescribe azilsartan with aliskiren-containing products (direct renin inhibitors) or other medications that impact the RAAS system, such as ACE inhibitors.

If a patient has a history of angioedema with prior ARB use, azilsartan should not be used, as with other ARBs.

# Monitoring

In patients with chronic kidney disease or those on potassium supplements or potassium-sparing drugs, the risk for hyperkalemia increases and requires monitoring.

Due to the primary method of metabolism for azilsartan being CYP2C9, once therapy has started, interactions with strong modulators of CYP2C9 should be monitored closely.

# Toxicity

No maximum toxic doses have been established yet for azilsartan. Patients on azilsartan with volume depletion, severe heart failure, or renal stenosis are at risk for oliguria or progressive azotemia.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although azilsartan is normally well-tolerated, it is always imperative to make sure the interprofessional team understands the danger of prescribing ACE inhibitors, aliskiren-containing products, and ARBs together. Physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners must be vigilant in ensuring that these drugs are not prescribed together if more than one member of the team is responsible for the patient. Pharmacists are responsible for checking the medication profile for drug interactions, alerting the team to potential adverse effects, and verifying dosing, as well as offering patient counseling when needed. Nurses must make sure that the patient accounts for each doctor and medication prescribed to him or her, and pharmacists must make sure that no drug interactions or duplicate therapies occur, as well as verifying appropriate dosing. It is of the utmost importance for each member of the interprofessional medical team to confirm that a female patient of child-bearing age is not pregnant before prescribing azilsartan or any other ARB. Only with this type of interprofessional team approach can azilsartan therapy be optimally implemented, leading to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]