In humans, uric acid is the end product of purine metabolism. There are three sources of purines in humans: 1) cellular RNA from cell turnover, 2) metabolic hepatic synthesis and 3) dietary intake of high purine foods.

Purine digestion produces xanthine which is converted to uric acid by the action of xanthine oxidase. Allopurinol works here; it blocks the effect of xanthine oxidase so uric acid production is reduced in favor of xanthine which is far more soluble than uric acid. In most other mammals, uric acid is further metabolized by uricase to allantoin, which is highly soluble and causes no pathology.

Endogenous uric acid synthesis is relatively stable at about 300 mg - 400 mg daily. The contribution of dietary sources can obviously vary, but generally, diet is responsible for 50% or less of total daily uric acid production. Total uric acid excreted daily on a typical Western diet is normally estimated at about 10 mg/kg body weight.

The etiology of uric acid stones can be diverse and is classified as follows:

- Idiopathic: the most common etiology, associated with metabolic disorders:

- Aciduria (low urinary pH) is due to higher acid production and/or inadequate available buffers.
- Diabetes mellitus
- Metabolic syndrome
- Obesity

- Acquired: less common, associated with low urinary pH and hyperuricosuria:

- Gout
- Persistent diarrhea (Irritable Bowel Syndrome, GI Bypass Surgery). Low urinary volume and hypocitraturia is seen instead of hyperuricosuria
- Cancer (due to high cell turnover; especially during chemotherapy which causes increased necrosis of tumor cells and acute tumor lysis syndrome.) 
- Dietary factors. High purine sources include organ meats (liver, kidney), poultry, fish (herring, trout, sardines), and red meat.
- Medications: probenecid and sulfinpyrazone block renal reabsorption of uric acid.  Other uricosuric drugs include benzbromarone, indomethacin, losartan, and salicylic acid.

- Congenital: uncommon, associated with hyperuricosuria:

- Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
- Von-Gierke disease
- Type 1 collagen storage disease
- Hartnup disease
- Wilson's disease 
- Familial hypouricemic hyperuricosuria ("Renal uric acid leak") and URAT1 mutations 
- Sickle cell disease and other hemolytic anemias (due to high cell turnover)

The occurrence of uric acid stones has risen considerably in patients suffering from metabolic syndrome.

Gout and/or hyperuricemia is associated with uric acid uropathy in 15 to 25% of uric acid nephrolithiasis patients.

Uric acid is much less soluble at a low urinary pH (5.5 or less), whereas solubility greatly increases at a higher urinary pH (especially at pH of 6.5 or more).

Hyperuricosuria increases the risk of calcium oxalate stone formation while reductions in hyperuricosuria with allopurinol and similar agents have shown a significant benefit in reducing recurrent calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis.

- Uric acid crystalluria reduces crystallization inhibitors and acts a nidus for heterogenous calcium oxalate nucleation.

- Dissolved uric acid in a solution can promote precipitation crystallization which increases calcium oxalate crystal formation leading to calculi.