There is no specific etiology or risk factor related to the development of this diverse group of tumors. However, the current emphasis on molecular characterization of brain tumors provides new insight into the genetic aberrations that underlie their tumorigenesis. Specifically, there may be two main molecular subgroups involving mutations within different cellular regulation pathways. The first subgroup demonstrates mutation in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, which is involved in cellular growth. Specifically, alterations to the proto-oncogene BRAF in the form of BRAF fusion and single nucleotide missense mutations are commonly found in these tumors, with the highest incidence in gangliocytoma and ganglioglioma, with 25% demonstrating fusion mutation and 13-56% demonstrating single nucleotide missense mutation.

These are gain-of-function mutations that lead to unregulated cell growth. The second group demonstrates mutation in fibroblast growth factor (FGFR) genes, mostly FGFR-1, which is upstream from the MAPK pathway.

MGTs are newly recognized lesions within the neuronal and glioneuronal tumor groups. They are similar to DNET but have a predilection for location in the septum pellucidum and are associated with mutation in the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) gene instead of FGFR.

PGNTs also demonstrate unique genetic aberrations among the neuronal and glioneuronal tumor groups. These often harbor a fusion aberration between solute carrier family 44 choline transporter 1 (SLC44A1) and protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA), creating SLC44A1-PRKCA.

Dysplastic cerebellar gangliocytoma, also referred to as Lhermitte-Duclos disease, represents a special case within this group of tumors because it is associated with Cowden syndrome, which is also referred to as phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) hamartoma tumor syndrome.

It is important to note that not all tumor samples are found to have the molecular aberrations noted above and that these do not represent all aberrations that have been associated with neuronal and glioneuronal tumors. There may be other mutations upstream from the signaling pathways noted above that contribute to their development. However, the rare nature of this group of tumors makes their molecular characterization somewhat difficult, with most information gleaned from case reports and small case series. Ongoing efforts are working towards a better understanding of the genetic alterations that contribute to their development.