Management is implemented based on the gestational age at which the mother presents to the hospital. At >34 weeks, if the mother presents with preterm labor, she is admitted. After observation for 4-6 hours, if she does not have progressive cervical dilation and effacement, fetal well-being is noted on a reactive non-stress test, and complications in pregnancy have been excluded, she can be sent home with instructions for follow-up in 1-2 weeks and return if there are additional signs and symptoms of preterm labor or other pregnancy concerns.

Mothers presenting at <34 weeks with signs and symptoms of preterm labor are hospitalized. In preterm labor with intact membranes, tocolytic drugs for up to 48 hours are used to inhibit labor.

Guidelines for tocolytic drugs: typically, tocolytics are a consideration between 22 and 34 weeks of gestational age and only when there are no contraindications.

The classes of these drugs include:

- Calcium channel blockers – Nifedipine is preferred as it has fewer side effects than other drugs

- Beta adrenergics– most commonly used beta-2 agonist is terbutaline

- COX inhibitors – indomethacin is safest if given no longer than the recommended 48 hours due to the risk of PDA closure

- Nitric oxide donors.

- Weaker tocolytic drugs

- Atosiban (oxytocin-vasopressin receptor antagonist) – not available in the United States
- Magnesium sulfate – of note, this is one of the most commonly used drugs in preterm labor. Mothers on this medication should have monitoring for the following: Deep tendon reflexes, vital signs, magnesium levels, urine output, and respiratory depression
- Glyceryl trinitrate

Contraindications to tocolytic drug use include preeclampsia with severe features, intrauterine fetal demise, lethal fetal anomaly, chorioamnionitis, hemorrhage, and significant maternal cardiac disease.

Once the membranes have ruptured, pregnancy cannot typically be prolonged enough for further intrauterine growth and maturation. However, appropriate therapy should reduce neonatal morbidity and mortality; this includes the following:

- Transferring the mother to a hospital with advanced obstetric and neonatal capabilities for care

- Administering appropriate antibiotics in labor to prevent GBS

- Antenatal administration of steroids to the mother to reduce morbidity and mortality of the fetus secondary to respiratory distress

- Intraventricular hemorrhage

- Necrotizing enterocolitis

- PDA

- Administration of magnesium sulfate in preterm labor before 32 weeks for neuroprotection

If contractions occur despite adequate tocolytic therapy, then the clinician must reassess the patient for amniotic infection, fetal compromise, possible abruption, and question whether the cervix is still changing.

In some instances, preterm labor induction may necessary. These instances can include intra-amniotic infection, fetal growth restriction, oligohydramnios, placental abruption, elevated blood pressures secondary to preeclampsia/eclampsia. In these cases, the fetus is monitored similarly as term fetuses, i.e., via fetal heart tracings. Monitoring has shown to reduce intrapartum death and neonatal seizures. Additionally, the neonatal care team should be informed of the status of the patient to ensure appropriate personnel and equipment are available if required.

It would be worth mentioning that after birth, delayed cord clamping (DCC) has been deemed advantageous for preterm infants. DCC has associations with higher initial hematocrits, high diastolic blood pressures, higher circulating blood volume, and a lower rate of resuscitation.