TJC helps hospitals and healthcare facilities to gain reputation by awarding them accreditation. These health care organizations are reviewed every 2 to 3 years. If organizations are compliant with all the standards, they receive accreditation. Otherwise, organizations must develop plans of action to improve safety and quality to satisfy the TJC. If a facility would like to be accredited by TJC, they pay a fee to the agency. After they have received a passing grade, they can display the results to the public. There is a fee of about $46,000 per year to keep the accreditation.

The accreditation is crucial to demonstrate compliance and commitment to patient safety. TJC adopts a tracer methodology to survey hospitals on compliance with safety.

- Individual: Tracing a patient's experiences while obtaining care at the hospital during the utilization of the facility's treatment and services through the course of care. For example, the tracing can start with a patient arriving in the emergency department and goes through the admitting process in registration, then has triage performed by nurses, receives a medical screening exam by a physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner, and subsequently goes through radiology, and laboratory services.

- System: Involves tracing the experiences of a patient while obtaining care at the hospital with a focus on care coordination, communication, departmental processes, infection control practices, and medication management. For example, the tracing can start with a patient arriving for surgery, starting with registration in admitting office, insurance verification, preoperative services; obtaining radiology service, diagnostic department for electrocardiogram; going through the surgery department, recovery department with a discharge process or a transfer to an inpatient unit.

- Program-specific: Evaluating a specific program's risk and safety concerns within an organization that provides a particular treatment or service and may be high-risk or high-volume patient populations. An example of this type of certification is a stroke program or a comprehensive cardiac care program.