The pathophysiology of platypnea is not completely understood, but it appears that the condition occurs in patients with disorders that increase the positional right-to-left shunting through intrapulmonary or intracardiac shunts. This right-to-left shunt could be transient and related to conditions that may worsen right-to-left shunting (like pulmonary hypertension or various other disorders). For example, platypnea may occur in patients with intracardiac right-to-left shunts such as atrial septal defect (ASD) or patent foramen ovale (PFO) after developing a disorder that increases the shunting such as pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary embolism, following a pneumonectomy, or having a large pericardial effusion. Intrapulmonary right-to-left shunts occur mainly in the base of lungs in patients with hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS). Being in the upright position causes more blood to flow to the lung base, thus aggravating shunting.

Platypnea may also result from worsening ventilation-perfusion mismatch in patients with underlying lung disease especially if the disease is worse at the base of the lung. Many case reports cite such a presentation. For example, patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis may have platypnea-orthodeoxia in the upright position because the fibrosis primarily occurs at the base of the lungs compared to apices.

In the upright position, the blood (perfusion) is directed mainly towards diseased areas resulting in worsening ventilation-perfusion ratio that will improve when lying flat. The same alteration may occur with other lung diseases, such as basilar pneumonia because the disease primarily affects the base of the lung.

Shunt fraction of total cardiac output (Qs/Qt) can be calculated by supplying the patient with 100% oxygen for 20 to 30 minutes then using this equation:

Qs/Qt (Shunt Fraction): (CcO2 - CaO2) / (CcO2 - CvO2)

Where CcO2 is the end capillary O2 content; CaO2 is the oxygen content of the arterial blood, and CvO2 is the oxygen content of the mixed venous blood. In normal people, the shunt fraction is about 5%.