# Continuing Education Activity

Cystitis cystica is a chronic reactive change of the urinary bladder mucosa, most probably due to chronic urinary tract infection or mechanical irritation. It is a benign and very commonly encountered condition. There are often invaginations of hyperplastic urothelial extensions into the superficial lamina propria, called von Brunn's nests. These inflammatory projections are considered reactive but benign and non-malignant. However, it should be promptly diagnosed to exclude malignant conditions with morphological similarities. This activity illustrates the evaluation and management of cystitis cystica and emphasizes the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with cystitis cystica.

**Objectives:**
- Identify cystitis cystica and its possible causes.
- Summarize the differential diagnosis of cystitis cystica.
- Outline the management of cystitis cystica.
- Explain the significance of interprofessional team coordination to diagnose cystitis cystica and exclude malignancy for improved outcomes.

# Introduction

Cystitis cystica is a common benign condition of the urinary bladder where there is a reactive inflammatory change of the bladder mucosa associated with subepithelial vesicles or cysts formation and glandular metaplasia (cystitis glandularis). There are often invaginations of hyperplastic urothelial extensions into the superficial lamina propria, called von Brunn's nests. These inflammatory projections are considered reactive but benign and non-malignant.

Cystitis glandularis is a further, proliferative progression of cystitis cystica characterized by glandular metaplasia of the urothelium.

Cystitis cystica and cystitis glandularis occur mainly in response to chronic irritation or inflammation. They are usually asymptomatic but may present with non-specific signs and symptoms that require thoughtful attention to exclude other morphologically similar malignant lesions such as bladder adenocarcinoma.

A nephrogenic adenoma is a rare, benign bladder tumor that is similar to cystoscopic appearance to cystitis glandularis and represents a type of superficial bladder proliferative disorder.

# Etiology

According to many studies that included a series of cases,  there is no definitive cause of cystitis cystica though chronic irritation, infection, or inflammation is a uniting feature among many affected individuals.

Potential causes:

- Chronic urinary tract infections (UTI), particularly infections caused by Escherichia coli

- Mechanical irritation (i.e., calculi)

- In-dwelling catheters

- Neurogenic bladders

- Chronic bladder outlet obstruction (i.e., benign prostatic hypertrophy, urothelial carcinoma, and pelvic lipomatosis)

- Bladder exstrophy is frequently associated with diffuse cystitis cystica changes in the bladder mucosa

In addition to the aforementioned conditions, nephrogenic adenoma was reported in many cases with organ transplantation and immunosuppression. It is caused by the implantation of desquamated distal renal tubular cells anywhere in the genitourinary tract, although most cases involve the urinary bladder.

In one series of 21 cases, the majority had a history of bladder augmentation surgery which causes recurrent infections and urolithiasis.

# Epidemiology

Cystitis cystica epidemiology is still not well documented because of the challenging diagnosis; however, it can affect males and females at any age, with a slightly higher prevalence in males. It is a common incidental finding in biopsies or cystoscopies done for any other reason, and it can be found in 60% of autopsies. Hence, it may be considered a normal variant of the urothelial mucosa.

Cystitis cystica is frequently seen in the bladder, neck, and trigone. Less commonly, it can be seen in the ureters and renal pelvis.

Cystitis glandularis may be diffuse or focal and generally affects about 2% of the population, usually appearing during the fifth and sixth decades of life.Nephrogenic adenomas are more common in males than females, with a 2-to-1 ratio. Its incidence is probably more common than is generally reported. While more common in adults, about 10% of cases have been reported in children.

# Histopathology

There are two main varieties of cystitis cystica changes that usually coexist, though one of them may predominate:

**Cystitis Cystica**

The urothelium becomes invaginated into the lamina propria forming Von Brunn nests and subsequently developing into cystically dilated vesicles. In some cases, it may be difficult to differentiate cystitis cystica and florid von Brunn nest proliferation from the nested variant of urothelial carcinoma.

Such differentiation can be critical as the nested variant of urothelial carcinoma is an aggressive malignancy. The finding of mutations in the TERT promoter has been proposed as a good method to distinguish a potentially dangerous nested urothelial carcinoma and its benign imitators.

**Cystitis Glandularis**

When the urothelium lining of the cysts exhibits glandular metaplasia. It is divided into two subtypes:

- Typical cystitis glandularis (CG): lined by simple mucinous cells.

- Cystitis glandularis intestinal-type (CGIT): lined by intestinal metaplastic cells in addition to goblet cells= and may produce mucin.

Cystitis glandularis intestinal-type is of clinical significance because, when extensive, it can mimic well-differentiated adenocarcinoma morphologically and histopathologically. Furthermore, it may exhibit a malignant potential.

The key discriminating element between cystitis glandularis intestinal-type and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma is the invasion of muscularis propria, which is seen in the latter.

Traditionally, cystitis glandularis have been considered potentially pre-malignant, although a number of more recent, long-term studies have shown no such association.

There does not appear to be any histological difference between those cases causing ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis and those that don't.

**Nephrogenic Adenoma**

Nephrogenic adenomas tend to appear after an injury to the urothelium. Generally described cystoscopically as polypoid, papillary, velvety, or fungating bladder lesions, grossly resembling a bladder malignancy. It tends to form most often in the trigone and bladder neck areas.

Nephrogenic adenoma has multiple histological types and may show mixed patterns.

- General architecture can be clear cell, oncocytic, flat or fibro-myxoidal

- Clear cells present only rarely

- Solid areas are usually seen only occasionally

- Histological types include cystic, microcystic, papillary, tubular, or signet ring-like

- Papillary, cystic, and microcystic patterns are the most common

- Pseudo-infiltrative growth pattern may occur that closely mimics urothelial carcinoma

- Tubules are lined by eosinophilic cuboidal or hobnail cells

- Hyaline rim surrounds the tubules

- No mitotic activity but nuclear atypia is possible

- Muscularis propria is only involved focally

The most common histological presentation is small, hollow tubules, somewhat similar to mesonephric tubules. They are usually lined with a single layer of eosinophilic cuboidal or hobnail cells.

In difficult cases, the combined expression of napsin A, EMA, PAX-2, and PAX-8 with a negative p63 has been suggested to help distinguish nephrogenic adenoma from a malignancy.

# History and Physical

Cystitis cystica and related pathologies have no unique symptoms. They may present with non-specific symptoms similar to many other urinary diseases and conditions, making the diagnosis more challenging.

The patient may complain of various symptoms.

- Hematuria

- Symptoms of a urinary tract infection

- Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) include frequency, urgency, incomplete emptying, and hematuria

- Pain (suprapubic or perianal)

- Obstructive urinary symptoms

- Rarely, urine retention and hydronephrosis

Other differential diagnoses need to be excluded with detailed history taking, including medical, social, sexual, and family history, accompanied by a focused genito-urinary examination.

# Evaluation

A systematic approach should be adopted to obtain the correct diagnosis of cystitis cystica. The definitive diagnosis requires cystoscopy and histopathological examination.

**Laboratory Investigations**

Examinations typically include a complete blood count, inflammatory mediators, urinalysis, and a kidney function test. Urinalysis, in particular, is important to detect the presence of hematuria or any urinary tract infection, and it should be obtained prior to commencing any antibiotic. If an infection is present, a culture and sensitivity test is required to identify the causative organism and the most effective treatment.

**Cystoscopy**

Cystitis cystica cystoscopic features can vary from a grossly unremarkable appearance to a large bladder cyst or mass. However, it typically appears as multiple small submucosal translucent cysts, found mainly at the trigone and the bladder neck. The bladder mucosa may demonstrate congestion, irregularity, thickening, multiple nodules, or ab exophytic polypoidal mass. A concurrent biopsy is typically performed on both the lesion and the mucosal changes since cystitis cystica typically has inconclusive cystoscopic and radiological features.

After establishing the diagnosis, it is recommended that patients with cystitis glandularis are maintained on follow-up visits every six months for two years, then yearly. The follow-up assessments may include clinical examination, urinalysis, ultrasound, KUB, and cystoscopy.

**Biopsy Analysis**

- Microscopic examination: - histopathological analysis of the obtained biopsy is the definitive method to diagnose cystitis cystica. The severity of the condition and the management plan is established according to the microscopic appearance and the presence or absence of intestinal metaplasia or other dysmorphic changes of malignancy. Cystitis glandularis with intestinal metaplasia (CGIT) has a similar appearance to a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, so it is essential to distinguish between the two entities clearly. The main difference between them is the extent to which the ectopic cells are present. In cystitis cystica, the cells are superficial to the lamina propria, while in adenocarcinoma, invasion of the deep muscle layer occurs. There are also other malignant criteria, including atypia, frequent abnormal mitotic figures, increased nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and the presence of necrotic tissue. Immunohistochemistry can be used in complex cases for differentiation. (See histopathology section.)

- Immunohistology: - the urothelial cells in the cystitis cystica nests are positively stained with p63, while nephrogenic adenoma is p63 negative.

- Immunofluorescence: - Cystitis glandularis typically exhibits a homogenous membranous expression of beta-catenin.

**Radiographic Imaging Modalities**

- Ultrasonography (US) is a non-invasive and reliable option to assist in the diagnosis of cystitis cystica. It is valuable in cases with recurrent urinary tract infections by measuring the bladder wall thickness. A study showed that bladder wall thickness values of more than 3 mm indicate cystitis cystica rather than simple recurrent UTIs, which generally have a bladder wall thickness of less than 3 mm.

- X-rays of kidneys, ureters, and bladder (KUB) can be done to detect stones.

- Computerized tomography (CT) scanning of the urinary system without and with contrast media (CT urogram) is used for the complete evaluation of the genitourinary system. It can visualize bladder lesions of sufficient size, measure the bladder wall thickness, and evaluate for any other lesion that may cause hematuria. In a CT urogram, cystitis cystica may appear as multiple, rounded, small-sized filling defects of 2 to 5 mm diameter in the bladder wall, although the lesions can be larger or rarely appear as a large, tumor-like mass.

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the urinary system can be done for a more detailed assessment and exclusion of other pelvic abnormalities.

- Cystograms can give a more detailed look at the bladder and are beneficial, especially in children, to detect the presence of vesicoureteral reflux, which may coexist with cystitis cystica or mimic its symptoms.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of cystitis cystica can be challenging due to the difficulty of identifying the exact cause. After confirming the diagnosis, the treatment mainly depends on removing the aggravating factor, antibiotics and chemoprophylaxis, symptomatic treatment, and surgical intervention if the previous methods fail.

**Medical Treatment**

Treating any active UTI with antibiotics followed by long-term low-dose prophylaxis is considered the first-line treatment option. Many antimicrobial drugs can be used according to the severity of the case. Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fosfomycin, and nitrofurantoin are considered first-line agents for the initial treatment of UTIs.

Local antibiotic administration in the form of regular, intermittent intravesical instillations can also improve outcomes.

After treating the current UTI episode, subsequent long-standing prophylaxis is crucial for reducing the incidence of recurrent UTIs and for improving the mucosal inflammatory changes of the bladder. Regression of cystitis cystica changes is achievable by compliance with a suitable pharmacotherapy regimen and proper follow-up.

D-Mannose is an inert monosaccharide dietary supplement that is used as a nonantibiotic prophylactic agent for cases of recurrent UTIs.

Patients with cystitis cystica and recurrent urinary infections did appear to benefit from daily d-mannose therapy with a significant reduction in UTIs. However, further studies are needed to recommend this treatment routinely.

Symptomatic treatment includes physical therapy, pelvic floor exercises with bladder training techniques, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and anticholinergic medications which help reduce the irritative symptoms and improve the patient’s urinary control.

Corticosteroids such as prednisolone can be used in otherwise intractable or severe cases. They appear to have a good success rate in confirmed, symptomatic cases not-responding to alternative treatments but typically require six months of therapy.

Oral cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) inhibitor therapy caused the complete disappearance of gross papillary type cystitis glandularis previously treated with transurethral resection, which recurred.

Intravesical sodium hyaluronate improves the mucosal layer integrity and inhibits the inflammation and proliferation of cystitis cystica changes leading to symptomatic improvement.

Sodium hyaluronate is a smaller molecule than hyaluronic acid and penetrates tissues more deeply. Sodium hyaluronate is a glycosaminoglycan that forms a viscoelastic solution in water. This acts as protection of the underlying urothelium from irritating urinary chemicals.

It also helps transport peptide-based growth factors and structural proteins to the injury site. Sodium hyaluronate further reduces bladder inflammation by inhibiting mast cell activation and reducing the secretion of inflammatory chemicals like interleukin (IL)-6 and histamine.

As it is enzymatically degraded, sodium hyaluronate releases proteins that promote tissue repair. The usual dose is 40 mg in 50 mL with weekly intravesical treatments until symptomatic control is achieved.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical intervention is beneficial for cases with unsuccessful medical treatment or if the patient is presenting with a mass or obstructing symptoms.

- Transurethral resection (TUR) of the lesion is the most commonly performed procedure. An excisional biopsy should be examined histologically to confirm the diagnosis and exclude other potentially serious disorders.

- Neodymium-YAG laser can be used in more severe cases not responding to conservative therapy and transurethral resection.

- Diathermy of the mucosal cystic changes can be performed in patients with recurrent UTIs, although this treatment requires more data and study.

- Extracorporeal shockwave therapy has been used for painful bladder syndrome, but its specific use in cystitis cystica and similar conditions is not well established.

Treating nephrogenic adenoma is either transurethral resection of the lesion or transurethral fulguration, but recurrence is common, especially in children.

Intravesical hyaluronate therapy has also been used successfully for nephrogenic adenoma treatment but only anecdotally.

**Summary of Treatments**

- Most cases will need a bladder biopsy when transurethral resection can be performed.

- Patients with recurrent urinary tract infections should have long-term low-dose prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or nitrofurantoin.

- Intravesical gentamicin or D-mannose therapy can be considered in selected cases of recurrent urinary tract infections.

- Any urinary calculi that could be a focus of infection should be removed.

- Initial treatment for symptomatic cases includes pelvic floor exercises, bladder training, NSAIDs, and/or overactive bladder medications.

- Patients who remain symptomatic may benefit from six months of oral corticosteroids or a COX2 inhibitor.

- Intravesical sodium hyaluronate appears to be an effective therapy in otherwise intractable cases. Prophylactic therapy can be continued as monthly maintenance after the initial weekly induction period.

- Surgical therapy typically involves transurethral resection.

- Long-term UTI prophylaxis and NSAIDs should be considered in recurrent, symptomatic, or severe cases and after surgical therapy.

- Other surgical treatments include laser ablation, diathermy, and extracorporeal shockwave therapy but efficacy data on such modalities is limited.

# Differential Diagnosis

Cystitis cystica differential diagnosis includes a wide range of diseases because of the unspecific nature of its presenting symptoms.

There are a number of differentials clinicians need to consider.

- Adenocarcinoma of the bladder

- BCG reactive cystitis

- Benign prostatic hyperplasia

- Chronic cystitis and other UTIs

- Endocervicosis of the urinary bladder (a rare benign condition that affects women of reproductive age, where ectopic endocervical tissue is found in the bladder wall or the paracervical region)

- Ejaculatory duct cyst

- Fibroepithelial polyp

- Florid von Brunn nest proliferation

- Inverted papilloma

- Keratinizing desquamative squamous metaplasia

- Malakoplakia

- Nephrogenic adenoma

- Painful bladder syndrome

- Polypoidal cystitis

- Radiation cystitis

- Schistosomiasis

- Squamous metaplasia

- Transitional cell carcinoma

- Trigonitis

- Vaginal metaplasia

- Vaginitis

- Xanthogranulomatous inflammation of the bladder

# Prognosis

The clinical course of cystitis cystica is yet undetermined though removing the cause of the irritation can cause the cystic inflammation to regress. Successful treatment and prevention of UTIs can lead to the disappearance of the mucosal changes.

The malignant potential of cystitis cystica remains controversial; however, some anecdotal cases have been reported of a widespread cystitis glandularis and nephrogenic adenoma turning into adenocarcinoma.

Cystitis glandularis intestinal type with dysplastic histology most likely still requires periodic surveillance, while other types of cystitis cystica and cystitis glandularis probably don't.

Nephrogenic adenoma has a high recurrent rate, so periodic follow-up cystoscopies are suggested.

# Complications

There are several possible complications of cystitis cystica, cystitis glandularis, and nephrogenic adenoma.

- Recurrent UTIs (the most common complication)

- Bladder pain syndrome

- Hydronephrosis

- Bladder outlet obstruction

- Urinary retention

- Urinary urgency, frequency

- Renal failure from bilateral ureteral obstruction

- Ureterovesical junction obstruction

- Malignant transformation in case of cystitis glandularis intestinal-type with dysplasia

- Psychological impact on the patient due to the chronicity and disturbing quality of life

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The main action plan to help prevent the occurrence and progression of cystitis cystica is to target, avoid and eradicate the predisposing factors whenever possible.

The most effective way of prevention is regular, long-term prophylaxis, especially in chronic or recurrent urinary tract infections. Renal calculi should be removed to eliminate a source of inflammation and recurrent infections. Bladder stones should be treated promptly to avoid long-standing mechanical irritation.

Patients should be counseled thoroughly to maintain proper compliance and good personal hygiene. Ensure that the patient adheres to the follow-up visits and evaluations to monitor the condition and detect any complications early.

Encourage patients to adhere to the general recommendations for preventing cystitis, such as maintaining good genital hygiene and increasing their daily water intake if it is insufficient.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Consider non-invasive therapy with corticosteroids or COX2 inhibitors in cases with no obvious, otherwise treatable cause.

- D-mannose may be of some help in recurrent UTIs but is not preferred over low-dose prophylactic antibiotic therapy.

- Intravesical treatment with sodium hyaluronate should be considered, especially in complex or intractable cases, due to good reports of efficacy, multiple modes of beneficial activity, and safety profile.

- Most cases probably do not need routine surveillance cystoscopy.

- There is evidence that vitamin C may be of some benefit in treating cystitis glandularis, but there is limited data.

- Most recent studies suggest no connection between cystitis cystica and bladder adenocarcinoma.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Since cystitis cystica, cystitis glandularis, and nephrogenic adenomas may have the clinical or radiological appearance of a bladder malignancy or ureteral pseudotumors, they should be considered in the differential diagnosis of possible urinary malignancies.

The histological examination confirms the final diagnosis. Assessment of the histological features of cystitis cystica facilitates its correct categorization and differentiation from adenocarcinoma of the bladder. Interprofessional collaboration is vital for the proper diagnosis and management for better outcomes.

Each team member must contribute from their area of expertise, monitor the patient's progress, record their observations in the patient's permanent medical record, and reach out to other team members as necessary so therapeutic modifications can be instituted if necessary. This interprofessional paradigm will lead to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Regarding the treatment, it is essential to eliminate any predisposing factor, either irritation, infection, or obstruction if possible. If no action is taken on these factors, the therapeutic and prophylactic measures listed will ultimately not be effective. Follow-up should be arranged (typically every six months) in selected patients due to the possibility of bladder adenocarcinoma transformation and to detect any complications as early as possible.