The preoperative evaluation and optimization should begin as soon as a person becomes a candidate for being an organ recipient. It plays a very crucial role in minimizing perioperative complications, improved graft, and recipient survival.

The recipient is screened for malignancy, active infection, and other viral infections. The common screening includes HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus), Hepatitis panel, EBV (Epstein-Barr virus), and CMV (Cytomegalovirus). They are tested accordingly depending on the comorbidities such as coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, and cerebrovascular accidents. It is crucial to document allergies, prior solid organ transplantation, prior blood transfusions, and previous pregnancies. It assists in determining the antibody load in the recipient and guiding the immunosuppression regimen. Rabbit allergy is important to note as thymoglobulin is obtained from rabbit serum. Additional testing is done as per institutional protocol.

Repeat evaluation every two years after the initial evaluation is required and sooner if the clinical situation changes.

If the patient has to undergo coronary revascularization, then a multidisciplinary team evaluation is required. This team aids in determining the time and type of intervention required. The duration of the dual antiplatelet regimen is a minimum of 4 weeks for balloon angioplasty, three months for a bare-metal stent, and 6-12 months for a drug-eluting stent. There are no guidelines for pulmonary function testing. However, patients with uncontrolled COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), asthma, ILD (interstitial lung disease) should not undergo organ transplantation. Pancreatic transplantation patients are younger with fewer comorbidities. However, they may be at a greater risk of micro and macrovascular complications due to diabetes mellites.

If the patient continues to be eligible for transplantation and an organ is available, surgery is planned.

It is crucial to thoroughly examine the airway before surgery, inquire about bleeding or clotting disorder, previous anesthesia exposure, type of anesthesia, any complication associated with previous exposure, and family history of anesthesia complication. Drug allergies are an important aspect of the pre-operative evaluation to avoid any adverse reaction intra-operatively. An anesthesiologist should note consent for blood and blood product transfusion, history of previous blood transfusion, and adverse reaction. The device should be interrogated before surgery by the company representative in patients with a permanent pacemaker or defibrillator. Qualified personnel should be present in the OR throughout the procedure to manage the device and revert its settings to baseline at the end. With all the above information and utmost diligence, anesthesia-related complications can be minimized intra-operatively.

The following tests are done on the day of surgery:

- CBC (complete blood count) with differentials

- Complete metabolic panel

- Coagulation panel (PT/INR/APTT)

- Blood group and HLA crossmatch and typing

- 12 lead ECG

- Chest X-ray

- Covid nasopharyngeal antigen and antibody testing

- Thorough airway examination