Mutagenesis has multiple implications in clinical medicine. This article will discuss a few, including carcinogenesis, heritable diseases, microorganism resistance, large-scale mutagenic projects, and precision medicine.

Carcinogenesis (i.e., tumorigenesis or oncogenesis) is when a cell begins to divide uncontrollably. Mutations of oncogenes (which promote cell growth), tumor suppressor genes (which inhibit cell growth), or cell-cycle genes (which regulate the cell cycle) can generate a clonal cell population with highly proliferative properties, leading to cancer.

Ionizing radiation (IR), as a consequence of atomic radiation (e.g., Chernobyl) or iatrogenic causes, is associated with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), among others. In PTC, IR increases the rate of DNA rearrangements that cause a permanently active promotor region of ret, a tyrosine kinase. This has been associated with the pathogenesis of PTC. Applying this knowledge, anti-promoter agents may one day be a method for future therapy of PTC.

Heritable diseases have their origin in mutagenesis, as these are permanent DNA changes that are passed to offspring. Some examples of hereditary diseases include sickle cell disease, Tay-Sachs disease, cystic fibrosis, Huntington disease, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and hemophilia, among many others. A well-studied example is sickle cell anemia. This is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from a missense mutation in the B-globin gene (i.e., a point mutation resulting in a glutamic acid to valine substitution). Research shows that this mutation created an adaptive advantage in heterozygote carriers in malaria-endemic areas.

Drug resistance in microorganisms is a result of mutagenesis. Multidrug-resistant (MDR) organisms are associated with increased antibiotic use. MDR organisms have increased mortality rates, and it is estimated that by 2050 there might be 300 million premature deaths worldwide due to MDR organisms. This highlights the need to practice effective antimicrobial stewardship to slow the development of MDR organisms.Trypanosoma cruzi may process this drug into metabolites that cause whole-genome mutations. Therefore, this may be a reason for treatment failure and the development of drug-resistant parasites. This can even lead to resistance to different classes of drugs, like posaconazole, used in combination therapy of Trypanosoma cruzi. Therefore, vigilance is required when using benznidazole in combination therapy.

Large-scale mutagenesis techniques can be used to map functionally important amino acid residues that affect particular phenotypes. For example, a mouse study on the Golgi protein GMAP-210 showed that gene alteration caused a phenotype that resembled human achondrogenesis type 1A. This helped lead to the discovery of a similar mutation found in humans.

Lastly, precision medicine (PM) is a concept where disease treatment is based on knowing an individual's genome abnormalities, which became relevant as whole-genome sequencing became more accessible. PM is dependent on new therapeutic strategies, drug development, and gene-oriented treatment.