Insulin, a natural endogenous hormone synthesized and secreted by pancreatic beta cells, has a structure of 51 amino acids.

Insulin is considered the most potent anabolic hormone known until today, and its effects on the body are necessary for tissue development, growth, and maintenance of glucose homeostasis. Insulin action starts by binding to two cell receptors, which are alpha and beta, that are linked by two disulfide bonds into a complex that is a heterotetrameric membrane.

The conformational change of the binding between insulin and the alpha and beta receptors enables ATP to bind and activate tyrosine kinase, which causes receptor autophosphorylation.

Insulin can affect every tissue in the body either directly or indirectly. But in this review, we will address the metabolic effects of this hormone on the liver, skeletal muscle, and adipose tissue. The effects of insulin on glucose metabolism are the following: Stimulation of the synthesis of glycogen, increased glycolysis in fat and muscle, increased glucose transport into fat and muscle, and inhibition of glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.

In terms of glucose production, glycogen breakdown to synthesis in the liver is facilitated by inhibiting glycogen phosphorylase and the stimulation of glycogen synthesis through the effects of insulin directly.

Insulin coordinates glucose and free fatty acids during states of feeding, fasting, and exercise to meet the body`s demands. Several mechanisms lead to insulin's effects on fat metabolism.

Insulin stimulates lipoprotein lipase to clear chylomicrons rich in triglycerides away from the circulation and then hydrolyzes them. The fatty acids generated from this reaction are taken up by skeletal muscle and adipose tissue to be oxidized and stored.

The overall effect of insulin on fat metabolism is decreasing lipolysis and increasing TG storage, thereby decreasing the flow of FFA to the liver.

In states of prolonged fasting or uncontrolled diabetes, such as DKA, in which insulin levels are low, FFA is released into circulation by lipolysis in addition to an increased hepatic FFA oxidation to ketone bodies (B-hydroxybutyrate and acetate) which results in ketonemia and metabolic acidosis.

Hyperinsulinemia decreases ketone body production by inhibiting carnitine palmitoyltransferase I by stimulating malonyl CoA, increasing ketone body peripheral clearance, and inhibiting lipolysis, as mentioned above, thereby decreasing the supply of FFA to the liver.

In general, insulin stimulates protein synthesis by increasing the number of translational efficiency ribosomes in skeletal muscle and liver and accelerating the transport of amino acids into hepatocytes, fibroblasts, and skeletal muscle, which in turn, causes a ribosome-catalyzed reaction and translation of the genetic code in specific messenger RNAs.

Decreasing proteolysis is the major effect of insulin on the human body in terms of protein metabolism. These effects are dose-dependent. Essential amino acids are more sensitive to insulin´s effect; therefore, in the presence of euglycemia and hypoaminoacidemia, the effects of insulin are effective in decreasing proteolysis.