In many instances, patients with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis may be asymptomatic, with elevated hemidiaphragm found incidentally on chest imaging. Less commonly, patients can present with varying amounts of dyspnea depending on underlying comorbidities, specifically underlying cardiopulmonary disease. In many instances, unilateral diaphragm paralysis can present similar to various cardiorespiratory disorders and may be overlooked initially.

One-third of patients may experience exertional dyspnea, while others with more comorbidities report dyspnea at rest. These patients experience hypoventilation, which can lead to hypercapnia that worsens during sleep and lead to daytime fatigue.

It is essential to ask about medical history when a patient presents with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis to identify the responsible cause for paralysis. There are many potential causes, and important details could be discovered from past medical history, surgeries, infections, recent trauma, vaccination history, or recent travel.

A physical exam may reveal non-specific findings for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. The exam may seem benign in an otherwise healthy individual. Occasionally there may be dullness to percussion or diminished breath sounds at the lung base on the affected side. During sleep, paradoxical thoracoabdominal movement may be seen, along with the complaint of orthopnea in the supine position, which improves with lateral positioning with the healthy lung down. Sleep respiratory disorders are also commonly associated with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, specifically during REM sleep.