Retinitis pigmentosa is a genetic condition, most commonly exhibiting autosomal recessive inheritance, that often presents with nyctalopia as the primary presenting symptom. At a cellular level, it characteristically demonstrates a degeneration of the rod and cone photoreceptors with a preference for rods. Biochemical defects may contribute to multiple pathways, including ciliary transport dysfunction, intracellular endoplasmic reticular stress, and apoptosis, resulting in photoreceptor death. Degeneration and death of rods in early stages leads to loss of peripheral and nighttime vision, referred to as “tunnel vision.” Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and cone death occurs in later stages and is responsible for the loss of acuity, daytime vision, and eventually blindness. RPE cells detach and migrate to perivascular retinal areas, forming melanin pigment deposits in a characteristic bone spicule “star shape.”

An obstruction to light in the anterior segment of the eye may lead to impaired travel of light energy to the retinal photoreceptors, such as the lens commonly in the form of cataracts, which can present as nyctalopia. Decreased activation of rod photoreceptors may present with disproportionately decreased processing of low-light environments.

Vitamin A, a fat-soluble vitamin primarily obtained from the diet in beta-carotene containing foods, deficiency can also cause nyctalopia. In the retinal rod photoreceptors, Vitamin A is a precursor substrate to 11-cis-retinal. The rhodopsin system is sensitive to dietary Vitamin A deficiency, and decreased Vitamin A intake may lead to low intracellular levels of 11-cis-retinal in the resting state, impairing dark adaption and manifesting as symptoms of night blindness.