Stroke care is a multidisciplinary approach. All rehabilitation services should be involved including physical, occupational, and speech/cognitive therapies. Poststroke complications should be followed closely for prevention and management.

- Patients treated with tPA may have angioedema acutely. If there is life-threatening angioedema or laryngospasm, tPA should be stopped immediately.

- Neurological deterioration is worse within 72 and 96 hours after stroke in hemorrhagic transformation and malignant cerebral edema.

- Hydrocephalus may develop in posterior circulation strokes more than anterior circulation strokes. In this case, craniotomy and external ventricular drain (EVD) should be considered.

- Increased risk of venous thromboembolism includes pulmonary embolism and deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in the first months due to decreased mobilization. Patients in a hospital should be on chemical DVT prophylaxis if there is no contraindication like giving tPA in 24 hours or hemorrhagic transformation.

- Dysphagia should be addressed with percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube placement before discharging the patient from the hospital if someone fails the swallowing tests with speech therapists.

- The risk for infections like pneumonia and urinary tract infection will be higher; however, there is no indication to use prophylactic antibiotics.

- Increased risk of seizures. There is no indication to use prophylactic antiepileptic drugs.

- Depression affects patients with CVA more in the first year. Fluoxetine helps for poststroke depression.

- Muscle relaxants may help with spasticity. If it is resistant, onabotulinumtoxinA injection is the next best step with oral medications.

- Decubitus ulcers may develop on bedbound patients. Changing the position of patients every 2 hours is beneficial.

- Increased mobility to prevent DVTs and deconditioning with family and physical and occupational therapy at the hospital, home, or nursing home.