It is important to assess the mother and fetus to exclude other causes of abnormal labor progression, such as cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD) and fetal malpositioning.

Management can be discussed as supportive measures and active measures.

**Supportive Measures**

- Continuous reassurance to keep the mother calm. Maternal stress increases endogenous adrenaline, which can inhibit uterine contractions.

- Encourage ambulation and avoid supine position. Although these are not proven to improve contractions or prolonged labor due to hypocontractility, they may improve the comfort of the parturient.

- Empty bladder, consider catheterization.

- Maintain adequate hydration.

- Adequate pain relief.

**Active Measures**

Medical management: These are interventions that improve the quality of uterine contractions.

- Amniotomy

Membrane rupture (amniotomy) stimulates contractions by the release of prostaglandins and reflex stimulation of the uterus when the presenting part becomes closely applied to the lower uterine segment. Amniotomy should be attempted when vaginal delivery is probable; where cervical dilatation > 4 cm, there is adequate fetal descent (station -2 or lower), and the presenting part is well-applied to the lower uterine segment.

- Oxytocin

Provided there are no contraindications. Oxytocin is the medication of choice for augmenting contractions. The dosage regimen should be titrated to effect for achieving adequate uterine contractions. However, dosing generally does not exceed 30milliunit/ minute.

A combination of amniotomy and oxytocin augmentation is effective in the management of hypocontractile labor than amniotomy alone when instituted early in the active phase.

Surgical management:

- Assisted vaginal delivery may be performed using forceps, vacuum, or breach extraction provided the cervix is fully dilated, and vaginal delivery is indicated and probable.

- Operative delivery by cesarean section should be considered early when the assessment indicates a CPD or fetal malpositioning/malpresentation. However, in the absence of an early indication, cesarean section is performed if all other measures have failed to stimulate the uterine contractions; when oxytocin is contraindicated (including cephalopelvic disproportion), if there is maternal exhaustion, fetal distress (category III fetal heart tracing), or before full cervical dilation.