A significant number of people regularly consume large quantities of vitamins in the belief that they are available over the counter and thus safe. In fact, close to 60,000 vitamin toxicities are reported each year in the US alone. The key is public education and this requires an interprofessional team. In most cases, the pharmacist is in the prime position to educate the public about vitamin safety. Rather than encourage the use of supplements, the pharmacist should educate the public on a healthy diet- not only is this cheaper, but it is safer. Countless cases of counterfeit vitamin products have been reported over the years.

Nurses should also encourage patients to consume a healthy diet and refrain from taking vitamins unless there is a documented deficiency.

Pregnancy is an absolute contraindication to isotretinoin therapy. However, patients may ingest other medications containing vitamin A such as isolated vitamin A, other supplements, and weight loss medications that may also have teratogenic effects. It is the responsibility of the nurses and medical aides entering medications, as well as the obstetrician or physician managing females' care, acting in concert as a coordinated health care team, to be sure that all medications, including vitamins and supplements, are included in a patient's medication-list and reviewed with the patient at each visit. The patient should be informed of the risk of vitamin A ingestion during pregnancy and the maximum recommended dosages during pregnancy. [Level I]