# Introduction

The word thymus means "soul" in Greek (stemmed from the belief that it houses the soul). However, its importance has long generated debate.

# Structure and Function

The thymus is a superior mediastinal retrosternal organ. It is bilobed and has two subcomponents: the cortex and the medulla and is made up of epithelial, dendritic, mesenchymal, and endothelial cells.

Positive selection is used by the thymus to select self-antigen-recognizing t-cells to be destined for apoptosis. The thymus is where T-cells get exposure to self-antigen, and 95% of all created T cells undergo apoptosis due to their recognition of self-antigen. The non-reactive T-cells then go through negative selection for those that bind to antigen with high affinity.

# Embryology

Originally derived from the ventral third pharyngeal pouch, the thymus grows from embryogenesis to 3 years of age and then involutes during puberty.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The thymus’ blood supply is complicated and widely varies. Most often the blood is supplied by the inferior thyroid, internal thoracic, pericardiacophrenic, or anterior intercostal arteries. Rarely, the thymus can obtain blood from the middle thyroid artery.

# Nerves

Sympathetic innervation of the thymus originates from the superior cervical and stellate ganglion. These fibers travel in a plexus along large blood vessels until they enter the thymic capsule. Parasympathetic fibers arise from the vagus, recurrent laryngeal, and phrenic nerves. Several rodent studies have found that thymocytes respond to stimuli via norepinephrine, dopamine, acetylcholine, neuropeptide Y, vasoactive intestinal peptide, calcitonin gene-related peptide, and substance P.

# Muscles

The thymus sits in the mediastinum just posterior to the manubrium. The muscles that depress the hyoid bone that attach to the sternum are near the thymus. These muscles include the sternohyoid and sternothyroid, and both muscles are bilateral. The thyrohyoid and sternocleidomastoid muscles are close to any ectopic thymic tissue or any superior extensions of the thymus. The thymus also lies anterior to the cardiac muscle and pericardium.

# Physiologic Variants

Variants in the number of lobes, size, and location of the thymus are common. The most common anatomic variant is an extension reaching up to the thyroid gland. During the descent of the thymus tissue may implant along the way and is then defined as an ectopic thymus. Fifty percent of people have ectopic thymic tissue. This variant is typically located in the anterior cervical region, deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle, anterior to the carotid sheath, and can expand into the retropharyngeal space. Half of these masses connect to the thymus in the mediastinum.

# Surgical Considerations

The thymus poses difficulty for surgeons due to its high variation in size and arterial supply. Imaging of the gland is also difficult and rarely provides surgeons any insight. On standard chest radiographs, the thymus is barely discernible as it gets lost in the cardiac silhouette.  The gland has smooth borders and is more visible in x-rays of infants and young children. Ultrasound is mostly used to assess the thymic parenchyma, and a CT scan is most helpful to assess the location, size, shape, and its relationship to other structures.

An ectopic thymus can be confused for lymphadenopathy or a tumor.  Since the difference is difficult to discern clinically, their benign nature is most often confirmed after resection. Another complication of ectopic thymic tissue is that it can compress nearby structures; this can cause swelling, decreased blood flow, discomfort, and impaired thyroid function. Resection of these masses possesses surgical difficulty due to many adhering to the carotid sheath and in close proximity to vital pharyngeal muscles and phrenic nerve.

# Clinical Significance

Insulin is known to play an essential role in thymic growth. Insulin, growth hormone, and insulin-like growth factor increase the development of lymphocytes, and insulin can be found in the medulla of the thymus. Type 1 diabetes adversely affects the thymus; these patients will have a decreased immune system in addition to their diabetes and other related complications. The supplementation with insulin can be protective of their thymic function and preserve their immune system maturation.

Thymus hyperactivity secondary to hyperplasia of the organ is common in myasthenia gravis. However, thymus tumors, lymphomas, systemic lupus, or hyperthyroidism can also cause this clinical finding. Patients with thymus hyperactivity will have pallor, lymphadenopathy, rhinorrhea, and tonsillitis. This condition's treatment includes vitamins A and D, calcium, and iodine. Thalassotherapy, thymus radiotherapy, and heliotherapy may also be treatments.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune pathology resulting in muscle weakness. The thymus produces antibodies that interrupt the signaling of acetylcholine at the motor endplate. The patient’s muscle strength worsened with continued contractions and this is a clinical finding that differentiates MG from Lambert-Eaton syndrome. Thymic hypertrophy in MG is so common that it is considered a diagnostic criterion; along with the antibodies found in the blood to the acetylcholine receptors and anti-muscarinic antibodies. Physicians may use an MRI or CT scan to evaluate the size of the thymus. MG is treated depending on the severity of the disease. Treatments range from immunosuppression and corticosteroids to surgical thymectomy. In some patients, only pyridostigmine bromide, a medication that slows the breakdown of acetylcholine, is necessary for symptom control. In patients with this condition, it is essential to keep in mind the potential drug exacerbations of disease when treating acute illness or comorbidities.

In contrast, atrophy of the thymus is present in several congenital conditions. DiGeorge syndrome is when the thymus fails to form in utero. This agenesis results in an immature immune system and recurrent infections. Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a genetic disorder where the thymus disappears early in childhood, and the patient lacks T and B cells. These children are also at significant risk for severe, recurrent infections.

# Other Issues

As humans age, and their thymus regresses, they have an increased susceptibility for disease. This decrease in thymus size and function leads to decreased circulating T cells and alteration of their role. This change in function can increase autoimmune diseases, bacterial and viral infections, and neoplasms. Restoring thymic function or intervening before involution could maintain the immune system throughout adult life.