Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US) is a term used to report a category of cervical epithelial cell abnormalities described by the Bethesda system for reporting cervical cytology. It refers to abnormal cytologic changes that are suggestive of the squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL) but are qualitatively and quantitatively less than those of a definitive SIL diagnosis.

About a decade ago, cervical cancer was the third most common cancer in women worldwide, and it was ranked as the first most common cancer in women in 42 low-resourced countries.

In developed countries such as United States, United Kingdom, and Canada, widespread availability and access to cervical cancer screening have led to a significant reduction in both incidence and mortality from cervical cancer.

Though it has been previously theorized that alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency may be a genetic predisposition, this is not yet confirmed.

Women that have ever been sexually active are at risk of developing cervical cancer; however, there are women with a greater risk profile than others. Risk factors commonly associated with the development of cervical cancer include younger age at sexual debut, multiple concurrent sexual partners, chronic intense smoking, HIV infection, and persistent infection with high-risk HPV. Though the Pap test dates back to the late 1940s, it has not been fully adopted and utilized in resource-limited settings for several reasons, including high cost and delay in getting results. Very low rates of Pap smear have been reported in resource-limited countries, including Jamaica at 15% and Nicaragua at 20% national coverage. In some Asian and African countries, Pap testing rates are even lower, or it does not even exist, compared to Jamaica.

Visual inspection of the ectocervix is the new way of screening, with immediate results and successful treatment of most of the identified precancerous lesions.