Every healthcare worker, including the pharmacist and nurse practitioner, must regularly determine what medications each patient takes; monitoring the patient's medications is an interprofessional team effort. Duplicate medications require removal from the patient's regimen after consulting with the clinician who initially prescribed them. The date of prescribing and duration must be stated during each clinic visit. If nursing staff suspects duplicate therapy, they should consult with a pharmacist and bring it to the prescriber's attention. The key reason for checking medications is to prevent polypharmacy which can lead to significant adverse patient outcomes. If any healthcare team member suspects duplicate or inappropriate therapy, they must immediately consult with the prescriber or pharmacist to verify their suspicions so corrective measures can be taken. This dynamic emphasizes the need for open communication and meticulous record keeping.

Each year, thousands of elderly patients suffer injuries or even mortality because of adverse effects from multiple medications. The pharmacist must have a list of all patient medications and continually update the physician and nurse practitioner for duplicates and unnecessary medications. All members of the interprofessional healthcare team (clinicians, nurses, pharmacists) need to educate the patient on why they are taking a given drug and help them or their caregiver understand the regimen as much as possible. This information must be made available to the interprofessional healthcare team so duplicate and extraneous agents can be deleted from the patient's regimen and medication therapy. [Level 5]

OPERAM (optimizing therapy to prevent avoidable hospital admission in multimorbid older adults), a cluster randomized controlled trial, was conducted to study the effect of optimizing drug therapy on drug-related hospital admissions in older adults with polypharmacy and multimorbidity. The trial concluded that inappropriate prescribing is common in older adults with comorbidities and polypharmacy admitted to the hospital, which can be reduced through an intervention to optimize pharmacotherapy. However, further measures are needed to recognize pharmacotherapy optimization interventions that decrease inappropriate prescribing and enhance patient outcomes.