**Periosteum:**The periosteum consists of two layers; Outer fibrous membrane and inner cellular layer.

**Outer fibrous layer**: Outer is an irregular, dense connective tissue type with more collagenous matrix and less number of cells.

**The inner cellular layer**of the periosteum is also described as the inner cambium layer by some authors. It is made up of osteoprogenitor cells (fibroblast-like cells); it is also known as the osteogenetic layer.

Blood vessels supplying the periosteum hold a small caliber and branches in to supply the Haversian and Volkmann canals. Sharpey’s fibers, clusters of periosteal collagen fibers, protrude the bone matrix and bind the periosteum to the bone. These fibers exist more at the attachment of ligaments and tendons to bone.

The periosteum is thick in initial years of life; the thickness of the periosteum decreases as age advances. Periosteum thickness differs with the site of the bone also.

**Endosteum**: A membrane lining the inner surface of the bony wall also identified as the lining membrane of the Bone marrow cavity is endosteum; The endosteum lines the Haversian canal and all the internal cavities of the bone. The endosteum consists of a layer of flattened osteoprogenitor cells and a type-III collagenous fibers (reticular fibers).

Endosteum is classified into three types based on their site: (i) Cortical endosteum: endosteum lining the bone marrow cavity, (ii) Osteon endosteum: Endosteum lining the osteons mainly contains nerves and blood vessels. (iii) Trabecular endosteum: Lines the trabecula near the developing part of the bone. It plays a role in the growth and development of the bone.