The intracranial arteries are supplied by the vertebral and the bilateral internal carotid arteries. These extracranial vessels supply the Circle of Willis, named after Thomas Willis, an English physician. The Circle of Willis is an anastomotic ring of vessels that supply the brain. The anterior circulation is largely provided by the ICAs, which branch intracranially into the middle cerebral and anterior cerebral arteries. The posterior circulation is supplied by the vertebral arteries, which join to form the basilar artery. The basilar artery gives off distinct branches, including the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA), pontine perforating arteries, and the superior cerebellar arteries. The basilar artery then bifurcates into the bilateral posterior cerebral arteries. The circle is completed via connections of the distal ICAs to the PCAs via the posterior communicating arteries, and the bilateral ACAs are connected via the anterior communicating artery.

The internal carotid artery can be broken down into multiple segments, typically C1-C7 based on a classification system by Bouthillier et al. While there is no universally accepted naming system of the carotid segments, the one by Bouthillier is the most commonly used.

**Vasospasm**

While the cause of vasospasm is not definitely identified, one potential cause is decreased production and decreased response of the artery to the vasodilator, nitric oxide. After a subarachnoid hemorrhage, the incidence of vasospasm usually occurs between days 4 and 14. Detection of vasospasm is important in a subarachnoid hemorrhage patient because of its association with delayed cerebral ischemia. Traditionally, vasospasm has been treated with "Triple H" therapy which included hypertension, hypervolemia, and hemodilution. However, this is no longer the mainstay treatment for vasospasm, with multiple newer treatments, including hypertension in a euvolemic patient, among others. Delayed cerebral ischemia is important to identify and treat, contributing to the high morbidity and mortality of subarachnoid hemorrhage patients.

When there is a decrease in the diameter of a segment of a vessel (as in vasospasm), there is an associated increase in velocity and decrease in pressure. This is based on Bernoulli's principle and is because the same volume of blood is trying to cross this narrowed vessel. To do this, the velocity increases. This fact is irrespective of the cause of the narrowing, be it from vasospasm, atherosclerotic disease, or other causes. This focal elevation in the velocity is the primary abnormality of interest in the interpretation of transcranial Doppler exams.