# Introduction

The femoral sheath is a fascial tube encapsulating the key vascular structures passing through the retro-inguinal space, a critical transition point between the abdomen and the anterior thigh compartment. It is an important anatomical landmark for understanding the structures in the femoral triangle within which it lies and has clinical importance as the site of femoral hernias.

# Structure and Function

The inguinal ligament spans the gap between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic tubercle. Beneath it, the retro-inguinal space is created and is divided by the iliopectineal arch into a muscular compartment and a vascular compartment. The femoral sheath lines the vascular compartment of the retro-inguinal space, which contains the femoral artery, femoral vein, and deep inguinal lymph nodes.

The femoral sheath has a conical shape and is of varying length, typically 3 to 4 cm, before it blends with the adventitia of the femoral vessels. Its anterior aspect is a continuation of the transversalis fascia, whereas the posterior aspect is formed from a continuation of the iliopsoas fascia.

Anteriorly, the femoral sheath is covered by the fascia lata of the thigh, and posteriorly it is related to the underlying iliacus and pectineus muscles. The femoral sheath is bordered medially by the lacunar ligament, and on its lateral side lies the femoral nerve.

The femoral sheath is divided into three compartments by vertical septa of connective tissue that separate it into distinct functional areas:

- Lateral compartment – containing the femoral artery

- Intermediate compartment – containing the femoral vein

- Medial compartment – called the femoral canal, containing loose connective tissue and lymph nodes

The function of the femoral canal (medial compartment of the femoral sheath) is to allow expansion of the femoral vein into this space following increased venous return.

- Anteriorly: the inguinal ligament

- Medially: the lacunar ligament

- Laterally: the septum between the femoral canal and the intermediate compartment of the femoral sheath

- Posteriorly: Pectineus muscle

The ‘mouth’ of the femoral ring is covered transversely by a sheet of peritoneal fatty tissue termed the femoral septum; this area is weak and abdominal viscera can traverse through it into the femoral canal, causing a femoral hernia.

The general function of the femoral sheath is to allow the femoral vascular structures to glide underneath the inguinal ligament during hip flexion and extension. It provides a smooth fascial layer to facilitate this.

# Embryology

The femoral sheath is a fascial structure formed anteriorly by a continuation of the transversalis fascia and posteriorly by a continuation of the iliopsoas fascia. Both of these fascia layers are part of the thoracolumbar fascia, which is key to maintaining posture and the transmission of force between the scapular and pelvic girdles.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The femoral artery travels in the lateral compartment of the femoral sheath. It is a continuation of the external iliac artery, commencing as it passes under the inguinal ligament.

The femoral vein occupies the intermediate compartment of the femoral sheath. It is a continuation of the popliteal vein and enters the femoral sheath before becoming the external iliac vein as it passes under the inguinal ligament.

The femoral canal contains deep inguinal lymph nodes and associated lymphatic vessels.

# Nerves

The femoral branch of the genitofemoral nerve (from L1-L2) is given off as it lies on psoas major. It then runs inferiorly under the inguinal ligament, accompanying the femoral artery in the lateral compartment of the femoral sheath, before piercing it anteriorly to innervate the skin over the femoral triangle.

The femoral nerve proper (from L2-L4) travels in the muscular compartment of the retro-inguinal space, lateral to the vascular compartment lined by the femoral sheath.

# Muscles

Behind the femoral sheath are the pectineus muscle (posteromedial) and the iliopsoas muscle (posterolateral).

# Surgical Considerations

The medial part of the femoral sheath, termed the femoral canal, is the site through which abdominal viscera can protrude, resulting in a femoral hernia. Femoral hernia repair can be performed with mesh (hernioplasty) or primary suture closure (herniorrhaphy). Modern practice internationally has favored mesh repair, either via an open approach or laparoscopically, in the elective setting for both male and female groin hernia repair.

The three classic open approaches to repair of femoral hernia are the infra-inguinal (Lockwood) approach, the trans-inguinal (Lotheissen) approach, and the high (McEvedy) approach, with each offering advantages in certain situations. The Lockwood approach, for example, involves a parallel incision approximately 1cm below the inguinal ligament and is suitable for elective repair as there is little opportunity to allow for bowel resection if required in emergency surgery

The two laparoscopic surgical techniques for groin hernias are the transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) and the totally intraperitoneal (TEP) approach.

# Clinical Significance

**Femoral Hernia**

Femoral hernias are the least common kind of groin hernia, accounting for between 20% and 31% of groin repairs in women and only 1% of groin repairs in men.

The typical clinical presentation of femoral hernia is a swelling inferior to the inguinal ligament and inferior and lateral to the pubic tubercle.

**Femoral Vascular Access**

The femoral vein is a relatively safe option for gaining central venous access when more proximal locations are less easily accessible. Ultrasound guidance helps reduce vascular bleeding by 60% when used for femoral vein cannulation.

**Node of Cloquet**

The node of Cloquet, which lies within the medial compartment of the femoral sheath (otherwise known as the femoral canal), is the junctional point between the external iliac lymph chain and the deep inguinal nodes.