The term stimulants cover a broad class of drugs that increase the activity of the central nervous system. These drugs are used by a very high percentage of the general population for various reasons, including performance enhancement, medical benefits, and recreational purposes. The drug may be legal or illegal, depending on the stimulant and jurisdiction.

Caffeine is the most commonly used stimulant in the world, used for a combination of dietary and recreational purposes as well as performance enhancement. Other legal stimulants are generally used for performance enhancement but may also find utility for specific symptoms depending on the drug. Illegal and/or prescription stimulants carry medical purposes but are also heavily used for recreational reasons.

**Medical Indications**

- Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

- Narcolepsy

- Asthma

- Obesity

- Nasal and sinus congestion

- Hypotension due to anesthesia

As the most commonly used stimulant, caffeine is found in various drinks and foods such as tea, coffee, and chocolate. It is consumed habitually in many countries worldwide, given its mild to moderate stimulant effects, which promote alertness. Its general properties have also made it rampant among students and athletes who seek a cognitive or physical edge, respectively.

The amphetamine class of drugs is used for medical and recreational purposes. They carry a multitude of effects that include general and cognitive performance enhancement along with euphoric effects. They also induce aphrodisiac effects in many users. ADHD treatment commonly uses a combination of dextroamphetamine and levoamphetamine, as well as pure dextroamphetamine and lisdexamfetamine. Methamphetamine is a widely trafficked and illegal drug used for recreational purposes. Athletes use many medications related to the amphetamine class of drugs for physical performance enhancement. These drugs fall under bans by the world anti-doping agency (WADA).

The purpose of this article is to review the most commonly used stimulants, their indications, and possible short-term and long-term adverse effects.