Diabetic gastroparesis occurs as a result of dysfunction in the autonomic and enteric nervous systems. Chronically high levels of blood glucose (or inefficient glucose uptake) lead to neuronal damage resulting in abnormal myenteric neurotransmission (e.g., vagus nerve), impaired inhibitory (nitric oxide) neuronal function, and dysfunctional smooth muscle and pacemaker (interstitial cells of Cajal) cells. Altogether, this dysfunction results in a combination of fewer contractions of the antrum, uncoordinated antro-duodenal contractions, and pyloric spasms, ultimately resulting in delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis).

Delayed gastric emptying in patients with diabetes, particularly of solids, may also occur in the setting of abnormal small bowel motility, which is thought to occur by a similar mechanism as that which is described in the stomach. Some patients with diabetes may additionally experience changes in gastric compliance, both increased or decreased, which may also contribute to delayed gastric emptying.

In addition to this, serum (postprandial) glucose levels have a direct relationship with gastric emptying. In the setting of diabetic autonomic neuropathy, acute hyperglycemia stimulates gastric electrical activity.  In patients with diabetes (without neuropathy) and healthy controls, acute hyperglycemia will instead relax the proximal stomach and suppress gastric electrical activity (e.g., reduced the frequency, propagation, and contraction of the antrum) in both fasting and post-prandial conditions, thereby slowing gastric emptying.

Acute hyperglycemia has also been associated with increased sensitivity in the gastrointestinal tract. This may be responsible for the postprandial dyspepsia (e.g., early satiety, nausea, vomiting, heartburn, bloating, and pain) frequently experienced by patients with diabetic gastroparesis.

Carbohydrate absorption is highly dependent on the speed of gastric emptying through the release of peptides such as glucagon-like peptide-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide, in which slower gastric emptying results in a higher level of carbohydrate absorption. Therefore, a higher serum glucose level due to delayed gastric emptying can itself lead to the worsening of gastroparesis.