Blood glucose is measured in mmol/L (millimoles per liter) or mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter).

Normal range: 4 to 6 mmol/L or 72 to 108 mg/dL.

**Lab-Based Blood Glucose Testing**

Lab-based testing is required for the appropriate diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.

**Prediabetes**

Impaired fasting glucose range: 5.7 to 6.4 mmol/L or 100 to 125 mg/dL.

Impaired oral glucose tolerance test range at two hours post 75-gram oral glucose ingestion: 7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L or 140 to 199 mg/dL.

**Diabetes**

Further testing may involve an oral glucose tolerance test to confirm the diagnosis. Advise the client to eat and drink over 150 grams per day of carbohydrate foods for the three days before testing. In addition, the client must fast overnight for at least 8 to 16 hours before this test. A fasting blood sample is collected, and a sweet drink containing 75 grams of glucose is given to the client after collecting the fasting blood sample. A second blood sample is collected two hours after consuming the glucose drink.

Oral glucose tolerance test: Glucose tolerance range at two hours post 75-gram oral glucose ingestion: ≥11.1 mmol/L, or ≥200 mg/dL.

A random venous blood glucose of at or above 11.1 mmol/L (≥200 mg/dL) or a fasting blood glucose at or above 7 mmol/L (≥126 mg/dL) on two or more separate occasions indicates the client is likely to have diabetes mellitus.

**Other Tests**

HbA1c: Glucose molecules tend to attach to hemoglobin. This test interprets the percentage of glucose molecules that combine with hemoglobin to form glycated hemoglobin. Once glucose molecules combine with the hemoglobin, the glycated hemoglobin remains for the life of the red blood cell, which is, on average and in health, approximately 120 days. Therefore, analyses of the red blood cell and its glycated hemoglobin reveal the average blood glucose levels in the client over that time frame.

Normal HbA1c: 3.5% to 5.6% or 15 to 42 mmol/mol.

Prediabetes is a possible diagnosis when the glycosylated hemoglobin is between 5.7% and 6.4%.

A HbA1c result >6.5% usually confirms the presence of diabetes mellitus. Pharmacological intervention is required in clients with HbA1c levels greater than 7.0%. The HbA1c is the recommended diagnostic test for diabetes mellitus and can also inform the appropriate ongoing management of the diabetic client.

Note: There is a small but significant difference between capillary blood glucose measurements undertaken at home and the venous or arterial blood sampling done in clinical facilities. Care must be taken when using the results from capillary and venous tests either exclusively or together.