**Prehospital**

The important goals in the prehospital setting are as follows:

- Recognition of patients who are at risk for spinal cord injury.

- Cervical spine immobilization.

- Triage to an appropriate facility.

**Emergency Department**

The important goals in the emergency department setting are as follows:

- Every resuscitation should begin with ABCDE

- Airway maintenance with cervical spine protection

- Breathing and ventilation

- Circulation with hemorrhage control

- Disability (Neurologic evaluation)

- Exposure (Environmental control).

The priority is to protect the airway. Beware that the higher the level of spinal injury, the greater the chance that early airway intervention will be required. Lesions above C3 have a potential for immediate respiratory arrest. Also, lesions involving C3 to C5 can influence the phrenic nerve and diaphragm function. Therefore, early endotracheal intubation should be considered if an injury at or above C5 is present. During intubation, in-line spinal stabilization should be maintained. Monitor vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory status, and temperature. Capnography may be useful to monitor respiratory status, particularly in the emergency department.

If hypotension is present in patients with spinal cord injury, neurogenic shock should be suspected. Hypotension and relative bradycardia are typical manifestations. However, blood loss should be suspected if hypotension is present in spinal injury patients until proven otherwise. Remember that a systolic blood pressure less than 80 mmHg is rarely due to neurogenic shock alone. A careful evaluation should be performed to search for the source of bleeding even if a spinal cord injury is present. Also, hemorrhagic shock may co-exist with neurogenic shock.

**Other Considerations**

Corticosteroid Use

Practitioners have treated patients with blunt spinal cord injuries with high-dose methylprednisolone. In the National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study (NASCIS), improved neurologic function was demonstrated in patients who received high-dose corticosteroids within eight hours of injury. A loading dose of 30 mg/kg of methylprednisolone was administered over a 15-minute period. This was followed by an infusion of 5.4 mg/kg/hr and continued for 24 hours in patients treated within three hours of injury, or 48 hours in patients treated three to eight hours after injury. No benefit was demonstrated when steroids were administered eight hours or more after injury. It is not indicated for penetrating injuries. It is not adequately studied in children under 13 years of age. Risks associated with steroid use are as follows:

- Gastrointestinal hemorrhage

- Wound infection

- Severe sepsis

- Severe pneumonia.