Mercaptopurine and azathioprine are prodrugs of a purine analog hypoxanthine that works as an antagonist to endogenous purines required for DNA replication during the S-phase of the cell cycle and inhibition of RNA and protein synthesis. Azathioprine breaks down into 88% mercaptopurine and 12% other thiopurine metabolites. 6MP requires conversion into 6-thioguanine nucleotides (6TGN) to become active and exert antileukemic effects.

The prodrug is metabolized in the liver, GI tract and taken up by lymphocytes, where mercaptopurine is metabolized via the purine salvage enzyme via hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT) to thioguanine nucleotides 6TGN and thioinosine monophosphate (TIMP). Inosine triphosphate (ITPA) catalyzes the hydrolysis of thioinosine triphosphate (TITP) to thioinosine monophosphate (TIMP), which increases 6TGN levels.

There is also a secondary pathway via thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), which produces inactive methylated bases, 6-methylmercaptopurine. The methylated metabolite, methyl-thioinosine monophosphate (Me-TIMP), is a potent inhibitor of the purine de novo synthesis. Me-TIMP further reduces purines available for incorporation in DNA synthesis.

Deoxy-6-thioguanine triphosphate (6-dTGTP) incorporates into DNA, and 6-thioguanine triphosphate (6-TGTP) inserts into RNA. 6-TGTP also binds to Rac1, resulting in the inactivation of the Vav-Rac1 signaling pathway in T-lymphocytes. This process further prevents the activation of Rac1 target genes such as nuclear factor kappa beta (NF-kB), which induces apoptosis of activated T-lymphocytes.

The replacement of the endogenous purines with these synthetic thiopurine nucleotides results in purine deprivation within the cells, which halts DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis leading to decreased cell proliferation and cytotoxicity.