Rosacea typically presents during adulthood, though it can rarely affect children. Rosacea presents with 4 different clinical subtypes during the disease. The erythematotelengiectatic subtype, which presents with persistent erythema with intermittent flushing of nose and cheeks, is usually the first clinical manifestation of rosacea. In the papulopustular form, patients present with eruptions of papules and pustules on the affected area on the face. This subtype is sometimes called “adult acne” due to the similarity in the appearance of lesions. Notably, rosacea lacks comedones, helping to differentiate it from true acne. The phymatous subtype manifests with fibrosis and hypertrophy of sebaceous glands. It is typically seen on the nose of male patients (rhinophyma), but can also affect the cheeks, chin, and glabella. Although phyma is typically a late manifestation of rosacea, de novo cases with no prior skin changes have been reported. Ocular rosacea presents with tearing, dry eye, gritty sensation, pruritus, hordeola, and blepharitis.

Based on the latest diagnostic guidelines by the National Rosacea Society Expert Committee, one of the following clinical presentations is considered diagnostic for rosacea:

Fixed centrofacial erythema in a characteristic pattern that may periodically intensify

Phymatous changes

Two of the following major criteria below are also considered diagnostic:

Flushing

Papules and pustules

Telangiectasia

Ocular manifestations including lid margin telangiectasia, interpalpebral conjunctival injection, spade-shaped infiltrate in the cornea, and scleritis and sclerokeratitis.