Enterococci do not produce toxins like staphylococci and streptococci, but their virulence comes from other properties like durability, structure, and antibiotic resistance.

Enterococcal surface components include the polysaccharide capsule, adhesins, pili, and the aggregation substance.

Enterococci secrete virulence factors like bacteriocins, hemolysin/cytolysin, gelatinase, and serine protease.

Enterococci are intrinsically resistant to cephalosporins, clindamycin, aminoglycosides, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

**Mechanism of resistance to specific antibiotics**:

**Antibiotic**

**Strain**

**Mechanism of antibiotic resistance**

**Detection of antibiotic resistance**

Beta lactams

E. faecium

-An increased expression of penicillin-binding protein (PBP) 5-R type

-Alterations in PBP5 protein around the active site

-Utilization of beta-lactam insensitive transpeptidase for cell wall synthesis.

E. faecalis

-Amino acid changes in PBP-4

-plasmid-mediated beta-lactamases

Nitrocefin test-rare penicillinase

Cephalosporins

All

Intrinsic resistance, presence of serine-threonine kinase

Aminoglycosides except for gentamicin and streptomycin

E. faecium

Tobramycin acetyltransferase

All

aph(3')IIIa gene

Streptomycin

All

Ribosomal mutation

Brain heart infusion (BHI) agar with streptomycin

Gentamicin

All

aph(2’’)-Ia gene which encodes a bifunctional enzyme with 2”-phosphotransferase and 6’-acetyltransferase

Clindamycin

All

lsa gene

Vancomycin-low level

All especially E. gallinarum and E. cassesliflavus

Van C, E, G, L, N genes

Vancomycin-high level:

Especially

E. faecium and E. faecalis

Van A (most common), B, D, M.

They work by replacing the D-Ala-D-Ala terminus of peptidoglycan with D-Ala-D-lactate which binds to vancomycin with significantly lower affinity. *

BHI agar with vancomycin

Vancomycin susceptible: </=4mcg/ml

Vancomycin intermediate: 8 to 16mcg/ml

Vancomycin resistant: >/=32mcg/ml

Linezolid

All

Mutation in 23S rRNA and other MGE resistances.

Daptomycin

All

Genetic mutations like cls, gdpD, and liaF impact the cell membranes' repulsion charge and target its composition.

Muller Hinton broth with Ca ion concentration measurement

*Sometimes, vancomycin-resistant genes are indolent, causing initial phenotypic vancomycin susceptibility that can later reverse in some emerging strains called vancomycin-variable enterococci (VVE).Staphylococcus aureus via horizontal VanA gene transfer when they co-exist.