Obesity is a chronic illness that affects children, adolescents, and adults globally. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), approximately 35% of adults and 17% of children are obese in the United States. Worldwide, there are 650 million obese adults and 42 million obese children under the age of 5. The definition of obesity is a body mass index greater than or equal to 30 kg/m2 with further delineation into classes.

Obesity has a psychosocial impact and an increase in medical and economic complications. With increased adipose tissue deposition, there is an increase in comorbid conditions and medical complications. These comorbidities include Type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular accidents, malignancies like colon, breast, and uterine cancers, osteoarthritis, obstructive sleep apnea, major depressive disorder, and liver disease. A positive correlation is seen with increased complications and increased fat deposition. Weight loss decreases medical complications such as hypertension and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. From a socioeconomic standpoint, treating obesity and its associated complications results in the United States alone expending more than $200 billion per year, which equals more than 20% of US health expenditure overall. Costs also are associated with missed work and a decreased life expectancy. When considering approaches to weight loss, medical and behavioral modifications may be ineffective for a plethora of obese patients. Patients who undergo bariatric surgery have lower long-term mortality rates than matched controls who do not undergo bariatric procedures.

Metabolic or bariatric, derived from the Greek words "baros," meaning weight, and "iatrikos," meaning medical, surgery has increased worldwide. In 2018, approximately 394,431 bariatric procedures were performed according to the International Federation of Surgery of Obesity and Metabolic Diseases. When discussing bariatric procedures, it is prudent to discuss obesity classifications. Class 1 is defined as a BMI of 30 to <35. Class 2 is defined as a BMI of 35 to <40. Class 3, which can be categorized as "severe obesity," is defined as a BMI greater than or equal to 40. The National Institute of Health Consensus Development Panel in 1991 outlined the indications for surgical management of class 3, severe obesity, which the American Bariatric Society later revised in 2004.

Candidates for bariatric surgery include adults with a BMI greater than or equal to 40 kg/m^2 without comorbid conditions or adults with a BMI between 35 to 39.9 kg/m^2 with at least one serious comorbidity. These comorbidities include diabetes mellitus, obstructive sleep apnea, hyperlipidemia, obstructive hypoventilation syndrome, hypertension, Pickwickian syndrome, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, pseudotumor cerebri, gastroesophageal reflux disorder, asthma, venous stasis disease, as well as debilitating arthritis. If a patient has been disqualified from another surgery due to obesity, such as surgery for osteoarthritis or ventral hernia repair, this serves as the qualifying serious comorbidity for bariatric surgery consideration.