**Initial Evaluation of a Hypertensive Patient**

Ideally, treatment for HTN should be initiated by primary care providers electively, not immediately prior to surgery. The initiation of treatment should be made after several measurements of BP on at least two different occasions. Diet in overweight patients, exercise, and decreased salt intake should be a mainstay of treatment. The goal of treatment should be to reduce both BP and risk of CVD. Primary agents to treat HTN include thiazide diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB), and calcium channel blockers. Secondary agents include loop diuretics, potassium-sparing diuretics, aldosterone antagonists, beta-blockers, alpha-1 blockers, centrally acting drugs, and direct vasodilators. Description of initiation, and use of these agents, has been described.

**Preoperative Evaluation**

Patients with prior medical history should be assessed in a preoperative anesthesia clinic a minimum of one week prior to surgery. This affords time for management changes to optimize the patient’s state of health, including BP. A new concept, the perioperative surgical home, has been described, using a team approach to both optimize the patient preoperatively, and guide care during the postoperative period.

If BP is well controlled, and history and physical examination are unremarkable, further testing may be unnecessary for uncomplicated surgery or procedures, but is appropriate if history or physical are concerning, and for larger and invasive surgeries. Electrocardiography (ECG), transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) detect the presence of LVH. Echocardiography can also measure its severity. Wall motion abnormalities and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) can be detected with TTE and TEE. DD by Doppler-echo, in combination with a normal LVEF and a history of CHF, suggests a diagnosis of HFpEF. Referral to a cardiologist may be advisable to determine appropriate preoperative tests, assess perioperative risk, and make focused recommendations for perioperative care. Cardiac catheterization is usually only performed when indicated by symptoms, and the cardiologist believes preoperative intervention may be indicated, such as percutaneous coronary intervention in a patient with worsening angina. A neurologist should assess neurologic signs or symptoms before elective surgery. Serum creatinine can indicate impaired renal function, though it needs to be appreciated that approximately 50% of kidney function may be lost before creatinine begins to rise. Electrolytes should be performed if patients are on antihypertensives that impact electrolytes, such as diuretics. Complete blood count and platelet count are indicated if the procedure may be associated with significant blood loss. Still, many preoperative clinics will perform a complete blood count prior to all but minor procedures. In patients with HTN, a basic metabolic panel should be performed to document the preoperative state of kidney function with serum creatinine.