**Malignant Disease**

**Multiple Myeloma**

Studies have shown increased overall survival and progression-free survival in patients younger than 65 years when consolidation therapy with melphalan is initiated, followed by autologous stem cell transplantation and lenalidomide maintenance therapy.

**Hodgkin and Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma**

Studies have shown that in cases of recurrent Hodgkin and Non-Hodgkin lymphomas that do not respond to initial conventional chemotherapy, chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation leads to better outcomes. A randomized controlled trial by Schmitz showed a better outcome at three years of high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell transplant compared to aggressive conventional chemotherapy in relapsed chemosensitive Hodgkin lymphoma. However, the overall survival was not significantly different between the two groups.

**Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)**

Allogeneic stem cell transplant has been shown to improve outcomes. It may prolong overall survival in patients with AML who fail primary induction therapy and do not achieve a complete response.

**Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL)**

Allogeneic stem cell transplant is indicated in refractory and resistant cases of ALL when induction therapy fails for a second time to induce remission. Some studies suggest an increased benefit of allogeneic HPSCT in patients with high-risk ALL, including patients with the Philadelphia chromosome and those with t(4;11).

**Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS)**

Allogeneic stem cell transplant is considered curative in cases of disease progression and is only indicated in intermediate- or high-risk patients with MDS.

**Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) and Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)**

Patients with CML and CLL received the fewest number of allogeneic transplants in 2020. HPSCT has high cure rates for CML, but because tyrosine kinase inhibitors pair high success rates with a low adverse risk profile, HPSCT is reserved for patients with refractory disease.

**Myelofibrosis, Essential Thrombocytosis, and Polycythemia Vera**

Allogeneic stem cell transplant has been shown to improve outcomes in patients with myelofibrosis and those diagnosed with myelofibrosis preceded by essential thrombocytosis or polycythemia vera.

**Solid Tumors**

Autologous stem cell transplant is considered the standard of care in patients with testicular germ cell tumors that are refractory to chemotherapy; in this case, refractory is defined as the third recurrence with chemotherapy.

**Non-Malignant Diseases**

**Aplastic Anemia**

Systematic and retrospective studies have suggested an improved outcome with HPSCT in acquired aplastic anemia compared to conventional immunosuppressive therapy.

**Severe Combined Immune Deficiency Syndrome (SCID)**

Large retrospective studies have shown increased overall survival in infants with SCID when they received the transplant early after birth before the onset of infections.

**Thalassemia**

Allogeneic stem cell transplant from a matched sibling donor is an option to treat certain types of thalassemia and has shown 15-year survival rates reaching near 80%. However, recent retrospective data showed similar overall survival compared to conventional treatments with multiple blood transfusions.

**Sickle Cell Disease**

An allogeneic stem cell transplant is recommended to treat sickle cell disease.

**Other Non-malignant Diseases**

HPSCT has been used to treat chronic granulomatous disease, leukocyte adhesion deficiency, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, Kostman syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Blackfan-Diamond anemia, and enzymatic disorders. Moreover, the role of HPSCT is expanding in non-malignant autoimmune diseases, including systemic sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus, and has already shown promising results in cases like neuromyelitis optica.