The typical presentation of patients with symptomatic osteoarthritis of the spine is pain, stiffness, and motion restriction, which is commonly accompanied by referred pain.

In many cervical spine osteoarthritis cases, patients complain of shoulder, posterior head, and anterior chest pain. If pain persists longer than one to two weeks, or there are neurological symptoms present such as numbness, tinglingly loss of grip strength, or there is fever or crepitus on range of motion, patients may require further evaluation.

Warning signs or red flags should also merit consideration as part of the initial evaluation of osteoarthritis of the spine. Review of systems should include numbness, loss of bowel or bladder continence, fever, chills, or the presence of saddle anesthesia.

Physical exam should include inspection and palpation of the area of reported history. Furthermore, active and passive range of motion testing of the spine should also be complete. Pronounced or reduced lordosis or kyphosis should also be documented, and the patient's gait and posture should also undergo assessment. Point tenderness over the spinous process requires differentiation from paraspinal muscle hypertonicity. Muscle strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflex testing are indicated depending on the location of the patient's pain. If there is a concern for myelopathy, the patient will experience upper motor neuron symptoms such as spasticity, an ataxic gait, hyperreflexia, or a positive Babinsky sign on the exam. Special tests are also necessary if radiculopathy is suspected, such as the Spurling test and straight leg raise.