The muscles of the face and scalp are predominantly striated muscles under voluntary innervation. They serve crucial roles in facial expression, vision, language, and mastication. The majority of these muscles are innervated by the facial nerve, oculomotor nerve, or trigeminal nerve, while the hypoglossal nerve innervates the tongue. Small smooth muscles of the eye are under sympathetic or parasympathetic control for lens accommodation, aqueous humor production, and other functions.

**Oculomotor Nerve (CN III)**

The superior division of CN III innervates the superior rectus muscle and the striated muscle component of the levator palpebrae superiors muscle. The inferior division of CN III innervates the medial and inferior rectus muscles and the inferior oblique muscle.

**Trigeminal Nerve (CNV)**

The mandibular nerve (V3) of the trigeminal nerve innervates eight muscles, four of which are used in mastication. The masseter and temporalis muscles elevate the mandible during mastication, while the lateral pterygoid protrudes the mandible. The medial pterygoid allows for lateral movement of the mandible, rocking it from side to side.

Also innervated by V3 of CN V are the anterior belly of the digastric muscle, the mylohyoid muscles, the tensor tympani used to dampen sounds, and the tensor veli palatini, which tenses the soft palate.

**Facial Nerve (CN VII)**

The motor root of CN VII innervates the stylohyoid muscle, the posterior belly of the digastric muscles, and the following muscles of facial expression:

- Buccinator

- Corrugator supercilii

- Depressor anguli oris

- Frontalis (part of occipitofrontalis)

- Levator labii superioris alaque nasi

- Mentalis

- Orbicularis oculi

- Orbicularis oris

- Platysma

- Procerus

- Risorius

- Zygomaticus major

- Zygomaticus minor

**Glossopharyngeal Nerve (CN IX)**

The stylopharyngeus muscle, which raises and dilates the pharynx, is innervated by CN IX.

**Vagus Nerve (CN X)**

The pharyngeal plexus is derived from CN X and innervates the musculus uvulae, the levator veli palatini, and many other muscles of the soft palate. Also innervated by the pharyngeal plexus are the salpingopharyngeus muscle and the superior, middle, and inferior pharyngeal constrictors.

The cricothyroid muscle is innervated by the external laryngeal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve, which is a branch of CN X. The motor component of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is also a branch of CN X and supplies the following muscles: oblique and transverse arytenoids, lateral and posterior cricoarytenoids, the thyroarytenoids, and the vocalis muscles.

**Spinal Accessory Nerve (CN XI)**

The sternocleidomastoid and trapezius receive motor innervation from CN XI.

**Hypoglossal Nerve (CN XII)**

The hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) mainly innervates the intrinsic muscles of the tongue. Its motor component also innervates the hyoglossus, genioglossus, and styloglossus muscles. A branch of C1 travels with CN XII to innervate the geniohyoid muscle. Of note, the palatoglossus muscle, despite its action to elevate the tongue, is innervated by CN X.