The presence of a Baker’s Cyst may be associated with a sensation of tightness, discomfort, or pain behind the knee. Swelling may be more evident when the patient is standing with full extension at the knee.  Swelling tends to be reduced or disappear as the knee is flexed to 45 degrees (Foucher's sign occurs due to the relief of tension on the cyst).  Pain often worsens with increased activity and may inhibit full flexion or extension at the knee.

As a Baker's Cyst enlarges, it may compress surrounding vessels, resulting in lower extremity edema as a result of venous obstruction. If the cyst begins to enlarge into the calf muscle (i.e., dissecting cyst), this too can result in swelling, erythema, distal edema, and a positive Homan's sign - similar to what one might expect to see in a patient presenting with thrombophlebitis or a deep vein thrombosis (DVT).

A Baker’s Cyst may rupture if, due to rapid accumulation of fluid, pressure within the sac becomes too high. When the fluid is released into the surrounding tissues, it may result in inflammation that may then elicit symptoms similar to those that would be experienced with thrombophlebitis in the calf. Symptoms may include sharp pain in the knee and calf, swelling or erythema of the calf, and a sensation that feels like water running down the calf. In addition, thrombophlebitis rarely can result as a complication of a bulging or ruptured Baker’s Cyst.

Cyst rupture also may lead to additional complications and associated symptoms. These can include (1) entrapment of the posterior tibial nerve (eg., posterior plantar numbness and calf pain), (2) occlusion of the popliteal artery (e.g., lower extremity edema), and (3) anterior (e.g. foot drop and edema of the anterolateral leg) or posterior (e.g. plantar dysesthesia, weakness of toes, swelling of the calf, and pain worse with passive toe extension) compartment syndrome.