The process of protein targeting begins with the synthesis of proteins and ends with their delivery. Depending on where the protein is produced and where it needs to be delivered determines the method of transport. Three protein-coated vesicles have been described in intracellular transport: COPI, COPII, and clathrin.

Apart from playing roles in vesicle formation, these three proteins decide which protein and lipid cargo are sent in each package.trans-SNARE complex by combining SNAREs on the surfaces of the vesicle (v-SNARE) and target site (t-SNARE), the energy barrier posed by the lipid bilayers is overcome, and the trans-SNARE complex is converted to a cis-SNARE complex on the target membrane.

Membrane fusion is completed by the SNARE complex in a zipper-like fashion by zippering from the distal N-terminal to the proximal C-terminal region. Before the fusion, the vesicle's coat must be slightly restructured, and this may happen reversibly by phosphorylation and ubiquitylation, but this needs further exploration. The cis-SNARE complex binds to the alpha-SNAP (soluble NSF-attachment protein) and the NSF (N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion) protein to create a 20S complex. The ATPase of the NSF breaks down ATP. This breaks up the union of the v-SNARE and t-SNARE, allowing them to be used again for membrane fusion.

**COPI**

COPI-coated vesicles participate in retrograde transport (cis-Golgi/ERGIC to RER). It is suggested that they also play a role in anterograde transport from the RER. Additionally, they have also been found in the post-Golgi compartment.

The membrane-anchored and myristoylated ARF1 GTPase brings the COPI components to the Golgi upon activation from ARF-GEFs (guanine nucleotide exchange factors).****The loaded COPI vesicles proceed to the RER via signals from the cytoplasmic or endoplasmic located multisubunit DSL1 tethering complex and SNARE proteins (syntaxin-18, Sec20, Sec22B, and Slt1). Long coiled-coil tethers are also involved in tethering. While multisubunit tethering complexes control vesicle targeting to membranes over shorter distances, long coiled-coil tethers target membranes over longer distances.

Examples of multisubunit tethering complexes include DSL1, COG, GARP, HOPS, CORVET, EXOCYST, and TRAPP (transport protein particle). The DSL1 complex is comprised of Dsl1, Tip20, and Dsl3/Sec39. TRAPP I, TRAPP II, and TRAPP III collectively participate in anterograde cargo transport from the RER to Golgi and are also involved in autophagy. Examples of long coiled-coil tethers include p115, Giantin, CASP, GM130, Golgin-97, Golgin-245, GCC185, and EEA1. Giantin, GM130, and p115 are involved in transport from the RER to the Golgi.

COPI is also uniquely involved in endosomal and lipid droplet functioning, mRNA transport, and the nuclear envelope's breakdown. The final step of COPI vesicle formation is the disassembly of the COPI complex by the activity of ARF GAPs (GTPase activating proteins).

COPI proteins are also involved with intra-Golgi trafficking and maintaining the structural integrity of the mammalian Golgi complex interface. COPI-coated vesicles perform most of the trafficking from the Golgi to the RER. However, it may not be the sole protein involved in this path since delivery of specific cargo like Shiga toxin, Shiga-like toxin, or certain glycosylation enzymes still occurred after blocking the recycling of ERD2 receptors or the VTC (vesicular-tubular clusters) markers.****Liquid lipid cargo such as sphingomyelin and cholesterol are excluded from COPI-coated vesicles due to the ability of membrane lipids to affect the construction of vesicles at various stages.****This also explains why the RER has less sphingomyelin and cholesterol when compared to thecis-Golgi.

**COPII**

COPII-coated vesicles participate in anterograde transport (RER to the Golgi). COPII may also be active beyond the Golgi since COPII proteins, Sec23 and Sec24, have been found on endosomes.****Assembly of the COPII complex is initiated by the Sar1 signal and mediated by the Sec12/PREB guanine nucleotide exchange factor.

These vesicles are approximately 60-100 nm in size. In-vitro knockdown studies have shown that the ability of COPII to accommodate large cargo, such as procollagen fibrils composed of a triple-helix matrix extending up to 400 nm, is due to the action of the transmembrane protein TANGO1. Another hypothesis suggests that a portion of the ERGIC is recruited and combined with the ERES, creating tubular uncoated buds capable of carrying large cargo. RAB GTPases, tethering factors, and SNARE proteins mediate vesicular movement and fusion. In mammals, tethering events are coordinated by RAB1, GM130, GRASP65, p115, and the TRAPP1 complex. COPII vesicles are formed by the COPII coat-mediated deformation of the RER.****COPII directs misfolded proteins to degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

**Clathrin**

Clathrin-coated vesicles are essential for lysosome biogenesis, endocytosis, retrograde transport (endosome-to-TGN), and anterograde transport (TGN-to-endosomes).

Clathrin-coated vesicles contain high amounts of MPR (mannose-6-phosphate receptors). The TGN is almost entirely populated by clathrin-coated vesicles, with COPI vesicles also present to a lesser extent. Clathrin adaptor proteins can be either monomeric or tetrameric. Clathrin adaptor protein 1 (AP1), a heterotetrameric protein, functions to form vesicles at the TGN, sort lysosomal hydrolases, and retrieve cargo like SNAREs, MPRs, sortilin, and furin.

The externalized LDL (low-density lipoprotein) receptor takes LDL into the cell via clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Once LDL binds to its receptor, a clathrin-coated pit forms, which moves the LDL receptor-ligand complex intracellularly. Clathrin dissociates from these vesicles and then goes back to the plasma membrane for further use.