Selective B1 blocker drugs have a negative inotropic and chronotropic effect; they decrease the heart contractions and heart rate. As a net result, bisoprolol reduces the oxygen consumption of myocardial cells. B1 receptors are also present in the juxtaglomerular cells. By blocking these receptors, bisoprolol leads to a decrease in the release of renin; as a result, it blocks the activation of the renin-angiotensin system.

B1 adrenergic receptors are present in cardiac myocyte cells and juxtaglomerular cells. They couple with the G-stimulatory protein receptor (Gs receptor) and become stimulated by either norepinephrine or circulating catecholamine. Activation of B1 receptors in cardiac myocytes leads to positive chronotropic and inotropic effects; therefore, the net result will be increased heart rate, contraction, and the strength of myocyte contraction by activating Gs receptors (by the exchange of GTP to GDP). Eventually, it increases intracellular calcium concentration and promotes heart cell contraction.

Activation of B1 receptors on juxtaglomerular cells leads to the activation of the renin-angiotensin system. Renin's release, therefore, increases the production of angiotensin I, which is eventually converted by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) to angiotensin II.

B2 receptors occur in multiple organs of the body and are activated by epinephrine, leading to different manifestations according to the location involved. In peripheral vessels, it causes vasodilation and decreases peripheral resistance, opposing the effect of alpha-1 receptors, which cause vasoconstriction on the peripheral vessels. On the bronchioles, it leads to extensive bronchodilation. In addition, B2 receptor activation in the liver and the muscles activates glycogenolysis and increases glucagon release, increasing the blood sugar level.

Non-selective beta-blocker drugs block both the B1 receptor and B2 receptors, decreasing cardiac output and decreasing renin release from the kidney. And B2 receptor blockage leads to additional manifestations—vasoconstriction of the peripheral vessels. It causes bronchial muscles contraction in the lung, leading to bronchospasm in patients with COPD or asthma. It also leads to decrease glycogenolysis and glucagon release, which may lead to hypoglycemia.