Ultrasonography is a sophisticated imaging technology that utilizes high-frequency sound waves.

In early pregnancy, ultrasound's main use is to determine the presence of an intrauterine pregnancy. Additionally, ultrasound can be used to evaluate for the presence of an ectopic pregnancy (cornual, tubal, adnexal, cervical, abdominal, cesarean section ectopic), free fluid in the pelvis, uterine and adnexal pathology, fetal cardiac activity and heart rate, miscarriage, or gestational trophoblastic disease.

Two anatomical approaches are used to visualize a pregnancy using ultrasound; transvaginal and transabdominal. A transvaginal ultrasound is performed using a high-frequency endocavitary probe placed into the vagina and visualizing the pelvic organs through the cervix. In contrast, a transabdominal ultrasound uses a lower frequency sound wave that can also be used to visualize pelvic organs but does so by looking through the abdominal wall with a curvilinear probe. The difference in frequency, along with the probe's anatomical placement during the exam, results in the transvaginal approach being superior for visualizing a very earlier pregnancy as well as evaluating the adnexa.

Deciding which modality of ultrasound to use is multifaceted; anatomy, age, weight, and beta-HCG levels should be considered. This may also be limited by the setting (clinic, hospital, emergency dept, radiology suite, etc.) and equipment available. It is reasonable to start with a transabdominal ultrasound, as this is less invasive. A full bladder is ideal for performing this study, as this provides an acoustic window. If the transabdominal approach is indeterminate, the transvaginal approach can be used given its superior imaging for the reasons discussed above.

It is paramount that privacy is offered to the patient when using either form of ultrasonography. A drape should be placed to cover any external anatomy that does not need to be exposed to provide comfort and privacy to the patient.