Certain features indicate relapse or resistance to MM treatment in a patient who has been in remission. Clinical relapse with new or worse CRAB features requires immediate treatment or modification in the treatment plan. In 2016, the International Myeloma Work Group (IMWG) released an updated version of the perimeters to monitor the treatment response in MM patients.

Biochemical relapse with or without symptoms also warrants treatment. Therefore, diligent monitoring is essential to mitigate the progression of the disease. In patients achieving minimal residual disease status or complete response, information from whole-body imaging for identifying focal infiltration has proven beneficial for monitoring disease relapse. Whole-body diffusion-weighted MRI is preferred over PET/CT, but both imaging modalities are commonly used.

A comparison of the follow-up imaging with initial whole-body scans should be used to identify the progression of bony lesions. Sometimes the new fractures may be due to the earlier disease course rather than the disease progression. Minimal residual disease (MRD) assessment is recommended regularly as studies have shown improved response and overall survival in patients with MRD-negative status.

MRD assessment in the bone marrow involves multiparametric flow cytometry (MFC) and molecular methods like next-generation sequencing. Extra-medullary disease evaluation for the minimal residual disease is performed by fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET). However, the role of MRD status in treatment decision-making is still investigational, and MRD positivity might not mean a change in the treatment outside a clinical trial at this point.

International Myeloma Work Group recommends initiation/modification of treatment if the following perimeters are met:

**Clinical Relapse**

- Hypercalcemia (serum calcium ≥11.5mg/dL)

- Decrease in hemoglobin of ≥2g/dL

- Rise in serum creatinine by ≥2 mg/dL due to myeloma

- Hyperviscosity requiring therapeutic intervention (deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism)

- Definite increase ≥50% in the size of existing plasmacytoma or bone lesions

- Development of new soft-tissue plasmacytomas or bone lesions

**Biochemical Relapse in Patients Without Clinical Relapse**

- Doubling of M-component in 2 consecutive measurements separated by 2 months with the reference value of 5g/L, or

- In 2 consecutive measurements, any of the following increases:

- The absolute levels of serum M protein by ≥10g/L, or
- An increase of urine M protein by ≥500 mg/24 h, or
- An increase of involved serum-free light chain by ≥20 mg/dL or 25% increase (whichever is greater)