Polyethylene glycol 3350 is available as a powder for solution. The preparation is usually for oral intake. It is available in oral powder packets for single-use (total of 14, 30, and 100 packets in a box) or in a bottle with a measuring cup (119 g, 238 g, 510 g, 527 g, and 765 g container).

- For adult constipation, 17 g of PEG 3350 is mixed in 8 ounces of liquid and taken once daily. The fluid can include water, juice, tea, coffee, or soda. Preliminary data suggests that PEG interacts with starch-based thickeners compared to xanthan gum thickeners. If using starch-thickened liquids for the mixture, there could be a loss of viscosity; this is relevant for patients who require thickened liquids to prevent aspiration. In these cases, an alternative (xanthan gum-based) thickening agent or alternative laxative is the recommended therapy.

- In the adult population, PEG should not be used for more than two weeks as an over-the-counter medication unless instructed by a physician; if needed more chronically, it can be taken for up to 6 months.

- In preparation for a colonoscopy PEG is used to cleanse the bowel to help provide a clear image of the mucosa. PEG is administered by mixing 238 grams in 2 Liters (L) sports drinks on the day before the procedure. Guidelines also recommend doing split dosing when the colonoscopy is in the afternoon, administering 1 L on the day before the procedure, and 1 L on the day of the procedure.

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine. The systemic absorption of PEG is believed to be minimum. Therefore, it is less likely to cause any severe effect on neonates. The American Academy of Family Physicians has reported despite the lack of research on PEG use in pregnancy; it is considered the drug of choice for chronic constipation in pregnant women.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**There is no specific recommendation for breastfeeding women on the manufacturer label. As previously discussed, PEG has poor systemic absorption, so it should excrete at a low clinical significant level in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**In children greater than two years of age, the guidelines recommend that for fecal impaction, the dose is 1 to 1.5 g/kg/day for 3 to 6 days, with a maximum of 6 consecutive days.

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment.

- **Geriatric Patients:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for geriatric patients.