**Primary Hyperparathyroidism**

Primary hyperparathyroidism is a relatively common disorder, affecting approximately 2% of the population over 55 years of age.

**Secondary and Tertiary Hyperparathyroidism**

Unlike primary hyperparathyroidism, which is characterized by inappropriate secretion of PTH, secondary hyperparathyroidism occurs as an appropriate reaction to a stimulus that induces the secretion of PTH from the parathyroid glands. In secondary hyperparathyroidism, PTH is synthesized and secreted in response to chronically low serum calcium levels, which may result from malabsorption of calcium from the GI tract, vitamin D deficiency, renal insufficiency, or medications such as thiazide diuretics.

**Hypoparathyroidism**

Hypoparathyroidism is a disease characterized by a depressed PTH level that results in hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and increased calcium loss in the urine. It is usually caused by surgery or radiation to the neck, but can also be a product of certain genetic, autoimmune, or other diseases. On bloodwork, hypoparathyroidism appears as a low ionized or albumin-corrected calcium level along with an inappropriately low PTH level.

**Pseudohypoparathyroidism**

Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a group of disorders characterized by a defect in the Gs-alpha/cAMP/PKA second messenger pathway that is activated when PTH binds to its receptor, which results in resistance to PTH, which can lead to decreased production of active vitamin D, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia.

**Parathyroid Carcinoma**

Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare malignancy that causes primary hyperparathyroidism and most commonly occurs in middle-aged adults. Certain genetic syndromes such as MEN I and II, isolated familial hyperparathyroidism, and hyperparathyroidism jaw tumor syndrome may predispose individuals to develop parathyroid carcinoma. Other risk factors include a history of radiation to the neck and CRF, resulting in secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism.