The initiation of NPPV must occur after careful patient, ventilator, and interface selection. As successful implementation of NPPV is mainly dependent on patient cooperation, the goals, process, and complications of this procedure must be explained to the patient in detail before initiation. Following this, mask fitting is started, and the patient should be given time to acclimate to the mask before securing it. The ventilator is then connected to the mask and turned on with oxygen supplementation.

Initiation and titration of NPPV must be performed carefully with close monitoring by the clinician and nursing and respiratory therapy. Titration protocols often differ by institution and pathology. In addition, few titration protocols have been published in the literature. One such protocol for NPPV titration for OSA has been published in the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.

**Titration of NPPV in an Acute Setting**

Clinician experience shows that the titration of NPPV in the acute setting in the intensive care unit can be divided into three categories. The first category is for those patients who have simple airway conditions, such as obstructive sleep apnea, needing end-expiratory positive airway pressure, or CPAP alone. The titration of pressure in this situation requires overcoming the collapsing pressure of the upper airway, which can be estimated from the actual body weight. From our experience, using 10% of the actual bodyweight of the patient in kilograms would be the starting point of the EPAP or CPAP.

The second category is for those with hypercapnic or mixed respiratory failures, such as those with acute exacerbation of COPD and no upper airway obstruction (no obesity or suspicion of OSA). In this category of hypercapnic patients, clinicians can use EPAP of 5 cmH2O and add high-intensity pressure support of 10 to 15 cmH2O, which can be titrated based on response in reducing CO2 (measured by arterial blood gas).

A third category is when patients hospitalized with hypercapnic respiratory failure are associated with obesity or obstructive sleep apnea. This group of patients is the most challenging as they require careful adjustment for both inspiratory and expiratory pressures to prevent upper airway collapse while maintaining adequate ventilation. Therefore in this group of patients, one must combine the strategy used in the previous two categories of patients where clinicians can apply sufficient EPAP to overcome the collapsing upper airway pressure using the 10% rule of actual body weight (in kilograms) and add high-intensity pressure support between 10 to 15 cmH2O to provide adequate ventilation and titrate based on arterial blood gas.

Once pH is normalized, the pressure support can be weaned off slowly to allow a slight decrease in hypercapnia that can be managed in an outpatient setting. Patients with chronic respiratory failure suspected of having OHS should be discharged on NPPV until they undergo outpatient diagnostic polysomnography and laboratory PAP titration. In the meantime, the BPAP S/T mode can be used with empiric settings or auto-titrating NPPV such as VAPS with the auto-expiratory positive airway pressure (VAPS-AE), which can automatically adjust the EPAP to ensure adequate upper airway patency due to OSA.

When monitoring to ensure adequate response to NPPV in the acute setting, the clinician must consider the subjective and physiologic responses of the patient. Clinicians should use caution when asking patients about their respiratory status, as some patients will minimize or deny discomfort, thus confounding the clinical picture. Patients who are likely to succeed on NPPV in the acute setting will have a drop in their respiratory rate after 1 to 2 hours, a decrease in heart rate, and better ventilator synchrony.

A blood gas should be drawn one hour after initiation of BPAP as a decrease in PCO2 and increase in pH is predictive of NPPV success. In addition to the parameters above, tidal volume and air leak must be closely monitored as these can contribute to treatment failure if not corrected. The patient's hemodynamics, including blood pressure and heart rate, must also be closely monitored during treatment as intrathoracic pressure and right ventricular afterload will increase and right ventricular preload will decrease, consistent with prior studies which have demonstrated a reduction in cardiac output after initiation of NPPV.

**Titration of NPPV in a Chronic Setting**

1) COPD with chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure: NIV is used for patients with COPD and stable hypercapnia (CO2 ≥52 mmHg). Prospective randomized controlled trials have significantly improved survival and clinical outcomes (less exacerbation rate and better disease control).

2) Obesity hypoventilation syndrome: OHS is defined as a combination of obesity (body mass index >/=30 kg·m^-2), daytime hypercapnia (arterial CO2 >/= 45 mmHg), and diagnosis of OSA (apnea-hypopnea index ≥ five events/hour) after excluding other causes of alveolar hypoventilation. OHS and coexistent OSA treatment is CPAP; however, when CPAP is not tolerated or fails to correct ventilation (CO2 >/= 45mmHg), NPPV (BPAP S/T mode or VAPS) is recommended (see prescription parameters below).

3) Thoracic restrictive disorder (TRD) with hypercapnic respiratory failure: TRD is defined as ventilatory defects associated with elevated CO2 (≥45 mmHg) due to neuromuscular disorders (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spinal cord injury, muscular dystrophy, diaphragm paralysis, spina bifida, and congenital central hypoventilation syndrome), chest wall deformity, and other ventilatory drive defects without evidence of interstitial lung disease. The use of NPPV treatment in TRD is similar to other hypoventilation syndromes. It requires careful assessment of OSA and monitoring of CO2 and oxygenation while the patient is awake and sleeping after initiation of therapy. In this condition, BPAP S/T or VAPS should be considered without sleep testing.

The prescribing physician determines settings.

Settings: Primary Mode:

AVAPS-AE with Target Tidal Volume

VT (Tidal Volume- 8ml/kg): _____

Max Pressure: _____

PS Max (pressure support max): _____

PS Min (pressure support minimum): _____

EPAP Max: _____

EPAP Min: _____

Rate (if rate= “auto” then “N/A”): ____