NMBA act at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). The NMJ consists of three parts

- Presynaptic nerve terminal

- Synaptic cleft

- Postsynaptic nicotinic receptors

When an electric impulse transmits along the motor neuron, it causes the release of acetylcholine (ACh) from the presynaptic membrane which travels across the synaptic cleft and acts on the nicotinic receptors on the postsynaptic membrane, causing muscle contraction.

**Presynaptic Nerve Terminal**

The presynaptic nerve terminal consists of motor neurons originating from the ventral horn of the spinal cord. The motor neuron loses its myelin sheath as it embeds in the muscle tissue. Motor neuron secretes trophic and growth factors.

The presynaptic nerve terminal contains acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) which are on the surface of the nerve membrane. These are nicotinic receptors identified as neuronal AChR (nAChR).

Storage of ACh is in two primary forms:

- Vesicle in a reserve pool

- Readily releasable vesicles

ACh released from readily releasable vesicles triggers the activation of sodium channels at the pre-junctional nerve membrane. These actions trigger the activation of voltage-dependent calcium channel (P-type fast) with causes an inward movement of calcium into the cytoplasm of the motor neuron.

**The Synaptic Cleft**

The synaptic cleft is the space between the presynaptic and postsynaptic membrane which measures about 50 nm. Several biologically active substances interact in the synaptic cleft to promote and enhance the transmission of nerve impulses. These substances include acetylcholine esterase (AChE), lipoprotein receptor protein 4, (Lrp4), and agrin.

The post-synaptic membrane basal lamina also contains proteins that help cell adhesion and aid neuromuscular signaling.

In the synaptic cleft agrin, a glycoprotein binds lipoprotein receptor protein 4 which activates muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK) that helps in the differentiation of acetylcholine receptors.

The postsynaptic membrane

This membrane is made up of multiple shoulders with a high concentration of ACh receptors (AChR). The clefts in this membrane contain voltage-gated sodium channels. Because the post-synaptic membrane contains a high concentration of receptors for ACh, this enables the neurotransmitter to elicit enough depolarization to stimulate the contraction of the muscle. The high density is of AChR is possible because of anchoring to rapsyn and other vital muscular proteins.

AChR receptors exist in two forms

**Adult/mature Junctional Receptors**are pentametric proteins with five subunits. They have high conductivity and remain open for a short period and have a half-life of approximately 14 days.

**Immature/fetal Junctional Receptors**are found mainly in fetuses but can proliferate in certain conditions like sepsis, burn, and upper and lower motor neuron diseases. The protein structure is pentameric, and they appear within 18 –24 hours of injury. The half-life of these receptors is short 24 hours. The receptors are resistant to the action of non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents but are sensitive to succinylcholine. Stimulation of these receptors can cause efflux of potassium leading to hyperkalemia.

There are two types of NMBA:

- Depolarizing

- Non-Depolarizing

**Depolarizing NMBA**

The depolarizing NMBA acts on the receptors at the motor endplate of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ), causing depolarizing of the membrane. This action makes the motor endplate refractory to the action of ACh. An example of depolarizing NMBA is succinylcholine. Succinylcholine or suxamethonium has a quick onset of action and rapidly metabolizes via the enzymatic action of plasma butyrylcholinesterase. The continued disruption of the effect of ACh causes muscular fasciculation and twitching. The onset of action is about 1 minute, and the duration is about 6 minutes.

**Non-Depolarizing NMBA**

The non-depolarizing NMDA works by a different mechanism. When administered, instead of causing depolarization of the motor plate at the NMJ, they block acetylcholine from binding to the motor plate at the NMJ, an action achieved by competing for the binding site on the alpha subunit of the nicotinic receptors. As the concentration of non-depolarizing NMBA builds up at the junction, relative to ACh, it establishes a neuromuscular blockade.

There are two major structural classes of non-depolarizing NMBA.

**Amino Steroids**

- Vecuronium

- Pancuronium

- Rocuronium

- Benzylisoquinolinium

- Mivacurium

- Atracurium

- Cis–atracurium

A third class is more recent:

**Mixed-onium**chlorofumarate (i.e., gantacurium)

Based on the duration of action NMBD are classified as

- Short-acting

- Intermediate-acting

- Long-acting

Short-acting NMDA includes mivacurium and succinylcholine

Intermediate-acting NMDA include vecuronium, rocuronium, and atracurium

Long-acting NMDA–pancuronium, gallamine, and tubocurarine