# Introduction

The tear film covers the ocular surface and is essential for protecting the eye from the environment, lubricating the ocular surface, maintaining a smooth surface for light refraction, and preserving the health of the conjunctiva and the avascular cornea. The tear film is approximately 3 to 10 μL in volume, 3 μm thick, and secreted at a rate of 1 to 2 μL/min.

There are three different types of tears, each with unique biochemistries. Basal tears are typically present on the ocular surface, providing nutrients to the ocular surface, maintaining ocular comfort, and ridding the surface of debris. Reflex tears are those released in response to irritants, including chemicals and foreign bodies. Reflex tears are produced in higher quantities than basal tears and are involved in flushing the ocular surface of irritants. Closed eye tears are those lubricating the eyes during sleep. Some components of the tear film, such as lactoferrin, lipocalin-1, and lysozyme, remain relatively constant between different types of tears.

# Fundamentals

The tear film is heterogeneous and is classically divided into three distinct layers – inner mucin, middle aqueous, and outer lipid layer. Though more practically, there is overlap and mixing between layers. The vast majority of the tear film is an aqueous phase containing various mucin concentrations depending on the layer and a thin superficial lipid layer 50-100 nm in thickness.

The inner layer is formed by mucins secreted mostly by the goblet cells in the conjunctival epithelium, and to a lesser extent, by the acinar cells of the lacrimal gland, epithelial cells in the cornea and conjunctiva.

The aqueous layer is essential for maintaining lubrication and protection of the ocular surface. It contains proteins, metabolites, inorganic salts, glucose, oxygen, and electrolytes (magnesium, bicarbonate, calcium, urea) essential for maintaining the health of the ocular surface as well as flushing away debris and toxins.

The lipid layer exists at the environmental-tear interface and essential for delaying the rate of tear evaporation. This superficial lipid layer contains cholesterol, wax esters, fatty acids, and phospholipids. Over 600 unique lipids from 17 different lipid classes have been identified in tears.

# Molecular Level

The cornea contains abundant tight junctions to prevent transcellular permeability, allowing the transparent and avascular structure to maintain its cellular architecture and prevent angiogenesis, inflammation, and cellular infiltration.

Numerous cells are involved in maintaining tear film homeostasis and responding to perturbances. For example, as stated previously, mucins are produced by the acinar cells of the lacrimal gland, epithelial cells in the cornea and conjunctiva, and goblet cells in the conjunctiva.

The majority of proteins found in the tear film are synthesized and secreted locally by the lacrimal gland; however, some protein components may leak into the tear fluid from systemic circulation.

# Function

Functions of the tear film include providing lubrication to the ocular surface and eyelid, antimicrobial defense, providing a smooth ocular surface for refraction, and supplying oxygen and nutrition to the avascular corneal epithelium.

The tear film forms a protective barrier between the ocular surface and the external environment, and it contains antimicrobial properties. Key antimicrobial factors found in the tear film include lysozyme, lactoferrin, transferrin, ceruloplasmin, IgA, IgG, IgE, complement, glycoprotein, and anti-proteinase, which are found in the aqueous layer of the tear film.

Lysozyme is bacteriolytic, hydrolyzing bacterial peptidoglycan cell walls. It is highest in concentration in tears compared to other bodily fluids.

Mucins and glycoproteins secreted by goblet cells also play a role in ocular defense by having decoy receptors for bacteria, thus preventing attachment to ocular tissue, as well as entrapping bacteria or foreign bodies.

# Mechanism

Sensory innervation plays a key role in regulating tear production. Trigeminal nerve (V1) afferent neurons in the cornea and eyelids receive sensory inputs in response to temperature changes and noxious stimuli through mechanoreceptors, polymodal receptors, and cold receptors. In response, they activate autonomic and somatic reflexes, which include increased tear production and blinking.

The lacrimal and meibomian glands, responsible for producing the aqueous and lipid layer of the tear film, respectively, receive both sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation. Together, they form a neuronal circuit that regulates tear secretion. Parasympathetic activation in response to pain, irritation, and cold leads to increased aqueous and mucin production and tear production. Sympathetic inputs lead to increased secretion from conjunctival epithelial cells.

# Testing

Tear break-up time (TBUT) is a measurement used to assess the stability of the tear film, conducted under slit-lamp examination after instilling fluorescein. A decreased TBUT (defined as <10 seconds) is considered abnormal and often seen in evaporative dry eye disease.

Tear osmolarity can be used as an indicator for tear film stability. Osmolarity ranges between 300 to 310 mOsm/kg in normal eyes and can reach 360 mOsm/kg in dry eye disease.

Ocular surface staining with fluorescein, lissamine green, and rose bengal can be used to visualize defects in the corneal surface and degenerated and dead cells. The volume of tears can be evaluated using Schirmer’s test, which measures tear production over time. In Schirmer’s test, a strip is placed inside the lower eyelid, and the amount of wetting from tears is measured. Examination of the tear meniscus is another method to assess the tear volume. Measurement of inflammatory biomarkers (such as matrix metalloproteinases, lysozyme, and lactoferrin) can assess the degree of ocular inflammation and abnormalities in the tear film.

# Clinical Significance

Abnormalities in tear film biomarkers can reflect prolonged metabolic disarray or disease states both in ocular surface and systemic disease. However, dysregulation of tear components can also be observed following ocular surgery, infection, and the use of contact lenses. Abnormal concentrations of proteins and inflammatory mediators in the tear film have been observed in glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, meibomian gland disease, pterygium, keratoconus, autoimmune thyroid eye disease, diabetes, and even systemic cancer.

Studies have shown an increase in proinflammatory cytokines in dry eye syndrome, including IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha.

Studies have shown an increase in proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, TNF-α in tears of patients undergoing glaucoma treatment.

Tear film abnormalities are observed in ocular graft-versus-host disease following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, characterized by severe dry eye and ocular surface disease. The tear film in these patients and most patients with dry eyes show elevated levels of IL-2, IL-10, IL17α, INF-g, TNF-α, and IL-6.

Proinflammatory mediators are also increased in the tear film in corneal neovascularization (CNV). CNV is the formation of new vascular structures on the cornea and can cause corneal opacification and vision loss. In adults, studies have shown the tear film of individuals with CNV has higher levels of proangiogenic factors IL-6, IL-8, and VEGF compared to controls without CNV.

While only a few disease states and their associated tear film have been included here, other ocular surface and systemic diseases have been similarly characterized. Further characterization of the tear film in various diseases can identify disease-specific biomarkers to elucidate disease etiology, pathogenesis, and novel treatment targets.