Usually, a careful history and physical examination are sufficient to diagnose telogen effluvium. Biopsy, if taken during the acute shedding phase (when the pull test is positive), can confirm an increase in the percentage of telogen hairs. If there is a concern for a hormonal condition (such as hypothyroidism), a chronic metabolic illness, or iron deficiency, testing for these conditions is indicated.

**Laboratory Testing**

Chronic telogen effluvium sometimes has a metabolic cause.

- Hypothyroidism

- If symptoms of hypothyroidism are present, a thyrotropin test is warranted

**Iron Deficiency**

- Iron deficiency should be evaluated with a complete blood count, serum iron, iron saturation, and ferritin.

- Blood is more important to survival than hair, so the body will shed hair before red cell indices become microcytic.

- Ferritin behaves as an acute-phase reactant, and inflammation can result in normal ferritin levels in an individual who is iron deficient.

- Low ferritin confirms iron deficiency; a normal ferritin level does not exclude iron deficiency.

- Iron saturation is the most sensitive indicator of iron deficiency.

**Syphilis**

- If syphilis is considered a cause, a rapid plasma reagin or VDRL test should be performed.

**Biopsy**

- Scalp biopsy is the most useful test to confirm the diagnosis, but it is seldom necessary if gentle hair pull produces numerous telogen hair.

- Telogen hair can be identified by a white bulb and no gelatinous hair sheath.

- If a patient is unwilling to allow a scalp biopsy, serial hair collections can be obtained.

- The patient should be instructed to collect all shedding hair in a 24-hour period. The patient should avoid washing the hair during the collection. This process should be repeated every week for a total of three or four collections.

- Collecting 100 hairs or more hairs in a 24-hour period suggests telogen effluvium. If the collections are performed over several weeks while the telogen effluvium is improving, the number of hairs collected may decrease.