There are three PAF features that the PAF receptor recognizes: ether bond at sn-1, short residue at sn-2, and phosphocholine head group at sn-3. There is a polyunsaturated arachidonoyl residue on the sn-2 position in a precursor molecule of PAF, phosphatidylcholine. It is replaced by alkyl residue during the controlled synthesis of PAF. However, if there is uncontrolled oxidation of this alkyl residue at the sn-2 position, an oxidized phospholipid is generated, and it can act as a potent ligand and agonist of the PAF receptor. These phospholipids are called “PAF-like lipids.”

Any alteration in the structure of PAF significantly reduces its binding to the PAF receptor. If two carbons elongate the acetyl group at the sn-2, the activity of PAF decreases by a factor of 10-100-fold. Any further elongation results in loss of function unless the alkyl group is oxidized. The PAF receptor can accept oxidized PAF even if it has an elongated alkyl group at sn-2 residue. In vivo, uncontrolled free-radical reactions generate large amounts of PAF-like oxidized phospholipids, especially if the injury is prolonged and vigorous.

LDL particles contain an abundance of PAF-like lipids. These PAF analogs are not synthesized by remodeling or de novo pathways because they have 4-carbon butanoyl residues at sn-2 instead of the acetyl residue found in PAF. Therefore, PAF-like activity by these lipids is due to oxidation. Oxidation of LDL is a well-known trigger for atherosclerosis cascade, and PAF-like biologic activity by the oxidized lipid plays a key role in its pathophysiology.

Isoprostanes are the products of oxidized arachidonate and are currently the best marker of oxidative processes. They are increased in some disease states and can be increased even further by the oxidative stress of cigarette smoking.