**Skills**

Adolescents with muscular dystrophy need an interprofessional plan of care, including consideration to heart and breathing difficulties, weight loss/gain, constipation, rehabilitative/developmental difficulties, psychosocial requirements, and neurologic and orthopedic problems.

**Strategy**

A regulated method for gathering and communicating data helps to support overall performance across programs, sites, and organizations.

**Ethics and****Responsibilities**

Primary care providers may serve as the arbiter of treatment for the various aspects of the disease as well as other problems. Therefore, all other team members now have one centralized point of contact to align with when making decisions on supportive and assistive measures. This point is important because proper implementation and monitoring is a crucial component of management.

**Interprofessional****Communication**

Another crucial aspect to the management of patients with muscular dystrophy, especially for those with chronic, progressive, and severe forms, relates to patients' need to be informed about research efforts for "their" disease. Because of Internet access and lay support groups, patients today are more familiarized with their disease than ever before. They want to know about current research and relevant ongoing clinical trials, the role of alternative therapies, and other issues and questions.

All members of the healthcare team must therefore always be ready to provide solid information about a patient's condition by keeping up with fellow team members about what each member's profession can offer in terms of information. This approach facilitates communication that centers around the patient and less around the disease of a given patient and may involve something as simple as providing patients with information on support groups or informative websites. Patients should be encouraged to participate as much as deemed feasible and practical. It is crucial to help patients and their families shift out of a passive mindset and realize that they have a role in their treatment too.

**Care Coordination**

Effective management will require an interprofessional approach that includes a diverse team of health care professionals.: Strength team members are those aimed at improving strength (e.g., prednisone, stretching). Supportive team members are those who focus on the problems resulting directly from muscle weakness such as respiratory distress. Symptomatic team members are those whose aim is to treat issues that are not directly related to muscle disease but are part of the condition. Examples include cardiac arrhythmias in myotonic dystrophy; and psychological team members whose goal is to improve the patient's mental outlook and provide up to date information about their diseases. An interprofessional team member approach offers a useful conceptual framework and allows for proper delegation of responsibilities.