The median nerve is a terminal branch of the brachial plexus, formed by the medial (C5, C6) and lateral cords (C8, T1). It branches from the brachial plexus at the axilla and courses through the upper arm along with the brachial artery, between brachialis and biceps brachii distally. Proximal to the elbow, the median nerve is located lateral to the brachial artery, and at the level of the elbow, the nerve is located medial to the artery.

Coursing distally, the median nerve enters the forearm between the biceps and pronator teres.   In the proximal forearm, the nerve gives off the anterior interosseous nerve (AIN) branch, the terminal motor branch of the median nerve.   AIN and the median nerve continuation both course deep to flexor digitorum superficialis and superficial to flexor digitorum profundus. The median nerve emerges in the distal forearm between FPL and FDS before transitioning to the wrist and hand via the carpal tunnel.

The median nerve travels in the carpal tunnel along with the FDS, FDP, and FPL tendons.  The boundaries of the carpal tunnel include the transverse carpal ligament (the roof), the scaphoid tubercle and trapezium (radial border), the hook of hamate, and pisiform (ulnar border), and the proximal row of carpal bones (the floor).  In the tunnel, the median nerve is medial/ulnar to the tendons of FDS and FD.   The nerve can be blocked at any point in the arm or forearm. However, its location in the forearm is quite superficial, and it is no longer adjacent to the brachial artery which makes inadvertent vascular puncture or injection less likely.

Carpal tunnel blocks are often performed, but studies have noted the wide range of anatomic variations and heterogeneous outcomes and success of blockade in the carpal tunnel.  A 2015 study proposed a novel technique utilizing wrist width to aid in injection accuracy at the wrist.