The treatment strategy for cervical spondylosis depends on the severity of a patient’s signs and symptoms. In the absence of “red flag” symptoms or significant myelopathy, the goals of treatment are to relieve pain, improve functional ability in day-to-day activities, and prevent permanent injury to neural structures. Symptomatic cervical spondylosis should be approached in a stepwise fashion, starting with non-operative management.

**Non-surgical**

The mainstay of non-surgical treatment is a four- to six-week course of physical therapy, including isometric and resistance exercises to strengthen the neck and upper back muscles.

Pharmacologic agents, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), oral steroids, muscle relaxants, anticonvulsants, and antidepressants can be prescribed for pain relief. Therapy can be escalated to opioid analgesics for refractory axial neck pain but is not recommended as first-line or for long-term use due to their potential adverse effects.

Durable medical equipment can be a consideration for symptomatic relief. Short-term use of a soft cervical collar can sometimes alleviate acute neck pain and spasm. Nighttime use of a cervical pillow may relieve neck pain by helping to maintain the normal cervical lordosis, which would improve the distribution of biomechanical loads between discs, thereby promoting better sleep quality.

In a 2001 meta-analysis by the Philadelphia Panel, physical modalities such as cervical traction, heat, cold, therapeutic ultrasound, massage, and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator (TENS) lacked sufficient evidence regarding their efficacy in the treatment of acute or chronic neck pain.

Trigger point injections can be employed to treat myofascial trigger points, which can clinically manifest as neck, shoulder, and upper arm pain. More invasive interventional treatment options include epidural steroid injections (ESIs), zygapophysial (facet) joint injections, medial branch blocks, and radiofrequency lesioning (RFL). In a 2019 systematic review and meta-analysis by Conger et al., approximately half of the patients with cervical radicular pain experienced at least 50% pain reduction at one and three-month follow-ups after cervical transforaminal ESIs.

**Surgical**

Surgical intervention should be considered in patients with severe or progressive cervical myelopathy, as well as those with persistent axial neck pain or cervical radiculopathy following failure of non-operative measures. These affected individuals must also have a pathological condition demonstrated on neuroimaging studies that correspond to their clinical features. The surgical approach depends on the clinical syndrome and the site(s) of pathology.

The anterior approach involves a cervical discectomy or corpectomy followed by fusion with autograft, allograft, or artificial intervertebral disc. Anterior plates, metallic cages, and synthetic spacers can be used in conjunction with bone grafts and have resulted in comparable fusion rates, however, the long-term outcomes are still unclear. In patients who experience radicular pain due to central or bilateral disc herniation, an anterior approach is preferable, whereas either an anterior or posterior approach is an option for a lateral disc lesion. Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) are used to treat patients with myelopathy and pathological compression up to three levels or when cervical lordosis is lost.

The posterior approach consists of partial discectomy, laminotomy-foraminotomy, laminoplasty, and laminectomy. Foraminotomy alone is adequate in patients with foraminal stenosis due to bone spur formation and/or lateral disc herniation. Laminectomy or laminoplasty is a clinical option in patients requiring decompression at four or more levels or whose anterior column is already fused. A preserved cervical lordosis is critical for a posterior approach as it allows the spinal cord to shift dorsally following decompression. Patients with flexible cervical kyphosis will require additional cervical posterior instrumentation to help restore normal lordosis and maximize the posterior shift of the spinal cord.