In the fully developed human body, each kidney contains one renal vein and one renal artery.

Unlike the renal arterial system, the renal venous system has what anatomists refer to as a “free anastomosis” system in place. This system allows venous blood within the kidney to communicate and freely flow throughout all the segments of the kidney, allowing branches of the renal venous system to be severed or ligated without severely compromising the venous drainage of the renal parenchyma; this arrangement circumvents destruction of the renal tissue with the loss of minor branches of the renal venous system following injury.

The right renal vein is distinctly unlike the left renal vein. It begins anteriorly to the renal artery in the hilum of the kidney and courses medially toward the lateral aspect of the inferior vena cava. The right renal vein is typically about 2 to 2.5 cm in length and courses in an anterior-superior direction until it reaches the inferior vena cava. The right renal vein most commonly does not have extrarenal vessels join its course before it enters the inferior vena cava, unlike the left renal vein.

The left renal vein is typically 8.5 cm in length on average. It passes transversely toward the medial aspect of the inferior vena cava. Its course from the hilum of the left kidney to the inferior vena cava includes passing anteriorly to the aorta and inferiorly to the superior mesenteric artery close to each respective vessel. This anatomic relationship has important clinical implications, including whether or not the left or right kidney is preferable for transplantation. Owing to the longer length of the renal vein, it is commonly suggested that the left kidney be taken for transplant over the right kidney.