**Clinical Manifestations**

Signs and symptoms of CLD can be nonspecific, such as fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, or depend upon the complication that the patient has developed. The three significant complications are because of portal hypertension (esophageal varices, ascites), hepatocellular insufficiency (e.g., jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy), and hepatocellular carcinoma. Decompensated chronic liver disease can present with one of the following complications.

**Portal Hypertension**

Portal hypertension is a result of resistance to portal blood flow because of cirrhotic and noncirrhotic etiology. A portal venous pressure above seven mmHg is considered portal hypertension; however, clinical features or complications do not develop until portal pressure is higher than 12 mmHg. Portal hypertension causes can divide into prehepatic (e.g., portal vein thrombosis), hepatic (e.g., cirrhosis), and post hepatic (e.g., Budd Chiari syndrome). Cirrhosis and hepatic schistosomiasis remain the most common cause of portal hypertension, with cirrhosis being more common in developed countries. The following are the consequences of long-standing portal hypertension.

- Esophageal varices: It presents with melena or upper GI bleed. Cirrhosis of the liver leads to raised portal pressure, which can cause esophageal or gastric varices. Esophageal variceal bleeding is the most common life-threatening complication of CLD.

- Caput medusae

- Rectal hemorrhoids

- Ascites: It is an accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity because of raised portal pressure (increased hydrostatic pressure), decreased albumin (reduced oncotic pressure), and splanchnic vasodilation (due to the release of nitric oxide). Most of the patients develop ascites in the later stages of cirrhosis. Clinical findings in such patients are abdominal distension, shifting dullness, and a fluid wave. Tense ascites can lead to shortness of breath or early satiety.

**Hepatocellular Insufficiency**

**Hepatic Encephalopathy**

This is a neuropsychiatric syndrome caused by hepatic dysfunction. Detoxification of harmful products of metabolism, e.g., ammonia, occurs in the liver. In a patient with cirrhosis, the removal of these substances from the body is impaired, leading to an increased level of ammonia. Raised levels of ammonia can impair consciousness. Almost 50% of patients with DCLD can develop hepatic encephalopathy.

According to AASLD guidelines, depending upon the severity of the disease, there are different grades of hepatic encephalopathy.

- **Grade 0/Minimal**: Subclinical, normal mental status with minimal changes in memory, coordination, intellectual function, concentration.

- **Grade 1:**Trivial lack of awareness, euphoria or anxiety, shortened attention span, impairment of addition or subtraction, altered sleep rhythm.

- **Grade 2:**Lethargy or apathy, disorientation to time, personality change, inappropriate behavior, dyspraxia, asterixis.

- **Grade 3:**Somnolence to semi-stupor, responsive to stimuli, confused, gross disorientation, bizarre behavior.

- **Grade 4:**Coma

The patient can present in any of these symptoms. Most of the patients with hepatic encephalopathy present with altered sensorium. Infections, GI bleed, hyperkalemia, TIPS

**Jaundice**

Jaundice is a yellowish discoloration of the eyes, skin, and mucous membrane because of overproduction or under clearance of bilirubin. Metabolism of hemoglobin or myoglobin produces bilirubin in the spleen. Bilirubin then circulates in the body, bound to albumin. The liver dissociates this complex and converts unconjugated bilirubin to conjugated bilirubin. Jaundice is clinically visible when total bilirubin is greater than 2 mg/dl. As in chronic liver disease, there is the destruction of liver parenchyma, and it does not conjugate bilirubin, which deposits in various tissues of the body. There is pruritus because of the accumulation of bile salts.

**Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis (SBP)**

It is one of the acute and painful complications of chronic liver disease. Bacteria (E. coli, Klebsiella, Streptococcus pneumonia) seep through the gastrointestinal tract and infect the ascitic fluid. The infection spread through the fluid to the peritoneal membrane, causing inflammation. SBP presents with fever, generalized abdominal pain, tenderness, and absent bowel sounds.

**Hyperestrinism**

In chronic liver disease, the catabolism of estrogen becomes impaired, resulting in excess estrogen in the body. This manifests as palmar erythema, spider angiomas (dilated cutaneous arterioles with a central red spot and red extensions that radiate outward like a spider's web in the territory of SVC), gynecomastia (enlarged tender subareolar tissue), and testicular atrophy.

**Hepatorenal Syndrome (HRS)**

Hepatorenal syndrome is a functional renal failure as kidneys are normal, where there is a gradual loss of renal function. It is a diagnosis of exclusion. Vasoconstrictors are released in CLD, which is responsible for the narrowing of renal vessels. The following criteria have been described:

- Chronic liver disease with portal hypertension or advanced liver failure

- Continuous rising in creatinine, usually more than 0.3 mg/dl within 48 hours or doubling from baseline within seven days.

- Oliguria with the absence  or minimal proteinuria

- Urine sodium less than 10 meq/L

- Failure to improve with volume expansion and stopping the diuretics.

- Absence of shock

- No recent use of the nephrotoxic drug

- Absence of renal parenchymal disease

**Coagulopathy**

The liver produces clotting factors, so the patients with CLD have coagulopathies and manifest or contribute to easy bruising and bleeding per gastrointestinal tracts. Hence, PT/INR (intrinsic pathway) and APTT (extrinsic pathways) are prolonged.