The following are the potential adverse effects of zonisamide:

**Common**

- Dizziness, somnolence, anorexia, ataxia, fatigue, abnormal thinking, and confusion are common side effects of zonisamide use.

- Zonisamide can cause mild to moderate weight loss. Obese patients or those who experienced weight gain associated with using other antiepileptic drugs may benefit from the addition of zonisamide to their regimen.

**Rare**

- Renal calculi are more common in individuals who have been taking zonisamide for at least six months, have a family history of nephrolithiasis, or are also taking other antiepileptic drugs. Zonisamide is not contraindicated in patients with a history of kidney stones, but care is necessary with patients taking zonisamide, and they should maintain adequate hydration to maintain good urine flow.

- Allergic reactions are rare but have been reported. A rash is the predominant allergic-type reaction reported. Zonisamide is chemically related to sulfonamide drugs; caution should be taken when using zonisamide in patients with prior allergic reactions to sulfa agents.

- Mild, relative neutropenia has been observed in some individuals.

- Oligohidrosis can occur, causing decreased sweating and hyperthermia. This has been reported more in children. Children on zonisamide should not be exposed to extreme heat for prolonged periods.

- Zonisamide can produce metabolic acidosis as it has carbonic anhydrase inhibitor activity. Serum bicarbonate should be checked before starting treatment and regularly thereafter, especially in individuals with impaired pulmonary or renal function.

- Zonisamide may alter cognition and behavior in some individuals. The true incidence of these adverse effects is unknown. Most of the reports of cognitive or behavioral problems have been in patients taking multiple antiepileptic drugs.

- Limited data are available on the teratogenic effects of zonisamide. Reports conclude that zonisamide is associated with no greater risk of teratogenicity than other antiepileptic drugs.