**Allergic rhinitis**

The treatment of allergic rhinitis consists of environmental measure to prevent allergen exposure, drugs, and desensitization. As an allergic disease, the prophylactic treatment by avoidance of allergens is the most potent means of treatment. However, avoidance is not always possible because of that drugs are needed to control symptoms or the use of desensitization.

Environmental measures include the avoidance of an allergen by a clinical history of allergy and not because of a positive skin test or RAST alone. The environmental control covers the removal of household pets, cleaning of house dust by frequent cleaning, avoidance of toys and other objects. The use of air-cleaning devices may be helpful. Prevention of pollen and outdoor mold growth is necessary.

Antihistamines are the most regularly used drugs in allergy rhinitis and should be administered with care for the avoidance of side effects although new nonsedating antihistamines are available that restrain most common side effects. Orally administered nasal decongestants may be helpful in combination with antihistamines. For treating allergic conjunctivitis antihistaminic eyes, drops are critical. The treatment with cromolyn by nasal spray four times daily is beneficial and free of immediate or long-term toxicity. Systemic corticosteroids are remarkably effective in reducing symptoms of allergic rhinitis, but since it is a chronic and benign condition should be used with much care. Desensitization (allergen injection therapy) should be given to patients whose symptoms are uncontrolled despite appropriate previous therapeutic measures.

**Allergic asthma**

It is a manifestation of atopy localized in the bronchus. There is a release of critical mediators including histamine, leukotrienes, and cytokines including IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, TNF and eosinophil chemotactic factor. The aim of symptomatic asthma is controlling the hyperirritable bronchial mucosa using environmental measures, drugs, and other therapies.

The drug treatment of bronchial asthma includes environmental control as referred to in atopic rhinitis. The drug treatment includes the use of sympathomimetic beta-adrenergic bronchodilators drugs, which are useful and use in acute attack or for long term management. Epinephrine can be successfully given in a dose of 0.2-0.5 mL subcutaneously. Albuterol, metaproterenol, pirbuterol, and isoetharine are selective beta-adrenergic bronchodilators dosed via inhalation in the aerosol. Theophylline is a potent bronchodilator when used in combination with sympathomimetic medication. Intravenous theophylline can be used in a dosage of 250 to 500 mg and administered swiftly in an acute asthmatic attack. Glucocorticoids are remarkably successful in the treatment of allergic asthma. Although their effectiveness should be used in asthma only when other therapeutic options have failed. A dose of 30 to 60 mg of prednisone daily is usually enough.

Cromolyn sodium (20 mg) can be given in a metered-dose inhaler and for long-term prophylactic therapy. It never reverses an acute attack. Antibiotics are an option in allergic asthma if secondary bacterial bronchitis or bronchopneumonia occurs. Hydration and expectorants are effective for thick sputum. The effectiveness of desensitization in allergic asthma works well as in allergic rhinitis. An example of it is injection treatment in pollen hay fever. Antileukotrienes such as montelukast and zafirlukast can be administered in allergic asthma and atopic rhinitis.

**Atopic dermatitis**

Atopic dermatitis presents as a chronic skin disease requiring proper skin care, environmental control, drugs and avoidance of the allergen. The most preventive measure is the use of nonirritating topical lubricants for skin itching. Topical steroids are effective when skin involvement is less severe, but in systemic eczema, systemic corticosteroids are necessary, often initiating with a high dosage and then tapering until achieving a therapeutic effect. Oral antihistamines help to control the itching. Patients should not engage in frequent bathing, or use irritating fabrics, and harsh detergents. If infection occurs, an appropriate antibiotic is necessary.

**Food allergy**

The treatment of a food allergy consists of a strict elimination of offending allergen. Having an emergency care plan and a written anaphylaxis action plan is of utmost importance. A form of self-injectable epinephrine and a medical alert bracelet is critical to signal healthcare professionals of what is going on. The most common food allergens in children are cow's milk, soy wheat, egg, and peanut that account for 91% of reactions. In adults, the most common allergens are fish, shellfish, peanuts, tree nuts, eggs, fruits, and vegetable.