Dermoscopy may result in confirmation of clinical diagnosis, often avoiding the need for a skin biopsy. Although a skin biopsy and clinicopathological correlation (CPC) remain the gold standard for cutaneous diagnosis, dermoscopy often helps tilt the clinical differential in instances where it identifies a distinct pattern. Its use has been most popular for differentiation between melanocytic nevi and melanomas in the West. However, the indications of dermoscopy are continually expanding and include an evaluation of hair disorders, general pigmentary disorders, appendageal tumors, inflammatory disorders like psoriasis and lichen planus, and for pre- and post-evaluation of therapeutic procedures. In the current scheme of things, we are gradually moving from CPC to clinico-dermoscopic-pathological correlation (CDPC).

Dermoscopic patterns (mainly based on pigment and vascular patterns) for conditions like melanoma and NMSCs have been well established, leading to the development of dermoscopic algorithms for early diagnosis and triage.

**Uses of dermoscopy beyond diagnosis**

The dermatoscope is an immensely versatile tool, with many more uses beyond diagnosis.

**Disease activity evaluation:**Dermoscopy can confidently predict disease activity, e.g., active alopecia areata (AA) shows black dots, 'exclamation-mark' hairs, broken hairs, yellow dots and clustered short vellus hairs, whereas, in a treatment-responsive patch of AA, black dots tend to disappear, pig-tail, and upright regrowing hairs appear and yellow dots persist.****are suggestive of disease activity. Forf rontal fibrosing alopecia (FFA), presence of background erythema is suggestive of disease activity

**Early comparison of pre- and post-treatment:**Appreciation of the post-treatment effect often precedes clinical improvement; this is especially true of chronic relapsing, recalcitrant dermatoses like melasma, lichen planus pigmentosus (LPP), vitiligo, alopecias, etc.

**Ex-Vivo Dermoscopy (EVD) to improve histopathological evaluation:**Dermoscopy-guided histological sectioning of the biopsy tissue can improve upon the sectioning of melanocytic neoplasms.

**Better doctor-patient communication:**Dermoscopy improves the doctor-patient communication regarding all aspects of skin disease.  Explaining the nature of the disorder becomes easier by showing lesional dermoscopic images to patients. Patients who warrant a skin biopsy but refuse can be convinced for the same after having been shown dermoscopic images, a concept popular as 'dermoscopy-induced biopsy.'

**Dermoscopic images as an evolving tool for clinical studies:**Since dermoscopy has proven a role as an early, objective and reliable measure of pre- and post-treatment comparison, it is now increasingly being used as an adjuvant tool for efficacy evaluation of therapeutic modalities in clinical studies.

**Dermoscopy in Dermatosurgery & Aesthetics:**Dermoscopy has been reported to facilitate the prompt identification and removal of retained sutures in crusted wounds. Dermoscopy can also facilitate the identification and removal of a foreign body impacted in the skin.

Dermoscopic evaluation of peri-ocular hyperpigmentation can aid in identifying the predominant abnormality (skin pigmentation, abnormal vasculature, skin laxity) thereby help in the development of customized treatment protocol.

Dermoscopy-based imaging system has recently been reported to be instrumental in the evaluation and categorization of ‘enlarged’ facial open pores.

Dermoscopy plays a significant role in optimizing the outcome of laser hair reduction (LHR) and has been reported to be useful in monitoring the response to LHR in women.

Hair transplant surgeons are increasingly using trichoscopy. It allows recording of the number of existing follicular units, the number of hair per follicular unit, the size of hair follicles, and other parameters at the donor and recipient sites. Trichoscopy aids in early differential diagnosis of post-transplant  complications such as folliculitis and secondary lichen planopilaris. It is also useful in optimizing outcome of ancillary trichology procedures such as scalp micro pigmentation (SMP).

**Miscellaneous Uses**: Dermoscopy has been reported to aid in confirmation of pathergy test in patients with Behcet’s disease.

**Teledermoscopy:**The acquisition and storage of digital dermoscopic images are referred to as digital dermoscopy, while teledermoscopy (TDD) refers to transferring a digitalized dermoscopic image (visual data) for diagnosis, education, consultation or followup.