The treatment of infantile colic is as varied (and often unproven) as the theoretical causes for colic. First-line treatment should be directed at the distressed parents, educating them about colic, and reassuring them that the condition is self-limiting and benign. Parents can be encouraged to develop coping responses when the child begins crying, minimizing the likelihood that they will become frustrated and injure the infant. In fact, parents who are frustrated by the infant's crying should place the infant safely in a crib and walk away briefly, to avoid shaking the infant and causing harm. Traditionally parents have resorted to methods such as swaddling, rocking, or driving the infant in a car to control the symptoms of colic. However, clear evidence for the effectiveness of these methods is lacking.

Studies examining the effectiveness of simethicone in treating colic have been inconsistent, but most of the studies demonstrate no effect. The anticholinergic dicyclomine has shown improvement in crying time, but its potential side effects of respiratory depression, apnea, seizures, pulse rate fluctuations and muscular hypotonia make its use undesirable in young infants; dicyclomine is not approved for use in children under the age of 6 months. Proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole are no better than placebo at reducing crying time in infants with colic. Thus, pharmacological approaches to the treatment of colic are not recommended.

Dietary modifications in the treatment of colic have been explored in some detail. Breastfed infants with colic have significant reductions in crying time if the mother is placed on a hypoallergenic diet, in which dairy foods, eggs, nuts, wheat, soy, and fish are eliminated from the mother's diet. Bottle-fed infants who are switched from traditional cow's milk formulas to soy-based formulas show no improvement in colic symptoms; at the same time, soy-based formulas are not recommended for infants less than 6 months of age due to the high concentrations of phytates, aluminum, and phytoestrogens in those formulas. The American Academy of Pediatrics discourages the use of soy-based formulas in the treatment of colic due to their lack of benefit. In contrast, a number of studies confirm the usefulness of extensively hydrolyzed or completely hydrolyzed cow's milk protein formulas in the reduction of crying times for infants with colic. Unfortunately, these formulas are more expensive and may provide a financial challenge to the parents; if no improvement in symptoms occurs within two weeks, the infant may be switched back to traditional formulas.

Some treatment approaches are directed at correction of the infant's gut microflora. While several studies demonstrate a reduction in crying time among bottle-fed infants with colic who receive supplements of Lactobacillus reuteri, other studies have contradicted those findings. However, there seems to be more consistent evidence regarding the positive effects of L. reuteri supplementation among infants who are breastfed. Probiotic supplementation may be useful for colicky breastfed infants but less useful for bottle-fed infants.

Reducing stimulation may be effective for some infants with colic, much like its effectiveness in children with migraines. Techniques may include reducing the lighting in the room, turning down loud music and avoiding toys that make noise, keeping siblings and pets in another room, avoiding strong odors or perfumes, and rocking the baby gently may have beneficial effects. Feeding the infant in a darkened room may facilitate infant sleep.

Comparisons have been made between infants with colic who were treated with massage and those who were treated with rocking. While there are reductions in crying time for both treatment groups in one study, the greatest reduction was seen in infants undergoing regular massage by their mothers. However, other studies examining the effects of massage have been inconsistent in demonstrating effectiveness. While the effectiveness of massage may not be concrete, it is at least a safe intervention that may improve parental-infant bonding and can be used in any intervention for colic.