If a surgical drain is present, the fluid can be sent for spot creatinine. Spot creatinine will usually be 25-450 mg/dL when the fluid is urine, but it will be similar to the serum creatinine when it is not urine. A basic metabolic panel should be ordered to evaluate kidney function. Elevated BUN/creatinine would raise suspicion for some disruption to the collecting system, preventing drainage of urine.

Imaging studies are the most important diagnostic tools available to evaluate for ureteral injury. A retrograde pyelogram (RPG) is the most accurate imaging test to evaluate the location and extent of the ureteral injury. Antegrade pyelogram also can be performed if the patient has antegrade access. A CT urogram (CT abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast and delayed images) can accurately identify ureteral injury. Other findings on CT imaging studies that may raise suspicion for ureteral or renal pelvis injury include perinephric stranding, low-density fluid around the kidney and ureters, perinephric hematoma, ureteral dilation or deviation, and incomplete visualization of the entire ureter. When a CT or intravenous urogram is inconclusive, and ureteral injury is suspected, an RPG must be obtained.

Surgical exploration of the retroperitoneum and direct visualization of the ureter is the most accurate method to identify ureteral injury. Inspection of the ureter should involve mobilization of the ureter and visualization of the entire wall for evidence of contusion, hemorrhage, or disruption. Extravasation of urine confirms the presence of ureteral injury. The viability of the ureter may be compromised when the ureter is murky, discolored, or without capillary refill. A dye study using indigo carmine or methylene blue can be administered by intravenous infusion an aid in direct visualization of ureteral injury. This can be performed by directly injecting into the renal pelvis or by retrograde injection during cystoscopic ureteral catheterization.