Cardiovascular disease is among the leading causes of death today. Atherosclerosis and hypertension are major risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Endothelial dysfunction also plays a crucial role in atherosclerotic disease and hypertension. Dysfunction in EDRF can lead to an increase in platelet adhesion which subsequently increases the risk of a prothrombotic state. Dysfunction in the relaxation factor also leads to paradoxical vasoconstriction. As hypertension worsens, the increased intravascular pressures may lead to further endothelial damage. Both atherosclerotic disease and hypertension put patients at risk for more life-threatening conditions such as myocardial infarction and/or stroke.

Interventions that aim to treat endothelial dysfunction, target the underlying risk factors that cause endothelial damage. For example, medications such as ACE inhibitors and calcium channel antagonists treat hypertension, and lipid-lowering agents are used for hypercholesterolemia. Lifestyle modification also plays a large role in treatment. Smoking cessation helps to decrease the possible ramifications of cigarette smoking on endothelial dysfunction, and an increase in physical activity is used to prevent endothelial dysfunction due to a sedentary lifestyle. Chronic conditions that can lead to endothelial dysfunction can also be treated, such as increasing control of abnormal metabolic conditions in diabetes mellitus and estrogen replacement therapy in menopause. Pharmacologic agents that can achieve vascular protection in addition to their primary therapeutic indications are ACE inhibitors and HMG COA reductase inhibitors. All of these interventions help induce positive changes in the endothelium due to inhibition of vasoconstriction, promotion of vasorelaxation, decreased free radical production, or other protective mechanisms against endothelial injury.

Stimulators of EDRF release include insulin and adiponectin. Chronic NO release by endothelial cells can be upregulated by dietary factors, estrogen, and exercise, and downregulated by oxidative stress, pollution, smoking, and oxidized low-density lipoproteins. NO release is also decreased with aging and in vascular diseases such as hypertension and diabetes. With impaired nitric oxide production, such as by oxidative stress, spontaneous hypertension, aging, and diabetes, this exacerbates endothelium-dependent contractions, and can contribute to decreased endothelium-dependent vasodilation in patients with essential hypertension or diabetes, as well as aging patients. Endothelin 1 can also contribute to endothelial dysfunction and vascular dysfunction. Also, under conditions of hypoxia, nitric oxide can cause unbalanced activation of soluble guanylyl cyclase such that cyclic inosine monophosphate (cIMP) production increases, instead of cGMP.  This increased cIMP can then lead to contraction of underlying vascular smooth muscle, instead of relaxation.

Ischemic diseases with impaired endothelial function have impaired EDRF formation and release into the vasculature include hypercholesterolemia, atherosclerosis, hypertension-induced vascular damage, diabetes, reperfusion damage, coronary spasm, and subarachnoid hemorrhage-induced vasospasm. In these ischemic diseases, there is decreased EDRF release or hemoglobin or oxygen-derived radicals immediately inactivate the released NO before affecting the vasculature. Due to impaired EDRF release, there is an increased vasoconstrictor tone, and this is exacerbated by insufficient receptor-stimulated or mechanical NO release in large feed arteries such as coronaries. This increased vasoconstrictor tone can cause inadequate blood supply which leads to ischemic damage.