**Chronic Pain**

A reduction of pain perception (analgesic effect) is recorded as reduced noxious-evoked brain activity in electroencephalography (EEG) in infants after stroking (at 3 cm/s), possibly due to inhibited nociceptive C fiber input. This emphasizes the impact of social touch in which parents stroke their babies instinctively at optimal velocity is crucial for bonding. The mechanoafferent tactile fibers cause spinal inhibition of nociceptive neurons, even for heat pain perception. Also, activation of A-delta nociceptors produces spinal and cortical inhibition to C nociception. C tactile fibers also have implications in mechanical and cold allodynia and pain gating; this could be an area of research for non-pharmacological interventions, even in early life.

Fibromyalgia is a chronic pain syndrome affecting widespread musculoskeletal areas, presenting significant treatment challenges due to its overlap with musculoskeletal and psychological pain etiologies and resistance to conventional pharmacological therapies.

**Nerve Injury**

Myelination is a crucial positive factor in determining the regeneration and repair of injured nerve fibers. It enables the afferent axons to regenerate into the peripheral nerve stump along the Schwann cell tubes. On the other hand, unmyelinated axons have lesser regenerative potential. Following injury, half of the regenerated unmyelinated afferent axons have chronic electrically hyperexcitable, continuous discharge properties, abnormal mechanosensitivity, and thermosensitivity. These continuous discharges in afferent C fibers may have originated from the injured axons as their physiologic stimuli and not from cell bodies of dorsal root ganglia. The regeneration is inefficient in that only one-third of unmyelinated afferents regenerate to reach the skin compared to almost two-thirds in A-fibers. The rest of the unmyelinated fibers die by 80 days after the cross-union. This could provide significant insight into the crucial role of injured axons (especially injured muscular afferents) as peripheral components of neuropathic pain and peripheral nerve injury for possible therapeutic targets.

**Sexual Stimulation**

C tactile stimulation at a frequency appropriate for C-fiber stimulation, plus appropriate social context, was demonstrated to increase somatosensory sexual feelings and possible erotic perception.