The treatment of parotitis is primarily symptomatic control with a focus on local application of heat, gentle glandular massage from posterior to anterior, sialagogues, and adequate hydration. Simple anti-inflammatory analgesics, such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen, are sufficient for discomfort. If purulent drainage expresses during the glandular massage, culture and sensitivities should be obtained by swab or needle aspiration to guide proper antibiotic therapy.

Sialolithiasis, a cause of parotitis, can resolve with warm compresses, massage, and sialagogues (sour food or lemon candy) but occasionally requires extraction. After local anesthesia with topical or infiltrated lidocaine, the duct can be dilated or filleted with scissors, then massaged to squeeze out the stone. Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy, to fragment the stone before extraction, or interventional sialendoscopy by otolaryngology specialists are options for refractory cases.

In parotitis suspected to be secondary to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or chronic autoimmune conditions (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis or Sjögren syndrome), providers should focus on treating the underlying condition, such as anti-retroviral therapy or steroids.

Treatment of acute bacterial parotitis should include intravenous (IV) hydration, analgesics, and 7 to 10 days of IV antibiotics.S. aureus (MRSA).

In neonates, where acute parotitis can be life-threatening, antibiotics are usually IV gentamicin or levofloxacin and anti-MRSA antistaphylococcal antibiotics. If clinical improvement does not take place within 48 hours, parotidectomy may be necessary. The rare parotitis from extrapulmonary tuberculosis responds well to antitubercular medications.

Consult otolaryngology early for incision and drainage for cases of acute parotitis refractory to conservative measures of hydration and antibiotics. Specialists might consider saline irrigation of the duct system to remove inspissated mucus or pus.

Treatment of HIV parotitis may include antiviral therapy, low-dose radiation, or partial parotidectomy to reduce glandular size.

Superficial parotidectomy is usually the last resort for chronic parotitis and may involve ligation of the duct or the instillation of methylene violet.