Before discussing what constitutes villous features of adenomas, it is important to differentiate the degree of dysplasia present in adenomas. The degree of dysplasia present in an adenoma is determined by both cytological and architectural features. Adenomas are tumors of dysplastic epithelium which can be characterized as having a low grade or high-grade dysplasia, which indicates the level of maturation of the epithelium. By definition, adenomas have at least low-grade dysplasia.

The cytological features of low-grade dysplasia include crowded, pseudo-stratification to early stratification of spindled or elongated nuclei that occupy the basal half of the cytoplasm. Pleomorphism and atypical mitoses should be absent or minimally present. Mitotic activity and minimal loss of cell polarity are allowed. Architecturally, the crypts should maintain a resemblance to the normal colon, without significant crowding, cribriform, or complex forms.

High-grade dysplasia cytologically shows an increased nucleus to cytoplasm ratio, more significant loss of polarity, more "open" appearing nuclei with increasingly prominent nucleoli. Other features which distinguish a high grade from low-grade dysplasia include significant pleomorphism, rounded nuclei, atypical mitoses, and significant loss of polarity. Mitotic figures may be observed as in low-grade dysplasia. Cribriform and crowding, back-to-back glands indicate high-grade dysplasia and can be important architectural features to aid in differentiating some cases of low vs. high-grade dysplasia which may have less distinct cytological features.

The villous component of adenomas refers to epithelial finger-like projections away from the muscularis mucosae. There should be deep crypts, and the projections should contain fibrovascular cores lined by dysplastic epithelium. As stated above, the amount of villous differentiation distinguishes villous adenomas (over 75% villous features) versus tubulovillous adenomas (mixed tubular and villous features with 25% to 75% villous features).