When patients and their families come with a concern for the pubertal delay, obtaining a good history is essential to a thorough evaluation.

- **History of Present Illness**: The provider should first inquire about any signs of puberty the child or the caregivers have noticed, such as breast development, testicular enlargement, body odor, axillary hair, pubertal hair, or acne. The occurrence of adrenarche versus puberty should be distinguished. A thorough review of systems from head to toe will help to rule in or rule out the causes of pubertal delay. Fatigue or weight loss could be concerning for a chronic condition such as sickle cell anemia, depression, or malnutrition. A young child complaining of headaches and blurry vision should undergo evaluation for a brain mass.

- **Medical History:**Birth history, immunization status, and the involvement of other specialties in the child's care are all pertinent to medical history. Does the patient have any medical conditions like asthma or cystic fibrosis?

- **Medications/Treatments**: If the patient had a malignancy in the past, did they receive any total body radiation for treatment?

- **Family History**: Were any biological siblings or parents considered "late bloomers" in their family?

- **Surgical History:**Did the patient have any previous surgical correction of cryptorchidism, which would result in primary gonadal failure?

- **Social history:**How is the patient's home environment? Do they live with both parents? Questions about having concerning behavior or mood instability should also merit investigation.

- **Development:**Has the patient missed any milestones or been diagnosed with any developmental delay? Disorders such as Klinefelter syndrome is commonly associated with developmental delay or behavioral issues.

A complete physical exam should always be done to deny or support any clinical suspicions. Before examining the child, assess vital signs, including height, weight, and body mass index (BMI). Using previous or current growth curves that are appropriate for age and sex will help portray any concerning patterns. Note any signs of adrenarche on examination, including body odor or facial acne. Lastly, assigning a Tanner stage must always be included. Please see the below figure for appropriate Tanner staging.