Though the pathogenesis of the condition is still unknown, a variety of hypotheses exist stating that there is often a triggering event, such as epithelial damage or post-sinusoidal obstruction, which may lead to the eventual dilatation of the hepatic sinusoids and cavities.

The anatomy of the sinusoidal capillaries is different than other capillary beds within the body. The fenestrations which are present within the liver allow for passes and filtration of larger molecules such as albumin. Epithelial damage can result from smoking, which can disrupt the architecture through the formation of free radicals. This damage, in turn, impairs vasodilation by inhibiting nitric oxide formation, which allows for normal physiologic relaxation of the arteries. Additionally, inflammation, whether it be autoimmune, direct trauma through surgical instrumentation, medication-induced, or invasion by malignancy, can result in the recruitment of inflammatory cytokines and cells, sometimes resulting in further epithelial damage. An alternate mechanism may be the depletion of glutathione, a critical regulatory molecule that assists in many biochemical detoxification reactions, which may disrupt the integrity of the epithelial wall and allow toxic metabolites to build up. However, through signal proteins such as vascular endothelial growth factor and others, re-endothelization can occur; thus, that is why using the absence of epithelial lining on imaging studies is not adequate to diagnose patients with peliosis hepatis, though it can raise the concern for it.

Lastly, post-sinusoidal obstruction from several conditions such as malignant invasion, autoimmune inflammation, and drug injury is also hypothesized to be an alternate mechanism in the formation of peliosis hepatis.