Granular cell tumors are rare neoplasms whose clinical and radiologic findings are often indistinguishable from other, more common lesions. These tumors, whether malignant or benign, typically present as solitary masses in a wide range of organ systems without any unique features until examined microscopically. Furthermore, while some of the malignant lesions present as such with nodal or distant metastases, many are not found to be malignant until the histology is worked up. Subsequently, while a single physician may be initiating the care of a patient with a granular cell tumor, it is important to consult with an interdisciplinary team of specialists promptly to expedite workup and treatment.

A dermatologist who diagnoses a malignant granular cell tumor of the skin by biopsy or excision may need to order additional imaging and rely on radiology to identify metastatic lesions. An interventional pulmonologist may need to be consulted for biopsy of lung lesions, with the subsequent engagement of thoracic surgery, surgical oncology, medical oncology, and radiation oncology to discuss and pursue management options for metastatic lesions with the patient.

**Radiology**

Radiologists play an important role in determining the etiology of the lesion, as they can advise the primary physician to keep benign tumors in mind, such as benign granular cell tumors, even when the imaging demonstrates malignant features such as spiculation. If the patient has a prior history of other benign granular cell tumors, it is important to relay that history to the radiologists to ensure they consider multiple foci of such tumors in the differential even if the lesion appears malignant. The radiologist may also be able to discern features suggestive of a malignant versus benign granular cell tumor.

**Pathology**

Pathologists are also a vital part of the team, as they identify the diagnostic morphologic and immunohistochemical findings in this tumor. They will ultimately communicate with the team whether the lesion is benign or its malignant counterpart. It is important to provide appropriate clinical history and imaging findings to the pathologist when tissue is sent, as this will impact diagnosis as well as classification of the tumor as malignant or benign. Failing to impart the information that lymphadenopathy was noted near the tumor or the fact that synchronous liver lesions were noticed in addition to a skin primary, for example, may lead the pathologist to call a lesion benign or atypical rather than malignant. Alternatively, if it is not communicated to the pathologist that a biopsy was just a superficial shave of a deep dermal lesion, the reactive pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia overlying a benign granular cell tumor may be erroneously called squamous cell carcinoma.

**Nursing and Pharmacy**

Leading up to and following surgical excision of the lesion, the nurses play an essential role in the interprofessional group, as they monitor the patient’s pre-operative, intra-operative, and post-operative vital signs and symptoms concerning for infection, and they assist with the education of the patient and family. Pharmacists will ensure the patient is sent home on the appropriate pain medication.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes of granular cell tumors depend in part on whether the lesions are malignant or benign. Benign tumors have excellent outcomes with wide local excision and rarely recur or metastasize. On the other hand, patients with large, malignant lesions and metastatic disease have dismally poor outcomes. Some studies report up to 41% recurrence after excision and a 62% rate of metastasis in malignant lesions. Another recent study demonstrated that patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis have 0% survival at 5 years.