**Vision Threatening Complications**

- Retrobulbar hematoma requires urgent orbital decompression. The incidence of retrobulbar hematoma is around 0.055% (1:2,000), and the incidence of subsequent blindness is 0.0045% (1 to 22,000).

- Rupture globe either from direct trauma during surgery or from the local anesthetic injection.

- Corneal abrasion or ulceration can be treated with topical antibiotic drops.

**Lower Lid Malposition**

This includes ectropion due to shortening of the anterior lamella, entropion due to shortening of the posterior lamella, and canthal rounding and canthal dystopia.

**Over Resection or Under Correction of the Fat Compartments**

In case of extensive resection of the fat pads, consider volume replacement such as dermis fat graft or fat transfer. Surgeons should be cautious with fat transfer as overcorrection may persist because of the high chance of survival of any transferred fat to the lower eyelid. In cases of under correction, further surgery is usually needed to address the excess fat.

**Adnexal Injury**

- Incarceration of the inferior oblique or inferior rectus muscles will lead to postoperative painful diplopia and may require another operation to release the entrapped muscle.

- Dry eye syndrome is more common when combined upper and lower blepharoplasty is done, especially in patients who receive regular hormonal replacement therapy.

- Damage of the ciliary ganglion.

- Early chemosis and edema are related to the inflammatory response after surgery. However, persistent interstitial chemosis may be related to lymphatic disruption and may require revisional surgery.

- Transient lagophthalmos, especially if combined with upper blepharoplasty.

**Suture-related Complications**

This includes stitch sinus, inclusion cyst, and granuloma.

Unsatisfactory results or recurrence of symptoms are possible complications as well.