Patients typically describe pain and deformity of the knee following a non-contact twisting injury, or a direct blow to the anterior or medial aspect of the knee. They often describe the knee giving way and feeling a ‘pop’, and commonly report swelling in the acute setting. In chronic cases, pain is usually anterior or anteromedial, and patients may report giving way, clicking and catching, with the symptoms being worse during flexion and kneeling.

On examination of an acute dislocation, joint effusion or hemarthrosis is a typical finding, but is less likely in the case of chronic dislocation. Alignment abnormalities can also be noted such as femoral anteversion, patella alta, tibial torsion, genu recurvatum, genu valgum or varum, pes planus, and general ligamentous laxity. The knee and surrounding structures can also be palpated, checking for tenderness or irregularities along all the poles of the patella (superior, inferior, medial and lateral), especially the medial pole. If pain permits, flexion and extension should be checked, feeling for any crepitus or restriction of movement. Assessment of the collateral and cruciate ligaments is also necessary.

Some patients can exhibit a positive J sign; excessive lateral patellar deviation going from flexion to extension. In a normal knee, the patella can be moved medially and laterally between twenty-five and fifty percent the width of the patella. In recurrent dislocators, it may move further (patellar glide). They may have a positive apprehension test; the knee is held relaxed in 20 to 30 degrees of flexion, and the patella is pushed laterally. A positive test is present when there is apprehension or guarding.