The orbicularis oculi muscle receives its blood from the branches of the facial artery and superficial temporal artery (which are branches of the external carotid artery), as well as the ophthalmic artery (which is a branch of the internal carotid artery).

The common carotid arteries arise from the brachiocephalic trunk on the right side and directly from the aortic arch on the left side. At the superior border of the thyroid cartilage in the neck, each common carotid artery divides into the internal and external carotid arteries.

The external carotid artery continues superiorly and splits into a number of branches, including the facial artery, superior temporal artery, superior thyroid artery, lingual artery, facial artery, ascending pharyngeal artery, occipital artery, maxillary artery, and posterior auricular artery. The facial artery then courses from the mandibular area, up the side of the nose and to the medial canthus of the eye, where it is called the angular artery. Branches of the facial artery and superficial temporal artery supply the orbicularis oculi muscle.

The internal carotid artery enters the skull through the carotid canal in the temporal bone. It travels through the cavernous sinus and then splits off a major branch call the ophthalmic artery. The ophthalmic artery enters the orbit through the optic canal. Within the orbit, it divides into various branches, including the lacrimal artery, supraorbital artery, ethmoidal arteries, supratrochlear artery, central retinal artery, ciliary arteries, and muscular branches. Some of these branches, such as the lacrimal artery and supraorbital artery, supply the orbicularis oculi muscle.