Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (PDE inhibitors) are a class of agents acting on specific phosphodiesterase enzymes in target cells and are FDA approved for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, erectile dysfunction, pulmonary arterial hypertension, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and atopic dermatitis.

Among the phosphodiesterase inhibitors, sildenafil is the more common agent acting on PDE-5 and is FDA-approved in 1998 for erectile dysfunction.

Cilostazol is a PDE-3 inhibitor that reversibly inhibits platelets from aggregation and is indicated to treat intermittent claudication from peripheral arterial disease(PAD). Dipyridamole is also a PDE-3 inhibitor and is used for postoperative prophylaxis for thrombosis, but its action on the PDE-3 enzyme is relatively weak. Dipyridamole can also be a diagnostic tool as a pharmacologic nuclear stress test. Dypriadamole increases perfusion to the myocardium, revealing reversible and irreversible ischemic areas in the myocardial muscle.

Milrinone and amrinone also inhibit PDE-3 enzymes, but their actions target heart cells, increasing cAMP in the myocardium, and producing a positive inotropic effect. Both agents may be used short-term for decompensated heart failure as therapy for greater durations may precipitate ventricular arrhythmias. Roflumilast is a PDE-4 inhibitor that acts on the target cells of lung tissue and is indicated for the treatment of reducing COPD exacerbations. Other PDE-4 inhibitors include apremilast and crisaborole; their uses are nonpulmonary, and indications include treating psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis(PA), and atopic dermatitis(AD), respectively, due to their action of decreasing pro-inflammatory chemokines. PDE-4 inhibitors decrease pro-inflammatory mediators and cause bronchodilation by inhibiting the degradation of cAMP. Theophylline is a non-specific PDE inhibitor with weak action on phosphodiesterase enzymes and has approval for symptomatic relief of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD).

Pentoxifylline is a xanthine analog and is a non-selective phosphodiesterase inhibitor, FDA approved in 1984 for muscle pain caused by intermittent claudication in chronic peripheral arterial disease. Anagrelide is a PDE-3 inhibitor approved for the treatment of thrombocythemia caused by myeloproliferative disorders. Ibudilast is a non-selective PDE inhibitor that has not secured approval by the FDA for its use. Ibudilast action causes dilations of the bronchioles and has been used to treat asthma in Japan since 1989.

**Types**

- PDE-3 inhibitors: cilostazol, dipyridamole, milrinone, and amrinone

- PDE-4 inhibitors: roflumilast, apremilast, crisaborole

- PDE-5 inhibitors: sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, and avanafil

- Non-specific PDE inhibitors: theophylline, ibudilast

**FDA-approved Uses**

- Erectile dysfunction(ED): sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, and avanafil

- Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH): tadalafil

- Pulmonary arterial hypertension(PAH):  sildenafil, tadalafil

- Psoriatic arthritis(PA): apremilast

- Psoriasis: apremilast

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD): roflumilast, theophylline

- Peripheral arterial disease (PAD): cilostazol, pentoxifylline

- Postoperative thromboembolic prophylaxis: dipyridamole

- Decompensated cardiac failure: milrinone, amrinone

- Atopic dermatitis(AD):crisaborole

- Thrombocythemia: anagrelide

- Neonatal apnea: caffeine citrate