# Definition/Introduction

Clinical ultrasound’s maximum utility as a diagnostic tool rests on understanding and manipulating multiple physics principles. The knowledge of ultrasound wave emission, interaction with fluid, tissue, various densities, wave receipt, and machine data processing are integral to ultrasound’s function. Ultrasound machines rely upon different probe types to emit sound waves at variable frequencies, depths, directions, focal points, and power in conjunction with motion and artifact management tools to enhance images obtained.

Understanding the physics of ultrasound is critical to applying clinical ultrasound, particularly as it applies to the optimization, interpretation, and clinical integration of images captured at the bedside. The American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine has published a full, recommended curriculum to standardize the clinical sonographers’ education on both ultrasound physics principles and the primary clinical applications that depend on them.

# Issues of Concern

**Primary Ultrasound Physics Principles**

The crucial physics principles needed to understand and optimize clinical ultrasound include frequency, propagation speed, pulsed ultrasound, waves’ interaction with tissue, angle of incidence, and attenuation.

Frequency refers to the number of cycles per second emitted by the probe over one second and is expressed in hertz (Hz). A period is the length of time for a complete wave cycle to occur (rarefaction and compression) and is inversely related to frequency. Similarly, the wavelength described is the distance between two adjacent wave peaks. It is important to distinguish the difference between period and wavelength; the former is a distance and the latter a length of time.

Amplitude is the height, or strength, of a wave defined by the distance between the peak and the average of the wave's highest and lowest points. Power in ultrasound refers to the square of wave amplitude, or difference between the maximum and average values, of propagated waves.

Intensity refers to the power delivered over a specific area, expressed in watts/cm2 or milliwatts/cm2.

Decibels (dB) are a logarithmic expression of the ratio of two sound intensities. The dB can be determined by calculating the ratio of the sound source intensity and the least audible intensity, calculating the LOG, and multiplying it by 10. There is a simplified rule of 3dB that states with each 3dB gain. There must be an additional doubling of power delivered. Thus, a 3dB gain requires twice the power, a 6dB gain requires four times the power, and a 9dB gain requires eight times the power.

Propagation speed is the rate at which waves pass through a medium. The ultrasound waves’ speed is accepted to be 1540m/sec in soft tissue, known as acoustic impedance. Propagation speed depends on the characteristics of the medium that waves are traveling through and is independent of the frequency. As tissue density increases, the propagation speed decreases. By contrast, the stiffer the tissue, the higher the propagation speed.

To achieve desired depth and resolution for clinical ultrasound, waves are emitted from the probe as pulses, typically a millisecond in duration and occurring up to several thousand times per second. This principle is referred to as pulsed ultrasound.

Ultrasound waves travel into tissue and are reflected back to the probe at a rate determined by the target tissue’s consistency. Reflections of sound that return to the probe are called echoes and are determined by two different materials' interfaces.

The angle at which ultrasound waves engage with any structure is referred to as the angle of incidence. Structures are ideally imaged with the angle of incidence perpendicular to emitted waves because echoed waves return to the probe in the greatest concentration.

Similarly, waves are deflected from a straight line when waves’ velocity differs between two structures and results in refraction.

Different tissue interfaces reflect differently and contribute to image quality. Smooth interfaces are considered specular reflectors and return a high proportion of waves to the transducer. Specular reflectors are contrasted against irregular interfaces called diffuse reflectors, which cause sound waves to reflect away from the transducer and reduce the image’s quality. An important type of scattering, called Rayleigh scattering, occurs when an object is smaller than the ultrasound beam’s wavelength. Red blood cells display this scattering type, resulting in waves scattering in all directions.

Considering that ultrasound waves cannot travel through the air, probes must contact patients’ skin through a coupling medium to engage with tissues. Coupling occurs through the use of ultrasound gel or water baths. As ultrasound waves interact with tissue and reflect the probe, the energy associated with any remaining beams decreases with increasing depth. The strength of penetrating waves is reduced by refraction, scattering, and absorption.

Wave attenuation, or the decrease in intensity over a given distance, is also measured in decibels (dB) and occurs at a rate per centimeter roughly equal to the frequency emitted initially. Thus, a 5MHz wave will attenuate at approximately 5dB in the first centimeter and another 5bB in the next centimeter. Ultimate wave penetration is determined by the depth at which the intensity of the waves is reduced by 50%, in a reverse fashion used to determine the dB gain described above. Thus, the depth at which 50% of the intensity is attenuated is equivalent to a loss of 3dB.  Higher frequency waves and waves for deep imaging are attenuated more quickly than low-frequency waves or waves used for shallow imaging.

Gain (power) can be adjusted over the entire image or, depending on the machine being used, at different depths to visualize structures at those depths best. Additionally, deeper structures must use lower frequencies to become visible. Such visibility comes at the expense of resolution, which is improved with higher frequencies. Sonographers must manage the frequency being used to balance the need for both depth and resolution depending on the ultrasound application for any specific target structure.

**Transducers**

Transducers are the instruments that emit and receive ultrasound waves by way of electrical signal conversion to sound waves. Ultrasound transducers contain piezoelectric crystals that, when electrical impulses are applied, produce waves at frequencies determined by the crystal’s propagation speed, divided by two times the thickness of the crystal layer. The typical thickness of crystal layers is between 0.2mm and 2mm. The bandwidth of a particular probe is the range of frequencies at which the probe will operate.

Transducers can both send and receive ultrasound waves by applying energy and, ultimately sound waves, in pulses. The pulsatile nature of ultrasound waves produced facilitates the emission and reception of sound waves. When incident pulses reflect off tissues, producing echoes, the device can detect the strength, direction, and timing of arriving echoes.

Typical transducers used in clinical ultrasound include linear array, phased array, and curvilinear array, which has multiple configurations and frequencies depending on the application needed. The transducer face’s crystals and structure's arrangement determine the area and shape of the image produced. Linear arrays have flat faces that produce a rectangular image. Phased arrays have crystal configurations and power sequences that steer beams from a single point to create a sector image ideal for scanning between ribs.

**Managing Images**

**Frequency**

Selecting a probe with the appropriate bandwidth is an essential consideration to ideal image acquisition. For general scanning presets, machines are often set to “GEN,” or general, typically the middle range for the probe bandwidth. If higher resolution is required to evaluate a structure, the frequency can be increased on the machine directly or using available “RES” for resolution. The increased frequency will sacrifice penetration depth. The reverse is true if greater penetration is needed. Frequency is decreased directly or by using the “PEN” or penetration setting.

**Gain**

When attenuation must be managed, either because a target is too bright or too dark, power can be increased or decreased either throughout the entirety of the image or at specified depths. Gain increases will add power to combat attenuation by increasing the brightness.

**Time Gain Compensation**

Time gain compensation refers to power controls at specific image depths to combat the attenuation with depth. This helps improve deep structure imaging, mainly if deep tissue is subject to posterior acoustic enhancement. This feature is often seen with “slider bars” seen on the ultrasound console.

**Depth of Field**

The depth of field is the depth to which sound beams are transmitted and received. Depth is altered on display to optimize the power and temporal resolution of the machine to view target structures.

**Focal Point and Resolution**

Ultrasound beams leave the transducer at the same width as the face. They travel through the near zone before narrowing at a focal zone and widening in the far zone. The resolution, or the ability to discern two closely situated objects, and lateral resolution is best in the focal zone. Spatial resolution can also be improved with higher frequencies, smaller pulse repetition frequencies, and short pulse duration. The axial resolution, or the ability to discern two structures in the path of the beam, is generally better than lateral resolution, or the ability to distinguish two side-by-side structures due to ultrasound beams being shorter than they are wide. Lateral resolution is greatest at the focal point where the beam width is most narrow. Temporal resolution, or the time the machine takes to create an image, is inversely related to the frame rate. Higher frame rates produce lower resolution images, and lower frame rates have higher resolution images. Frame rates of at least 15 frames per second produce real-time images.

**Multibeam**

Modern ultrasound transducers are created to send ultrasound signals out at multiple angles across the probe’s face. They produce multiple angles of incidence that have multiple angles of reflection back to the probe receiver. This helps to improve image quality, especially around structures that would otherwise be prone to refraction artifacts.

**Tissue Harmonics**

Tissue harmonics refers to tissue’s tendency to resonate at multiples of the incident frequency transmitted by the probe. For example, when 3MHz waves are transmitted to tissue, the tissue will resonate at 3MHz, 6MHz, and 9MHz. Transducers can be set to receive the incident frequency and the harmonic frequencies, combining them to create a higher resolution image. Using tissue harmonics settings also assists in reducing artifacts.

**M-Mode**

M-Mode, or time-motion display, allows a single beam to emit from the transducer along a defined track in conjunction with a recorder that captures all motion that occurs along the path. This mode allows high temporal resolution, thus affording the examiner an excellent view of subtle motions.

**Artifacts**

Artifacts are image errors that are interpreted by the ultrasound machine related to the physics principles discussed previously. They are often the result of assumptions that ultrasound waves always travel in straight lines, that all tissue transmits sound at 1540 m/sec, and that waves are always reflected in the transducer directly.

**Reverberations**

Reverberation artifacts result from sound waves bouncing between a smooth reflector and the transducer face.

**Posterior Acoustic Enhancement**

Fluid has a higher propagation rate and less attenuation than soft tissue. As a result, sound waves travel to and return from tissue deep to fluid-filled structures faster than sound waves in adjacent, non-fluid-filled structures.

**Shadows**

Structures of high density are highly reflective, returning the majority of sound waves to the transducer and allowing almost no waves to penetrate deep tissues.

**Mirror**

When sound bounces off a strong, smooth reflector, the transducer may reflect the pulsed wave that causes the machine to believe that the tissue interface is deep and is the same as the tissue interface to the superficial structure.

**Ring Down**

Ring down artifacts occurs when tiny bubbles or crystals resonate at the same frequency as the emitted ultrasound frequency, which emits waves of their own. Sound received from these arrives after the original echoes and is interpreted by the machine as deep structures.

**Refraction**

Refraction artifacts, often referred to as edge artifacts, occur when incident ultrasound waves interact with structure interfaces at angles other than 90 degrees. The difference in structure density promotes the refraction or bending of sound waves off the surface. The result is that echoes do not return to the transducer from an area expected to reflect echoes, and thus a shadow is produced.

# Clinical Significance

Diagnostic ultrasound is a powerful, minimally-invasive tool that improves the diagnostic accuracy of clinical examinations when employed at the bedside. Understanding ultrasound physics is critical to image acquisition, image optimization, image interpretation, and ultimately clinical integration. Once aware of ultrasound principles and how machines use them to manipulate sound waves, sonographers can best utilize the available tools to optimize the clinical utility of diagnostic ultrasound.

Specifically, the ability to discern normal from pathologic findings also requires understanding how sound waves interact with different tissues and how primary ultrasound functions are used to best display the differentiation. Sonographers who examine patients without applying ultrasound physics principles at the bedside competently will struggle to leverage the technology for timely and accurate diagnosis.