Testicular malignancy usually presents as a unilateral lump or painless swelling as an incidental finding. Less commonly, testicular cancer presents with pain, with about one-third of the patients having dull pain. Acute pain is noted in about 10% of the individuals. While testicular cancer is not associated with trauma, antecedent trauma may elicit examination or imaging of the testes and result in an ultimate diagnosis. A careful physical examination will reveal a firm intratesticular lesion. Each testis should be gently held and rolled between the fingers to identify a firm intratesticular mass and differentiate intratesticular from extratesticular lesions. It is important to completely examine the contralateral testis as 0.6% of patients have a synchronous contralateral testis tumor.  Occasionally, the testis is unable to be completely palpated due to the presence of a hydrocele, and the presence of a testicular lesion should be confirmed with ultrasonography, which is an extension of the physical examination.  Patients uncommonly present with symptoms or signs of metastatic disease.

Clinical manifestations of testis cancer from metastatic disease

- Systemic symptoms: anorexia, malaise, weight loss

- Pulmonary metastasis: cough or shortness of breath

- Lymphatic metastasis: cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy

- Retroperitoneal disease: Bulky retroperitoneal disease can present as back pain or may lead to compression on the gonadal veins leading to findings of varicocele

- Vascular obstruction or thrombosis leading to lower extremity edema

- Nausea, vomiting, or gastrointestinal hemorrhage from retroduodenal metastases

- Central or peripheral nervous system symptoms from the cerebral, spinal cord, or peripheral nerve root involvement

Prompt diagnosis and treatment are crucial since testicular malignancy has excellent cure rates due to high chemo-sensitivity with modern cisplatin-based chemotherapy, radio-sensitivity, and surgical excision with orchiectomy or retroperitoneal lymph node dissection.