**Non-Representative Biopsy**

Numerous pitfalls exist in the work-up and diagnosis of granular cell tumors. One well-known pitfall involves a shave biopsy of the superficial skin or mucosa overlying a granular cell tumor. Granular cell tumors are commonly associated with superficial pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, which has a morphologic appearance that is strikingly similar to squamous cell carcinoma. If only the epidermis overlying a deep dermal or subcutaneous nodule is shaved, the patient will be misdiagnosed and receive inappropriate therapy. Similarly, needle biopsies are discouraged for lesions amenable to complete excisional biopsies. Some granular cell tumors may have patchy foci of malignant histology such that a single core may not be representative of the entire tumor.

**Incomplete Excision**

Another pitfall is not obtaining broad margins on local excisions of lesions where it is feasible. Clinically benign-appearing lesions may still have malignant histology, so wide local excision with negative margins is recommended for all lesions suspected or proven to be granular cell tumors to minimize the possibility of recurrence.

**Lymph Node Dissection**

Although it is debated in the literature, performing a lymph node dissection for benign or malignant tumors before a sentinel lymph node biopsy may result in unnecessary surgery and morbidity associated with lymph node dissections. Many authors recommend sentinel lymph node biopsies only for malignant tumors before a full lymph node dissection.

**Poor Communication**

Finally, if there is poor communication between the clinician and the pathologist, the patient may mistakenly be diagnosed with a benign granular cell tumor rather than a malignant one. The history of rapid growth, size over 5 cm, ulceration, and prominent lymphadenopathy, for example, may prompt the diagnosis of a malignant lesion regardless of histologic findings. Failure to communicate that to the pathologist may result in a benign diagnosis and, subsequently, inappropriate follow-up and under-investigation for metastatic lesions.