Generally, peripheral veins may be divided into three categories: deep veins, superficial veins, and perforating veins. Deep veins lie within the muscular fascia, superficial veins lie external to the muscular fascia and drain the cutaneous microcirculation while perforating veins connect these two.

Peripheral veins return blood from the extremities against gravity by relying on a system of pumps (heartbeats and skeletal muscle movements), a pressure gradient, and one-way bicuspid valves.

A number of pathologies may cause turbulence—common entities include stenosis, pseudoaneurysm, and arteriovenous fistulas.

Variant anatomy presents a challenge to any imaging study, especially the peripheral venous system, which has a wide breadth of normal variants. Common upper extremity variants include unpaired brachial veins and low-lying basilic veins.

**Common Pathologies**

The potential pathologies discovered or evaluated on a peripheral venous duplex US study are extensive and beyond the scope of this article. However, it is helpful to recognize the more common pathologies an ordering physician may be evaluating with peripheral duplex US.

Venous malformations (VMs) are congenital vascular lesions with predispositions to stagnated blood. Oftentimes, the stagnated blood thromboses resulting in pain, swelling, and overlying skin changes. Classically in the US, venous malformations appear heterogeneous and hypo- to-anechoic vascular spaces that are compressible. However, the overall US appearance of VMs is variable.

Venous insufficiency is a common condition that may significantly impact a person’s quality of life. The condition clinically manifests as dilatation of peripheral veins, which predominantly occurs in the lower extremities. Initially, smooth muscle and elastin content decrease within the vessel wall resulting in vascular dilation. As dilation increases, the bicuspid valves become incompetent, allowing blood to reflux. Eventually, multi-level valve failure occurs, and blood flow stagnates.

Deep venous thromboses (DVTs) are clots occurring in deep veins. DVTs may cause pain and swelling from the partial or total obstruction of blood in the vessel, though they may also occur painlessly. DVTs are particularly important to screen for, as they can become dislodged (termed thromboembolism) and obstruct pulmonary vessels downstream (termed pulmonary embolism).

A pseudoaneurysm is an extravasation of blood into a false lumen that maintains a patent connection to the injured vessel. This pathology may be encountered as a complication after a vascular procedure, such as a central line placement. Interrogation with Doppler US demonstrates a swirling flow pattern at the communicating neck and turbulent, pulsatile flow in the vein lumen. On color Doppler US, the turbulent pattern creates the appearance of the aliasing artifact. Controlled compression at the pseudoaneurysm neck during color Doppler interrogation can convert the pseudoaneurysm into a simple hematoma to avoid the need for surgical intervention.