Typically, appendicitis presents as an initial generalized or periumbilical abdominal pain that localizes to the right lower quadrant. Initially, the visceral afferent nerve fibers at T8 through T10 are stimulated, leading to vague centralized pain. As the appendix becomes more inflamed and the adjacent parietal peritoneum is irritated, the pain becomes more localized to the right lower quadrant. Pain may or may not be accompanied by any of the following symptoms:

- Anorexia

- Nausea/vomiting

- Fever (40% of patients)

- Diarrhea

- Generalize malaise

- Urinary frequency or urgency

**Uncommon Presentations**

Some patients may present with uncommon features. In these patients, the pain may have woken the patient up from sleep. In addition, the patients may complain of pain while walking or coughing.

Pain upon passive extension of the right leg with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position is known as the psoas sign. This maneuver stretches the psoas major muscle, which can be irritated by an inflamed retrocecal appendix. Patients often flex the hip to shorten the psoas major muscle and relieve pain.

**Physical exam**findings are often subtle, especially in early appendicitis. As inflammation progresses, signs of peritoneal inflammation develop. Signs include:

- Right lower quadrant guarding and rebound tenderness over McBurney's point (1.5 to 2 inches from the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) on a straight line from the ASIS to the umbilicus)

- Rovsing's sign (right lower quadrant pain elicited by palpation of the left lower quadrant)

- Dunphy's sign (increased abdominal pain with coughing)

Other associated signs such as the psoas sign (pain on external rotation or passive extension of the right hip suggesting retrocecal appendicitis) or obturator sign (pain on internal rotation of the right hip suggesting pelvic appendicitis) are rare. The time course of symptoms is variable but typically progresses from early appendicitis at 12 to 24 hours to perforation at greater than 48 hours. Seventy-five percent of patients present within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms. The risk of rupture is variable but is about 2% at 36 hours and increases about 5% every 12 hours after that.

Several practical scores have been defined to facilitate the prompt diagnosis of acute appendicitis, mainly based on the history and physical examination, accompanied by laboratory tests and imaging measures, including abdominal ultrasonography. Accordingly, evaluation of patients with suspicious signs and symptoms suggestive of acute appendicitis has been widely undertaken with Alvarado criteria since 1986. The highest score among Alvarado criteria is allocated to the tenderness in the right iliac fossa, leukocytosis, and each of the other predicted symptoms, including migratory right iliac fossa pain, nausea, and or vomiting, and anorexia, hold one score. Moreover, positive findings in the remaining indexes of physical examination, including fever and rebound tenderness in the right iliac fossa, would hold a similar score of one.