Only after ruling out local and systemic causes of burning symptoms can the patient be considered as having burning mouth syndrome.

The current management options include topical and systemic medications and a newer approach: cognitive behavioral therapy. Despite the need for standardized guidelines regarding its use, laser therapy has also reduced symptoms.

**Topical Medications**

Capsaicin is an analgesic used as a desensitizing agent that acts on the sensory afferent neurons to manage neuropathic pain.

Topical clonazepam successfully improves BMS symptoms.

Interestingly, unconventional topical agents, including a mouth rinse of tabasco sauce with water

Due to its short-term effect, topical anesthesia like lidocaine is not considered an effective treatment option.

**Systemic Medications**

Low doses of clonazepam (0.5 mg per day) are frequently prescribed for treating BMS pain.

Systemic clonazepam relieves BMS pain but does not improve taste dysfunction, xerostomia, or mood.

Systemic capsaicin can improve BMS symptoms but should be prescribed with caution because of its side effects, including gastric pain.

Even though they contribute to xerostomia symptoms, tricyclic antidepressants – amitriptyline, desipramine, clomipramine, imipramine, and nortriptyline – can also be used in managing patients with BMS.

Antipsychotic drugs like amisulpride and levosulpiride show good patient compliance in short-term treatments and proved to reduce patients’ burning symptoms (24-week course of 50 mg daily).

A study reported a complete resolution of symptoms after supplementation with vitamins BC, B12, folic acid, and minerals

Finally, hormone replacement therapy has been used to decrease oral burning symptoms in peri- and post-menopausal women.

**Behavioral Modulation**

Relaxation and cognitive restructuring are two cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) techniques for BMS treatment. In the relaxation technique, patients learn focused breathing and muscle relaxation to alleviate pain.

**Low-level Laser Therapy (LLLT)**

Low-level laser therapy stimulates the production and secretion of serotonin and β-endorphins and decreases bradykinin secretion, alleviating burning symptoms.