SCS and FPR are indirect techniques. Indirect techniques require the clinician to place the patient into a position of ease, away from the restrictive barrier

During SCS, the clinician first will need to locate a tender point (TP), sometimes called Jones tender points. For the thoracic spine, there are twelve anterior (AT1-12), twelve posterior (PT1-12), and four lateral (LAT5-8) tender points. Each TP corresponds to a thoracic vertebra; for example, AT1 correlates with thoracic vertebrae T1.

For the anterior TPs 1-8, the patient will be supine, and the clinician will be seated at the head of the table. For AT 9-12, the patient will be supine, and the clinician will be standing on the side of the patient where the TP is. AT1 is located at the sternal notch. AT2-8 are all located below the sternal notch in a row down the sternum, ending at the xiphoid process. The clinician will modify the patient's position by flexing the patient's head towards their sternum. AT9 is located superior/laterally from the umbilicus, AT10-11 are located inferior/laterally from the umbilicus, and AT12 is located on the superior portion of the iliac crest.

The clinician will modify the patient's position by flexing the patient's hips and knees and resting them on the clinician's leg, which should be positioned on the table. The clinician should then cross the patient's leg that is farther from the clinician over the patient's other leg, to induce side bending and rotating away from the TP. The lateral TP's are located at the costal cartilages of the rib of the corresponding vertebrae. The patient will be seated, and the clinician will be behind the patient with their leg on the table. The clinician will modify the patient's position by rotating them towards the clinician's leg and away from the TP. The posterior TP's are located at the ends of the transverse processes of the corresponding vertebrae. The patient is prone, and the clinician is standing on the opposite side of the TP. For the upper TP's, modify by pulling the patient's shoulder back on the same side of the TP. For the lower TP's, modify by pulling the patient's pelvis back on the same side of the TP.

After locating a TP, the clinician will ask the patient what they rate their pain at the tender point on a scale of 1 to 10. The clinician will modify the patient's position based on the TP location until the patient reports their pain has decreased to a 3 out of 10 or less on the pain scale. Once the pain is reportedly a 3 out of 10 or less, the clinician will hold the modified patient position for a total of ninety seconds. After ninety seconds, the clinician will passively return the patient to neutral.

Before treating the thoracic spine with FPR, a diagnosis of the spine with Fryette's principles is necessary. Fryette's principle says that a group curve will typically be neutral, rotated, and side bent in different directions (e.g., T1-T3NRLSR). It also states that if there is a single vertebra that is dysfunctional, it will typically be non-neutral (flexed or extended), rotated, and side bent to the same side (e.g., T1FRLSL). Since FPR is indirect, place the patient away from the restrictive barrier or into the diagnosis.

The patient will be seated, and the clinician will be standing behind the patient. To straighten the patient's thoracic kyphosis, have them sit as straight as possible. Ask the patient to cross their arms. The clinician should place their forearm on the opposite shoulder to which the TP is located. The clinician's other hand should be monitoring the thoracic vertebrae of concern. Once both the patient and clinician are in the correct position, induce the patient into their diagnosis, and add a compressive force with the forearm that is resting on the patient's shoulder for 3 to 5 seconds.