# Introduction

Neuropraxia is the mildest form of traumatic peripheral nerve injury. It is characterized by focal segmental demyelination at the site of injury without disruption of axon continuity and its surrounding connective tissues. This condition results in blockage of nerve conduction and transient weakness or paresthesia. Complete recovery is the expectation upon spontaneous remyelination—peripheral nerve injury (PNI) organizes into five categories that clinicians use today. Sunderland stratified and expanded Seddon's (1943) classification into Grade I, refers focal segmental demyelination; Grade II refers to damaged axon with intact endoneurium; Grade III refers to damaged axon and endoneurium with intact perineurium; Grade IV refers to the damaged axon, endoneurium, and perineurium with intact epineurium; and Grade V refers to complete transection (Table 1).

Neuropraxia, and PNI in general, can be secondary to trauma from sports, accidents, or improper positioning.

# Structure and Function

Neuronal cells, glial cells, and stromal cells comprise the peripheral nervous system. The nerves are consist of different combinations of sensory, motor, and autonomic neurons. Motor and autonomic neurons are efferent neurons that receive signals from the central nervous system, while sensory neurons are afferent neurons that receive signals from specialized cell types (e.g., Pacinian corpuscles).

The stromal connective tissues are the endoneurium, perineurium, epineurium. They are important scaffold (mechanical and protective role) for the nerve and are essential in comprehending and classifying peripheral nerve injuries. Each myelinated or unmyelinated axon is enclosed by the endoneurium, which consists of collagen fibers. Axons are grouped together in bundles called a fascicle. The perineurium surrounds each fascicle and separates extracellular space from intrafascicular endoneurial space. It is composed of specialized myofibroblasts and intercellular tight junctions. The outermost stromal layer is the epineurium, which is rich in collagen fibers. It is composed of two parts, the epifascicular and epineural epineurium. The epifascicular epineurium or internal epineurium encases and separates fascicles while the epineural epineurium or external epineurium is more superficial and surrounds the nerve trunk proper. The external epineurium defines a nerve anatomically.

Schwann cells are glial cells that enclose nerves in a layer of myelin. It also releases neurotrophic factors such as nerve growth factor (NGF), which provide trophic support. The myelin enhances conduction velocity by restricting the sites of ionic transfer in the axon to the nodes of Ranvier; this results in saltatory conduction, an expedient, "jumping" action potential propagation. There are myelinated and myelinated nerve fibers. The most heavily myelinated fibers are type Aα (efferent to muscles, for the motor function), followed by Type Aβ (afferent from skin and joints, for tactile & proprioception), type Aγ (efferent to muscle spindles, for muscle tone), type Aδ (from afferent sensory nerves; for pain, cold, temperature and touch) and the least myelinated is type B (preganglionic sympathetic, for various autonomic functions). Type C is unmyelinated and is responsible for multiple autonomic functions, pain, temperature, and touch.

# Embryology

The peripheral nervous system (PNS), like the central nervous system, arise from the neural plate. The cells at the neural plate margin give rise to neural crest cells. Neural crest cells migrate extensively throughout the embryo, which contributes to the majority of glial cells and neurons in the PNS. At the cranial level, the PNS has a dual origin, the ectodermal placode, and cranial neural crest cells. The placodes generate the "sense" organs (ears, nose, the lens of the eye) and cranial sensory ganglia. Caudally, the entire peripheral nervous system derives from the neural crest cells. The neural crest cells contribute to sympathetic ganglia and the dorsal root of the PNS. The dorsal root ganglia form bilaterally beside the developing spinal cord. It is sensory and innervates the skin and organs for proprioception, injury, and temperature. Other neural crest cells migrate ventrally, forming the sympathetic chain ganglia, which innervate various organs along the trunk.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Within the nerve fascicles are the endoneurial microvessels and investing perineurium. Together, they form the blood-nerve barrier (BNB).

Meanwhile, the epineurial macro vessels are composed of anastomosing plexus derived from the extrinsic blood vessel supplying the nerve.

# Surgical Considerations

Neurapraxia, as a complication of perioperative injuries, is usually via compression. Inappropriate perioperative position and/or poor padding are the main culprits. Examples include ulnar nerve damage in the park bench position, due to increased pressure and excessive flexion at the level of the elbow; the radial nerve suffers injury due to compression between the humerus and the edge of the operating table

Local anesthesia (LA) can cause neurapraxia through different mechanisms. One way is by causing vasoconstriction, which leads to nerve ischemia. It can also produce chemical nerve injury.

# Clinical Significance

The true incidence of neurapraxia is challenging to assess due to the following factors: It is reported as peripheral nerve injury in general, and PNI are almost always missed, underreported, and underestimated.

Neurapraxia typically results from mild traction or compression of the nerve. On the other end of the spectrum, neurotmesis result from transection injuries such as laceration, penetrating injuries, or gunshot wounds.

Based on a retrospective study, from 1989 to 2014, of 1124 patients (1418 nerve lesions), results showed the most common cause of PNI is vehicular accidents (46.4%), which affected mostly young men. Meanwhile, of the 866 cases with identified etiology, other causes are: penetrating trauma (23.9%), falls (10.9%), gunshot wounds (6.6%), car accidents involving pedestrians (2.7%), sports-related (2.4%) and miscellaneous (7.2%).

Most peripheral nerve compression injuries fall under Grade I or neurapraxia, which commonly occur in areas where the nerve passes through narrow anatomical openings. Compressions can be acute or chronic. Proposed mechanisms that appear to give rise to nerve compression and traction injuries include narrow openings and superficial nerve locations, which makes the nerve and its blood supply vulnerable to mechanical compression,

Patients with peripheral nerve injuries usually present with sensory or motor function disorders.

In these cases, a good knowledge of anatomy is beneficial.

Differential diagnosis includes peripheral neuropathies due to diabetes, hypothyroidism, alcohol, and malnutrition, radiculopathy, myelopathy, spinal cord trauma or infarction, muscle diseases.

The history and neurologic examination can diagnose a specific nerve involvement (PNI); however, the severity of the nerve damage is difficult to distinguish. The electrodiagnostic study, electromyography (EMG), and nerve conduction studies(NCS)), can differentiate neurapraxia, axonotmesis, and neurotmesis. It can localize the lesion and help in prognostication (Table 1).

Blood investigations (complete blood count, liver and renal function, blood glucose, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and vitamin B12) should be requested to evaluate non-traumatic causes of peripheral nerve injury.

The management in peripheral nerve injury has four goals: to identify the lesion, to correct the pathology, to alleviate the symptoms, and to inform, reassure, and support the patient.

Initial treatment includes rest, physical rehabilitation, orthotic measures (e.g., splints, foot care, limb supports), avoidance of the aggravating activity, and pain relievers for neuropathic pain (e.g., analgesics, antidepressants, anticonvulsants, corticosteroids, anesthetics).

As the mildest form of peripheral nerve injury, neurapraxia has an excellent prognosis. Complete recovery due to axon remyelination is the expectation within days to weeks.

# Other Issues

Nerve conduction studies are performed by stimulating a nerve using an external electrode in two different locations with its receiving electrode placed over the muscle or skin supplied by the nerve. The motor response is called compound muscle action potential (CMAP). CMAP reflects the sum of motor unit potentials stimulated. The amplitude is directly proportional to the number of depolarized axons. When the amplitude of the CMAP no longer changes, this means that all the axons are stimulated. On the other hand, the sensory response is called sensory nerve action potential (SNAP). SNAPs aid in determining whether the lesion is post-ganglionic or pre-ganglionic, which ultimately helps in localizing proximal lesions. The parameters measured in NCS are amplitude, latency (the time it takes to generate a response [i.e., CMAP or SNAP] from the time of administering the stimulus), and conduction velocity. In neurapraxia, CMAP and SNAP can be elicited distal to the injury. Proximally, NCV shows partial or complete conduction block, varying degrees of decreased CMAP and SNAP amplitude, and reduced conduction velocity. When remyelination is complete, these changes improve completely or partially.

Meanwhile, EMG is performed by directly inserting a needle electrode in the muscle that is at rest and during contraction, which can record action potentials in the muscle. It helps determine the chronicity of injury and differentiate if the cause of weakness is neuropathic or myopathic. It is used to detect abnormal spontaneous activity at rest, insertional activity, and motor unit action potential (MUAP) during voluntary contraction. The abnormal spontaneous activity aids in determining the onset of injury, the probable location, nature, and severity of the lesion. It includes fibrillation (FIB) and positive sharp waves (PSW). In neurapraxic lesions, the muscle does not reveal any abnormal spontaneous activity (i.e., absent FIB and PSW), and there are normal morphology and poor MUAP recruitment on voluntary contraction.

The electrodiagnostic study can be falsely reassuring from the time of injury up to two weeks because, at this time, Wallerian degeneration (i.e., in axonotmesis) is not yet complete.

In the retrospective study of 1124 cases, neurapraxia electrodiagnostic studies showed absent or rare FIB and PSW, normal MUAP morphology with reduced recruitment, and normal or reduced/absent SNAP or CMAP.

There have been recent advances made in the diagnostic evaluation of peripheral nerve injuries. The high-resolution ultrasound imagings help in comparing the cross-sectional area of the concerned nerve with that of its healthy counterparts.

Similarly, studies have verified the highest sensitivity of the proton density fat-suppressed MR  sequences in ruling out peripheral nerve injury in comparison to that of the high-resolution ultrasound studies.

Moreover, the usage of the fractional anisotropy, that measures the axonal density as well as the diffusion pattern along the nerve fibers, in conjunction with the tractography, helps in the earliest assessment of the continuity of the fiber tracts as well as visualization of any wasting of the fascicles, in comparison to that of their healthy counterparts.