The diagnosis of CAIS and PAIS includes assessing clinical and biochemical features, 46 XY karyotype, and exclusion of defects in testosterone synthesis. Furthermore, confirmation is possible with genetic testing.

**Exclusion of Defects in Testosterone Synthesis**

Studies suggest measuring levels of testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) in the first year of life. The expected postnatal surge in gonadotropins and testosterone is usually present in PAIS but may not occur in CAIS as the gonadotropins surge is androgen-dependent.

17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency: CAIS and PAIS individuals have normal testosterone responses after the hCG stimulation test.

5-alpha-reductase deficiency: Differentiation of CAIS and PAIS from 5-alpha-reductase is done by analyzing the ratio of testosterone to DHT in serum. In patients with steroid 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency, the production of DHT decreases, and the plasma ratio of testosterone to DHT increases. In most girls/boys with PAIS, the production of DHT and the ratio of testosterone to DHT is normal. Women with CAIS may have secondary 5-alpha-reductase deficiency due to a decreased mass of the urogenital tract tissues, which normally produce DHT.

**Importance of Genetic Testing in the Evaluation of AIS**

In addition to clinical features, biochemical testing may not be adequate to establish the diagnosis of CAIS or PAIS. Therefore, molecular genetic studies become imperative to diagnose CAIS or PAIS. CAIS confirmation is possible with genetic testing locations where the typical loss-of-function mutations in the coding sequence of the androgen receptor exist. The AR gene is on chromosome Xq11-12. It encodes a protein that composes the typical three major functional domains of the nuclear receptor superfamily. In patients with AIS, research has described large structural alterations along with over 1000 mutations. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis is a study available to detect deletions or duplications of exons or the entire gene.