Over the past few decades, the incidence of insulin resistance has skyrocketed primarily due to our lifestyle and the rising incidence of obesity. Without treatment, the condition is associated with numerous complications including fatal cardiac events. The management of insulin resistance is best done with an interprofessional team. The consultations most indicated for the treatment of insulin resistance include:

- Obesity medicine specialist: Medical management for weight loss and weight management

- Bariatric surgeon: Bariatric surgery is effective for weight loss in individuals who satisfy criteria for surgery

- Endocrinology: Early and aggressive management of both type I and type II diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and PCOS demonstrate merit.

- Cardiology and cardiac surgery: Management of the vascular complications of insulin resistance.

- Neurology: Management of the cerebrovascular and peripheral neurologic complications of insulin resistance

- Vascular surgery: Surgical management of both carotid artery disease and PAD

- Nurse diabetic educator assists the clinician in educating patient on regular evaluation and treatment.

- Dietitian to educate the patient on a healthy diet

- Physical therapist to educate the patient on the benefits of weight loss

- The pharmacist to educate the patient on the importance of medication compliance. This involves taking medications to lower blood pressure, lipids, and diabetes. The pharmacist should also encourage the patient to stop smoking and abstain from alcohol-both risk factors for insulin resistance.

- Social worker to ensure that the patient has support and finances to obtain treatment

The key is encouraging lifestyle changes in these patients. Dietary intervention should include a combination of calorie restriction and reduction of high glycemic index carbohydrates. Physical activity improves both calorie expenditure and insulin sensitivity in muscle tissue.

Outcomes

For those who remain compliant with therapy, the outcomes are good but unfortunately, many patients remain non-compliant and suffer adverse cardiac or CNS events. This is why an interprofessional team approach is needed in the management of these patients.