History and physical examination can help tremendously to guide further work-up. The clinician needs to think in an organized fashion with regards to end-organ deficiencies or excess and their manifestations as well as local complications of an enlarged pituitary gland.

If a patient has hypothyroidism, they may experience symptoms such as weight gain, fatigue, cold intolerance, constipation, dry skin, and irregular menses in females.

The history should also include asking about prior diagnoses of endocrine conditions, including hypothyroidism. Current medical diagnoses and medication lists are important to enquire about as well. Especially in patients already on thyroxine treatment, enquiring about adherence is vital. Family history should be noted, including the presence of any autoimmune or endocrine conditions that run in the family.

The physical examination needs to include a head-to-toe approach. Starting with the head, inspect for typical facies such as a "peaches and cream" complexion or loss of the lateral third of the eyebrow in those with hypothyroidism. A comprehensive eye examination should be performed, inspecting for periorbital edema, including testing visual fields and performing fundoscopy. Neck examination should include examining the thyroid for goiter or palpable nodules. Examining the extremities should include looking for dry skin, nail changes such as onycholysis or brittle nails, proximal muscle weakness, and checking reflexes that can show a delayed relaxation in patients with hypothyroidism. Moving on to the chest, the clinician should evaluate for breast discharge, check the pulse for an irregularly irregular rhythm suggestive of atrial fibrillation, or bradycardia in severe hypothyroidism, evaluate for a very soft or inaudible heart sounds that may suggest the presence of a pericardial effusion and finally check for reduced breath sounds at the lung base with dullness to percussion that may suggest the presence of a pleural effusion. For children specifically, the clinician should include the height and weight growth charts, calculation of body mass index (BMI), and Tanner classification.