# Introduction

The dexamethasone suppression test (DST) is used in the evaluation of endogenous Cushing syndrome (CS) by assessing for the lack of suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis by exogenous corticosteroids.

Dexamethasone is a potent synthetic corticosteroid (dexamethasone 0.75 mg = prednisone 5 mg = methylprednisolone 4 mg = hydrocortisone 20 mg) with high affinity for the glucocorticoid receptors and long duration of action (biological half-life 36 to 54 hours; plasma half-life 4 to 5 hours).

The dexamethasone suppression test is also used to investigate mild autonomous cortisol excess (MACE) in patients with incidentalomas. For the diagnosis of CS and also MACE, a serum cortisol concentration of 1.8 µg/dL (50 nmol/L) is the widely recommended cut-off that increases the diagnostic sensitivity of the test to approximately 95%.

# Pathophysiology

The HPA axis, a primary neuroendocrine system, helps maintain homeostatic function and the stress response.

Under basal conditions, only about 5% to 10% of circulating cortisol is free.

Unbound cortisol is filtered at the glomerulus and excreted. This fraction constitutes less than 1% of the total cortisol synthesized daily; the rest is excreted as soluble metabolites and glucuronide conjugates.

Serum cortisol, also called the stress hormone, exerts negative feedback on both the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary, inhibiting the secretion of CRH and ACTH, respectively. This positive/negative feedback mechanism helps regulate serum cortisol levels and the stress response.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Both serum and heparinized plasma are suitable specimens for measuring cortisol in the blood.

Urinary free cortisol can be measured by immunoassay or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) methods. These procedures require an extraction step using methylene chloride, and it is customary to monitor the efficiency of the extraction technique by extraction of a urine control with known cortisol concentration.

Immunoassays are the main methods for the estimation of cortisol in clinical laboratories. These immunoassays are competitive immunoassays, where cortisol in the sample competes with labeled cortisol for a limited number of anti-cortisol antibodies.

Chromatographic methods are an alternative to immunoassay for the determination of cortisol. They have the advantage of less interference, but these methods are time-consuming and unsuitable for routine analysis.

# Testing Procedures

**Types of Dexamethasone Suppression Tests (DST)**

**Low-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (LDDST)**

LDDST helps in the initial diagnosis of Cushing syndrome as either a screening or a confirmatory test.

- Overnight, 1 mg test: The overnight test is the most commonly used screening test due to ease and convenience. Dexamethasone 1 mg is administered orally between 11 PM and midnight. Serum cortisol levels are drawn the next morning between 8 and 9 AM.

- Two-day, 2 mg test: Dexamethasone 0.5 mg is administered orally every 6 hours (9 AM, 3 PM, 9 PM, 3 AM) for two days (total dose 4 mg). Serum cortisol level is drawn 6 hours (9 AM) after the last administered dose.

**High-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (HDDST)**

Once the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome is confirmed, the next step is to categorize ACTH-independent vs. ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome by checking the plasma ACTH levels. In ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome, the plasma ACTH is low or undetectable, indicating an adrenal etiology (causing pituitary suppression of ACTH). In ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, the plasma ACTH is inappropriately normal or high, suggesting either a pituitary or an ectopic source.

In ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, HDDST can help distinguish a pituitary (i.e., Cushing disease) from an ectopic source of ACTH overproduction. The principle behind the HDDST is that the overproduction of ACTH seen in Cushing disease (but not ectopic tumors) can undergo either partial or complete suppression by high doses of dexamethasone (approximately 8 mg). As in the LDDST, the HDDST utilizes oral dexamethasone as either an overnight or two-day test.

- Overnight, 8 mg test: Baseline morning serum cortisol is measured, and oral dexamethasone 8 mg is administered between 11 PM and midnight. Repeat serum cortisol is drawn the following morning (between 8 and 9 AM).

- Two-day, 8 mg test: On day 1, a baseline morning serum cortisol or 24-hour urinary free cortisol (UFC) from the day before is obtained. Dexamethasone 2 mg is administered orally every 6 hours (9 AM, 3 PM, 9 PM, 3 AM) for two days to complete a total dose of 16 mg over days 1 and 2. A urine sample for UFC is collected simultaneously with dexamethasone administration. Additionally, serum cortisol levels are checked 6 hours after the last dose of dexamethasone (9 AM of day 2).

**Intravenous Dexamethasone Suppression Test**

This test helps in the initial diagnosis of Cushing syndrome while overcoming concerns of drug compliance and malabsorption.

**Dexamethasone Suppressed Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone Test**

Based on the rationale that glucocorticoid suppression of the HPA axis can be overcome by corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation in Cushing disease and not in pseudo-Cushing syndrome (physiologic hypercortisolism), this test helps distinguish the two entities. Dexamethasone 0.5 mg every 6 hours (12 PM, 6 PM, 12 AM, 6 AM) is given orally for 48 hours. Two hours after the last dose of dexamethasone, an intravenous CRH dose of 1 mcg/kg is administered (8 AM), and serum cortisol is drawn 15 minutes later.

# Interfering Factors

1. Iatrogenic hypercortisolism can cause exogenous Cushing syndrome.

2. Pseudo-Cushing syndrome, also called physiological or non-neoplastic hypercortisolism, is seen in conditions like alcohol use disorder, obesity, insulin resistance, and neuropsychiatric disorders due to HPA axis stimulation.

3. In any acute illness, be it emotional or physical, a stress response can occur via stimulation of the HPA axis, resulting in elevated ACTH and cortisol levels. Evaluation for Cushing syndrome should take place after the resolution of acute stress.

4. Corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG): Approximately 90% of circulating cortisol is protein-bound. Currently available assays measure the total cortisol (free and protein-bound); conditions resulting in elevated levels of circulating CBG, such as pregnancy or use of estrogen-containing medications, or reduced levels of circulating CBG, such as malnutrition or nephrotic syndrome, may lead to spurious results on DSTs.

5. Dexamethasone bioavailability: Malabsorption, altered metabolism, or non-compliance with taking the medication can result in variable bioavailability of dexamethasone, confounding the results. Dexamethasone is metabolized by the liver via CYP3A4.

6. Improper urine collection: An inadequately collected urine sample for urinary-free cortisol (UFC) leads to diagnostic errors. For this reason, the urine sample should include testing for 24-hour urinary creatinine excretion in addition to cortisol.

7. Others: Cyclic Cushing syndrome and glucocorticoid receptor polymorphisms are rare causes of false test results.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

**Low-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (LDDST)**

In either of the LDDSTs (overnight or two-day), a serum cortisol level of 1.8 mcg/dL (50 nmol/L) is the recommended cut-off value that increases the diagnostic sensitivity of the test to approximately 95%.

**High-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (HDDST)**

A reduction in either urinary-free cortisol (UFC) or serum cortisol greater than 50% overnight during a two-day HDDST makes Cushing disease (CD) the likely source of ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome. At a cut-off value of 50% suppression, HDDST provides a sensitivity and specificity of 60 to 100%. Increasing the cut-off value to greater than 90% cortisol suppression increases the specificity of diagnosing Cushing disease to almost 100%, albeit at a much-reduced sensitivity.

**Intravenous Dexamethasone Suppression Test**

The diagnosis of Cushing syndrome is made if the day-2 serum cortisol level is greater than 20% of the baseline value [or greater than 4.7 mcg/dL (130 nmol/L)] with a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 96%.

**Dexamethasone Suppressed Corticotropin-releasing Hormone Test**

Serum cortisol levels greater than 1.4 mcg/dL (39 nmol/L) at 15 minutes suggest Cushing disease with a 90% to 100% sensitivity and 50 to 100% specificity.

# Clinical Significance

Iatrogenic hypercortisolism is the most common cause of Cushing syndrome. It should be recognized before these individuals are subject to further diagnostic testing; instead, the focus should be on titrating down (or discontinuing, if feasible) the prescribed steroid dosages.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. If necessary, laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance.

Westgard multi-rules are used to evaluate the quality control runs. If a run is declared out of control, investigate the system (instrument, standards, controls, etc.) to determine the cause of the problem. Do not perform any analysis until the problem has been resolved.

Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious. Exercise the standard precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Primary care providers may initially evaluate patients with suspected Cushing syndrome prior to referring them to an endocrinologist for further workup. Clear communication and care coordination between clinician, patient, and nurse are of paramount importance as the correct implementation of DST and sample collection can have a dramatic impact on these factors on subsequent results.