Improved patient outcomes are the most significant clinical impacts associated with a nursing shared governance structure within healthcare organizations. Numerous studies have found improved results for nursing-sensitive indicators such as catheter-associated urinary tract infections, hospital-acquired pressure ulcers, falls with injuries, and central line-associated bloodstream infections using shared governance structures and processes. Knowledge of this benefit should aid in the desire for all nurses to be involved in this type of initiative.

Improved job satisfaction among nurses is also a positive clinical impact for those implementing a shared governance structure. Nurses are more engaged in policy development and revision, helping to give them a better overall picture of the hospital environment. Nurses are also more satisfied when they see their ideas at work within the various patient care improvement projects. Giving the nurse a sense of belonging and loyalty to their healthcare organizations also increases morale and performance.

Successfully shared governance programs and structures assist healthcare organizations with internal succession planning. Bedside nurses become actively engaged with decision making, policies, and procedures, which helps them to see their leadership skills come to life. Nurses move from being members to the chairperson of the shared governance councils. Active learning occurs during this participatory process. Growth internally of nursing leaders helps healthcare organizations promote from within, improve the culture through career ladder plans, and allows for investing in the future of the organization.