Once the DFU is assessed and staged, it is helpful to obtain certain laboratory and radiographic data.

Baseline CBC with differential count, chemistry with BUN and creatinine, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein to assess for osteomyelitis, as well as a glycosylated hemoglobin level are all helpful. If bone involvement is suspected, plain film radiograph followed by MRI or a 3-phase bone scan may be necessary.

Wounds that are staged as a Wagner 3 or higher that have failed conventional wound care for 30 days should be referred for hyperbaric medicine consultation. Chronic wounds are oxygen starved as are the periwound tissues. The only way to increase oxygen delivery to these hypoxic tissues is with hyperbaric oxygen treatments. Hyperbaric oxygen increases oxygen concentration to the wound, stimulates angiogenesis in and around the wound, facilitates delivery of certain antibiotics to the tissues, stimulates fibroblasts, and encourages migration of growth factors to the wound bed.

Hyperbaric oxygen is, simply, 100% oxygen delivered under supra-atmospheric pressure. The patient is treated in either a multiplace or monoplace pressure vessel for human occupancy or a chamber. Treatments usually are conducted at 2 to 2.4 atmospheres absolute. This pressure is equivalent to 33 feet and 42 feet of sea water. Patients usually are treated for approximately 60 to 90 minutes every day for 30 to 60 treatments. Patients at risk of oxygen toxicity at these hyperoxic levels are given 5-minute air breaks every 30 minutes throughout the treatment, during which time they breathe 21% oxygen from a face mask or handheld mouthpiece. This decreases the risk of seizures from oxygen toxicity to approximately 1:10,000 treatments.