Though the exact function and clinical significance of the K-complex is still a matter of debate and mystery, some disease states do show documented changes in the waveform.

**Alzheimer Disease**

The neurocognitive decline in Alzheimer disease based on MMSE scores is associated with a significant decrease in the frequency of K-complexes in the frontal region; this indicates that the neurodegenerative process of Alzheimer disease is maximal in the frontal lobes as well based on the location of K-complex changes.

**Insomnia**

Given the sleep protective role of the K-complex by inhibiting cortical arousal, the postulate is that they must be reduced in insomnia and is especially associated with increased night-time awakenings. However, in one study, there was no deficiency in the frequency and density of K-complexes in those who have chronic psychophysiological insomnia.

**Epilepsy**

Since seizures are associated with abnormal neuronal discharges, changes may be seen in the K-complex, too, since it is also a phenomenon of electrical brain activity. Most individuals with primary generalized epilepsy suffer from epileptiform discharges and clinical seizures induced by a faulty arousal system. When a polyspike or spike discharge overlaps on a K-complex, it is termed as an epileptiform K-complex and occurs in focal and generalized epilepsy. The polyspike/spike is more frequent and sharper in generalized epilepsy when compared to a normal epileptiform K-complex. Nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy is an autosomal dominant disorder in which K-complexes not only increase but are almost always present at the start of a clinical seizure.

**Restless Legs Syndrome**

Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic, sleep-related movement disorder marked by an uncontrollable urge to move the legs, particularly when they are at rest with partial relief obtained after performing leg movement. Patients with this condition have an increased number of K-complexes, which often precede the leg movement. The dopamine enhancing drugs used to treat it reduce the leg movements but not the K-complexes, which suggests that the movement of the legs occurs secondary to the increased K-complexes, which is the primary event.

**Obstructive Sleep Apnea**

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a condition caused by the repetitive collapse of the airway during sleep, which leads to episodes of apnea and hypopnea. When compared with healthy individuals, the K-complex in patients of OSA has shorter durations, smaller amplitudes, and rougher positive waves.