# Introduction

Aerospace medicine involves investigating and optimizing human physiology in esoteric environments such as undersea, flight, mountain, and space. As opposed to the majority of medical disciplines in which pathophysiology gets addressed in a eubaric environment, here effects on normal physiology get addressed in an abnormal environment, which presents a myriad of challenges regarding environmental exposures and physiologic function.

# Issues of Concern

**Radiation**

Humans in the aerospace environment are exposed to an increased ionizing radiation index, leading to genetic and cytogenetic changes. One concern is that an unpredicted solar particle event (e.g., solar flares) may expose space crew to unacceptably high radiation levels and cause acute radiation syndrome, which typically manifests following whole-body or partial-body exposure greater than 0.5 Gy.

**Microgravity**

Microgravity refers to an environment in which gravitational force is less than that experienced at the surface of Earth, including weightlessness. Primary musculoskeletal effects include loss of bone mineral density and deconditioning of skeletal muscle.

**Acceleration**

Acceleration is typically a factor during flights involving aggressive maneuvering. Importantly, the mechanics of rotational acceleration about various flight axes produce an effective increase in the force of gravity sustained by aircrew in the physiologic vertical axis (cephalad to foot). This effect becomes quantified in multiples of the normal acceleration due to gravitational force, expressed as G. For example, a 70-kg pilot executing a 9-G turn would experience the effects equivalent to a weight of 630 kg, resulting in pooling of blood volume in capacitance vasculature of the lower extremities, which reduces the ability of the cardiovascular system to ensure cerebral perfusion.

**Musculoskeletal Impact**

Musculoskeletal challenges are frequently incurred in high-performance aircraft as they undergo close air combat maneuvering against another maneuvering aircraft. These aircraft routinely attain and even sustain 9-G rotational acceleration, subjecting the pilot to an axial force of 9 times the force of gravity. This force frequently coincides with the pilot attempting to maneuver physically within the cockpit to maintain sight of the adversary aircraft, requiring the pilot to aggressively rotate, flex, and extend the neck and upper trunk against this force. As a result, fighter pilots often experience acute strain injuries of the cervical and paraspinal musculature of the upper back. High G force subjects the spinal column to significant stress. Pilots exposed to high G forces have an increased incidence of chronic neck and back pain compared with pilots exposed to low G forces.

**Ventilation**

Ventilation must occur in various environments, from undersea divers breathing compressed air to mountain climbers ascending through hypoxic environments. A range of variables presents to the respiratory system for compensation, including changes in partial pressures of breathing gas as well as their relative concentrations. Hypoxia, which refers to inadequate delivery of oxygen to the tissues, can occur in the aerospace medicine environment in the form of hypoxic hypoxia, in which there is the inadequate environmental partial pressure of oxygen (PO2).

**Hypobaric Changes**

Both hyperbaric and hypobaric conditions present unique challenges to the cardiovascular system. The hypobaric environment below 2500 m (8200 ft) is usually well tolerated by healthy individuals without pathological conditions, but the rate of ascent, genetic factors, age, and underlying pathophysiology will influence changes in the body during ascents.

**Hyperbaric Changes**

The hyperbaric environment is less frequently encountered and is most commonly associated with scuba diving or artificial depth in a hyperbaric chamber. Although an oversimplification, it is easy to conceptualize the physiologic changes at altitude as an inverse to that which occurs at depth; however, it is important to understand that the significant difference in density between water and air leads to more abrupt changes in partial pressures of gases at depth. Whereas the atmospheric pressure drops to one-half of its value at nearly 20000 ft, it requires a depth of only 33 ft of seawater to double atmospheric pressure. Thus, the short-term physiologic changes are mostly related to the behaviors of gas under pressure (Henry’s law and Boyle’s law) and give rise to many unique disease states when ascent, descent, and time at depth are not under strict control. Although there are notable and expected cardiovascular changes at normally encountered depths (reduction in heart rate, cardiac output, and preservation of stroke volume),

# Clinical Significance

Traditional medicine involves the diagnosis and treatment of pathology in a normal environment. The aerospace medicine clinician must remain cognizant of the fact that, in general, addressing the physical effects of the aerospace environment on professional aviators, divers, astronauts, etc., does not primarily comprise considerations of pathology but instead focuses on strategies to mitigate the deleterious effects of an extreme environment on normal human physiology. For example, high-performance tactical fighter pilots are exhaustively screened to ensure optimal health. They are also the population most frequently involved in G-LOC occurrences. Interventions to mitigate this have included aircrew training and conditioning to maximize G resistance and the development of novel garments (G suit) to compress the lower extremities under G and reduce pooling of blood in the extremities and optimize cerebral perfusion. Consequently, the frequency of G-LOC has been reduced, augmenting the safety and efficacy of flying operations.