Note: The technique described here is intended for a healthcare provider performing one-rescuer CPR on an adult victim in the out-of-hospital setting. The modifications for children, infants, and in-hospital CPR are listed below. These recommendations are current as of the 2015 American Heart Association's Guidelines Update for CPR and Emergency Cardiac Care.

The immediate recognition of cardiac arrest is essential to initiate the emergency medical services (EMS) response and begin CPR as soon as possible. In this era of universal mobile phone availability, it is now possible to call 911 while remaining with the victim. Make sure that the scene is safe, then call for help. Simultaneously, begin CPR by first performing chest compressions (C), followed by opening the airway (A) and delivering rescue breaths (B) (the CAB sequence as compared to the former ABC sequence). The hands are placed on the lower half of the sternum, and chest compressions are begun at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per minute. The goal is to depress the sternum to a depth of at least two inches while avoiding excessive depth of compressions. The chest wall should be allowed to recoil fully on the upstroke to maintain coronary artery perfusion pressure.

After 30 chest compressions, the rescuer performs a head tilt/chin lift maneuver to open the airway (assuming there is no suspicion of a cervical spinal injury). If a cervical spine injury is suspected, the airway is opened using the jaw-thrust maneuver without extending the head. Two rescue breaths are administered: the rescuer takes a "regular" breath (not deep or excessive) and delivers a rescue breath lasting approximately one second, which should be enough just to allow the chest to rise. The process is repeated for a second rescue breath prior to resuming chest compressions.

Ideally, a healthcare provider inclined to intervene as an out-of-hospital rescuer should have ready access to a barrier device such as a rescue mask. However, this is not always the case. Mouth-to-mouth rescue breaths have been the alternative, which many untrained rescuers are hesitant to perform, especially on an unknown victim. This is a decision that healthcare providers must make for themselves. Compression-only CPR has been accepted as appropriate for untrained lay rescuers. If extenuating circumstances prohibit a healthcare provider in the out-of-hospital setting from performing rescue breathing without a barrier device, compression-only CPR should be performed until EMS arrives.

The cycle of 30 chest compressions alternated with two rescue breaths is continued until an AED becomes available or until additional help arrives.  If an AED arrives, its pads should be applied to the front and back of the patient, taking care to minimize any delay in restarting chest compressions.  Most modern devices verbalize further instructions—after attached to the patient, AEDs will detect the current cardiac rhythm and advise whether the patient should receive defibrillation. If the AED advises a shock, cease chest compressions and stay clear of the patient until defibrillation is completed.  After defibrillation is completed, or if no shock is advised, immediately resume cycles of chest compressions and rescue breaths following the CAB sequence until additional help arrives.