# Continuing Education Activity

Cerebellar hemorrhage or hematoma is a type of intracranial hemorrhage in which the bleeding is located in the posterior fossa or cerebellum. This condition is most frequently seen in middle-aged and older adults. Cerebellar hematomas can block the normal flow of cerebral spinal fluid leading to hydrocephalus, increased intracranial pressure, and the onset of symptoms. Cerebellar hemorrhage can be spontaneous or secondary to stroke or trauma. Cerebellar hemorrhages are associated with high morbidity and mortality. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of a cerebellar hematoma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify clinical examination findings suggestive of a cerebellar hematoma.
- Describe diagnostic and imaging strategies for patients presenting with features concerning for cerebellar hematoma.
- Outline the treatment and management options for cerebellar hemorrhage.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the treatment of cerebellar hemorrhage and improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Cerebellar hemorrhage or hematoma is a type of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) where the bleeding is located in the posterior fossa or cerebellum and accounts for 9% to 10% of all ICH.

# Etiology

The most common non-traumatic etiology for cerebellar hemorrhage as for all intracranial hemorrhages is hypertensive vasculopathy causing microaneurysms and resultant rupture. Cerebellar hemorrhage from hypertension most commonly occurs in the middle-aged or older population, often in the dentate nucleus with extension to other areas from the rupture of microaneurysms along the penetrating small vessels. Other causes of cerebellar hemorrhage include trauma, coagulopathy (cirrhosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation or thrombocytopenia) or bleeding disorders (primary and drug-induced (anticoagulation, antiplatelet or thrombolytic medications)), ischemic stroke with hemorrhagic transformation, cerebral amyloid angiopathy,

The most common primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors to undergo hemorrhagic transformation are glioblastomas. The metastatic CNS tumors that are more prone to hemorrhage include lesions from the lung, breast, kidney, and melanomas. Cerebellar hemorrhage in younger patients may be due to substance abuse, trauma, or CNS aneurysms, or AVMs.

# Epidemiology

Nontraumatic intracranial hemorrhage varies by race and age, but overall it is the cause of 9% to 27% of strokes globally with an annual incidence of 12 to 31 per 100000 people.

# Pathophysiology

The cerebellar location is not unique as far as the causes of intracranial hemorrhage. The prevailing belief is that patients with long-standing hypertension have degenerative changes in the penetrating small blood vessel walls leading to the subsequent formation of microaneurysms that rupture and hemorrhage.

# History and Physical

Symptom onset is typically abrupt, with a significant variation of symptom presentation dependent on the location and size of the hemorrhage. Some patients with smaller cerebellar hemorrhage remain awake and may complain of headache, nausea, vomiting, vertigo, or ataxia. If the hemorrhage is large, patients may present with an altered level of consciousness or even unresponsiveness. Symptoms may change suddenly, correlating with hematoma expansion. Symptoms may also occur during stressful situations or strenuous activity. A detailed history is critical, noting any of the following: a history of hypertension, coagulopathy including chemically induced, head trauma, known history of an intracranial aneurysm, or arteriovenous malformation (AVM), history of malignancy, and use of sympathomimetic drugs (cocaine and amphetamines). Symptom presentation in descending order of frequency include the following:

- Abrupt onset headache

- Nausea and vomiting

- Difficulty with ambulation (truncal ataxia)

- Vertigo and dizziness

- Dysarthria

- Neck pain or nuchal rigidity

- Loss of consciousness or altered mental status

Physical examination is also variable and dependent on hemorrhage location, with some patients awake and others unresponsive. Cerebellar signs may include any combination of the following:

- Limb ataxia

- Dysarthria

- Nystagmus

- Abnormal gaze or facial weakness (cranial nerve palsy ipsilateral to the hematoma)

- Abnormal gait

# Evaluation

Noncontrast head computerized tomography (CT) imaging is quick and widely available so it is typically the first and most efficient method of evaluation for those patients who present with signs and symptoms of possible cerebellar hemorrhage. Most hemorrhages are readily identified as hyperdense lesions in the cerebellum. On occasion, dense calcification of the dentate nucleus can be confused with hemorrhage, but the absence of a mass effect, sharp margins, and bilateral presence should point more towards calcification over a hemorrhage. Contrast extravasation following an endovascular procedure will also appear dense like a cerebellar hemorrhage, but dual-energy CT can differentiate the two.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of cerebellar hemorrhage is dependent on the size of the hemorrhage in addition to the clinical presentation. Airway protection with endotracheal intubation may be necessary for patients who present with severely altered and depressed level of consciousness or altered mental status (GCS less than 8). Neurosurgical consultation should be obtained urgently after diagnosis to assist with optimal management and treatment. Small hemorrhages without significant mass effect can often be managed conservatively with admission to a critical care unit capable of frequent neurologic assessments. Large hemorrhages, typically greater than 3 to 4 cm, may require surgical intervention and evacuation, particularly if associated with edema, intraventricular extension, brainstem displacement, or hydrocephalus. If patients are intubated, normocarbia should be maintained. There is no need for prophylactic hyperventilation except in the extreme cases of impending brainstem herniation, and it should only be for a short period.

Patients with cerebellar hemorrhage often have an acute blood pressure elevation, as in any other case of intracranial hemorrhage. It is often a fine balance to aim to minimize hemorrhage growth and increased intracranial pressure while maintaining cerebral perfusion. A recent consensus recommendation believes it is safe to lower the blood pressure to less than 140 mm Hg systolic.

Anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet medications should be immediately discontinued in cases of cerebellar hemorrhage. The reversal of the coagulopathy should take place with an appropriate reversal agent. Patients on warfarin should receive vitamin K (10 mg) and factor replacement in the form of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) or prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC), both of which are effective.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for patients presenting with any combination of sudden onset of symptoms such as headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, or vertigo includes both central and peripheral disease processes.

Central causes:

- Acute demyelinating disorder such as multiple sclerosis (MS) or encephalitis

- Alcohol use disorder

- Cerebellar hemorrhage

- Cerebellar infarction

- Cerebellar neoplasm

- Cerebellitis

- Illicit drug use

- Medication toxicity (phenytoin or carbamazepine)

Peripheral causes:

- Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)

- Labyrinthitis

- Meniere disease

- Vestibular neuronitis

# Prognosis

The mortality associated with cerebellar hemorrhage can range from 25% to 57%.

# Complications

Significant cerebellar hemorrhage may have peri-hemorrhagic edema and mass effect, which, unfortunately, can cause multiple complications, including brainstem compression, cerebellar herniation, compression of the fourth ventricle with resultant obstructive hydrocephalus, an extension of hemorrhage into the ventricular system, and recurrent hemorrhage typically within the first 24 hours. There are two options for managing the mass effect from the cerebellar hemorrhage: (1) hyperosmolar agents or (2) decompressive surgery.

Osmolar therapy is used to reduce the space-occupying effects of hemorrhage and edema by increasing serum osmolality and facilitating an osmotic movement of water into the vasculature with resultant reactive vasoconstriction. The goal is an overall reduction in intracranial pressure and tissue shrinkage. There is no superiority of hypertonic saline over mannitol or vice versa for the treatment of intracranial hemorrhage. Hypertonic saline concentrations typically utilized for treatment are 3% (250 mL bolus), 10% (75 to 150 mL bolus), and 23.4% (30 mL bolus). Boluses and continuous infusions have the goal of sodium levels of 145 to 155 mmol/L and osmolality of 310 to 320 mOsm/kg.

Decompressive surgery of choice is a suboccipital craniectomy with hematoma evacuation.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Most cerebellar hemorrhages are hypertensive in origin. Patients suffering from hypertension should receive an education so that they are aware of all the potential risks and complications associated with poor control of their disease process. These patients should be encouraged to seek medical attention urgently if they develop worrisome symptoms.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of a cerebellar hemorrhage are with an interprofessional team that includes a combination of the following: emergency clinician, neurosurgeon, neurologist, primary care provider, intensivist, and acute practice provider. The nurses who usually monitor these patients have specialty training in neuroscience and know what signs and symptoms to watch for the progression of the disorder. They must discuss abnormal findings with the clinicians as quickly as possible. The interprofessional team also includes providers and pharmacists, which is considered the best approach to the management of these cases for optimal care and outcomes. The presentation of cerebellar hemorrhage may be subtle to a patient in extremis and is often not easy, requiring intensive management and treatment. The majority of patients are managed in a critical care setting with frequent neurologic assessments, blood pressure control, electrolyte, and intravenous fluid management, and supportive care. Management requires treatment with multiple pharmacologic agents. The pharmacist should manage medication reconciliation and consider potential drug interactions reporting to the team concerning drug interactions. [Level 5]

The outcome depends on the severity of the bleeding, the presence of neurological deficit, the age of the patient, and other associated co-morbidity. An interprofessional team approach to the evaluation and education of the patient and family will lead to the best outcomes.