Little equipment is needed for a field clinician to complete vestibular rehabilitation assessments and exercises. A thorough history is critical for understanding the underlying cause of a patient’s symptoms. As such, access to a detailed history (from the patient or caregiver) is needed to guide treatment. A surface sturdy enough for a patient to lay on is necessary for BPPV assessment and treatment (plinth, bed, etc.), as well as a chair or surface for the patient to sit on during oculomotor assessment comfortably.

Progression of gaze stabilization exercises requires increasing degrees of light and visually stimulating backgrounds with appropriate equipment. Initial vestibular treatment should be completed with a trained professional present to ensure the safety and maintenance of balance. Proper use of safety equipment, including parallel bars, gait belts, or tethers, should also be utilized to ensure the patient does not fall. If the patient is deemed able and safe to complete portions of exercises as part of the home exercise program, proper safety precautions should be maintained, including using a stable surface in front of them.

A stretcher capable of tilting may also be indicated for patients requiring canalith repositioning techniques who are not able to tolerate head extension.

It is important to note that ancillary testing is primarily only needed if the diagnosis is questionable or the patient has not demonstrated adequate response to an appropriate course of treatment.