**Involvement of Patient and Family**

The patient and family can assist in making informed decision-making regarding continuing or discontinuing opioid therapy. For example, family members are often aware of when a patient is depressed and less functional. If the patient agrees or does not object to discussing information with their family members, clinicians may ask the family members:

- Is the patient's day focused on taking opioid pain medication?

- What is the frequency of pain medication?

- Does the patient have any other alcohol or drug problems?

- Does the patient avoid activity?

- Is the patient depressed?

- Is the patient able to function?****

**What To Teach A Patient Taking Opioids**

- Avoid driving or operating power equipment

- Avoid stopping opioids suddenly

- Avoid taking other drugs that depress the respiratory system as alcohol, sedatives, and anxiolytics.

- Follow up with the prescriber if medication is not adequate for relief

- Dispose of extra or remaining opioids appropriately

- Do not share opioids with friends or family

- Follow the prescribed dosing regimen

- Provide product-specific information

- Set appropriate expectations

**Interprofessional Approach To Prevent Opioid Abuse**

Clinicians, pharmacists, and allied health professionals must work together as an interprofessional team to provide safe and appropriate opioid medication use. While clinicians initially evaluate and prescribe, pharmacists play a crucial role by evaluating the appropriateness and legitimacy of prescriptions received. Failure to assess possible abuse, misuse, or diversion results in patient and society problems. A team approach of prescribers and dispensers is likely to produce the best outcome.