Band shaped keratopathy: The diagnosis of band-shaped keratopathy is largely clinical. The slit-lamp examination reveals the typical appearance and its subepithelial location. The exact cause of the lesion needs to be ascertained. To rule out systemic causes of band-shaped keratopathy, various serological tests are performed which include serum calcium, serum parathormone, serum phosphate/phosphorus, serum ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme), serum vitamin-D levels, urine analysis, chest X-ray, and other tests.

PBK and ABK: The diagnosis is made based on clinical evaluation. A history of complicated cataract surgery or delayed visual recovery is almost always elicited. Owing to the presence of thick opaque pannus over the cornea, visualization of anterior chamber structures may not be feasible. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) is an important tool to assess the corneal thickness, the extent of subepithelial scarring, and the gross abnormality of Descemet's membrane. Specular count of the endothelial cells and their morphology in the fellow eye is needed.

Striate keratopathy: The slit-lamp examination helps differentiate between corneal edema secondary to Descemet's membrane detachment (DMD). ASOCT may be performed to confirm the absence of DMD.

Whorl keratopathy: Slit-lamp examination reveals bilateral golden brown deposits in the basal epithelial layer of the cornea. If no chronic systemic medication is found, systemic investigations to rule out systemic associations should be done which include α-galactosidase activity.

Exposure keratopathy: The diagnosis is largely clinical. The inferior location of corneal ulceration is very typical. The exact cause should be looked for. The tone of orbicularis oculi muscle is assessed. Status of Bell's phenomenon, lid lag, or lid abnormalities is looked for. Cicatricial ectropion, Bell's palsy, and proptosis may be self-evident.

Infectious crystalline keratopathy: Clinical examination along with corroborative history, helps clinicians make a diagnosis of ICK. A tissue biopsy can yield the causative organism.

Neurotrophic keratopathy: The diagnosis of neurotrophic keratopathy is based on history and clinical findings.

Metabolic keratopathy: In all metabolic keratopathy, bilaterality in association with systemic features suggest the disease. In MPS, the systemic features and corneal findings are very suggestive; however, the diagnosis of a specific type of MPS needs assay of deficient enzyme/s. For diagnosing cystinosis, the leucocyte cystine level and conjunctival biopsy are done to measure the free cystine level. Renal functions are also grossly altered. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography can be used to assess the depth of involvement. For Wilson's disease, 24-hours urine collection shows elevated levels of urine copper. Serum ceruloplasmin levels are decreased in the majority of cases of Wilson's disease.

Filamentary keratopathy: The diagnosis is made based on the clinical findings. The systemic causes of aqueous deficient dry eye are looked for, using a battery of serological tests.

Climatic droplet keratopathy and Lipid keratopathy: The diagnosis is based on clinical examination.

Superficial punctate keratopathy (SPK) and ultraviolet keratopathy: The patients when examined on a slit-lamp after staining with fluorescein stain under cobalt blue filter shows areas of punctate corneal staining. The distribution of SPKs suggests the etiology.

Keratopathy related to SJS/TEN: Schirmer's test shows severe aqueous deficient dry eye. On slit-lamp examination, using fluorescein dye posterior migration of mucocutaneous junction can be demonstrated. Other features like lid margin keratinization, dermalization, and pannus over cornea can be seen on a slit-lamp.

Keratopathy related to aniridia: The diagnosis is largely clinical.