Evaluation of a patient with suspected GPA involves a complete clinical, laboratory, radiological, and histopathological assessment. A thorough clinical evaluation to assess the site and extent of involvement is key while evaluating a patient with GPA. Laboratory evaluation includes a complete blood count, electrolytes, renal function panel, urinalysis, titers of PR3-ANCA and MPO-ANCA, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and c-reactive protein (CRP). Radiological evaluation of sinuses, lungs, trachea, and orbits can be performed to assess the sites and extent of involvement. A chest x-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan of the lungs can be done to look for pulmonary lesions and hemorrhage. This could further help in differentiating between GPA and MPA. Histopathological evaluation, including kidneys, skin, and lungs, can be performed to look for vasculitis and immune deposits. The lung is the most common site for biopsy, and a renal biopsy could be performed, which shows necrotizing glomerulonephritis.

**Diagnostic Criteria**

Various diagnostic criteria have been proposed to diagnose GPA and distinguish the disease from other vasculitides.

- The ACR criteria include: a) Urinary sediment showing red blood cell casts or more than five red blood cells per high power field, b) Abnormal findings on chest radiograph, c) Oral ulcer or nasal discharge, and d) Granulomatous inflammation on biopsy. The presence of two or more out of the above-mentioned four criteria was associated with a 92% specificity and 88% sensitivity.

- The ELK (E stands for ears, nose, and throat or upper respiratory tract, L for lung, and K for kidney) proposed by DeRemee utilizes ANCA to diagnose. Per these criteria, any typical manifestation involving the ELK along with positive c-ANCA or typical histopathological finding qualifies for a diagnosis of GPA.