**Carotid Sinus Nerve**

The carotid sinus nerve (CSN) originates from the glossopharyngeal nerve near the exit from the jugular foramen. Impulses sent via the carotid sinus transmit along the CSN to the glossopharyngeal nerve, which synapses with the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) in the medulla. The CSN demonstrates multiple communication sites with the sympathetic trunk (frequently at the level of the superior cervical ganglion) and vagal trunk (often near the main trunk, superior laryngeal nerve, and pharyngeal branches). The course of the CSN is predominantly on the anterior aspect of the internal carotid artery to reach the carotid sinus, carotid body, and intercarotid plexus.

**Carotid Sinus and Carotid Body**

The carotid sinus has two types of fibers for transmission of vasculature status. Type 1 carotid baroreceptors, also known as dynamic baroreceptors, have large, myelinated A-fibers. Type 2 baroreceptors, also known as tonic baroreceptors, have small A-fibers and unmyelinated C-fibers. Simulation by acetylcholine and ATP result in the transmission of information through the afferent fibers of the carotid body.

**Arterial Baroreceptors**

Impulses sent via the carotid sinus transmit along the carotid sinus nerve to the glossopharyngeal nerve, which synapses with the NTS in the medulla. Impulses originating in the aortic arch travel along afferent fibers of the vagus nerve to synapse at the NTS. The NTS tonically provides sympathetic outflow to peripheral vasculature. Stimulation of the NTS results in inhibition of sympathetic tone and a vasodilatory effect with associated decreased cardiac output.

**Cardiopulmonary Receptors**

Impulses transmit from the atria to the vagal center of the medulla via the vagal nerve. As a result, sympathetic outflow to the kidney is reduced, resulting in decreased renal blood flow and decreased urine output. Alternatively, the sympathetic outflow is increased to the sinus node in the atria resulting in increased heart rate and, therefore, cardiac output. Additionally, vagal stimulation inhibits the vasoconstrictor center of the medulla resulting in decreased release of angiotensin, aldosterone, and vasopressin.

There are two types of cardiopulmonary receptors within the atria. Type A receptors are activated by wall tension developed by atrial contraction during ventricular diastole, while type B receptors are activated by wall stretch developed by atrial filling during ventricular systole.