There are several mechanisms through which H. influenzae adhere to the host cells and exhibit virulence. Encapsulated H. influenzae uses proteins such as protein H and Haemophilus surface fibrils (Hsf), but these features are not present in NTHi subtypes. The capsule confers antiphagocytic properties to the bacteria, and the lack of anti-capsular antibody causes increased bacterial proliferation. NTHi has been widely causing infections after the advent of specific vaccines for capsular H.influenzae.

Therefore, there is ongoing research to investigate the mechanisms of host-pathogen interaction in cases of NTHi. NTHi exerts its final effect through an array of host proteins, both via direct attachment to the surface epithelial cells and accessing the underlying extracellular matrix layer, and also through invading certain serum factors. These binding mechanisms allow NTHi to maintain strong adhesion, mediate colonization, and favors easy entry into the host cells. Through similar interactions, they evade and modify the host complement and immune system responses, and also help in developing a biofilm-like colony.

About half of the adult population aspirates some amount of oropharyngeal secretions while lying down in sleep position, but effective mechanisms like mucociliary clearance, coughing, and humoral and cellular immune processes are in place which protects the lower airways and prevents the occurrence of recurrent infections. That is the reason why silent aspiration is a concern with advancing age and is a significant factor in cases of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP).