Given the heterogeneous presentation of HFM, an individualized and interprofessional approach is necessary.

Reconstructive surgery for HFM has the goal of improving facial symmetry, jaw function, and normal occlusion.

- Grafts. Grafts were first described by Gillies in the 1920s.

- Mandibular distraction osteogenesis (MDO). MDO was first popularized by McCarthy in the 1990s.

- Soft tissue correction. Soft tissue correction is performed after facial skeletal re-alignment. Options to augment surrounding tissue include microvascular free tissue transfer, autologous fat grafting, and implants such as high-density porous polyethylene.

- Ear reconstruction. HFM can present with deformities involving the auricle, external auditory canal, and middle ear structures. Deformities range from mild hypoplasia requiring only reshaping of the ear cartilage, to complete anotia with middle ear involvement necessitating reconstruction. Options for reconstruction include autologous grafting using costal cartilage grafts for the auricular framework and synthetic implants. Both have advantages and disadvantages, and the interested reader is directed to other articles with more in-depth discussions about microtia reconstruction. A less invasive option for reconstruction is the placement of a prosthetic ear. Prostheses can be adhesive or attached to an osseointegrated anchor that is placed surgically. The advantages of prostheses include the option for upgrades as the patients grow and the absence of donor site morbidity. One notable potential disadvantage of the osseointegrated device is that once placed, the other reconstruction options are no longer feasible.