Initial management - first aid, ATLS approach to the patient, preserve amputated part, tetanus vaccination, and antibiotics as per local hospital guidelines.

In the traumatic setting, the ideal candidate for replantation should be young, healthy, sharp mechanism of injury (giving a clear amputation level), minimal tissue destruction, and contamination.

Indications for replantation

- Thumb amputation - loss of thumb represent approximately 40 to 50% loss of hand function

- Multiple finger amputations

- Amputations at or proximal to palm

- Pediatric patients with finger amputation(s) at any level

- Single finger amputation distal to the insertion of the flexor digitorum superficialis (zone I) (studies have shown that replantation distal to this insertion point had better outcomes than those proximal)

- Patient consideration - specialist requirement, e.g., occupation or pre-morbid compromised hand function

Contraindications and relative contraindications

- Single-digit injury through flexor tendon zone II

- Smoking

- Severe crush

- Mangled limb

- Heavy contamination

- Segmental injuries

- Prolonged warm ischaemic time

- Medically unfit

- Improperly preserved amputated part.

- Avulsion injuries

- Other life-threatening injuries

- Mentally unstable

- Previous surgery to the affected finger

- 'Redline' or 'red ribbon' sign (seen in vessels during surgery), which predicts the level of intimal damage in the vessel

Once the patient arrives in the operating theater, the amputated part should undergo a careful assessment for suitability for replanting. All structures should be dissected and identified, especially the neurovascular bundle. If no suitable vessels are identified, then replantation should not proceed. Usually, there is an order for repair of structures:

- Bone fixation with or without bone shortening to allow repair of soft tissue

- Tendon repair - extensor and flexor tendons

- Nerve repair

- Arterial anastomosis

- Venous anastomosis (if suitable veins are present)

Bone fixation should be simple and quick to perform, but it also depends on the configuration of bony injuries. Usually, two Kirschner wires are an option, but other fixation methods may also be used (i.e., plate fixation). Occasionally, bone shortening is required before fixation to allow for soft tissue closure and repair of neurovascular structures without excessive tension.

In case the restoration is not possible, and the clinician decides to opt for amputating or forming a stump, then provide a mobile, stable, painless stump with the least interference from the remaining tendon and joint function to ensure the most useful result. Whenever possible, use volar skin for the stump coverage because it provides skin that is thicker and more sensate than dorsal skin. The options for rearrangement of volar tissue to cover the stump include**:**

- Fillet flaps

- Volar V-Y flaps

- Bilateral V-Y flaps

- Homodigital island flaps

In an acute setting, the "dog ears" should be left to decrease the tension and the likelihood of ischemia to the remaining flaps, and these dog ears disappear over time. Regarding the treatment of the bone in a digital amputation/stump formation, the bone under the stump end must be smooth. The remaining bone chips and devitalized bone should be removed. The articular cartilage can be preserved when the amputation occurs at the level of the interphalangeal (IP) joint. This can provide a shock pad for trauma and potentially causes less pain under than skin than the bone edges.

While addressing the nerve at the stump end, it is vital to avoid neuroma formation in this location. The nerve end should be in a position away from the stump end or an anticipated point-of-contact pressure. To decrease the likelihood of neuroma formation at the stump end, traction neurectomy of the digital nerve should be performed bilaterally for each digital amputation. Tendon insertions should be preserved where possible as the preservation of a tendon insertion enhances the active mobility and function of an amputation stump. Adhesions can result, and so early mobilization of the digit is recommended.