Radiation therapy is an important component in the treatment of cancer. It may play a role as an adjuvant, neoadjuvant, palliative, or definitive therapy, with or without concurrent chemotherapy. Radiation is most commonly delivered as a local/regional treatment by an external beam consisting of photons, electrons, protons, or heavy particles but may also be delivered via brachytherapy (where a sealed radiation source is placed adjacent to the target) or systemically via unsealed sources. The side effects of radiation therapy are a function of the tissues included in the radiation field. Treatment of diseases within the thoracic region, such as Hodgkin lymphoma, lung, and breast cancer, carries the risk of radiation-induced cardiovascular toxicity (RICT).

Side effects of therapeutic radiation to the heart and coronary vessels include pericarditis, coronary artery disease (CAD), arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, valvular dysfunction, and heart failure. Pericarditis and pericardial effusions are potential short-term toxicities that may occur during or within the weeks following treatment. Long-term side effects may present in the months to years after radiation therapy, possibly as late as 20 years or more post-treatment. Late toxicities include CAD, valvular heart disease, and heart failure.

Major risk factors that increase the likelihood of RICT include higher radiation doses, adjuvant treatment with cardiotoxic chemotherapy, irradiation of the left side of the thorax, and the presence of pre-existing cardiovascular disease.