The meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) international workshop describes MGD as "chronic diffuse abnormality of the meibomian glands, characterized by terminal duct obstruction along with qualitative or quantitative changes in the glandular secretion."

These meibomian glands are a type of sebaceous glands that are located in the eyelids. These are named after a German physician and anatomist 'Heinrich Meibom.'

Meibomian glands produce lipids, which are the major component of the superficial lipid layer of the tear film. This lipid layer is known to protect the excessive evaporation of the tear film's aqueous layer. It also helps by lowering the surface tension and thus stabilizing the tear film. It acts as a lubricant during blinking and provides an outer barrier that prevents bacteria from entering the tear film. The functional disorders caused by the meibomian gland dysfunction resulting in alterations in the meibomian gland secretions are also referred to as posterior blepharitis.

Based on underlying etiology, it can be divided into:

- Low delivery

- High delivery

The low delivery type can be hyposecretory (meibomian sicca) and obstructive (cicatricial or non-cicatricial). Meibomian sicca results from atrophy of the meibomian glands or secondary to medications. MG atrophy results in an overall reduction in functional meibomian glands. The most common form of MGD is the obstructive type. This results from hypertrophy and keratinization of the ductal epithelium. This is further classified into cicatricial or non-cicatricial.