Most patients present with very nonspecific symptoms of chronic shortness of breath and cough with or without sputum production. As the disease process advances, the shortness of breath and cough progressively get worse. Initially, there is exertional dyspnea with significant physical activity, especially arm work at or above shoulder level, with progression to dyspnea with simple daily activities and even at rest. Some patients may present with wheezing because of airflow obstruction.

As COPD advances, patients can lose significant body weight due to systemic inflammation and increased energy spent in the work of breathing. Also, there are frequent intermittent exacerbations as the obstruction of the airways increases. Episodes of COPD exacerbations may present with increased shortness of breath, increased severity of a cough, and increased sputum, typically brought on by an infection or an environmental factor.

Smoking history is important, with an emphasis on the age at which the person started smoking and the total pack years. If the person has quit smoking, it is important to know how many years have passed since he/she last smoked. A history of environmental and occupational exposure and a family history of chronic respiratory conditions and COPD is essential.

In the early stages of the disease, the physical examination may be normal. Patients with emphysema are typically referred to as “pink puffers,” meaning cachectic and non-cyanotic. Expiration through pursed lips increases airway pressure and prevents airway collapse during respiration, and the use of accessory muscles of respiration indicates advanced disease. Clubbing of the digits is not typical of COPD. Many other comorbidities may be possible. Current smokers may have an odor of smoke and nicotine staining of hands and fingernails.

Percussion may be normal early in the disease. The rest of the examination may range from prolonged expiration or wheezes on forced exhalation to increased resonance, indicating hyperinflation as the airway obstruction increases. Distant breath sounds, wheezes, crackles at the lung bases, and/or distant heart sounds are heard on auscultation.