The sural nerve is a purely sensory nerve composed of fibers from lumbosacral spinal roots L4-S1. Its origin is classically described as the union of the lateral and medial sural cutaneous nerves, branches of the common peroneal and posterior tibial nerves, respectively.

The medial sural cutaneous nerve descends sub-fascially between the heads of the gastrocnemius muscle, deep to the lesser saphenous vein. At the point of myotendinous union of the gastrocnemius heads, the nerve emerges subcutaneously through the deep fascia, where it joins with the lateral sural cutaneous nerve and forms the sural nerve. The nerve confluence usually occurs at the middle or distal third of the leg.

The sural nerve courses obliquely towards the posterior aspect of the lateral malleolus, where it curves anteriorly. During its final course, the nerve gives off one collateral branch, usually 6 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus: the lateral calcaneal branch. Terminal branches of the sural nerve are located 2 cm distal to the lateral malleolus; one branch turns to the lateral dorsum of the foot and joins with the superficial peroneal nerve. The other branch reaches the lateral border of the foot.

The superficial sural artery and lesser saphenous vein accompany the nerve along its course, usually lying superficial and just posterior to the nerve.

Recent anatomical studies suggest that roughly half of sural nerves (41.4-51.5%) of sural nerves are formed by the confluence of the medial sural cutaneous and peroneal communicating nerves. Less commonly, the sural nerve arises from the union of the medial and lateral sural cutaneous nerves (8.7-31.2%), or the continuation of the medial sural cutaneous nerve in the absence of a peroneal communicating nerve (13.8-34.67%). Still less frequently, the peroneal communicating nerve (0.48-1.8%), the lateral sural cutaneous nerve (0.48-1.1%), or the sciatic nerve (0-0.7%) may become the sural nerve without any additional contributions.