Bile acid sequestrants should not be used in patients with hypersensitivity to active ingredients or any of its components.

Cholestyramine use is contraindicated in patients with complete biliary obstruction where bile is not secreted into the intestine. Some formulation contains phenylalanine, so it should be used with caution in patients with phenylketonuria.

Bile acid sequestrants are inappropriate for use in patients with serum triglycerides greater than 300 mg/dl or in those who have type III hyperlipoproteinemia since they can exacerbate hypertriglyceridemia and put the patient at risk for pancreatitis. Bile acid sequestrants are used with caution in patients with triglyceride concentrations of 250 to 299 mg/dL with regular monitoring every 4 to 6 weeks after administration, with discontinuation of therapy if triglycerides exceed 400 mg/dL.

Some studies have shown that colestipol can bind T4 in the gut in vitro. Theoretically, this binding can disrupt normal T4 reabsorption causing hypothyroidism. However, further investigation found that euthyroid patients had normal thyroid concentrations throughout resin treatment. As a precaution, patients taking supplemental thyroid should not take their thyroid medications simultaneously as taking bile acid sequestrants.

Colesevelam hydrochloride is contraindicated in patients with triglyceride levels of more than 500 mg/dL or patients with a history of hypertriglyceridemia-induced pancreatitis. It is also contraindicated for patients with gastroparesis, other gastrointestinal motility disorders, patients at risk for bowel obstruction, and patients with a history of major gastrointestinal tract surgery or bowel obstruction.