Osteomyelitis is a complicated infection to treat. In most cases, management involves a multifaceted, interprofessional approach, including the primary care provider, radiologist, surgeons (orthopedic, vascular), a podiatrist, an infectious disease specialist, pharmacist, nurse wound care team, and sometimes a plastic surgeon, a pain specialist or interventional radiologist. The primary care provider often plays a vital role in the initial diagnosis and coordination of care across these medical and surgical specialties.

The therapeutic approach to management is guided sometimes by the site of infection and the presence of vascular insufficiency. Minimally invasive CT or fluoroscopically guided aspiration of the disc space (usually by interventional radiology) for microbiological and histopathological testing is recommended for the diagnosis of suspected NVO if clinical, imaging and other laboratory data suggest osteomyelitis in the absence of positive blood cultures with an organism known to cause osteomyelitis (S. aureus, Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Brucella).

Once again, a strong collaboration between the surgical and vascular teams is essential for the effective management of osteomyelitis due to vascular insufficiency, especially if associated with diabetes mellitus. Revascularization of the affected limb is critical for proper wound healing. Procedures to restore adequate blood flow, including therapeutic angiogram by either interventional radiology or vascular surgery and even femoral to popliteal by-pass, are used before amputation depending on the severity of vascular insufficiency. Surgical revascularization procedures that use local pedicle muscle flaps and myocutaneous flaps maintain vascular supply to the surgical site, fill the space left by surgical debridement, and also fight infection.

Following surgical debridement, the need for close follow-up with prolonged antibiotics and meticulous wound care cannot be overemphasized. Infectious disease specialists involved in the patient's care often monitor response to therapy and adjust antibiotics regimens where needed. Many patients can continue with parental antibiotics outpatient via peripherally inserted intravenous access to complete their antibiotic course while others can transition to highly bioavailable oral antibiotic therapy such as quinolones when feasible based on microbiological results. Qualified home-bound patients benefit from home health wound nurse visits several times a week, while those who are ambulatory are encouraged to use wound care clinics if available. Family members and caregivers are also an integral part of the care team, providing support and care between healthcare provider visits. Only through such an approach can the morbidity of osteomyelitis be decreased.