Sugammadex is contraindicated for patients with a history of hypersensitivity reactions, ranging from isolated skin reactions to anaphylaxis. In a study conducted by the manufacturer, the incidence of hypersensitivity in patients with given doses of placebo, 4 mg/kg, or 16 mg/kg was 1%, 7%, and 9%, respectively.

Patients with a creatinine clearance of less than 30 mL/min are currently not considered candidates for sugammadex. Plasma clearance and urinary excretion of rocuronium and sugammadex are significantly decreased in patients with a creatinine clearance of < 30 ml/min.

The remaining contraindications should be considered relative. Therefore, the decision to administer sugammadex should be determined on a patient-by-patient basis after weighing individual risks and benefits.

Few studies have been conducted on children. The recommended doses for adults appear to be equally efficacious and safe in children.

There is very little information regarding the use of sugammadex in pregnant patients. Sugammadex appears to be effective and has a low maternal side effect profile when administered during cesarean delivery.

The use of sugammadex in breastfeeding patients is likely safe, but there is insufficient data to understand the effect on milk letdown, breastfeeding success, and fetal safety. While it is unknown if the drug is secreted into human breast milk, the likelihood of effects on the infant is low. In one study, sugammadex was present in rat milk, with the maximum drug level occurring 30 minutes after intravenous administration. The Drug and Lactation Database currently states that fetal exposure to sugammadex through breast milk is likely to be low and that sugammadex administration to breastfeeding women is acceptable.

Patients taking hormonal birth control to prevent pregnancy should consider nonhormonal alternatives for one week after exposure to sugammadex. Sugammadex can bind to progesterone and decrease the effectiveness of hormone-based contraception. Receiving a single dose of sugammadex has been stated to be similar to missing one dose of birth control containing estrogen or progesterone. Therefore, it is recommended that institutions develop a standard handout describing the effect of sugammadex on hormone contraception and recommend additional barrier contraception for seven days following surgery.