B-ALL has a favorable overall prognosis in children but a less favorable outcome in adults. The rate of complete remission rate in children is more than 95% and in adults is 75%. The following factors are associated with a poor prognosis in ALL/LBL: infancy, age (older than 10 years), leukocytosis, inadequate, slow response to initial therapy, the presence of minimal residual disease, and CNS involvement.

There are a number of stratification schemes that are used to assess risk in ALL/LBL patients. One of the stratification schemes utilized in ALL stratifies patients into "standard risk" and "high risk." The stratification is based on age (younger than 10 years standard and older than 10 years high risk) and white blood cell (WBC) count (fewer than 50,000 per cubic millimeter-standard, greater than 50,000 per cubic millimeter-high). Another useful tool in assessing prognosis in B-ALL is genetic studies. The following genetic abnormalities are associated with a favorable outcome: high hyperdiploidy and the t(12;21) ETV6-RUNX1.

On the other hand, the following genetic abnormalities are associated with an unfavorable outcome:

- Hypodiploidy (fewer than 44 chromosomes)

- MLL rearrangement

- BCR-ABL1 Ph-like ALL

- CRLF2 rearrangement

- Intrachromosomal amplification of chromosome 21

T-ALL shows an unfavorable prognosis compared to B-ALL. Early T-cell precursor ALL, a rare subtype of T-ALL/LBL, is particularly associated with an unfavorable outcome. Overall, T-LBL prognosis depends on age, disease stage, and LDH levels.