Dexrazoxane is approved clinically for anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity (reducing the incidence of congestive heart failure and LVEF dysfunction) and extravasation. This drug is only recommended for use intravenously. Healthcare providers comprising of physicians (ranging from the patient's primary care provider to the oncologist as well a psychologist to deal with any form of mental illness the patient could be going through), nurses and pharmacists, need to be cognizant of the most common side effects of this drug which is myelosuppression and work together to assess dosage of this drug, adjusting doses if and when necessary to combat adverse consequences seen with myelosuppression, monitor hematological function, and tackle any early signs of infection or bleeding. It is also critical to note that dexrazoxane does not completely improve cardiac dysfunction associated with the use of anthracyclines; hence constant monitoring of heart function should be advised.

It is also important to get a cardio-oncologist specialist involved when heart failure or a significant decline of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) occurs during chemotherapy. This assistance is critical for careful decision making regarding further exposure to cardiotoxic cancer treatment.

Oncology nurses will be administering this drug in most cases and need to be conversant with the adverse effects which could mimic those seen with anthracyclines, reporting any issues to the physician team as well as assessing the patient's vitals and injection sites for any signs of inflammation. Patients should be made aware of the adverse reaction seen with dexrazoxane and advised to report any changes noted as soon as possible.

Their obstetrician should also counsel patients on pregnancy planning and prevention as this medication is a known teratogen and can cause fetal harm. Female patients should use effective contraception during treatment.

It is unknown if dexrazoxane is secreted in breast milk, has any effect on milk production or the breastfed infant. Due to the unknown nature of this drug on milk production or secretion, women should halt breastfeeding while on dexrazoxane therapy and for two weeks after the last dose.