Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors may be administered via topical, oral, or IV routes. Examples of carbonic inhibitor medications currently available are acetazolamide, methazolamide, dorzolamide, brinzolamide, diclofenamide, ethoxzolamide, and zonisamide.

The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor medications used for glaucoma are divided into topical and systemic subgroups. Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, including dorzolamide and brinzolamide, can reach the ciliary body through corneal penetration. These medications may be used as monotherapy but are often used in combination with other glaucoma medications. Dorzolamide hydrochloride preparation is available as a 2% solution, and brinzolamide is available as a 1% suspension; the recommended dosage for medications is 1 drop in both eyes three times daily when used alone or twice daily when used with other glaucoma medications. Dorzolamide is also available in combination with timolol in a 2%/0.5% solution. Systemic carbonic inhibitors, such as acetazolamide, methazolamide, ethoxzolamide, and dichlorphenamide, are indicated when intraocular pressure cannot be reduced via topical administration and in acute angle-closure glaucoma when vomiting may necessitate the parenteral route.

Acetazolamide is available in 125, 200, and 500 mg tablets. Patients with glaucoma may take nearly 250 mg to 1000 mg per day. The dose range is higher for the treatment of altitude sickness. The treatment of edema, epilepsy, and diuresis in congestive heart failure with a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor medication requires lower doses.

Methazolamide is available in 25 mg and 50 mg tablets. The recommended dosing of methazolamide for glaucoma is 50 to 100 mg twice daily (BID) or three times daily (TID), whereas dosing for altitude sickness is 150 to 200 mg once daily. Dichlorphenamide, used in the treatment of open-angle glaucoma as well as preoperative acute closed-angle glaucoma, is available as a 50 mg tablet by mouth.

Recommendations for patients taking carbonic anhydrase inhibitors include drinking water at the time of administration to avoid the formation of kidney stones due to increased urinary alkalinization.