# Continuing Education Activity

Endovascular papillary angioendothelioma (EPA), also known as Dabska tumor (DT) and papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (PILA), represents a borderline entity between hemangioma and angiosarcoma. DT has an overall favorable prognosis; however, there is potential for local recurrence and low-grade metastasis. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and prognosis of endovascular papillary angioendothelioma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of endovascular papillary angioendothelioma.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of endovascular papillary angioendothelioma.
- Outline the management options for patients with endovascular papillary angioendothelioma.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients with endovascular papillary angioendothelioma.

# Introduction

Endovascular papillary angioendothelioma (EPA), also known as Dabska tumor (DT) and papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (PILA), represents a borderline entity between hemangioma and angiosarcoma. EPA has an overall favorable prognosis. However, it does have the potential for local recurrence and low-grade metastasis. It most frequently presents in children in various skin locations, subcutaneous tissue, and in deeper areas of the body. However, there have been reports of EPA in adults and internal organs.

Lesions are typically two to three centimeters in size at the time of presentation. A biopsy is diagnostic, and treatment is wide surgical excision.

# Etiology

Endovascular papillary angioendothelioma may appear de novo or arise within an area of chronic lymphedema or a preexisting vascular malformation such as a hemangioma or a lymphangioma circumscriptum, etc.

A lymphatic origin for this entity has been proposed due to common morphologic and immunophenotypic findings between adjacent lymphatics and lymphangioma in EPA, as well as the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and lymphatic immunohistochemical marker, D2-40.

# Epidemiology

The Dabska tumor was originally described by Dabska et al. in 1969 in a case series with six patients, all children.

# Pathophysiology

Endovascular papillary angioendothelioma is within a borderline area between benign lesions such as hemangioma and malignant ones like angiosarcoma. There have been cases of these tumors arising within preexisting vascular lesions such as cavernous hemangiomas. Morphologic similarity has also been observed with retiform hemangioendothelioma and may represent the spectrum of the same lesion. Based on the literature review, currently, the diagnosis of EPA is limited to low-grade sarcoma, demonstrating characteristic histopathological and immunohistochemistry features.

# Histopathology

Histopathological evaluation remains a gold standard for the diagnosis of these rare tumors. They are characterized by numerous interconnecting vascular channels with papillary projections or tuft like structures as observed in renal glomeruli. Endothelial cells lining the vascular channels have a classic hobnail or matchstick appearance due to an apically placed nucleus that produces a surface bulge.

Immunohistochemistry further aids in diagnosis by identifying the tissue origin. EPA tumor cells react positively to vascular and lymphatic markers. They are classically positive for CD34, VEGFR - 3, CD31, D2-40, and factor VIII related antigen.

Small storage granules consisting of von Willebrand factor and P-selectin, called Weibel Palade bodies, might be demonstrated upon examination under the electron microscope of the tumor cells. Also seen are irregular nuclei, abundant perinuclear cytoplasmic filaments, and pinocytotic vesicles.

# History and Physical

Generally, endovascular papillary angioendothelioma presents as a slow-growing, painless nodule that is typically localized to the subcutaneous tissue of the extremities, dermis, and less commonly on the trunk, head, and neck.

Most cutaneous tumors come to medical attention when they are two to three centimeters in size.

Symptomatology is also variable. Patients may complain of pain, ulceration, or bleeding from the affected site.

# Evaluation

The definitive diagnosis of EPA is made with a biopsy. As this is such a rare entity, protocols for disease involvement, surveillance, and follow-up have yet to be established. It is reasonable to consider obtaining a chest radiograph for any patient with pulmonary symptoms due to a reported case of a patient dying of pulmonary metastases. Lymph node examination may be performed if there is suspicion for involvement.

# Treatment / Management

Surgical excision is recommended. In general, the prognosis is favorable for Dabska tumors even with invasion into deeper structures. However, the malignant potential of this tumor should not be ignored, and close follow-up should be maintained.

In one case report, the authors chose to follow National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) practice guidelines in oncology for soft tissue sarcoma of extremity/trunk stage IIA (T1bN0M0G2), which recommends chest imaging (plain radiograph or chest computed tomography) every 3 to 6 months for 2 to 3 years, then every six months for two years, and then annually for ongoing monitoring.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of this tumor is histologic, as many neoplasms display intravascular proliferation. The differential should include intravascular papillary endothelial hyperplasia (Masson tumor), epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, angiosarcoma, lymphangioma-like Kaposi sarcoma, and retiform hemangioendothelioma.

The unique feature of EPA is the papillary structure lined by atypical columnar endothelial cells. A similar formation has been described extravascularly in the patch stage Kaposi sarcoma. Ordinary angiosarcomas may also show focal morphologic patterns of EPA, and in a study of 80 cases of angiosarcoma of soft tissue, 14% showed evidence papillary fronds.

Organized thrombi cause the Masson phenomenon, showing papillary processes of the fibrous cores covered with a layer of endothelial cells. Unlike EPA, the Masson phenomenon is contained within blood vessels, and there are often visible intravascular thrombi. It lacks the presence of columnar endothelial cells and has a single endothelial cell layer surrounding hyalinized stromal cores.

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma display endothelial cells with eosinophilic vacuolated cytoplasm. The tumor cells arrange as cords, trabeculae, or sheets with myxoid or hyalinized stroma, and often spread outside of the blood vessel.

Of note, there have been reports in the literature of benign acquired vascular proliferations displaying areas with Dabska features simulating malignancy. Therefore, the presence of atypical architectural features in an otherwise benign-looking acquired vascular proliferation should not lead to unnecessarily aggressive treatment.

# Surgical Oncology

Currently, wide local excision remains the treatment of choice for these tumors.

# Radiation Oncology

Evidence for radiation therapy in these tumors is limited. Of the six patients reported by the Dabska et al. group, three received radiation therapy; of these, two received preoperative radiation while one received it after surgery.

Due to the rarity of these tumors, the benefit of radiation therapy in a randomized trial would be difficult to obtain. Hence it would be prudent to consider radiation in tumors showing features of a high risk of recurrences such as size > 5 cm, deep invasion, and positive margins based upon their behavior pattern similar to low-grade sarcomas.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Due to the rarity of these tumors, it is challenging to obtain level I evidence for treatment recommendations. Currently, the practice guidelines are obtained from published case series and reports.

# Treatment Planning

Patterns of failure are yet to be determined for this rare tumor; meanwhile, it would be prudent to consider radiation in a post-operative setting for tumors exhibiting high-risk features for recurrence. Dose, technique, and volume delineation should be based on the principles of radiation therapy in sarcoma.

# Medical Oncology

Based on the literature review, the role of systemic therapy remains yet to be established. Chemotherapy has shown response in angiosarcomas; there may be a role for chemotherapy in the metastatic setting.

# Prognosis

In general, endovascular papillary angioendothelioma are low-grade tumors with favorable outcomes managed with surgery alone. Long term review of originally described patients with Dabska tumors has reported excellent outcomes.

# Complications

Endovascular papillary angioendothelioma are slow-growing tumors with favorable prognosis. However, there have been reports of pulmonary metastasis; hence these tumors are not to be underestimated and should be evaluated and treated in time.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Endovascular papillary angioendothelioma must be kept in the differential, especially for children presenting with slow-growing intradermal nodules and evaluated accordingly. Awareness among dermatologists is crucial, as most likely, they will be the primary providers to whom the children will present.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Endovascular papillary angioendothelioma, also known as Dabska tumor and papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma, is a rare tumor of deeper skin. The diagnosis is made with a biopsy. Because of the vast differential for a painless skin lesion, the management should be by an interprofessional team that consists of a dermatologist, plastic surgeon, oncologist, and general surgeon.

Primary clinicians who are not familiar with the management of such lesions should refer the patient to an oncologist. EPA has an overall favorable prognosis, but it does have the potential for local recurrence and low-grade metastasis. Thus, long term follows up is required.