The use of general anesthesia (GA) versus regional anesthesia (RA) for performing major lower extremity amputation is an area of ongoing debate. There is literature to support the use of RA for major lower extremity amputation with decreased blood loss, need for transfusion, postoperative pain medication, and faster time to oral intake when compared with the general anesthesia group.

There are several components in the preparation of the patient in the operating room which apply to all amputation levels. The patient should be in the supine position with appropriate use of tourniquet as this has shown to reduce blood loss during lower extremity amputation in the setting of peripheral artery disease.

Principles of amputation surgery at any level includes: removal of diseased tissue, providing a residual limb that allows for prosthetic fit, tapering the ends of bone to avoid sharp edges, providing a conical shaped limb to allow better prosthetic fit, controlling postsurgical edema, avoiding hematoma formation, allowing for nerve retraction, preservation of length and optimized postoperative pain control.

The critical steps in surgical technique for several amputations levels will be discussed in order of proximal to distal.

- Above-knee amputation

- The anterior and posterior flaps should be marked before incision to resemble an ellipse or fishmouth.  It is useful to measure the circumference and mark the apices equally.   If length is not an issue, the tip of the anterior flap should reach the edge of the patella with a mirror image posterior flap.
- Tourniquet and Esmark bandage is used.  An incision is carried through the fascia, and the anterior musculatures divided with cautery.
- The muscle gets divided to the level of the femur, and the periosteum elevated from the femur circumferentially to the level of the incision apex. 
- An oscillating saw or Gigli saw is used to divide the femur.  The adductor tendon is separated separately from the medial epicondyle and distal femur; this may be preserved for use in a myodesis. The edges are then rasped smooth.
- The femoral artery and femoral vein are clamped and suture ligated with heavy suture.
- The saphenous nerve should be dissected as proximally as possible and divided on tension.  It is this authors opinion that avoiding ligation helps avoid foreign body reaction and future neuroma formation. The nerve should retract 5 cm to 10 cm. 
- If performing a myodesis (preferred by this author), a 2 mm drill bit is used to make a medial and lateral osteotomy on the distal femur.
- The preserved adductor tendon is then secured to the osteotomies medially and laterally with heavy non-absorbable fiber-wire or braided nylon suture. 
- If the medullary canal remains open, the elevated periosteum can be reapproximated at this point with heavy absorbable suture.
- The posterior tissue then gets divided with an amputation knife or cautery. 
- The sciatic/tibial nerve is now divided and allowed to retract as above
- The tourniquet is released, and all bleeding ligated.
- A subfascial drain is left in place if needed but generally unnecessary. 
- The anterior and posterior flap is reapproximated with a heavy absorbable suture at the fascia.
- Skin and subcutaneous tissues closed in layers.

- Through-knee amputation

- An elliptical incision similar to the above-knee is made with the apices at the medial and lateral epicondyles near the top of the patella if a line were extended around the femur.  The anterior flap distal margin extends to the tibial tuberosity.  The posterior flap should attempt to mirror the anterior flap. 
- A tourniquet is used as above.  The surgeon employs a similar technique through the fascia as above. 
- The patellar tendon is detached from the tibia, and the surgeon enters the knee joint. 
- The joint capsule is incised circumferentially and the cruciate ligaments divided from within the knee joint.
- Before dividing the posterior joint capsule and posterior tissues, it is useful to identify the semitendinosus medially and the biceps femoris laterally as the insert into the tibia posteriorly.  They should be held with a Kocher clamp to prevent retraction.
- Popliteal artery and vein individually suture ligated.
- The common peroneal and tibial nerves are divided under tension and transected sharply to allow for retraction. 
- The posterior tissues get divided with amputation knife or cautery. It is not necessary to preserve any gastrocnemius muscle.  
- The specimen is removed at this point.
- An oscillating saw is used to make six osteotomies removing all of the articular surfaces while preserving the majority of the adductor insertion medially; this will be cancellous bone with no medullary canal.
- The patella is then everted and removed from the inner surface of the patellar tendon taking care not to injury the thin skin from the bare area in the mid-tendon.
- The tourniquet is released and further hemostasis achieved with ligatures.
- Myodesis then follows by suturing the semitendinosus and biceps to the cruciate remnant posteriorly and the patellar tendon to the cruciate anteriorly. This process is performed with heavy fiber-wire or braided nylon. 
- Fascia, subcutaneous tissue, and the skin closed as above.

- Open below-knee amputation

- This procedure is performed as distal as the soft tissues allow and can take place expeditiously with a Gigli saw through all structures followed by suture ligation of vascular structures. The residual limb is covered with wet to dry dressings once hemostasis obtained. 
- The alternative is to use a scalpel and electrocautery for the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle followed by isolation and control of vascular bundles. A power saw or the same Gigli saw can be used for bone. The residual limb is covered with wet to dry dressings upon achieving hemostasis.

- Formal below-knee amputation

- The level selected depends largely on soft tissue viability with the ideal length being approximately 12 to 18 cm from the tibial tubercle.
- It is useful to have a standard technique to determine skin flaps.  This author prefers to measure the diameter at the transection site and make the anterior flap one-half the circumference and the posterior long flap's full circumference; this prevents unnecessary tension at the time of closure. Additionally, longer residual limb lengths typically involve a smaller circumference and thereby have less chance for tension. 
- The incisions are carried through the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and anterior muscle with suture ligation of vasculature identified.
- The tibial bone gets transected with a power saw, or Gigli saw and tibial edges blunted with use of a rasper. The power saw or rasper can be used to bevel the anterior aspect of the tibia. This process allows for less trauma to the posterior flap as it sits along a smooth surface. 
- The fibula gets transected in the same manner at approximately 1 cm proximal to the tibial transection and sharp edges removed with rasper, giving the residual limb a cornified aspect. 
- The posterior tissue is divided with amputation knife leaving only a thinned portion of the soleus but preserving the gastrocnemius. 
- At this point ligation of anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and peroneal arteries are confirmed before the tourniquet is released.  The tibial, deep and superficial peroneal, and soleus nerves divide on tension.
- The myodesis is performed by bringing the Achilles tendon to the tibia. Three osteotomies are created with a 2 mm drill bit in the anterior portion of the tibia.  Fiber-wire or heavy braided nylon is used to secure the Achilles to the tibia utilizing the three osteotomies in a mattress fashion.  
- Skin and subcutaneous tissues closed in layers.

- ERTL amputation

- All steps similar to formal below-knee amputation except a keyhole incision is used extending just lateral to the tibial distally and then around the ankle. The tibialis anterior muscle is preserved in the anterior compartment.
- An osteal periosteal graft is raised using a hammer and chisel and left attached to the tibia anteriorly.  
- The fibula is transected at the same length as the tibia.
- Soleus muscle and anterolateral compartment muscle are transected. A GIA stapler is useful for this.
- Vascular bundles and nerves receive similar treatment.
- A portion of the fibula is trimmed to create a strut between the tibia and fibula, which gets secured with a tightrope device, plate, or headless screw.
- The periosteal graft is secure around the fibula strut to aid in ossification
- Tibialis anterior is secured over the strut followed by the Achilles myodesis (pants over vest).
- The closure begins anteriorly, and the skin and subcutaneous tissue resected as the closure proceeds posteriorly

- Syme amputation

- A weight-bearing amputation through the ankle that involves removal of all of the bones of the foot while preserving the heel pad for weight-bearing

- Boyd  amputation

- A weight-bearing amputation through the ankle that preserves the calcaneus and heel pad for weight-bearing.
- The calcaneus gets fused to the tibia and is non-mobile

- Chopart amputation

- A weight-bearing amputation at the midtarsal level preserving the additional length of the foot