**Ultrasound**

It is the investigation of choice in prenatal screening. Ultrasound localizes the exact size and site of neural tube defects and vertebrae.

Accurate diagnosis of anomalies with the help of ultrasound depends upon the gestational age of the fetus, careful evaluation of anomalies.

**Serum Alpha-fetoprotein**

Alpha-fetoprotein is a globulin protein formed by the fetal yolk sac, liver, and gastrointestinal tract. Initially, its concentration is greater in amniotic fluid and fetal plasma as compared to maternal serum. But as gestation advances, due to increased permeability of the placenta, alfa-fetoprotein crosses the fetal-placental barrier so that maternal serum alfa-fetoprotein level rises and amniotic fluid and fetal plasma decreases. A high level of alfa-fetoprotein indicates neural tube defects. In addition, the acetylcholinesterase level is estimated in the case of abnormally high levels of alpha-fetoprotein. Though serum alpha-protein level has an important role in screening neural tube defects, it is not a cost-effective approach.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI is performed in cases of uncertain ultrasound description to evaluate the anomalies more accurately. Although MRI has a diagnostic role in cases of neural tube defects, some studies in chick embryos showed that MRI exposure increases the incidence of neural tube disorders.

**Chromosomal Microarray**

As it is clear that neural tube disorders can contribute to genetic abnormalities, genetic testing estimates the association between genetic mutation and neural tube defects.

**Associated Anomalies**

In many cases, neural tube defects are associated with other anomalies such as cardiovascular, cleft palate, urinary tract infections, coloboma, etc.

**Maternal Serum Folic Acid Level**

Maternal serum folic acid level before or during conception helps to rule out the causative factors of NTDs.