Dextromethorphan (DM) received FDA approval in 1958 for its use as a cough suppressant. It has been one of the most common compounds found in most over-the-counter antitussives for the past 50 years.

In 2010, the FDA approved the use of DM for pseudobulbar affect (PBA) combined with quinidine. PBA is a neurologic dysfunction of emotional expression characterized by outbursts of crying or laughing inappropriately and disproportionately to the mood. The pathology of PBA is still incompletely understood. Still, the leading hypothesis suggests that it is due to a loss of descending cortical control of brainstem motor nuclei and the cerebellum. This loss of control disrupts inhibitory mechanisms for motor control of emotional expression.

Many other potential therapeutic uses for DM are currently under investigation in clinical studies. Most of these use the property that DM has as a neuroprotective agent. These indications include

- Depression: DM has a fast-acting antidepressant activity for its similarity to ketamine.

- Stroke: Studies have shown that DM has a role in the improvement of some neurological and psychiatric complications, however, not the overall functional outcomes.

- Traumatic Brain Injury: Although the studies have shown limited effects, there are proposed mechanisms that confer the benefits of DM in TBI, including its activity at NMDA and sigma-1 receptors.

- Seizure: Some clinical studies have shown that DM has efficacy in refractory seizures.

- Pain: There are studies on the analgesic effects of DM for pain conditions such as cancer-related, post-operative, neuropathic, and gastrointestinal pain.

- Methotrexate Neurotoxicity: DM showed a complete resolution in neurologic deficits associated with MTX toxicity in 5 cases.

- Parkinson disease: DM meliorated primary Parkinson disease in 2 studies.

- Autism: Contradicting data regarding DM's role in behavioral improvement.