The management of scoliosis is complex and the overall results are poor. Because the condition results in a cosmetic and functional deformity it is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a physical therapist, orthopedic surgeon, pulmonologist, rheumatologist and a neurologist. The vast majority of patients do not require surgery and can be managed with non-surgical therapies.

While braces are heavily prescribed, they have low compliance because of the extreme discomfort. For those with functional deficits, physical therapy is recommended - this therapy has no impact on scoliosis - it just improves muscle and joint function. After surgery, nurses should encourage and educate patients regarding incentive spirometry to prevent atelectasis.

Surgery is recommended for symptomatic patients with severe deformity-but the patient needs to be educated about the complications of scoliosis which are not trivial. After surgery, nurses should encourage incentive spirometry to prevent atelectasis.  Surgery can improve function and aesthetics but a significant number of patients do remain with residual pain or other neurological deficit that can reduce the quality of life.

A mental health nurse should consult with all patients because scoliosis can impart serious cosmetic deficits which lead to anxiety, withdrawal, and depression. Most patients with scoliosis do not take part in sports for fear of embarrassment or humiliation.

Some degree of pain is present in patients with scoliosis but the key is not to empirically prescribe prescription-strength pain medications. Many other modalities for pain control like TENS, acupuncture, stretching, exercise, and yoga can help.

**Outcomes**

Overall the outcomes after surgery are not satisfactory; the surgery is often associated with severe complications that are worse than scoliosis itself. In addition, many patients have low self-esteem because of the spinal defect and remain isolated and withdrawn. The interprofessional team should take steps to ensure that they do not offer invasive treatments that are more likely to do more harm than good; the key is to improve the quality of life.