Ethanol has existed almost from the start of civilization as a drink for merriment. Only in the recent century, through extensive research, have we been able to use ethanol in treating diseases. As a constituent of hand sanitizers in a medical setting, ethanol has become indispensable in impeding hospital-acquired infections practitioners to the patient and vice versa via the transfer of microorganisms. The care provider's duty, including the clinician, mid-level providers, nurses, pharmacists, and anyone involved in the overall case management, is to ensure that they sanitize their hands, wear gloves before approaching and handling the patient, catheters tubes, cannulas, etc. The same principle is necessary for choosing ethanol lock therapy in an ICU setting to prevent sepsis associated with infected catheters.

As an ablative, ethanol is under ongoing research for different neoplastic conditions where surgery is not feasible. The surgeon must identify such patients by their age, financial status, and comorbid conditions to prefer an ethanol ablation over a classic surgery to prevent mortality. As an antidote to methanol or ethylene glycol poisoning, ethanol has been used for decades. Even though fomepizole has emerged to be a better drug due to reasons including, but not limited to, better neutralization of the offending agent, predictable pharmacokinetics, and decreased mortality, ethanol is still preferred by many owing to its low cost and greater physician familiarity.

Alcohol use disorder remains a global challenge considering the mortality that correlates with misusing. More than 135 million people in the USA, age 12 and older, actively use alcohol.

An interprofessional healthcare team is an optimal approach to the proper therapeutic use of ethanol. This team includes clinicians (including NPs and PAs), nursing staff, and pharmacists, working collaboratively to achieve optimal patient outcomes with minimal adverse events. [Level 5]