Since the introduction of the first HAART drug, zidovudine, in 1987 and the initiation of combination therapy in 1996, there has been a significant decrease in the incidence of HIV-related opportunistic infections. Several studies have demonstrated clear mortality benefits of HAART therapy in HIV/ AIDS. Its inception has led to the dramatic improvement in HIV-related outcomes, including mortality outcomes in HIV patients.

The use of HAART in HIV/AIDS provides the following benefits:

- It decreases HIV viral load.

- It leads to an increase in CD4+ T lymphocytes.

- It restores protective humoral and cellular immune functions against infections.

The potential adverse outcomes from the use of HAART are outlined below:

**A. Side effects of HAART drugs:**The most frequently encountered adverse effect of HAART includes nausea, lethargy, cold, loss of taste sensation, anxiety, anorexia, depression, peripheral neuropathy. Other potential side-effects include anemia, lactic acidosis, pancreatitis, hepatotoxicity, lipodystrophy, specifically noted with nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI), Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI), and protease inhibitors (PIs) use. Prior studies have reported that HAART related side effects have resulted in medication non-compliance, which has led to drug resistance, progression to AIDS, and increased mortality.

**B. Immune reconstitution syndrome (IRIS):**IRIS is a potential complication of initiation of HAART. It can occur in up to a third of cases of HIV patients initiated on HAART. It is a state of hyper-inflammatory response against latent infections that happens after the improvement in CD4 cell count and immune response once therapy for HIV has started. Commonly reported opportunistic pathogen is cytomegalovirus, mycobacterium, cryptococcus, Epstein-Barr virus, pneumocystis, JC virus, hepatitis B, and C. Therefore, the knowledge of any latent infections in patients is crucial before starting HAART in HIV/AIDS patients. The clinical presentation and severity of IRIS depend on the organism involved, location of the infection, and severity of inflammatory response.

**C. The risk for drug-drug interactions:**Drug-drug interactions can occur between HAART and drugs used for treating other conditions in patients with HIV/AIDS. The most commonly encountered drug interactions in HIV/AIDS patients treated with HAART drugs occur in patients receiving treatment for cancer and patients receiving treatment for other co-infections like tuberculosis, fungal infections. Drugs metabolized by the cytochrome P450 enzyme system includes NNRTI, PIs, anti-tubercular, anti-cancer drugs. These drugs interact with each other either by inducing or inhibiting the efficacy of one another.

**Increase in Serum Level of Drugs and Increased Risk of Drug-related Side-effects**

- The use of fluconazole and zidovudine (ZDV) can increase the serum concentration of ZDV and lead to an increased risk of hepatotoxicity and hemato-toxicity.

- NSAID use with efavirenz (EFV) can increase serum concentrations of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and cause an increase in the risk of nephrotoxicity.

- Co-administration of morphine and EFV increases the serum concentration of morphine, resulting in respiratory depression.

**Decreased Serum Level of Drugs and Decreased Therapeutic Efficacy**

- Use of anti-epileptics such as carbamazepine can decrease the levels of NNRTI (non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor)

- Rifampicin for treatment of TB can decrease serum concentrations of efavirenz (EFV) and zidovudine (ZDV)

**QTc Prolongation and Increased Risk of Arrhythmia**

- Use of haloperidol with protease inhibitors (PI) or azithromycin with ZDV can lead to an increase in QTc and result in cardiac arrhythmias.

**Increased Risk of Organ Toxicity**

- Simultaneous use of nitrofurantoin and ZDV can increase myelosuppression associated with both agents.

- The combination of isoniazid and stavudine can increase the risk of neuropathy associated with isoniazid.

The prevalence of IRIS is likely to increase with the increasing use of HAART in HIV patients. Some studies reported that up to 25% to 30% of HIV patients on antiretroviral therapy have IRIS.

**Risk factors for IRIS**

The risk factors for IRIS in non-HIV patients are not fully understood. However, similar to HIV patients, an abrupt shift from an anti-inflammatory state to a pro-inflammatory state would cause an increased risk for IRIS. For example, patients on TNF-alpha blocking agents or high doses of steroids, abruptly taken off of medications, or neutropenic patients who have an abrupt improvement in white cell counts following allogeneic bone marrow or stem cell transplantations.

In the case of HIV patients receiving HAART based on prior observational studies, the following are the risk factors for IRIS:

- Starting HAART treatment at a younger age or in male patients has shown an association with an increased risk of developing IRIS.

2. CD4+T cell count less than 100 cells per microliter at the time of initiating HAART.

3. An accelerated rise in CD4 count following treatment with HAART.

4. Rapid HIV RNA viral suppression within ninety days of HAART increases the risk of immune reconstitution syndrome.

5. Pre-existing latent opportunistic infection with a high antigenic burden increases the risk and severity of IRIS.

6. Initiating HAART within a short time interval (30 days) after completing treatment for opportunistic infection.

7. Studies have also suggested that genetics play a role in determining who is at an increased risk for IRIS, particularly in herpes and mycobacterial infections (HLA-A, -B44, -DR4 associated with herpes virus IRIS), and TNFA-308*1, IL6-174*G (associated with mycobacterial IRIS).