Most cases of serotonin syndrome are mild and will resolve with the removal of the offending drug alone. After stopping all serotonergic drugs, management is largely supportive and aimed at preventing complications. Patients frequently require sedation, which is best facilitated with benzodiazepines. Antipsychotics should be avoided because of their anticholinergic properties, which may inhibit sweating and heat dissipation. Vital signs should be normalized with intravenous (IV) fluids and cooling measures. Antipyretics such as acetaminophen are ineffective because increased muscular activity causes hyperthermia in serotonin syndrome. Severe hyperthermia may require sedation, paralysis, and intubation for mechanical ventilation. Autonomic instability may require antihypertensive agents or vasopressors, depending on the presentation, and maybe quite labile and difficult to manage.  Short-acting agents such as esmolol are recommended if antihypertensive are required. Most cases with hypotension can be managed with IV fluids alone, but in refractory cases, direct-acting sympathomimetics such as phenylephrine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine are preferable.

Cyproheptadine is a histamine-1 receptor antagonist with nonspecific 5-HT1A and 5-Ht2A antagonistic properties. While strong evidence to support its use is lacking, it is widely used as an antidote for serotonin syndrome. Side effects may include sedation, which may be desirable, and hypotension, which in most cases will respond to IV fluids. The usual starting dose is 12 mg, followed by an additional 2 mg every two hours as long as symptoms persist. As the patient improves, cyproheptadine is usually continued at a dose of 8 mg every 6 hours until symptoms resolve.

Patients with abnormal vital signs require admission to a monitored setting, and severe cases warrant intensive care unit care.