Radiotherapy is the single most effective non-surgical treatment of cancer.

- **Stereotactic Surgery (SRS) and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT):**Single fraction treatment (SRS) or multifunctional (SBRT) administration of high dose radiation to particular target areas from multiple directions to maximize dose delivery at highly specific points helps reduce exposure to surrounding normal tissues. Commonly utilized in intracranial, spinal, or extracranial sites in sensitive tissues (e.g., lungs, pancreas, head and neck cancers).

- **Brachytherapy:**Radiation source is placed inside the tissue or next to the target area and slowly emits radiation, which is active only for a short distance. Commonly utilized for prostate cancer and gynecological malignancies.

- **Fractionation:**Delivers radiation in multiple fractions allows time for normal tissues to repair before the next dose of radiation. Experimental evidence suggests that fraction size is the dominant factor in determining late effects.

- **Image-Guided Radiotherapy and Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy:**Utilizes real-time imaging for precise sculpting of dose distribution to guide external beam therapy to avoid irradiation of sensitive tissues deliberately.

- **Targeted Radionuclide Therapy:**Employs radionuclides that decay within the body at target tissues without accumulating in the normal tissues. Examples include radioisotopes of Iodine 131 for thyroid cancer treatment, Radium-223 for bone metastases, radionuclide linked anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies for leukemia, lymphomas, and radionuclides embedded in resin microspheres for direct intraarterial embolization of tumors in use of liver cancers.

- **Intra-Operative Radiation Therapy:**Intraoperative delivery of high dose targeted radiation therapy based on clinical and frozen-section pathology results to identify areas at increased risk of local recurrence with appropriate shielding maximizes the dose of radiation to target tissue and limits exposure to surrounding normal tissues.

Modification of techniques of therapeutic irradiation can play an essential role in reducing complications and enhancing local tumor control. Careful planning for radiotherapy considers likely patterns of locoregional tumor spread, uncertainties in positioning the patient for each treatment, tumor and organ movement during therapy and between treatment, tumor, and local tissue sensitivity helps to determine the appropriate irradiation dose, treatment intervals, and technique. Combined chemoradiation leads to prolonged mucosal, gastrointestinal, and urinary toxicities.

The use of appropriate tools to classify and measure toxicities can help guide treatment strategies and guidelines for radiotherapy in individual cancer treatments.

- Identify patients at a higher risk of radiation toxicity- e.g., patients with active collagen vascular disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and atherosclerotic vascular diseases.

- Use of predictive factors of clinical radiosensitivity - e.g., age, BMI.

- Cancer-specific predictive biomarkers may help identify individual curves or subsets to determine the appropriate dosing regimen.

Coordination of care by a surgical and medical oncologist, pathologist, radiotherapist, and interdisciplinary care team consisting of oncology and radiotherapy trained nurses and PCAs, psychiatrists, neurologists, pharmacists, nutritionists, and pain management services to make an individualized patient-centered care plan can significantly reduce toxicity and improve long term quality of life for cancer survivors.