# Continuing Education Activity

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a rare but serious post-infectious immune-mediated neuropathy. It results from the autoimmune destruction of nerves in the peripheral nervous system causing symptoms such as numbness, tingling, and weakness that can progress to paralysis. This activity illustrates the evaluation and management of Guillain-Barré syndrome and explains the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the pathophysiology of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
- Describe the use of electromyography and nerve conduction studies in the evaluation of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
- Summarize the management of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by Guillain-Barré syndrome.

# Introduction

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is the most common cause of acute, flaccid, neuromuscular paralysis in the United States. Guillain-Barré syndrome was first discovered more than a century ago. Advances in the past century include investigating the immune-mediated pathophysiology of the disease, recognizing the spectrum of presentations, advancing diagnostic modalities, prognostic models, and performing randomized trials of treatments to improve outcomes. Given the morbidity that can occur without treatment, all physicians should have knowledge of this rare disease.

# Etiology

The Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) and its variants are considered post-infectious, immune-mediated neuropathies. Evidence from animal models suggests a key role of molecular mimicry. In Campylobacter jejuni gastrointestinal infections, a lipooligosaccharide present in the outer membrane of the bacteria is similar to gangliosides which are components of the peripheral nerves.

Many infections have been linked with GBS. The most common are gastrointestinal or respiratory illnesses. Up to 70% of patients have reported an antecedent illness in the 1 to 6 weeks before the presentation of GBS.

In 1976, flu vaccination against the influenza A/H1N1 antigen led to a well-documented, increased incidence of cases of GBS; however, further surveillance data of flu vaccinations in subsequent years have described only one additional case of GBS for every 1 million vaccines. Subsequent studies estimate that developing GBS after a flu infection is up to 7 times more likely than developing GBS after a vaccination.

# Epidemiology

Although rare, with an incidence of 0.4 to 2 per 100,000, Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) has major effects on the healthcare system. The cost of medical care for a patient with GBS has been estimated at up to $318,966. Overall, the cost of treating patients with GBS has been estimated at $1.7 billion dollars per year. Males are affected at a slightly higher incidence than females. Each year, it is estimated 100,000 patients worldwide would contract GBS.

# Pathophysiology

Antecedent infections are reported in up to 70% of patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS).

Certain gangliosides are more likely to be associated with specific presentations. For example, Miller-Fisher syndrome is associated with the anti-GQ1B antibody.

Given that not all patients test positive for anti-ganglioside antibodies, further research is needed to elucidate the roles of anti-ganglioside antibodies in GBS as causal or epiphenomenon. Less is known about the pathophysiology behind the acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy variant (AIDP) of GBS, despite the fact that it is considered the most common variant in the United States.

# History and Physical

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) patients describe a fulminant course of symptoms that usually include ascending weakness and non-length dependent sensory symptoms. By definition, the nadir is usually reached within 4 weeks. Symmetric involvement is a key feature of GBS.

GBS often presents (up to 70% of patients) within 1 to 6 weeks of antecedent illness.

Classically, patients with GBS will have a pattern of proximal and distal weakness, which is flaccid and often profound if hospitalized. Significant neck flexion weakness may be present and can portend the need for intubation. Areflexia or hyporeflexia is usually present. (Rare cases without hypo/areflexia have been described, mostly in the AMAN variant of GBS).

Besides the classic GBS presentation described above, many variants of GBS have been described. There is a variant with pure motor involvement called "AMAN (acute motor axonal neuropathy)" that is more common in Asian countries.

# Evaluation

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is considered a clinical diagnosis; therefore, a diagnosis can be made with confidence at the bedside in most cases. For atypical cases or unusual subtypes, ancillary testing can be useful.

Electromyography and nerve conduction studies may be helpful in distinguishing GBS from its mimics. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) utilize technology to help distinguish between demyelinating and axonal forms of neuropathy. Needle electromyography may help to determine the acuity of a patient’s symptoms. In some cases, these studies may be helpful in evaluating for other considerations in the differential diagnosis, such as neuromuscular junction disorders or diabetic neuropathy. Classically, electrodiagnostic studies should be undertaken at 10 to 14 days after symptom onset due to the time for Wallerian degeneration of sensory and motor nerve fibers; however, there have been many studies that reveal that early, nonspecific findings may be helpful in diagnosing GBS as early as 3 to 7 days after symptom onset.

The more common early electrodiagnostic findings in GBS include absent or prolonged H-reflexes and/or F-wave latencies.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shows a classic pattern of albuminocytologic dissociation. This term means that spinal fluid shows a normal amount of white blood cells and an elevated CSF protein level.

A number of ganglioside antibodies have been associated with GBS. Antibodies include anti-GM1, anti-GD1A, anti-GT1A, and anti-GQ1B. These range in sensitivity from up to 60% (anti-GM1 antibodies in acute motor axonal neuropathy) to up to more than 90% (anti-GQ1B antibodies in Miller Fisher syndrome). However, these laboratory studies usually require some time to obtain results and, therefore, may not be as helpful in decision-making at the time of patient admission.

Imaging studies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) spine may show enhancement of the nerve roots, indicating a breakdown of the blood-nerve barrier due to inflammation in GBS. However, MRI utility in GBS is most useful to rule out other etiologies of quadriparesis or facial diplegia, such as transverse myelitis or intracranial disease.

A negative inspiratory force (NIF) should be performed on patients with suspected GBS.  Serial NIFs should be followed in patients with a high risk of respiratory compromise.  Patients that are unable to perform a NIF of -20 to -30 cm H2O should be considered at very high risk.

# Treatment / Management

In randomized controlled trials, there are two treatment options currently considered the standard of care in Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). These include either intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or plasma exchange. IVIG is thought to act by its immune-modulating action; however, the exact mechanism remains to be elucidated. IVIG is given 2 grams/kilogram divided over 5 days. [Evidence level 1]

Overall, most patients with GBS do well, with up to 85% of patients achieving independent ambulation with recovery; however, there is a significant proportion of patients (20%) with morbidity. [Evidence level 3] Further studies of plasma exchange followed by IVIG and IVIG concurrent with steroids have not shown significant improvement. [Evidence level 1]

# Differential Diagnosis

Following the eradication of poliovirus, Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is the most common cause of acute or subacute, flaccid neuromuscular weakness worldwide; however, other disorders may mimic GBS. If flaccid weakness occurs in a critically ill patient with multiorgan involvement, critical illness neuropathy and myopathy should be considered. Other etiologies that may mimic GBS include tick paralysis. There would be an initial presentation of neuromuscular junction disorder, acute intermittent porphyria, HIV infection, spinal cord disorders, toxic neuropathies, and even infections (such as West Nile virus or rabies). Some atypical clinical features should lead providers to consider other diagnoses. These include early bowel and bladder involvement, asymmetric features, and hyperreflexia or normal reflexes.

Distinguishing GBS from its mimics would require a thoughtful evaluation of history, clinical presentation, and ancillary data. Regarding the clinical presentation, the presence of dilated pupils may be more suggestive of tick paralysis or botulism. Ancillary testing such as electromyography and nerve conduction studies may distinguish GBS from critical illness neuropathy/myopathy, along with history and clinical context. Cerebrospinal fluid testing showing pleocytosis rather than the classic albuminocytologic dissociation may lead to further consideration of infectious etiologies such as HIV or West Nile Virus infection.

# Prognosis

After the acute phase of the illness, Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) patients tend to do well. More than 80% achieve independent ambulation after 6 months.

Studies to assess whether plasma exchange followed by IVIG would have an additional benefit were not significant.

Other clinical features have been shown to predict the need for ventilation during the illness. These include fulminant course (onset to admission less than 7 days), bulbar weakness, and neck flexion weakness. These predictive factors would suggest triage to an intensive care unit rather than a step-down unit.

Following recovery, patients may continue to contend with residual fatigue, pain, and paresthesias for up to several years. [Evidence level 3]

# Complications

The most feared complications are respiratory compromise and bulbar palsies.

# Consultations

- Neurology

- Pulmonology/intensive care

- +/- Infectious disease

- +/- Immunology

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The care of the patient with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) requires all members of the healthcare team. Nurses are integral in recognizing and preventing complications, including decubitus ulcers, dysautonomia, and infection prevention. Pharmacists should be well-versed in the adverse effects that may occur with the administration of treatments for GBS, such as IVIG. Respiratory therapists can assist with preventing atelectasis and aspiration pneumonia. Physical and occupational therapists are crucial as the patient begins to regain function and strength. Following recovery, patients often may find it helpful to enlist in support groups available through the GBS foundation.