**Signs and Symptoms**

- Malnutrition

- Dementia
- Pellagra (The 3 Ds)

- Depression
- Dermatitis
- Diarrhea


- Mental changes
- Anorexia
- Weight loss
- Glossitis

- Encephalopathy

- Confusion
- Coma
- Asterixis
- Fetor hepaticus

- Enteropathy

- Intestinal dysfunction
- History of organ transplantation
- Vascular congestion
- Pitting edema
- Ascites
- Alpha 1 anti-trypsin deficiency
- Recent Tm99 scintigraphy

**Pharmacotherapy**

- Cephalosporins can bind to the penicillin-binding proteins, thereby inhibiting bacterial cell wall synthesis.

- Macrolides and Lincosamide both bind to the 50s ribosomal subunit, which inhibits bacterial protein synthesis

- Aminoglycosides and Tetracyclines both bind to the 30s ribosomal subunit, which blocks aminoacyl-tRNA from binding, thus inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis.

**Laboratory Medicine**

- Plasma and serum protein concentration is approximately 7.0 g/dl/L

- CSF protein concentration is approximately 0.48 g/dl/L

- Urine protein concentration is approximately 1.5 g/day

- Serum protein concentration is approximately 140 mEq/L

- Approximately 50% of serum protein is albumin.

- Hypoalbuminemia is approximately < 2.5 g/dl.

- Approximately 48% of serum protein is globulin.
- Alpha 1: approximately 5.7%
- Alpha 2: approximately 9.4%
- Beta: approximately 11.6%
- Gamma: approximately 17%

Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate & C Reactive Protein

If there are too many proteins in the plasma, it can be reflected in laboratory studies by an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP). ESR is a blood test that determines the rate of red blood cell sediment during centrifugation in one hour. CRP is an opsonin that binds to the surface of dead cells to activate the complement system. An elevation in CRP indicates nonspecific inflammation. An elevated ESR does not specify which proteins have increased. Other factors that affect ESR are microcytic anemia, sickle cell anemia, and polycythemia. The value in ESR comes from its ability to show whether an inflammatory or non-inflammatory process.

Envision that there is a vial of a patient's plasma. Shake it up and turn it upside-down. Count how long it takes for one RBC to float down to the bottom. Once it hits the bottom, the clock stops. If it hits the bottom quickly, then the sedimentation rate is low.

If proteins are in the way, the erythrocytes will bounce around until they reach the bottom; this will cause a high sedimentation rate. Anemia will cause a false high sedimentation rate because there are so few cells in the vial; by chance alone, it will take a long time for one to finally float to the bottom.

A falsely low sedimentation rate can occur if the vial is already full of erythrocytes. Therefore it is not necessary to run a rate on a polycythemic patient since the cell count will confound the result. Sickled red blood cell shape allows for the cells to arrive at the bottom of the vial quicker, making the sedimentation rate falsely low.

**Preventive Health**

Diabetes

High protein diets can promote weight loss via increased insulin sensitivity, increased oxidation of fatty acids, increase, and appetite suppression increased satiety. However, caution is necessary for people with diabetes who have gout because protein can elevate niacin levels, which may exacerbate gout related symptoms.

Screening

Certain protein combinations can be useful in health screenings. For example, certain combinations of proteins have a sensitivity for detecting cancer higher than testing for one particular protein alone.