**Structure**

The cutaneous innervation of the hand is formed primarily by the terminal branches of three nerves: the median nerve, the radial nerve, and the ulnar nerve. These nerves are formed proximally by the brachial plexus, which arises from the cervical root levels C5 to T1. These nerves course through the axilla and various compartments of the arm and forearm until reaching the wrist where each nerve's sensory and motor branches distribute throughout the hand. Both the radial and median nerve receive and send input via each brachial plexus level C5 to T1 while the ulnar nerve receives and sends inputs via just the C8 and T1 spinal levels. The anatomic course of these nerves is discussed in greater detail below in the 'neves' section of this article. These sensory branches include the superficial radial nerve, superficial and dorsal ulnar nerve, and the palmar branch of the median nerve. These nerves then give off digital nerve branches that feed into the individual digits providing cutaneous sensory information to the brain.

**Function**

The function of these nerves summates the cutaneous innervation of the hand as well as the muscular innervation of a few muscles discussed in the muscles portion of this document. They provide the sensation of touch, pressure, pain, and temperature to the brain. These nerves contain sympathetic and autonomic afferent fibers and sympathetic efferent fibers providing innervation to the cutaneous blood vessels, sweat glands, and arrector pili muscles of hair follicles. These autonomic afferent fibers primarily supply the cutaneous innervation.