In the older population, one of the serious health concerns that are associated with comorbidity, impaired functioning, excessive use of health care resources, and increased mortality (including suicide) is a depressive disorder. Depression that occurs among individuals 65 years and above with no previous history of depression is known as late-life depression. Depression in late life is underdiagnosed and inadequately treated. The diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), defines major depressive disorder by the presence of depressed mood or marked loss of interest or pleasure in activities along with five of the following symptoms- changes in appetite or weight (5% total body weight), sleep, energy, concentration, and psychomotor activity, feelings of inappropriate guilt or worthlessness and recurrent thoughts of death or suicide. There should be an impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning. The symptoms of depression should have been present during the same 2-week period. This activity examines late-onset depression and the role of the interprofessional team in collaborating to provide optimal care for patients with this diagnosis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of depression.
- Review the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of depression.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for depression.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance treatment of depression and improve outcomes.