Chronic atrophic gastritis is more prevalent in the older population, although it is variable in different regions of the world. The difficulty arises due to the asymptomatic nature of the condition in most individuals.

**Age**

In a population-based cohort study in Germany diagnosed on the serological assessment of pepsinogen 1 and H. pylori testing, the prevalence increased from 4.8% in the 50 to 54 age group to 8.7% in the 70 to 74 age group. This difference was observed to be higher in Japan, rising from 2.7 to 9.1%.

Autoimmune atrophic gastritis is prevalent in the older women of Northern European and Scandinavian origin but has now been found to exist in every ethnicity, region, and age.

**Age andHelicobacter Pylori**

There is a higher prevalence of CAG in older individuals with H. pylori infection and slightly more common in men. Prevalence was observed in serological pepsinogen and endoscopic biopsy testing. In higher incidence areas like Japan and China, this varies to as high as 33% to 84%.

Overall there is a wide variation in the risk of gastric adenocarcinoma developing in individuals with premalignant conditions like CAG (GA/IM) with a <1% annual incidence (person-year) irrespective of whether the individual is from a low risk or high-risk group.

There are two different types of malignancies associated with CAG, gastric adenocarcinoma linked to H pylori infection and a neuroendocrine gastrin dependent tumor (type 1 gastric carcinoid) secondary to hyperplasia of the enterochromaffin-like cells.

**Atrophic Gastritis and Cancer Risk**

Endoscopic surveillance was performed in another cohort study for individuals with H pylori AG to identify the risks of gastric cancer. The mean duration of follow-up endoscopy was 6.2 +/- 4.8 years. The cumulative 5-year incidence of gastric adenocarcinoma ranged between 0.7% in no or mild AG to 10% in severe AG.