**Hypersensitivity**

- There are reports of serious and life-threatening anaphylactoid reactions with ampicillin-sulbactam therapy. Although anaphylaxis is more common following parenteral therapy, it can also occur after oral administration. In addition, anaphylaxis is more likely in a patient with a previous history of penicillin hypersensitivity and/or reaction to multiple allergens. Therefore, a careful inquiry is necessary before initiating therapy regarding hypersensitivity reactions to cephalosporins, allergens, or penicillin.

- If a hypersensitivity reaction occurs, the clinician should discontinue therapy and alternative treatment initiated. Anaphylactoid reactions require immediate emergency treatment with oxygen, epinephrine, steroids, and airway management, including intubation if indicated.

**Clostridioides difficile Infection**

- Antibacterial treatment alters the intestine's natural flora, leading to the overgrowth of Clostridium difficile. Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea(CDAD) occurs when using nearly all antibacterial agents, especially ampicillin. The resulting severity may range from mild diarrhea to fulminant colitis. Hypertoxin-producing C. difficile strains cause increased morbidity and mortality, as these strains are refractory to the recommended antimicrobial therapy and may require colectomy. Therefore, Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea may be a consideration for all patients present with diarrhea after antibacterial use. Since it reportedly occurs over two months after administering antibacterial agents, a careful medical history is necessary in these cases.

- If CDAD is confirmed, ongoing antimicrobial use not directed against the organism might require therapy discontinuation. Adequate fluid and electrolyte management, protein supplementation, the antimicrobial regimen of C. difficile, and surgical evaluation merit consideration if indicated.

**Concomitant Infectious Mononucleosis Infection**

- Many patients with infectious mononucleosis started on ampicillin-sulbactam to develop a rash. Ideally, the rash appears 7 to 10 days following the initiation of ampicillin-sulbactam therapy and remains for a few days to one week after discontinuing the drug. In most cases, the rash is maculopapular, generalized, and pruritic. Therefore, ampicillin-sulbactam administration is not a recommended agent in these patients. Whether these patients are truly allergic to penicillin remains unknown.

**Hepatic Dysfunction**

- Ampicillin reexposure can lead to the recurrence of drug-induced liver injury(DILI). Avoid the use of ampicillin in patients with a history of aminopenicillin-induced hepatitis.