The initial management of patients with rumination syndrome consists of education regarding the disease process, reassurance, and behavioral modifications to reduce the episodes of regurgitation.

**Diaphragmatic Breathing**

Diaphragmatic breathing is the first-line treatment for rumination syndrome. It works by initiating a competing mechanism to the acquired, unperceived contractions of the abdominothoracic muscles. The patient is instructed to sit in a chair and place one hand on the chest and the other on the abdomen. During breathing, only the hand on the abdomen is allowed to move with slow and deep 6 to 8 respirations per minute. The patients inhale, contracting the diaphragm and expanding the abdomen.

Diaphragmatic breathing should be initiated after completion of a meal or with signs of incoming regurgitations. Effects of diaphragmatic breathing can be visualized via EMG and/or HRIM (biofeedback), which helps some patients to objectify the method. Referral to a behavioral therapist for augmentation strategies (general relaxation and gum chewing) and cognitive behavioral therapy for rumination disorder (CBT-RD) can be used as adjuncts.

**Medical Therapy**

Limited data is available concerning medical therapy for rumination syndrome. Generally, pharmacotherapy for rumination syndrome should be reserved for patients who fail initial management with behavioral therapy. Pauwels et al. indicated in a small cross-over study that baclofen 10 mg three times a day reduces flow events and improves patient-reported symptoms in rumination syndrome, with similar results reported in different studies.

Baclofen counteracts transient lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxations by increasing the basal LES pressure, thereby limiting regurgitation episodes. Tack et al. indicated in a cross-over study for functional dyspepsia that buspirone has positive gastric fundus relaxation properties, which might benefit patients with rumination syndrome.