Diagnosis of colitis has its basis in clinical findings, laboratory tests, endoscopy, and biopsy. Endoscopy and biopsy should not be the primary investigations and may be arranged after a critical evaluation of the patient’s condition and the results from the initial examinations.

- Because colonic infection is a common etiology of colitis and can produce clinical presentations indistinguishable from inflammatory bowel disease, microbiological studies and cultures for bacterial and parasitic infestations should be the primary investigations. Laboratory workup including complete blood count, ESR, CRP, arterial blood gases, activated partial thromboplastin time, serum albumin, total protein, blood urea, creatinine, electrolytes, and purified protein derivative, should be ordered.

- D-lactate levels in the blood could be a sensitive marker of colonic ischemia; however, it is an experimental laboratory test.

- Electrocardiogram, transthoracic and even Holter monitoring may be necessary in patients with ischemic colitis.

- Plain X-ray is of limited value; however, it may be useful in the diagnosis of toxic megacolon, bowel obstruction, and intestinal perforation (pneumoperitoneum). Thumbprinting is a classic finding for mucosal edema though not specific for ischemic colitis.

- Multidetector CT and thin sections, can accurately demonstrate inflammatory changes in the colonic wall and help assess the extent of disease. Ulcerative colitis is distinguishable from granulomatous colitis (Crohn disease) in terms of location of involvement, extent, and appearance of colonic wall thickening, and type of complications.

- Colonoscopy or proctosigmoidoscopy is essential for the final diagnosis; it typically appears normal in microscopic colitis although edema or erythema may present. Ulceration suggests an alternative diagnosis, although these can be present in patients on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

- Other colonoscopy changes, depending on the etiology, include loss of typical vascular pattern, granularity, friability, and ulceration.

- Several laboratory tests specific to certain colitis may be ordered including perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA), which may present in Crohn disease, anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA), a feature in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), which is elevated in patients with active ulcerative colitis.

- Assess the extent, degree, and severity of the disease and any complications.