Bacterial sepsis and the resulting septic shock are a result of the overproduction of inflammatory signals. This overproduction of inflammatory signals results from the interaction of the immune system with bacterial wall constituents. Lipopolysaccharide, peptidoglycans, and others are particularly implicated in this process. When these bacterial wall components bind to complement and Fc receptors on the surface of mononuclear cells, the macrophage becomes metabolically active and produces microbicidal agents, and secretes proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha.

Patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism will be hypocalcemic, hyperphosphatemic, and have elevated PTH as the parathyroid gland tries to make more hormone to fix the imbalances. Patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism can have their electrolyte imbalances manifest as tetany, seizures, cardiac arrhythmias, papilledema, and psychiatric symptoms.

In patients with McCune-Albright syndrome, endocrine functions are most affected, resulting in precocious puberty, thyrotoxicosis, gigantism, acromegaly, Cushing syndrome, or hypophosphatemic rickets, depending on where the mutation occurred. Mutations can also occur in the liver or heart, resulting in cholestasis and hepatitis or cardiac arrhythmias.

In patients with myasthenia gravis, often the first noticed symptom is diplopia or ptosis due to weakness of the ocular muscles or eyelid muscles. In worse forms of the disease, the bulbar, limb, and respiratory muscles can also be affected. A similar condition is Lambert-Eaton, where autoantibodies target the presynaptic calcium channels resulting in the inability of the neuron to release acetylcholine into the NMJ.

Androgen insensitivity syndrome exists on a spectrum, from partial to complete, based on the level of functioning of the androgen receptor. In complete androgen insensitivity, the presentation is often a healthy female child found to have inguinal masses that contain testes. Patients are also commonly identified during puberty when they fail to menstruate. Upon testing, patients will have abnormally high levels of testosterone, LH, and FSH due to the failure of the negative feedback loop in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis.

The mutation in achondroplasia causing a constitutively active FGF3 receptor results in inhibited chondrocyte proliferation and endochondral bone formation resulting in growth restriction and bone shortening, among other skeletal abnormalities.