Typically, the GCS is used universally for patients with head injury or any patient with reduced levels of consciousness. This has been criticized, particularly as the GCS scale is not ordinal or linear. For example, losing two points in speech may represent a focal disorder of speech and not a disorder of consciousness. It is well established that the motor component is more sensitive and specific as grading of severity in head injury than the overall GCS.

Radiological imaging such as CT head is mandatory for patients presenting with reduced consciousness unless there is a known medical or metabolic cause, such as hypoglycemia. Patients with unequal pupils and reduced consciousness are very likely to have a surgically amenable lesion and therefore require urgent imaging.

In the case of PCA occlusion, there may be established ischemic changes in the distribution of the PCAs. With upward herniation, the ischemic changes are more likely to be in the distribution of the superior cerebellar arteries (SCAs) within the cerebellum. With compression of the aqueduct, there may also be hydrocephalus of the lateral and third ventricles. This is particularly common in posterior fossa lesions causing upward herniation and dorsal midbrain compression closing off the aqueduct.

- An intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring system may be warranted, usually in the form of an ICP bolt. With a herniation syndrome, this will show raised pressures, typically over 20 mmHg, with poor compliance. Poor compliance is represented by P2 being higher than P1 and P3 on the ICP waveform. On an ICP waveform, the P2 represents the ’tidal wave’ of the brain and thus the compliance. P1 is the ‘percussion wave’ or arterial kick during systole. P3 is the venous wave or ‘dicrotic notch.’ In normal physiology, P1 should be higher than P2 that is higher than P3. When compliance is reduced, P2 is the higher wave. This indicates an intracranial system that is unable to compensate for the increased volume, and therefore, the pressure will be rising.

A contentious issue within neurocritical care is that numerous studies have shown control of ICP is key to a good outcome in traumatic brain injury.

An important patient presentation to be mindful of is the head-injured patient who may ’talk and die.’ This is a patient who initially does not exhibit signs of significant brain injury but later after the ‘lucid interval’ deteriorates neurologically into a coma. This is typically seen in extradural hematoma, where the rapid expansion of the hematoma causes a coma.