Angiodysplasia is more commonly diagnosed as an incidental finding for endoscopy for different reasons and can divide into incidental angiodysplasia, nonbleeding angiodysplasia in a patient with GI bleeding, and an actively bleeding angiodysplasia with GI bleeding. Clinicians should base treatment decisions on these factors.

**Incidental angiodysplasia**- Incidental angiodysplasia should not have treatment if there is no history of GI bleeding or unexplained iron deficiency anemia. The future risk of incidental angiodysplasia-related bleeding is unknown, and the recommendation is based solely on expert opinions.

**Nonbleeding angiodysplasia in a patient with GI bleeding**- In these patients, angiodysplasia should have treatment, which again has its basis on expert opinions.

**Actively bleeding angiodysplasia**- In most patient’s management should follow a similar path as in managing upper and lower GI bleeding for other reasons, which is hemodynamic resuscitation, frequent complete blood count monitoring, and blood transfusion if needed. Treatment decisions should be dependent on hemodynamic stability and whether the patient is actively bleeding or not.

**Hemodynamically unstable patient**- In an unstable patient with active bleeding intravenous fluid resuscitation should be started immediately. If the patient is obtunded with a thready pulse, hypoxic, having active hematemesis, and unable to protect the airway, then they need to be intubated and admitted in the intensive care unit for frequent CBC monitoring and blood transfusion as required. An endoscopy or colonoscopy should be done if possible, but it may not be possible if the patient is actively bleeding. In that case, surgery or radiology intervention with angiography is usually required.

**Hemodynamically stable patient**- In patients with stable vitals, an endoscopy or colonoscopy should be done within 24 hours based on characteristics of bleeding. If the test reveals no identified source, then the next diagnostic modality is chosen on the fact whether the bleeding is active or not.

**Endoscopy or colonoscopy**- If angiodysplasia is present on endoscopy or colonoscopy then different techniques can be used to treat angiodysplasia which is as follows

- Argon plasma coagulation ablation - Most commonly used intervention.

- Electrocoagulation - Uses bipolar or heater probe coagulation. It is more suitable for the lower GI tract.

- Endoscopic clips and band ligation - These are mechanical methods to treat angiodysplasia. Band ligation is an option in the stomach and small bowel angiodysplasia treatment.

- Injection sclerotherapy - It includes injecting a sclerosant to obliterate angiodysplasia and other vascular lesions of the upper and lower GI tract. Commonly used sclerosants are ethanolamine or sodium tetradecyl sulfate. Endoscopic ligation, endoscopic resection, and photocoagulation are also some other techniques that are being used in the treatment of angiodysplasia endoscopically.

**Endoscopy with push enteroscopy**is used to investigate and treat with endoscopic intervention in OGIB.

**Angiography**- Usually done in patients with active bleeding who have failed other treatment mentioned above, patients who are poor surgical candidates, and to localize bleeding sites as a preoperative investigation before surgical resection. The therapeutic intervention involves either temporary absorbable gelatin sponge, local infusion of vasopressin, or permanent such embolization with micro-coils, particles, or glue.  Major complication includes bowel ischemia or infarction along with complication of arteriography itself. The initial success rate of achieving hemostasis with embolization in lower GI bleed is 95% and 64% to 89% in upper GI bleeding.

**Surgery**- Surgical resection is required eventually in patients with heavy active bleeding requiring multiple blood unit transfusion with failed all other measures described above.

**Angiogenesis inhibitors**- Thalidomide and bevacizumab have been described with success in the treatment of gastrointestinal vascular malformation, including angiodysplasia.

**Hormone therapy**- Few studies have evaluated treatment with estrogen with or without progesterone in chronic obscure GI bleeding.

**Octreotide**– Octreotide seems to be effective in the treatment of refractory angiodysplasia related GI bleeding, as mentioned in some case series and meta-analysis. Octreotide with twice-daily subcutaneous injections with dose 50 to 100 mcg and long-acting form, octreotide-LAR, which is given intramuscularly once a month is an option. The studies which evaluated octreotide showed 73 to 76% of patients showed response in terms of bleeding events, transfusion requirement, and mean hemoglobin.