Renal size increases with age, and renal enlargement eventually occurs in 100% of patients with ADPKD. The severity of the structural abnormality correlates with the manifestations of ADPKD, such as pain, hematuria, hypertension, and renal impairment. Most clinical manifestations are directly related to the enlargement of renal cysts.

Episodes of acute renal pain are seen quite often due to cyst hemorrhage, infection, stone, and, rarely, tumors. Visible hematuria may be the initial presenting symptom

Urinary tract infection (UTI) is common in ADPKD. UTI presents as cystitis, acute pyelonephritis, cyst infection, and perinephric abscesses. Most infections are caused by Escherichia coli, Klebsiella and Proteus species, and other Enterobacteriaceae.

Both CT and MRI are sensitive to detect complicated cysts.

Renal stone disease occurs in about 20% of patients with ADPKD. Most stones are composed of uric acid, calcium oxalate, or both. Stones can be difficult to diagnose on imaging in ADPKD because of cyst wall and parenchymal calcification. CT urography is helpful.

Hypertension is the most common manifestation of ADPKD. Microalbuminuria, proteinuria, and hematuria are more common in hypertensive patients with ADPKD.

In a majority of patients, renal function is within the normal range. By the time renal function starts worsening, the kidneys usually are greatly enlarged. ESRD is not inevitable in ADPKD. Up to 77% of patients are alive with preserved renal function at age 50 years, and 52% at age 73. Kidney and cyst volumes are the strongest predictors of renal functional decline.

Most simple hepatic cysts are solitary, and PLD should be suspected when four or more cysts are present in the hepatic parenchyma.