The ankle joint is formed by the tibia, fibula, and talus. The medial malleolus is an osseous excrescence from the medial distal tibia. The posterior lip of the distal tibia is often referred to as the posterior malleolus. The lateral malleolus is the most distal extension of the distal fibula. The tibial plafond is the name given to the articular surface of the distal tibia. Fractures involving the medial and lateral malleoli are termed bimalleolar fractures. By extension, fractures of all three malleoli are referred to as trimalleolar fractures.

The talar anatomy is complex and is divided into the head, neck, and body. Because of its unique role in the foot and ankle mobility, it is extensively covered with articular cartilage, and there are few muscle or tendon attachments.

The posterior process of the talar body is composed of medial and lateral tubercles, which form a groove through which the flexor hallucis longus tendon runs. The lateral process extends from the lateral aspect of the talar body and articulates with the fibula superiorly, and forms the anterolateral portion of the posterior facet of the posterior subtalar joint.

Vascular supply to the ankle is complex and is derived from the three distal branches of the popliteal artery. A particular concern for vascular disruption should be paid to the talus due to its tenuous blood supply. This consideration arises because of the extensive articular cartilage coverage of the talus, which prevents direct vascular supply over much of the talar surface.

The ankle articulations are maintained by ligamentous support, including the lateral collateral ligaments, the deltoid (medial) ligaments, the syndesmotic ligaments, and the tibiofibular ligaments. Classically, these ligaments are injured in predictable sequences based on the pattern of injury. Additionally, avulsion fractions at the site of attachment of the ligament may occur due to these same patterns.

Ankle fractures are created by the movement of the talus within the ankle mortise, with leverage exerted by the foot. The primary motions of the ankle are external rotation, abduction, and adduction. Secondary motions include dorsiflexion and plantar flexion. Lines of force are directed against the lateral, medium, and posterior malleoli.

Many ankle fracture types and fracture patterns have been described. For the sake of brevity, we will only review the most common fracture types in this article. The most common ankle fracture involves the lateral malleolus, and the most common injury of this structure is an obliquely oriented fracture in the coronal plane. This fracture extends from the joint line anteroinferior to the posterior aspect of the fibula posterosuperiorly and arises from supination-external rotation injuries. These can be difficult to see on anteroposterior (AP) views while nondisplaced and are more easily seen on mortise and lateral views. Avulsion fractures from the distal tip of the lateral malleolus are also common and result from inversion injuries to the ankle. These are typically well evaluated on AP and lateral views. Other common fracture types involve transverse fractures at, distal, or proximal to the joint line, and these are due to pronation-external rotation forces. Transverse fractures invariably involve injury to the syndesmotic ligament.

Medial malleolus fractures are not uncommon, and the most common fractures are transversely oriented, distal to the corner of the ankle mortise. They are the most commonly due to eversion injuries. A less common fracture type is transversely oriented, extending from the medial corner of the ankle mortise superomedially to the medial cortex of the tibial metaphysis. This injury results from ankle inversion or adduction.

Posterior malleolus fractures are typically either avulsion at the site of the attachment of the posteroinferior tibiofibular ligament (due to external rotation) or fractures involving the joint surface due to impaction of the talus against the posterior aspect of the tibial plafond (secondary to forced plantarflexion of the foot).

An impaction fracture of the anterior tibial plafond with the foot in inversion and dorsiflexion is termed a pilon fracture. The radiographic appearance often involves comminution of the anterior plafond. These can be difficult to differentiate from trimalleolar fractures on radiographs and may require computed tomography (CT) for further evaluation.

The Tillaux fracture, an avulsion fracture of the anterior tibial tubercle, occurs with external rotation and abduction of the foot.

Fractures of the lateral process of the talus occur either due to ankle eversion and dorsiflexion, which leads to the impaction of the calcaneus against the lateral process of the talus or occasionally by ankle inversion. This has been termed the “snowboarder’s fracture” and is typically only seen on the AP ankle view.

Fractures of the posterior process of the talus are due to either forced dorsiflexion of the ankle, which causes an avulsion, or a chip fracture when the ankle is severely plantarflexed, causing the lateral tubercle to become wedged between the posterior lip of the tibia and the calcaneus. They occur more commonly at the medial tubercle and are best evaluated on the lateral radiographic view.

The above fracture patterns are most commonly seen in adults. Ankle fractures in children are relatively less frequent, but when they do occur, they tend to involve the epiphysis (Salter-Harris fractures), as the open physeal plate is a plane of weakness in any bone. The distal tibial epiphysis is the second most common epiphyseal fracture in the entire body, following the distal radial epiphysis.

Additional normal anatomic variants are important to appreciate, as they may be confused for fractures. Numerous accessory ossicles have been described throughout the foot and ankle and must be differentiated from fractures. Confusingly, many of these may occur at sites where fractures also occur, such as the distal tips of the malleoli and the anterior process of the calcaneus. The imaging clue that osseous fragments in these locations represent normal variant anatomy as opposed to fractures. These secondary centers of ossification are typically round and well-corticated along all margins, and the cortex of the adjacent bones is normal. Conversely, fractures tend to be irregular in appearance, with the absence of a well-defined cortex along the margin of the fragment and the adjacent bone. Avulsion fractures tend to be linear or curvilinear.