When performed correctly and utilized in the appropriate clinical context, direct antiglobulin testing has been shown to demonstrate a positive predictive value of 97% to 99%, although a more recent study involving hospitalized patients reported a false positive rate of up to 7% to 8% in patients without any evidence of hemolysis clinically or histologically. The majority of these false positives show a low grade of agglutination, though up to 1% of these results may demonstrate higher grades of agglutination.

Several other confounding variables can affect the accuracy of DAT and IAT test results:

- Type of antibody - most commercial antiglobulin testing screens for antibodies to IgG, complement C3, or both. As such, false-negative results may occur in cases of AIHA caused by autoantibodies other than IgG or C3, such as IgM or IgA.

- Amount of antibody present - in some rare instances, autoimmune anemia may be induced by levels of antibody below the detection limit of DAT, which is approximately 150 to 500 molecules of IgG per red cell.

- High serum protein - certain diseases, such as myeloproliferative diseases, may cause a falsely positive agglutination study due to abnormally high levels of protein unrelated to antibody-RBC agglutination. Exogenous sources of excess protein or immunoglobulin, such as cases in which a patient is receiving intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), may also result in a falsely positive study.

- Infection - the serum of individuals infected with certain microorganisms may create a false positive agglutination result. Examples include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), malaria, hepatitis C virus (HCV), and in rare cases, the hepatitis E virus (HEV).

- Antiphospholipid syndrome - cross-reactivity between antiphospholipid antibodies and RBC membranes can result in falsely positive DAT testing, as reported by Win et al.

- Wharton jelly - in neonatal umbilical cord blood samples, the presence of mucopolysaccharide-rich Wharton jelly has been shown to produce false-positive antiglobulin results.