The surgical management of insular lesions is particularly challenging, given the difficulty of accessing this region via the overlying eloquent operculae of the frontoparietal and temporal lobes and the intricate MCA vascular supply. Nevertheless, a better understanding of both gross and microsurgical insular anatomy, preoperative fMRI and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) tractography, awake cortical mapping, and stereotactic and fluorescein guidance have collectively improved the ability of neurosurgeons to resect lesions in this area while respecting eloquent structures.

Speech and motor areas are of particular concern when attempting to gain access to the insula. In a patient's dominant hemisphere (typically the left), the major language areas overlie the insula. Care is also necessary regarding the arcuate, uncinate, and inferior frontal-occipital fasciculi. The basal ganglia lie medial to the insula. Finally, although short perforators of the M2-MCA can be sacrificed during surgery, long branches must be preserved, as these supply the adjacent corticospinal tract in the corona radiata. Disruption of these vessels may thus lead to hemiplegia.

**Berger-Sanai Classification of Insular Gliomas**

In 2010, after a growing understanding of the challenges of surgery to the insula, the Berger-Sanai surgical classification system for insular gliomas was developed. This system, which bisects the insula along two perpendicular planes, the lateral sulcus and a line through the Foramen of Monro, divides the insula into four zones. It is useful both for strategizing the surgical approach to the insula and for a pragmatic functional and anatomic understanding of the area. It has been validated as a predictor of the extent of resection and postoperative morbidity in the surgical resection of insular gliomas. The zones are listed below.

- Zone I: Anterior-Superior

- Zone II: Posterior-Superior

- Zone III: Posterior-Inferior

- Zone IV: Anterior-Inferior

**Surgical Approaches to the Insula**

An incision and craniotomy under general anesthesia are required to access the brain parenchyma. Choice of craniotomy (i.e., pterional, temporal) may follow the lesion's location and the preferred surgical approach. The two main surgical approaches to the insula are the transsylvian and transcortical techniques, and there are advantages and risks to both. The ultimate goal is to maximize the extent of resection while minimizing surgical risk to adjacent structures, and thus, the choice is ultimately surgeon-dependent. There remains debate over the preferred approach.

**Transsylvian Approach**

The transsylvian approach to the insula, via a wide exposure through the lateral sulcus, was the first-described technique. It is of particular benefit when accessing lesions in the dominant hemisphere since the operator can better spare the eloquent language areas of the temporal and frontal lobes. Disadvantages include a need for extensive subarachnoid dissection, the manual distraction of the MCA, and opercular retraction for large lesions.

**Transcortical Approach**

The transcortical approach is increasingly used for large lesions that may extend beyond the confines of the peri-insular sulcus, especially posteriorly. Cortical and subcortical mapping is important to identify eloquent cortex, whereby exposure windows through non-eloquent areas may be accessed. There appears to be a preference for the transcortical approach for large gliomas and those located in Berger-Sanai Zone III. The transcortical approach may also be associated with lower ischemic morbidity for Berger-Sanai Zone II lesions.