During the normal menstrual cycle, the follicular phase is characterized by increasing follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) production. That leads to the selection of dominant follicles for priming to release from the ovary. In a normal functioning ovary, estrogen production from the dominant follicle leads to a luteinizing hormone surge (LH), resulting in ovulation. After ovulation, follicular remnants form a corpus luteum, which produces progesterone. This inhibits FSH and LH production. If pregnancy does not occur, the progesterone declines, FSH and LH rise, and the next cycle begins.

**Functional Cysts**

**Follicular and Corpus Luteal Cysts**

Follicular and corpus luteal cysts are considered functional or physiologic cysts, and both occur during the normal menstrual cycle. Follicular cysts arise when follicles fail to rupture during ovulation and can appear smooth, thin-walled, and unilocular. In the follicular phase, follicular cysts may form because of a lack of physiological release of the ovum due to excessive FSH stimulation or the absence of the usual LH surge at mid-cycle just before ovulation. These cysts continue to grow because of hormonal stimulation. Follicular cysts are usually larger than 2.5 cm in diameter. Granulosa cells lead to excess estradiol production, which in turn leads to decreased frequency of menstruation.

Without pregnancy, the life span of the corpus luteum is 14 days. If the egg is fertilized, the corpus luteum continues to secrete progesterone until its dissolution at 14 weeks, when the cysts undergo central hemorrhage. If the dissolution of the corpus luteum does not occur, it may result in a corpus luteal cyst, which usually grows to 3cm. Corpus luteal cysts can appear complex or simple, thick-walled, or contain internal debris. Corpus luteum cysts are always present during pregnancy and usually resolve by the end of the first trimester. Both follicular and corpus luteal cysts can turn into hemorrhagic cysts. They are generally asymptomatic and spontaneously resolve without treatment.

**Theca Lutein Cysts**

Theca lutein cysts are luteinized follicle cysts that form as a result of overstimulation in elevated human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels. They can occur in pregnant women, women with gestational trophoblastic disease, multiple gestation, and ovarian hyperstimulation.

**Polycystic ovary syndrome**

Polycystic ovary syndrome is a disorder affecting 5 to 10% of women of reproductive age and is one of the primary causes of infertility. It is associated with diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease most of the time. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) appears as enlarged ovaries with multiple small follicular cysts. The ovaries appear enlarged due to excess androgen hormones in the body, which cause the ovaries to form cysts and increase in size.

**Neoplastic Cysts**

These cysts arise from the inappropriate overgrowth of cells within the ovary and may be malignant or benign. They may arise from the surface epithelium, and the benign lesions include serous and mucinous tumors. Other cystic lesions can include stromal or germ cell elements. Stromal masses are more often solid. Germ cell tumors are more often complex. Malignant cysts arise from all ovarian subtypes. These most frequently arise from the surface epithelium and are partially cystic. Epithelial malignancies include serous carcinoma, mucinous carcinoma, endometrioid carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, and malignant Brenner tumors. Malignant germ cell tumors include immature teratoma, endodermal sinus tumors, embryonal carcinoma, and polyembryoma.

Dermoid cysts or mature cystic teratomas contain elements from all three differentiated germ layers (ectodermal, mesodermal, and endodermal) and appear complex but can have a variety of appearances due to the tissue they contain. Struma ovarii is a specialized teratoma that consists predominately of mature thyroid tissue and is present in approximately 5% of ovarian teratomas. Although mostly benign, dermoid cysts can undergo a malignant transformation in 1 to 2% of cases.

Endometriosis is the presence of endometrial glands and stroma at extrauterine sites, with the ovary being one of the most common sites. Endometriomas (common in endometriosis) arise from ectopic growth of endometrial tissue and are often referred to as chocolate cysts because they contain dark, thick, gelatinous aged blood products. They appear as a complex mass on ultrasound and are described as having “ground glass” internal echoes. Endometriomas can be classified into two types. Type I consists of small primary endometriomas that develop from surface endometrial implants. Type II arises from functional cysts that have been invaded by ovarian endometriosis or type I endometriomas. Although the overall risk of malignant transformation is low, endometriomas increase this risk in women with endometriosis.