The AGS Beers Criteria® was developed to be utilized in an interprofessional, patient-centered approach to avoid adverse drug events and assess the prescription of PIM. Clinicians, pharmacists, nurses, and other professionals should be involved in the integral care of geriatric patients.

Several studies have shown that using real-world data based on direct measurements improves patient outcomes and reduces adverse drug events. Databases such as FAERS, WHO VigiBase, and the SYMPATHY Project provide useful information for implementing safe prescribing strategies.

Physicians play an essential role in prescriptions. Nonetheless, it is often challenging for medical professionals to monitor patients' behaviors and global health. Nurses are better positioned to follow patients and understand changes in health status closely. Pharmacists have a deep understanding of medications.

In a study conducted in Malaysia, awareness of the AGS Beers Criteria® was less than 40% among pharmacists, meaning that prescriptions were filled without further assessment. Interdisciplinary education and familiarity with the AGS Beers Criteria® are crucial to utilizing system-based review and reducing PIM prescriptions. Promoting pharmacist review of medications, assuming their familiarity with the AGS Beers Criteria®, is a simple intervention that could reduce mistakes.

The Finnish Interprofessional Medication Assessment was a randomized controlled trial that compared adverse drug events when assessing medications with an interprofessional team versus a conventional approach. The intervention resulted in a statistically significant decrease in adverse events.

When collaboration is encouraged, medication management is simplified, and risks are minimized.

Appropriately prescribing medications is a key intervention to improve patient outcomes. Medical knowledge is not sufficient to guarantee the elimination of harmful medications. Interprofessional collaboration is essential to achieve the goals of care. Prescriber education, feedback and auditing, and clinical decision support tools are strategies that should be systematically implemented to improve healthcare practices.