The patient preparation for FDG-PET is complex as FDG is a glucose analog and will be taken up by all the tissues that physiologically transport glucose. PET imaging provides functional assessment at the cellular level; therefore, it is prone to artifacts caused by the physiological increase in cellular activity. Control of the glycaemic level and avoidance of activity of the non-target areas of the body are vital to maximizing diagnostic yield.

- Glycaemic control: Patients are required to fast for 4 to 6 hours prior to the scan to reduce competition between glucose and deoxyglucose at the level of GLUT-1 transporters. The insulin spike from eating can also divert glucose/ FDG to peripheral muscles through insulin-dependent GLUT-4 receptors. In diabetic patients, imaging is preferred in the early morning to make use of overnight fasting. For the above-described reasons, the insulin injection should not be given before the scan. The blood glucose level is checked before the scan to ensure that it is below 200mg/dl.

- Muscular activity: As part of routine preparation, patients must avoid exercise the day before and on the day of the procedure. Patients should stay relaxed at the time of scanning and avoid swallowing and speaking during the scan to prevent radiotracer uptake in the muscles of phonation.

- Brown fat uptake: The brown fat, due to its ability to produce non-shivering thermogenesis, can take up FDG in the cold environment and thus can give false-positive PET interpretation. Therefore, it is essential to provide the patient with a warm ambiance to keep brown fat activity in control.

- Hydration: Patients should be well hydrated to increase renal excretion of FDG and are further instructed to empty the bladder just before the scan to minimize activity in the pelvic area from the full bladder. The patients are directed to drink water after the scan to facilitate the excretion of radioactive material from the body. Caffeinated drinks are not recommended.

- Cannulation: The procedure is explained to the patients, and any questions are answered to minimize anxiety. Patients are then seated in a lead-lined room and preferentially cannulated with a butterfly infusion set to avoid radiation exposure to the staff members.

- The vaccine status and injection sites are recorded to avoid false-positive pitfalls as local inflammation at the injection site can produce FDG avid reactive change in the draining lymph nodes, most commonly seen in the axilla with arm vaccines.