Musculoskeletal (MSK) injuries sustained after trauma are a very common occurrence across the United States and throughout the world. Nearly 15% of all routine emergency department (ED) visits are for MSK injuries according to the American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. They also state that 85% of all patients suffering blunt force trauma experience some form of MSK injury. MSK injuries are one of the most common injuries that emergency medical services (EMS) providers manage. In addition, MSK injuries affect 1 in 4 Americans annually, and their symptoms are the second most common reason for physician visits.

EMS providers encounter MSK injuries in a wide variety of incidents including motor vehicle collisions, falls, sporting accidents, and physical assaults. MSK injuries are a substantial source of pain and disability. Proper management with appropriate splinting technique not only diminishes this pain but also reduces additional injury to the surrounding tissues and prevents long-term damage. Isolated MSK injuries, along with those occurring as a result of multi-system trauma, all merit the same proper management and treatment to provide the patient with optimal care. It is imperative that EMS providers know how to appropriately stabilize and manage these injuries as many can result in limb-threatening or life-threatening conditions.

Not all bones are created alike or have equal strength. Generally, small bones such as the bones of the wrist and hand, require a smaller amount of force to sustain injury as compared to larger bones like the femur or pelvis. An injury to the MSK system proximal to the ankle or wrist is an indication that a significant force impacted the body. The larger the injured bone and the greater the force, the more suspicion EMS providers need to have for other injuries.