**Granulation (secondary intention)**

Generally speaking, the more superficial a wound is, the more appropriate granulation is a suitable method of reconstruction. Superficial wounds tend to heal within a few weeks, while wounds that extend into the aponeurosis or deeper can take 6 to 8 weeks to heal. Granulation method is usable in any location of the scalp. Good candidates include patients with poor wound healing (smokers, diabetics, previous radiotherapy to the region) and those patients who want a minimal amount of surgery. This method is commonly aided by a negative pressure wound-vac system to increase favorable results in the setting of a larger defect.

**Primary closure**

The ideal wound to do primary closure is any full thickness wound where the edges can be opposed with minimal tension. Primary closure method can be used in any location of the scalp. Good candidates include any patient who has wounds that will close easily with this method with minimal surgical time.

**Advancement Flap**

The ideal wound for an advancement flap is any full thickness wound where the edges are not closable with primary closure. The ideal location on the scalp is where there is redundant local tissue and where hiding the incision lines within cosmetic subunits is possible. Good candidates are those patients who can undergo the additional surgical time required.

**Rotational Flap**

The ideal wound for a rotational flap is any full thickness wound where the edges are not closable with primary closure. The ideal location on the scalp is where there is redundant local tissue and where the incision lines are hidable within cosmetic subunits. Good candidates are those patients who can undergo the additional surgical time required.

**Transpositional flap**

Similar to indications with advancement and rotational flaps, but the flap moves laterally over normal intervening skin for placement into the defect. Good candidates are those patients who can undergo the additional surgical time required.

**Skin Grafts**

- 
**Split-thickness skin grafts (STSG)**

The ideal wound for an STSG is any full-thickness scalp wound where the wound will not easily close with primary closure or a flap. Good candidates for STSG are those patients who have large scalp defects which are devoid of a vascular bed to have a full-thickness skin graft and those who are willing to have additional surgical procedures.

- 
**Full-thickness skin grafts (FTSG)**

The ideal wound for an FTSG is any full-thickness scalp wound where the wound will not easily close with primary closure or a flap. Good candidates for FTSG are those patients who have large scalp defects which have a good vascular bed, and those who are willing to have additional surgical procedures.

Some have proposed artificial dermis as an alternative to using donor skin from the patient. Its use is not widespread.

**Free Flaps**

Free Flaps are sometimes the best reconstruction solution for very large scalp defects. This method is the most complex in the reconstruction ladder. There are rarely seen in routine dermatological practice and not concentrated on in this article.

**Allograft**

There are a variety of available products that can be used as part of a measure of scalp reconstruction. Allografts can be used to prepare a defect for further reconstruction from an autogenous graft or flap, or as a single stage reconstruction.