A detailed history should be taken, focusing mainly on the length of time the lesion has been present and any associated symptoms, including nipple discharge, pain, bleeding, burning, redness, scaling, and itching. A long-standing eczematous pruritic lesion should prompt to think about underlying parenchymal breast malignancy. Early symptoms and signs of PDB include excoriation from itching and resolution & recurrence of small vesicles within the skin lesion. The history should also cover the patient's individual risk profile for breast cancer like personal or family history of breast or ovarian cancer, hormone replacement therapy, social history, etc.

Bilateral breast examination should be performed, focusing on associated breast abnormalities. Usually, in PDB, there is unilateral involvement in comparison to eczema, which usually involves the breast bilaterally, but bilateral breast involvement in PDB has also been reported. On physical exam, typically an erythematous, scaly, crusty, and thickened plaque-like lesion is present on the nipple spreading to the surrounding areolar areas. This erythematous patch is sharply demarcated and deeply infiltrated, unlike eczematous dermatitis, but it is often difficult to distinguish PDB from eczematous dermatitis or melanoma.

Lesions are usually present centrally (within 2 cm of the areola) but occasionally may be present peripherally. The size usually ranges from 3 mm to 15 cm in diameter and may be associated with serosanguinous discharge. An underlying malignancy is present in up to 88 percent of the cases with these skin lesions. An associated palpable mass may be present in 50 percent of the cases.