**Lymph Nodes of the Head and Neck**

The lymph nodes in the head and neck are paired and broadly split into superficial and deep nodes.

**Superficial**

- Occipital nodes - At the lateral border of the trapezius muscles

- These drain the skin overlying the occiput.

- Mastoid (post-auricular) nodes - At the insertion of the sternocleidomastoid muscle on the mastoid process of the temporal bone

- These drain the posterior neck, the superior portion of the external ear, and the ear canal until the tympanic membrane.

- Pre-auricular nodes - Anterior to the tragus of the ear

- These drain the superficial face and temporal region.

- Superficial parotid nodes - Overlying the parotid gland.

- These drain the nose, the nasal cavity, part of the external ear canal, and the lateral orbit

- Submental nodes - Overlying the mylohyoid muscle.

- These drain the middle-lower lip, the floor of the mouth, and the tip of the tongue.

- Submandibular nodes - Found in the submandibular triangle, bounded by the inferior edge of the mandible and the anterior and posterior bellies of the digastric muscle, overlying the mylohyoid and hyoglossus muscles

- These drain the submental and facial nodes, the cheeks, the upper lip, and the marginal areas of the lower lip.

- Facial nodes - Comprised of maxillary, buccinator, and supramandibular lymph nodes

- These drain the mucus membranes of the inside of the cheek, the nasal mucosa, the eyelids, and the conjunctiva.

- Superficial cervical

- Anterior superficial cervical - Along the anterior jugular vein.

- These drain the superficial portions of the anterior neck.


- Posterior superficial cervical - Along the external jugular vein

- These also drain the superficial tissues of the neck.

**Deep**

- Deep parotid - Found deep to the parotid gland.

- These drain the nasal cavity and the nasopharynx.

- Deep cervical - Found along the internal jugular vein. These are named prelaryngeal, pretracheal, retropharyngeal, infrahyoid, jugulodigastric, jugulo-omohyoid, and supraclavicular nodes, depending on their anatomical positional.

- These drain the superficial nodes and all of the head and neck.

In terms of anatomical dissection, these more easily split into levels of the neck.

**Level I**

- Level Ia (submental nodes) - anteriorly, in the midline between the anterior bellies of the paired digastric muscles

- Level Ib (submandibular nodes) - in the submandibular triangle, as described above.

**Level II**

These nodes, also called the upper internal jugular nodes, are found in an anatomical area bounded by the base of the skull superiorly, the hyoid bone inferiorly, the submandibular gland anteriorly, the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle laterally, and the internal carotid artery medially. The spinal accessory nerve separates the level IIa and IIb nodes.

- Level IIa (jugulo-digastric nodes) - superficial or anterior to internal jugular vein

- Level IIb - deep or posterior to the internal jugular vein

**Level III**

These nodes are also names the middle internal jugular nodes and are bound superiorly by the hyoid bone, the cricoid cartilage inferiorly, the anterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle anteriorly,  the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and the common carotid artery medially.

**Level IV**

These nodes are also named the lower internal jugular nodes and include Virchow's node. The anatomical area in which they are found is bound superiorly by the cricoid cartilage, the clavicle inferiorly, the sternocleidomastoid muscle anteriorly, and the common carotid artery medially.

**Level V**

These are also named the posterior triangle nodes and are bounded by the convergence of the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles superiorly, the clavicle inferiorly, the sternocleidomastoid muscle anteriorly and medially, and the trapezius muscle posteriorly.

- Level Va - superior to the cricoid cartilage and include the spinal accessory nodes

- Level Vb - inferior to the cricoid cartilage and include the transverse cervical nodes and  the supraclavicular nodes

**Level VI**

This level is also named the anterior compartment and contains the anterior jugular, pre-tracheal, para-tracheal, pre-cricoid, pre-laryngeal, and thyroid nodes. It is bound superiorly by the hyoid bone, inferiorly by the suprasternal notch, by the platysma muscle anteriorly, and the common carotid artery laterally.

**Lymph Nodes of the Upper Limb**

The deep and superficial lymphatics in the upper limb eventually drain into the axillary nodes. However, there are supratrochlear and cubital lymph nodes at the level of the elbow, brachial lymph nodes, and deltopectoral lymph nodes. The drainage of the upper limbs is particular due to the presence of sentry or sentinel lymph nodes. These are usually larger than the rest of the lymph nodes and are the first to filter the incoming lymph. However, it is not uncommon for multiple smaller sentry lymph nodes to also be present.

**Axillary Nodes**

- Anterior nodes (pectoral) - They drain the breast and the anterior thoracic wall.

- Posterior nodes (subscapular) - They drain the posterior thoracic wall and the scapular area.

- Lateral nodes (humeral) - These are found posterior to the axillary vein and are the primary draining nodes for the upper limb.

- Central nodes - These are found close to the 2nd part of the axillary artery and receive lymph from the anterior, posterior, and lateral nodes.

- Apical nodes - These are located near the 1st part of the axillary artery and vein and filter the lymph received from the central axillary nodes and the cephalic vein.

The apical nodes further form the subclavian lymphatic trunk, which then drains into the right lymphatic duct.

**Lymph Nodes of the Lower Limb**

The superficial and deep lymphatic vessels of the lower limb drain into the inguinal lymph nodes in the femoral triangle. This anatomical region, also named Scarpa's triangle, is bounded by the inguinal ligament above, the medial border of the sartorius muscle laterally, and the medial border of the adductor longus muscle medially.

**Inguinal Nodes**

The inguinal lymph nodes split at the level (where the great saphenous vein becomes the deep femoral vein) into sub-inguinal lymph nodes below and superficial inguinal nodes above.

- Sub-inguinal nodes 

- Superficial sub-inguinal nodes - These are found alongside the proximal saphenous vein and drain the superficial lymphatic vessels.
- Deep sub-inguinal nodes - These nodes are commonly found alongside the medial femoral vein and collect lymph from the deep lymphatic channels of the lower limb.

- Superficial inguinal nodes - These nodes are traditionally found immediately inferior to the inguinal ligament and drain the perineal area (penis, scrotum, perineum), the gluteal region, and part of the abdominal wall.

**Iliac Nodes:**

- External iliac nodes

- Lateral external iliac lymph nodes - These are found lateral to the external iliac artery.
- Intermediate external iliac lymph nodes - These are found medial to the external iliac artery and anterior to the external iliac vein.
- Medial external iliac lymph nodes - These are found medial to the external iliac vein.

- Common iliac nodes - They commonly arise at the level of the aortic bifurcation (4th lumbar vertebra) and extend until the level of the common iliac bifurcation (2nd sacral vertebra)

- Lateral common iliac lymph nodes - These are found lateral to the common iliac artery.
- Intermediate common iliac lymph nodes - These appear alongside the posteromedial common iliac artery.
- Medial common iliac lymph nodes - These are alongside the medial common iliac artery.