**Surgical Repair of Acute Ulnar Collateral Ligament Injury of the Thumb**

Surgical repair of the UCL is indicated for an acute injury to the ligament that results in a complete tear. Injuries that have been present for greater than 3 to 6 weeks typically require surgical reconstruction; however, there is no consensus on whether surgical reconstruction or repair of the UCL ligament is preferred for either acute or chronic UCL injury of the thumb. The clinical presentation of UCL injury is discussed in further detail below. MCP joint laxity is assessed to determine if there is a complete UCL tear. This is done by applying a valgus stress to the MCP joint while holding it in mild extension. If greater than 35 degrees of radial deviation is present or there is more than a 20-degree difference from the uninjured thumb, then a complete UCL tear is highly suspected.

Surgical exposure is gained from an incision on the dorsal aspect of the thumb MCP joint. The joint capsule is exposed by vertically incising the adductor aponeurosis to the extensor pollicis longus.

**Open Reduction for MCP Joint Dislocation**

Open reduction is indicated for irreducible MCP joint dislocations. The clinical findings of MCP joint dislocation are discussed below. In complex dislocations, the volar plate is either entrapped between the joint surfaces or has maintained its proximal phalanx attachment and is lying on the dorsal aspect of the metacarpal shaft. Occasionally seen in complex dislocations, the metacarpal head may become buttonholed between ligaments and tendons preventing closed reduction and requiring open reduction.

To perform an open reduction of the MCP joint, a dorsal, volar, or combined approach may be used to obtain proper exposure.

**MCP Joint Arthroplasty**

Several joint prostheses types are available for MCP joint arthroplasty; however, silicone implant arthroplasty is currently the gold standard. Other small joint arthroplasty options include pyocarbon implant arthroplasty and autologous small joint transfer.

The primary indication for silicone implant MCP joint arthroplasty is arthritis (osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, post-traumatic type), and these surgeries can usually treat the joint deformations from these diseases. These deformities include complex joint dislocations, volar subluxation, and severe articular cartilage damage. Pyocarbon implant arthroplasty is not suggested in RA affected joints as it relies on significant soft tissue support to bolster the implant.

Silicone implant arthroplasty begins with a transverse incision made on the dorsal aspect of the metacarpal neck while preserving the superficial neurovascular structures. Next, the extensor tendons are bluntly dissected to reveal the underlying joint capsule. With the joint capsule exposed, a release of the sagittal band is performed, followed by a release of the collateral ligaments, and finally a release of the joint capsule.

Silicone implant arthroplasty typically provides significant pain relief; however, only marginal improvements are seen on MCP joint range of motion postoperatively.