There are many possible causes for unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, either due to issues in the musculature of the diaphragm or secondary to phrenic nerve pathology.

**Traumatic**

Trauma is considered the most common cause of diaphragm weakness. Direct trauma, either blunt trauma or during a surgical procedure, has the potential to injure the phrenic nerve leading to hemidiaphragm weakness or paralysis. The highest risk is during cardiac bypass cases, where up to 20 percent of cases result in temporary diaphragm weakness due to the cooling necessary for the procedure, which is more common on the left than the right side.

**Compression**

Compression of the phrenic nerve, whether in the form of cervical spondylosis or from an adjacent tumor or malformation, mediastinal chest tubes, or chronic sclerosing mediastinitis

**Neuropathic**

Disease states that often cause nerve damage or demyelination may lead to diaphragm paralysis or weakness by interfering with the conduction of the phrenic nerve. Diabetic neuropathy can cause damage to the phrenic nerve, especially if glucose is not tightly controlled. Multiple sclerosis could also diminish the function of the phrenic nerve, depending on the location of the lesions, along with other chronic demyelinating disorders.

**Inflammatory**

Viruses such as herpes zoster, Zika, poliovirus, and other viral infections have been linked to unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. A case series of congenital Zika syndrome reported four infants with diaphragm weakness that eventually died secondary to respiratory failure.

**Iatrogenic**

Patients often receive nerve blocks to assist with pain control in the preoperative or postoperative settings. Local spread of anesthetic can affect the phrenic nerve, block impulses sent to the diaphragm, and cause unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. This phenomenon has been reported with many blocks but is more commonly seen in interscalene, brachial plexus nerve blocks, and high thoracic paravertebral nerve blocks.

**Idiopathic**

There have been many cases of both unilateral and bilateral diaphragmatic paralysis and weakness for which the cause is considered unknown. Nearly 20% of the cases have been considered idiopathic.