The management of MPS II patients involves a multi-disciplinary team. A definite cure has not been established for Hunter syndrome yet. The aims of treatment are to replenish the deficient enzyme and treat the associated symptoms.

The two approved treatments for MPS II are enzyme replacement therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

- 
**Enzyme replacement therapy:**

Recombinant IDS is administered to Hunter syndrome patients to normalize the levels of IDS enzyme in the body. The schedule of recombinant IDS administration to MPS II patients is once weekly via the intravenous route. The enzyme replacement therapy should be initiated before six years of age for maximum benefit with the treatment.

Intravenous administration of recombinant IDS improves somatic symptoms. The ERT has been documented to result in significant improvement in one of the following somatic symptoms, including coarse facial features, joint contractures, joint mobility, and high frequency of respiratory tract infections.

- 
**Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT):**

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is considered a superior therapy compared to ERT. It is more cost-effective, as it is a one-time procedure. The stem cells cross the blood-brain barrier.

- 
**NSAIDs:**

The accumulation of GAGs at articular cartilage, extracellular matrix, and tendons at joints initiate inflammatory cascade, which causes erosive dysplasia and degenerative changes at the articular cartilage. This results in osteoarthritis with structural deformation and a decreased range of movement at joints. The claw hand deformity in hands and osteoarthritic changes at hip and knee-joint decreases mobility and independence in performing tasks of patients. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit the production of inflammatory mediators and prevent the associated degenerative joint changes.

- 
**Gene therapy:**

The emerging treatment for MPS II is gene therapy. It will be superior to both ERT and HSCT as it will be a one-time procedure with better safety and efficacy profile. Hunter syndrome is a genetic disease caused by a defect in a single gene on the X chromosome. Normal IDS gene can be delivered to patients through specific vectors via intravenous, intracisternal, or intrathecal routes.