Acute radiation damage predominantly involves rapidly proliferating cells, e.g., epithelial surfaces of the skin or digestive tract. Radiation damages the stem cells, which manifests when tissues are lost as part of normal cell turnover, but there is inadequate replacement by stem cells due to radiation damage.

Late complications occur in tissues with slow turnover, e.g., brain, kidney, liver, the wall of the intestine, subcutaneous tissue, fatty tissue, and muscle. Consequences of radiation in such tissues include fibrosis, atrophy, necrosis, and vascular damage - telangiectasia and carcinogenesis. Late effects are a result of a complex interplay of various cytokines and adaptive cellular processes. Damage to vasculature results in increased permeability and subsequent release of vasoactive cytokines, TGF-beta, and fibrin, promoting collagen deposition. Most of these tissues or organs have a threshold dose above which late effects increase.

Leucocyte adhesion to damaged endothelial cells results in the formation of thrombi and subsequent distal ischemia, which results in distal atrophy and necrosis. Further cell loss may perpetuate the cytokine storm and dysregulated cellular interactions. The type of cytokines released depends on the tissue type and is responsible for the differential response of tissues to irradiation. e.g., the predominant response in the lungs is fibrosis, while in the brain, the predominant response is necrosis.

Radiation injury results from an interplay of radiobiologic factors, intrinsic radiosensitivity, the volume of tissue or organ irradiated, total dose, dose per fraction, the severity of acute effects, and combination with surgery and chemotherapy.