The effects of isolated changes in preload are best demonstrated on the pressure-volume (P-V) loop, which relates ventricular volume to the pressure inside the ventricle throughout the cardiac cycle. The P-V loop plots volume along the x-axis and pressure on the y-axis. The area of the loop is equal to the stroke volume, which refers to the amount of blood pumped out of the left ventricle in one cardiac cycle. This number is calculated as the end-diastolic volume (EDV), point B, minus the end-systolic volume (ESV), point A, on the graph. The effects of intramyocardial and extra myocardial events are plottable on the P-V loop. Changes in preload are visible as movements along the line showing the end-diastolic P-V relationship, as shown. If afterload and contractility are held constant, an increase in preload will result in a rightward shift along this line. As a result, the EDV increases, and thus the stroke volume increases. Also, as EDV increases, the proportion of blood ejected by the heart increases slightly; this is the ejection fraction (EF) calculated by the equation: (EDV-ESV)/EDV. The reverse is also true. A decrease in preload will result in a leftward shift down the end-diastolic P-V line, decreasing EDV, stroke volume, and a slight decrease in ejection fraction.

What the P-V loop doesn’t account for are the neurohormonal and reflex responses that can affect preload. For example, the activation of beta-Adrenergic receptors leads to an increase in renin and antidiuretic hormone. Consequently, there is an increase in preload via salt and water retention. Further, stimulation of beta1-adrenergic receptors specifically, increases both the inotropy and lusitropy of the heart, which results in a shift of the end-diastolic P-V curve down and to the right, as the time the heart spends in diastole decreases. The sympathetic stimulation of the alpha-1 receptors in the veins causes vasoconstriction and forces more blood in the veins to return to the heart, increasing preload. Additionally, the release of angiotensin II stimulates the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex; this causes additional sodium and water retention.