Subungual hematomas are injuries of the nail bed in which bleeding develops under the nail. Patients usually complain of pain and discoloration of the nail. The damage is caused by a direct blow or a crush injury to the distal phalanx, for example, getting a finger pinched in a doorway. As blood enters the space it applies painful pressure to the nail-bed. The injury may also be accompanied by distal phalanx fractures, nail avulsion, or finger-tip avulsions. Most subungual hematomas can be relieved with simple trephination, a procedure which involves making a small hole in the nail.

**Physical Examination**

The provider should examine the entire nail structure for disruption of the nail fold and the whole finger for motor function, sensation, and evaluation of circulation. The extensor mechanism of the distal interphalangeal joint (DIP) should be evaluated by holding the middle phalange and testing the strength of extension by providing resistance to the motion. A decrease in strength compared to the contralateral side indicates a mallet finger injury. Circulation can be tested by capillary refill distal to the injury. In some patients, such as small children, practitioners may be required to perform digital nerve block to examine the injury.

**Testing**

Three-view radiograph should be obtained to evaluate for underlying fracture as distal tuft fractures are common. Point of care ultrasound (POCUS) can be used to identify nail bed laceration and underlying distal tuft fractures that may indicate a more involved repair.