**Landmark-Guided Technique**

**High-Level Block**

Inject 6 to 10 ml of the injectant to ensure satisfactory block at the site of the maximal tenderness which is 10 to 15 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus at the anterolateral aspect of the leg.

**Low-Level Block**

Inject 6 ml of the injectant to ensure satisfactory block just anterior to the lateral malleolus.

In both techniques, operators introduce the needle from inferior to superior targeting the long axis of the nerve or from lateral to the medial targeting the short axis of the nerve.

**Ultrasound-Guided Technique**

- Place the probe transversely and scan the short axis of the nerve from its origin down to the lateral malleolus. The scanning will help recognition of the site of the entrapment, any anatomic variations and localize the accompanying small vein.

- Target the nerve at the site of the entrapment according to the ultrasound scanning or the desired level of the anesthesia:

- Between fibula and peroneus longus muscle

- Within the peroneus longus muscle

- Between peroneus brevis and extensor digitorum longus muscles

- At the peroneal tunnel

- Superficial to the lateral malleolus

The operator introduces the needle from the lateral to the medial using "in-plane approach" to inject 3 to 5 ml of the injectate targeting the short axis of the nerve.

**Ultrasound-Guided Catheter Technique**

The operator places the linear transducer posterolaterally about 12 cm distal to the knee to visualize the nerve. Low amplitude peripheral nerve stimulation (0.5 mA [0.1 ms] stimulus) applied to reproduce the patient’s pain and insert the catheter under the ultrasound guidance through the "in-plane approach" to target the short axis of the nerve. The operator injects a bolus of 15 mL of the injectate (containing 0.25% bupivacaine with epinephrine 1:200,000 and clonidine 25 mcg) via the catheter.

**Benefits of Ultrasound Guidance**

- Ultrasound guidance avoids collateral damage of the nearby vessels and extremely lowers the risk of procedure-related nerve injury.

- It helps the accurate placement of the injectate around the target nerve leading to better pain control.

- Ultrasound guidance needs smaller amounts of local anesthetics to achieve the target pain control.