**Anesthetic Considerations**

Placental and umbilical blood flow impact fetal oxygen delivery. Myometrial tone and maternal blood pressure have a direct correlation with uterine artery blood flow. Volatile anesthetics usually decrease myometrial tone and tend to reduce maternal blood pressure. Subsequently, there is a decrease in fetal oxygenation due to a reduction in placental blood flow. Maintenance of patent umbilical arteries and baseline maternal arterial blood pressure is essential for maintaining sound cardiac output for the fetus. For example, maternal hypercapnia leads to fetal hypoxia and metabolic acidosis as a result of umbilical venous flow reduction. Similarly, maternal hypocapnia should be avoided during all maternal or fetal procedures since it has a direct correlation with fetal hypoxia. Consequently, inhalation anesthesia is the best option for fetal and intrauterine procedures. Moreover, epidural anesthesia plays a critical role in the prevention of premature labor during the postoperative period of maternal surgeries.

**Intravenous Administration/Catheterization**

The umbilical vein is considered the primary site for cannulation. The umbilical vein remains open for approximately one week after labor, and it can be useful for administering intravenous fluids and medications for newborns requiring more aggressive resuscitation efforts. The umbilical vein has a larger lumen than the umbilical arteries due to its thinner tunica media—catheterization through the umbilical vein to the ductus venosus. Finally, the catheter arrives at the inferior vena cava below the right atrium.