The earliest symptoms and signs are impairment in concentration, memory, and executive functioning. As the disease progresses, psychomotor retardation, depressive symptoms, irritability, and subclinical motor signs are observed. These motor signs include tremors and hyperreflexia. With time and continued progression, the clinical features evolve to include overall global dementia, myelopathy, neuropathy, and even Parkinson-like features.

The severity of HIV infection and antiretroviral treatment (ART) status greatly affects the presentation of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). As described above, patients with severe disease (dementia) are likely to have untreated HIV infection with low CD4 cell counts. They are likely not on any ART or are on ineffective regimens. Patients on ART are likely to have a slowly progressive course of neurocognitive decline with milder deficits.

When present, HIV-associated dementia classically presents with subcortical dysfunction. This usually constitutes attention-concentration impairment, depressive symptoms, and impaired psychomotor functions.

In mild neurocognitive decline, impaired attention and working memory are the predominant features. Higher executive functioning may also be impaired. These deficits may not necessarily be clinically evident. When symptomatic, they may reveal difficulty with reading and/or maintaining concentration in conversations or activities.

**CNS Viral Escape Syndrome**

This is a very uncommon but clinically recognized condition. It can be seen in patients who are receiving antiretroviral therapy and present with severe new-onset neurological deficits. A "viral escape" phenomenon occurs when the patient has adequate peripheral viral suppression, but there is evidence of CNS HIV replication.

**Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome**

Another rare cause of new-onset neurocognitive symptoms in patients with HIV is immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). This is due to HIV CNS infection and presents with severe encephalitis, diffuse white and gray matter abnormalities on radiographic imaging, and CD8 cell pleocytosis in the CSF.