The primary treatment strategy should be aimed at the prevention of preterm birth, if possible. This should include the routine administration of antenatal corticosteroids if preterm birth is expected and the transfer of the mother to a facility that has advanced capabilities of caring for very low birth weight infants before delivery. Maternal corticosteroid administration for fetal lung maturation showed a protective effect against PIVH in preterm newborns.

In the delivery of the preterm infant, delayed cord clamping should be the routine practice. This method has support from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and a delay of between 30 and 180 seconds has demonstrated a reduced risk of PIVH compared to the immediate clamping group.

Postnatal management should be targeted to limit hypoxia and fluctuations in cerebral blood flow. Several pharmacologic agents have been utilized to achieve those goals, such as phenobarbital and indomethacin. The meta-analysis of 10 trials showed a reduction in the incidence of severe IVH (grade III and IV) with use of prophylactic indomethacin.

After the PIVH is established, no specific treatment exists to limit the hemorrhage. However, PIVH can be prevented by implementing early interventions to maintain stability and avoid fluctuations in cerebral blood flow and blood pressure. These interventions include head position along the midline, adequate respiratory support, avoidance of physical therapy maneuvers, constant blood pressure maintenance, and interventions to minimize pain.

The care bundle has been used in Brazil with promising results and is summarized below:

- Keep the infant in supine position and head along the midline (Improper positioning may affect jugular venous return)

- Do not perform physical therapy maneuvers (Can cause changes in intracranial pressure and cerebral blood flow)

- Orotracheal tube suctioning only if necessary (Can alter blood pressure, cerebral blood flow, and intracranial pressure)

- Do not collect cerebrospinal fluid (Lumbar puncture will alter heart rate and oxygen saturation)

- Do not weigh the infant (Manipulation can trigger changes in the heart rate, oxygen saturation, and blood pressure)