Genetic testing and counseling might be recommended in congenital forms of hydrocephalus.

CSF analysis could be done to help with the diagnosis and to exclude residual infection.

X-rays of the skull may show erosion of sella turcica, or so-called "beaten copper cranium" appearance, but are seldom helpful or indicated with the availability of better imaging techniques.

Ultrasonography through anterior fontanelle may be used in infants for evaluating the ventricular system and progression of hydrocephalus.

Neuroimaging plays a central role in confirming the diagnosis in suspected cases, identifying the cause and possible treatment. In cases of acute hydrocephalus, an emergency head computed tomographic (CT) scan is the first option to assess the ventricular size. Transependymal exudate can be visualized as periventricular hypoattenuation on the brain CT scan. Ballooning of frontal horns of lateral ventricle and third ventricle creates the so-called "Mickey Mouse" sign. It may indicate an aqueductal obstruction.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain is the study of choice as it shows better the posterior fossa structures, can differentiate between brain tumors and degenerative diseases and can differentiate NPH from cerebral atrophy. Transependymal exudate can be visualized as periventricular hyperintensity on T2 and FLAIR sequences. CSF extravasation must be differentiated from age-related changes of periventricular white matter. Such changes are usually less than 10mm in diameter on axial cross-sectional images, and their thickness decreases from anterior to posterior.

In cases of chronic hydrocephalus, temporal horns may not be so prominent. Corpus callosum may be atrophied in these cases as well, but the neurodegenerative disease should be excluded. CSF stroke volume measurements in the cerebral aqueduct can be done using the MRI cine technique, but these measurements don't appear to be useful in predicting response to shunting.

Radionuclide cisternography is a method used in assessing NPH and prognosis about possible shunting. This test has low sensitivity and is not commonly used.