In trauma and other mechanical injuries, the peroneus longus tendon can become dislocated, subluxated or ruptured. In 2016, a research team queried foot and ankle surgeons nationally to understand their management of acute peroneal tendon tears. There were marked differences in treatment protocols as well as operative techniques. 22% of the surgeons chose nonoperative treatment for greater than one year, while 33% immediately went to operative interventions. For surgeons who decided to operate, 88% tubularized tendons after the repair, 33% excised redundant tissue, and 22% removed the peroneal tubercle if it demonstrated hypertrophy.

Surgical treatment correlates with improved full return to activity and improved patient-reported outcome scores in symptomatic patients.

The lateral compartment of the leg is also susceptible to acute compartment syndrome. When the pressure inside the lateral compartment increases, tissue perfusion can be compromised, potentially leading to irreversible muscle and nerve damage, resulting in muscle and soft tissue necrosis.

Patients with compartment syndrome will often present with pain out of proportion to the clinical situation. The physical exam findings of compartment syndrome often include pain on palpation of the muscles involved, pain with passive stretching of the muscle (most sensitive test finding before the onset of ischemia), and firmness of the compartment.

Compartment syndrome primarily affects the venous system. Consequently, arterial pulses are usually intact.