**Why do Active Shooter Incidents Occur?**

While some active shooter incidents are spontaneous and driven by emotions, most are preplanned.  In those situations which are pre-planned, the active shooter may have had a grudge, may have been terminated or treated harshly, and in return, the individual plans of taking revenge.  Unfortunately, when a shooting incident occurs in a health care facility, it is impossible to know whether it is a spontaneous event or something that has been preplanned.  Most people attempt to hide rather than confront the shooter to determine the reason.

**Understanding the Problem**

When an active shooter incident is taking place in a health care facility, it is important to know what type of violence is taking place.  Is it a spontaneous event involving two people who know each other, (shooting incidence) or is this a preplanned shooting incident designed to kill many people (active shooter).  To understand the hazard, one has to be aware of the different types of workplace violence.  The key reason to understand the different types of shooting incidents is that it allows for a better understanding of the crime and one can then take steps to prevent or deter the event. One of the key features of any type of preventive action is that the more people know about the different types of shooting incidents that can occur, the more likely is that preventive measures can be undertaken. More people involved means that there are more "ears and eyes" that can sense abnormal behavior.  Today, law enforcement has classified active shooting incidents into five categories**:**

- **Type 1 -**Criminal Intent
- In this scenario, the shooter had no formal or legitimate connection with the workplace. The chief motive in such a case is theft. In most type 1 cases, a deadly weapon is used, and there is a high risk of fatal injuries to the worker. A typically type-1 scenario includes banks and retail businesses, for example,  gold and jewelry shops. Individuals who work alone or work in the late evenings are at a very high risk for harm in type-1 violence.
- In the United States, the majority of workplace homicides are type-1 shootings. In many cases, a simple robbery or shoplifting incident turns violent, resulting in death. The type-1 shootings are unheard of in-hospital care settings, but there have been reported events of prescription drug robberies in hospitals and pharmacies in the past.

- **Type 2 -**Customer/Patient
- In this scenario, the shooter may be a patient, employee, or a customer. The argument may have started some time ago, and the violence usually occurs during working hours. Some jobs appear to have a very high risk for type-2 shooting. For example, some healthcare workers like psychiatrists and social workers are more likely than other hospital employees to be involved in such shootings.
- For example, a social worker may be required to tell a family that their children are being taken away and the father or mother may resort to violence.  Or a patient being treated by a psychiatrist may feel that the doctor is the one creating hallucinations and delusions; and in turn, harm him or her. 

- In 1991, Richard Worthington entered Alta View Hospital armed with a handgun, shotgun, and dynamite.  His target was Dr. Glade Curtis.  Richard entered the Women’s Center and took several hostages including patients and nurses.  Dr. Curtis saw what was happening, hid, and called the police.  One nurse attempted to wrestle the gun from Richard, but as she ran, she was fatally shot in the back.  Finally, after 18 hours Richard surrendered and released the rest of the hostages.  He later committed suicide.

- **Type 3 -**Worker-to-Worker
- In this scenario, the shooter is a former employee or current employee.  The violence is often a result of workplace conflicts or interpersonal differences.  It may be that the worker may have felt that he or she has been treated unjustly or in an unfair manner. This type of violence accounts for about 7% of all workplace homicides.  In such scenarios, the victims are usually managers or supervisors.  These type of shooting events have been gradually increasing at the post office where some workers have felt that they have been verbally and physically abused.  In June 2017, Dr. Henry Bellow, a 45-year-old Nigerian family physician, had recently been terminated from the hospital and armed with a gun opened fire at the Bronx Lebanon Hospital in New York, killing a doctor and wounding six others.

- **Type 4 -**Intimate Partner violence or domestic violence
- Can also occur in the workplace.  In most cases, the shooter is not an employee, but the partner is.  The target is usually the female, and the perpetrator is usually a male acquaintance or spouse.  Intimate partner violence in the workplace tends to occur when one partner has filed a restraining order or is in the process of separating.  This type of shooting even often occurs in the parking lot and is often lethal.

- **Type 5 -**Ideological violence
- Now becoming common.  The perpetrator(s) has developed certain ideologies and wants to direct violence at masses of people, a property, an organization for his/her political belief.  In most cases, the violence is perpetrated by religious zealots, environmental animal right activities, or others who believe that the government is causing them harm.  There may be one or more perpetrators, and the victims are usually innocent people. 
- For example, in Colorado Springs there was a shooting incident at a Planned Parenthood facility.

- On November 27, 2015, a male armed with weapons stormed the Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado Springs.  By the time he was done, two civilians and a law enforcement officer were killed, and four civilians and five law enforcement officers injured.  The standoff lasted more than 5 hours, and the police had to crash the front entrance with armored vehicles to capture the suspect.

**What is Hybrid-Targeted Violence (HTV)?**

HTV is defined as the use of violence which targets a specific population or a group of individuals using a variety of unconventional and conventional weapons combined with tactics to ensure large kills. Individuals involved in HTV often target several locations at the same time. Some examples of HTV over the recent years include incidences at the following places:

- Westgate mall in Nairobi was attacked by gunmen in September 2013.  The gunmen went during mid-afternoon from store to store in this upscale mall killing at least 67 people and cause more than 200 injuries.

- Beslan School siege massacre in 2004 lasted 3 days and resulted in at least 334 deaths and hundreds more injured.  The perpetrators were heavily armed Islamic militants who took over the school demanding the withdrawal of Russian troops from Chechnya.  On the third day, the Russian forces stormed the Beslan School with tanks, rockets and machine guns killing most of the terrorist.  Sadly 186 children also died.

- The Mumbai siege took place in nov 2008 when members of an Islamic terrorist group carried out coordinated attacks over four days in Mumbai.  The terrorist killed 164 people, and hundreds were injured.

- In April 2013, two homemade bombs were denoted at the finish of the Boston Marathon, killing three people and injuring hundreds, some of who lost their limbs.  The perpetrators are two Kyrgyz American brothers, Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev. Over 3 days, they killed a policeman and then had a shootout with police.  The older brother was killed, and the younger brother was captured.

- In 2015, 14 people were killed and 22 others injured in a terrorist attack in San Bernardino.  The perpetrators were two Islamic couple, Tashfeen  Malik and Syed Farook.  The married couple targeted the San Bernardino Dept of Public Health, where Farook was an employee.  After the shooting, the couple left in an SUV and got involved in a shootout with police; both were killed.

- In March 2017, gunmen dressed in hospital robes entered the military hospital in Kabul and killed 49 people and injured dozens more.  The gunmen had placed themselves strategically at the entrance of the hospital and went from floor to floor killing everyone they saw.

HTV incidents are not novel and have been occurring time and time again, not only in the United States but in many parts of the world.  In the majority of HTV events, the individuals involved are part of a terrorist group or those with fanatical religious/political ideologies.  Tragically over the past 2 decades, many international terrorist groups have tried to conduct HTV attacks on American soil because of American foreign policy.  One large recent attack in Afghanistan indicates that HTV has the potential to occur on US soil, in healthcare facilities.

**Characteristics of HTV**

Unlike the active shooter incidents usually conducted by one or two individuals, in an HTV attack, there may be many individuals who are well trained, know how to operate a variety of weapons, and are willing to die.  Most of the HTV attacks may involve small groups of attackers in different locations.  Furthermore, these individuals also manage to communicate with others in the group.  The key feature of an HTV attack is that it usually involves attracting the first responders so that more damage can be inflicted. F or example in Israel, Palestinians have been known to knife people on the streets, and when people gather, the same perpetrators call for an ambulance which carries more attackers so that they kill first responders.  In some cases in Iraq and Afghanistan, the attackers have even complicated the event by inducing fires, thus causing more harm.  The big worry is that one of these days an HTV attack may involve the use of CBRN agents.  In Syria and Afghanistan, HTV attackers have been known to possess high-grade exposure, high powered military weapons, and even suicide bomb vests.

**Hospitals and Terrorist Attacks**

Over the past few decades, there are have been at least 10 dozen terrorist attacks on healthcare facilities in 43 countries.  These attacks have resulted in 1217 injuries and 775 deaths.  Terrorists now identify hospitals as viable targets.  They are fully aware that by disrupting care, the terrorists can cause significant deaths.  In addition, by attacking a health care facility, the terrorist can also distract law enforcement and emergency medical services from going to the primary target area.  Thus individuals wounded at the primary site cannot be helped.