# Continuing Education Activity

Cannabinoids are a collective group of compounds that act on cannabinoid receptors. They include plant-derived phytocannabinoids, synthetic cannabinoids, and endogenously-derived endocannabinoids. The primary source of cannabinoid toxicity is from plant-derived cannabinoids and synthetic cannabinoids. These agents act as cannabinoid receptor agonists. More than 60 naturally occurring cannabinoids are found in the Sativa and Indica species of Cannabis, with delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) being the main psychoactive compound. Other naturally occurring cannabinoids include cannabidiol and cannabinol. Marijuana is the most common colloquial name for crushed, dried leaves and flowers of the Cannabis plant. This activity describes cannabinoid toxicity and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of cannabinoid toxicity.
- Review the presentation of cannabinoid toxicity.
- Summarize the treatment options for cannabinoid toxicity.
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by cannabinoid toxicity.

# Introduction

Cannabinoids are a collective group of compounds that act on cannabinoid receptors. They include plant-derived phytocannabinoids, synthetic cannabinoids, and endogenously-derived endocannabinoids. The primary source of cannabinoid toxicity is from plant-derived cannabinoids and synthetic cannabinoids. These agents act as cannabinoid receptor agonists. More than 60 naturally occurring cannabinoids are found in the Sativa and Indica species of Cannabis, with delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) being the main psychoactive compound. Other naturally occurring cannabinoids include cannabidiol and cannabinol. Marijuana is the most common colloquial name for crushed, dried leaves and flowers of the Cannabis plant.

In recent years, there have been many reports of marijuana toxicity, primarily in the pediatric population, as medical and recreational marijuana has been legalized. The terms phytocannabinoids, marijuana and cannabis are used interchangeably.

# Etiology

Cannabinoid intoxication occurs most frequently through inhalation, whether being used recreationally or medicinally. Cannabinoid toxicity usually occurs due to overuse and abuse or inadvertant ingestions of cannabis. Accidepntal overuse can occur with marijuana edibles due to excessive ingestion during the extended, unanticipated time it can take for peak action.

# Epidemiology

Internationally, cannabis is the most commonly abused illicit substance with a high incidence of usage in adolescents. Over 140 million people use cannabis worldwide. Trends in the United States to decriminalize marijuana have led to increased exposures reported to poison centers and presenting to emergency departments. Exposure characteristics are generally related to excessive use in adults and inadvertent ingestions in small children. This has been well documented throughout the recent legalization of recreational marijuana in Colorado, and now other states. Synthetic cannabinoids are the most abused synthetic drug and second most abused drug among adolescents.

# Pathophysiology

The endocannabinoid system is very complex, and research is still ongoing and necessary for a continued understanding of its function. Cannabinoids, whether endogenous or exogenous, act on specific cannabinoid binding receptors (CB), cannabinoid binding receptor 1 (CB1) and cannabinoid binding receptor 2 (CB2). CB1 is primarily centrally located but is also present in the periphery, while the opposite is true for CB2, which is primarily peripherally located but also found centrally. CB1 receptors are mainly involved in the central effects of cannabinoids, which include consequences on learning, memory cognition, emotion, movement, sensory perception, and nausea, as well as the psychoactive properties associated with cannabinoids.

CB2 receptors are located peripherally and are thought to affect inflammation and immune system regulation. Cannabinoid receptors are G-protein linked receptors that inhibit adenylyl cyclase and thereby cyclic AMP, which affects calcium channels and potassium channels, leading to overall decreased intracellular calcium and extracellular potassium concentrations. This subsequently leads to decreased neurotransmission. However, depending on the specific location of the CB and specific G-protein involved, stimulation of CB1 may result in the inhibition or stimulation of various neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine, L-glutamate, γ-aminobutyric acid, dopamine, norepinephrine, and 5-hydroxytryptamine. This neurotransmitter modulation may contribute to the central and peripheral effects observed in cannabinoid toxicity.  The physiological effects of synthetic cannabinoids may vary based on the specific molecule in play, as many synthetic cannabinoids are continually being produced and often contaminated with other products. Chemically, synthetic cannabinoids and traditional cannabinoids like THC are vastly different. As opposed to THC, which is a partial agonist at the CB1 receptor, synthetic cannabinoids are full agonists. They exhibit a markedly higher affinity for CB receptors. As such, the effects of synthetic cannabinoids can be much more potent than THC thus increasing the effects seen physiologically and toxicologically.

# Toxicokinetics

The toxic effects of cannabinoids are secondary to overstimulation of the endocannabinoid system by exogenous cannabinoids. This immoderate stimulation of the endocannabinoid system leads to the aforementioned erratic neurotransmitter modulation that can lead to toxicity. The absorption kinetics of cannabinoids and THC depends on the exposure route, with inhalation reaching peak serum concentrations in less than thirty minutes, and ingestion peaking in concentration at around 2 to 4 hours (or longer) after consumption. Duration of toxicity secondary to inhalation and ingestion lasts approximately 2 to 6 hours and 8 to 12 hours, respectively. THC's volume of distribution is approximately 3 liters per kilogram, and after exposure eventually collects in fat due to its high lipid solubility. Chronic exposures lead to increased accumulation in fat.

THC crosses the placenta and can accumulate in significantly elevated concentrations in breast milk. The hepatic cytochrome p450 system primarily metabolizes THC to many metabolites, mostly inactive. THC’s main active metabolite is 11-hydroxy-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol which is further broken down to numerous inactive metabolites, including 11-nor-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-carboxylic acid (THC-COOH), which is detectable in urine, as excretion is through both feces and urine over the course of hours to days, with more prolonged elimination depending on the chronicity of use. The toxicokinetics of synthetic cannabinoids are less predictable as the specifically abused compound may vary, and adulteration is not uncommon.

# History and Physical

Acutely, the physiologic effects of cannabis use include decreased systemic vascular resistance, elevated heart rate, decreased intraocular pressure, nystagmus, conjunctival injection, lethargy, decreased concentration and generalized psychomotor impairment. Whereas tachycardia may occur in acute use, slowing of the heart rate has been reported with more chronic use. Cannabis toxicity in children can be more concerning and can lead to decreased muscle coordination, lethargy, seizures and even obtundation. Synthetic cannabinoid toxicity is associated with similar symptoms. However, sympathomimetic toxicity, acute psychosis, and agitation, as well as seizures and sedation can occur. In severe cases, hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis, and renal failure have occurred. Synthetic cannabinoids are commonly adulterated, leading to these worsened effects. Liberalization of marijuana laws have led to an increased incidence of cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome which presents with cyclical vomiting, usually reported to be relieved with warm showers and cessation of cannabis abuse. Other chronic effects of prolonged cannabinoid use include lung disease, increased risk of cardiovascular disease, reduced fertility, and deficits in cognition and memory.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of cannabinoid toxicity is clinical, like most toxicities and exposures, and is established through history and physical examination.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of cannabinoid toxicity is largely supportive and focuses on symptomatic and supportive care.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Agent 15 poisoning

- Barbiturate toxicity

- Benzodiazepine toxicity

- CBRNE-incapacitating agents, LSD

- Panic disorder

- Sedative-hypnotic toxicity

- Toxicity, mushrooms

- Tricyclic antidepressant toxicity

- Withdrawal syndromes

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

With more states liberalizing the use of cannabis, many cases of toxicity are now being reported, esp in children and teenagers. These patients typicallly present to the emergency department with varying mental status changes. The toxicity is best managed by the emergency department physician, posion control, an internist, nurses, neurologist and or psychiatrist. Most cases of cannabis toxxicity are managed with supportive care with close monitoring. Pharmacological therapy is used to manage symptoms that arise.

Patients should be observed for 6 hours for resolution of symptoms and be admitted for monitoring when there is central nervous system (CNS) depression, altered mental status, multiple seizures, or persistently abnormal vital signs. Longer periods of toxicity can be expected to occur with ingested edible products and with synthetic cannabinoids. Patients returning to baseline do not require any further testing or follow-up and should be counseled. The outlook for most patients is good but repeat incidents of toxicity are starting to become common all over the US.