**Interpretation**

Tibial translation or movement of 5 mm or more than movement in the normal limb generally indicates a rupture of the ACL, and more than 2 mm of anterior translation of the affected knee compared to the unaffected knee is considered a positive test indicating ACL injury. Grading of ACL laxity is described as 1 through 3, which correlates to mild, moderate, and severe ACL injuries. Mild (grade I) is 0 to 5 mm, moderate is 6 to 10 mm (grade II), and severe is 11 to 15 mm (grade III) of anterior tibial translation compared to the uninjured side. The examiner should consider concomitant medial collateral ligament (MCL) and meniscal tears if there is greater than 11mm of translation.

Correct technique is necessary for accurate test interpretation, as clinicians using proximal tibial placement were more likely to correctly interpret a Lachman test than those using a more distal tibial hand placement.

**Diagnosis**

Diagnosis of an anterior cruciate ligament tear is definitively made by diagnostic imaging (MRI) or knee arthroscopy, but most often, the patient's history and physical presentation can reliably establish the diagnosis. Suggestive clinical findings of an ACL rupture include an acute knee effusion with positive Lachman, pivot shift, and/or anterior drawer tests.

**Test Accuracy**

Lachman's test is generally regarded as the best test for assessing ACL integrity with a sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 93%. The anterior drawer test has a sensitivity of 48% and a specificity of 93%. The pivot shift test has a sensitivity of 61% and a specificity of 97% and has the highest positive predictive value of the 3 tests.

Studies suggest performing both the Lachman and the pivot shift test to confirm an ACL rupture due to the high sensitivity of the Lachman and the high specificity of the pivot shift test. Also, a positive pivot shift test is the best for ruling in an ACL rupture, whereas a negative Lachman test is the best for ruling out an ACL rupture.

Several factors can affect Lachman's test accuracy. If hemarthrosis is present, the increased intra-articular volume may cause pain on range of motion with extensive guarding and spasm of the hamstring muscle group. This may limit knee range motion and decrease the accuracy of Lachman test findings.

Additionally, false-positive Lachman tests can be associated with isolated posterior cruciate ligament injury and should be interpreted with caution in patients with suspected posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) injury diagnosed with either a positive posterior drawer sign or positive posterior sag sign.

An orthopedic device called the KT-1000 knee ligament arthrometer can be used in diagnosis to provide an objective measurement of anterior-posterior tibial translation. The device is more widely used in clinical studies evaluating ACL injuries and less commonly used in clinical practice for ACL diagnosis because the physical examination is generally reliable.