**Nonsurgical Management**

Eliminating acute inflammation is the priority in shoulder rehabilitation. After a swimmer, first experiences pain, ice, NSAIDs, and rest can prevent progression. If pain continues or worsens, a 7-day to 10-day course of NSAIDs and rest is ideal but often proves difficult if the injury occurs during the middle or late part of the season. At a minimum, effort should be made to reduce yardage to below the point of pain. For swimmers with impingement, tendinitis, or scapular dyskinesis, a subacromial and/or glenohumeral corticosteroid injection may be beneficial diagnostically and for pain reduction.

Stretches that focus on the posterior capsule are important for preventing and reversing impingement. When they are coupled with overstretching of the anterior capsule, swimmers can create imbalances that worsen impingement. The swimmer can stretch the posterior capsule by horizontally adducting the arm and using the contralateral arm to pin it against the body.

Disproportionately increased adduction strength and internal rotation are unavoidable consequences of swimming. Overdevelopment of the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi muscle groups creates a force that displaces the humeral head anteriorly, leading to joint instability. Additionally, rotator cuff strengthening will lead to muscular balance restoration, which will reduce or eliminate impingement. As muscle endurance and strength improve, sport-mimicking exercises can be attempted, followed by low-yardage workouts at slow speeds, as long as the swimmer is pain-free, and progressing slowly until the swimmer can return to competition.****

**Surgical Management**

Surgery is appropriate for structural pathologies. An athlete may elect symptomatic management rather than surgery so that he or she may continue competing until the pain begins to interfere with daily life. For swimmers with persistent multidirectional instability, a capsular plication or inferior capsular shift procedure should be considered. Athletes should be aware. However, that training volumes may need to be reduced permanently to avoid pain. A subacromial exploration and removal of the hypertrophied, inflamed, and scarred tissue (thereby maintaining the structural integrity of the shoulder) is an option for athletes who obtain only limited relief from physical therapy. For swimmers with a labral tear in whom nonsurgical treatment has failed, the next treatment option is labral debridement or repair.