Asymptomatic bacteriuria is the presence of bacteria in the properly collected urine of a patient that has no signs or symptoms of a urinary tract infection. Asymptomatic bacteriuria is very common in clinical practice and its incidence increases with age. The incidence is 15 percent or greater in women and men age 65 to 80 years and as high as 40 to 50 percent after age 80. Most patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria will never develop symptomatic urinary tract infections and will have no adverse consequences from asymptomatic bacteriuria. Only patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria that will benefit from treatment should be treated, and most patients will not benefit from treatment. There are, however, a few exceptions. There is sufficient evidence that a pregnant woman with asymptomatic bacteriuria should be treated. Also, patients undergoing urologic procedures in which mucosal bleeding is expected and patients who are in the first three months following renal transplantation should be treated for asymptomatic bacteriuria.This activity reviews the evaluation and management of asymptomatic bacteriuria and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance outcomes for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Explain how the diagnosis of asymptomatic bacteriuria is made.
- Outline the reasons for treating asymptomatic bacteriuria with antibiotics. 
- Summarize the reasons for avoiding unnecessary treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria.
- Describe how an optimally functioning interprofessional team would coordinate care to enhance outcomes for patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria.