Treatment of ACPO involves decompression of the dilated colon to prevent bowel ischemia and perforation. Initial management in a stable patient may be conservative with serial x-rays of the abdomen to evaluate colonic diameter.

Neostigmine is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that exhibits a parasympathomimetic effect by increasing the amount of available acetylcholine and indirectly stimulating muscarinic and nicotinic receptors.  These receptors, which are located on the smooth muscle of bowel mucosa, cause muscle contraction. The initial dose is 2 mg, administered slowly over 5 minutes.

If the pharmacologic approach is unsuccessful or contraindicated, colonoscopic decompression should be considered. The colonoscope is advanced to the dilated bowel, and the air is suctioned. A decompression tube can also be placed up to the transverse colon with the aid of a guidewire to prevent re-occurrence.

Surgery remains the final option when the above measures have failed or if the patient's condition continues to worsen. Options include placing a cecostomy tube or performing a colectomy.

For patients with chronic symptoms, prokinetic agents can help treat oral intake intolerance. Erythromycin is useful in treating acute exacerbations by stimulating motilin receptors in the bowel.

Proper nutritional assessment is also imperative for patients with CIPO.  Patients with oral intake intolerance should employ strategies such as small, frequent meals, and high-calorie drinks. If these adjuncts are unsuccessful in achieving caloric goals, feeding tube access through a gastrostomy tube. A jejunostomy may be indicated if there is evidence of gastroparesis in conjunction with CIPO.  Finally, patients with severe symptoms may require parenteral nutrition.