Pulmonary edema is the accumulation of free fluid in the alveoli resulting in a decrease in the capacitance of the parenchyma and impairing gas exchange across the alveolar membrane. Acute onset pulmonary edema can lead to severe respiratory distress and death in 20 to 30 minutes.

To understand the pathophysiology of pulmonary edema, it is essential to understand the starling forces operating to maintain a homeostatic flow across the pulmonary capillary bed.

**Outward Driving Force**

7 mmHg (capillary hydrostatic pressure) + 8 mmHg (negative interstitial fluid pressure) + 14 mmHg (interstitial colloid osmotic pressure) = 29 mmHg

**Inward Driving Force**

28 mmHg (plasma colloid osmotic pressure)

Therefore, the net pressure of +1 mm Hg drives fluid out of the pulmonary capillaries and is taken away by an efficient network of pulmonary venules and lymphatics.

An imbalance in these forces in the form of raised pulmonary hydrostatic pressure (for diastolic: left ventricular failure), decreased plasma osmotic pressure (e.g., protein-losing enteropathy) or increased capillary membrane permeability (e.g., infections like pneumonia, inhalation of toxic gases like carbon monoxide) leads to pulmonary edema.

**Pulmonary Edema Protection Factor**

In accordance with the starling forces, excess edema fluid will accumulate when the interstitial tissue fluid overwhelms the capillary osmotic pressure (>28 mmHg).

Since the baseline left atrial pressure (and hence the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) is 7 mmHg, this gives a protective factor of 21 mmHg, i.e., the left atrial pressure can rise by an additional 21 mmHg before pulmonary edema develops. However, beyond this value, the rate of accumulation of fluid is rapid, and pressures beyond 30 mmHg can lead to death due to pulmonary edema in 20 to 30 minutes (i.e. acute cardiogenic shock). However, in long-standing cases (i.e. chronic mitral stenosis), the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure may be as high as 40 mmHg before edema develops as both the heart and lungs have had time to compensate.

**Starling Forces Equation**

Starling forces can be used to determine the direction of net water movement, thus evaluating filtration out of or absorption into the capillary. The starling equation for fluid flux (volume per time) can be found below.

Jv = Kf [(Pc-Pi)-σ(Πc - Πi)]

Jv: net fluid direction, Kf: filtration coefficient (vascular permeability to water, e.g. inflammation, burns); P: hydrostatic pressure, Π:oncotic pressure; c: capillary, i: interstitium, σ: reflection coefficient (movement of protein across the membrane)

In the lungs there are additional forces to be considered, alveolar air pressure and surface tension, with air pressure driving fluid into the vasculature, and surface tension pulling water into the lungs.

Another factor to consider is the net filtration pressure (NFP). This NFP reflects the driving force: Net Filtration Pressure = [(Pc-Pi)-(Πc - Πi)]