GLUT4 is part of a family of glucose transporter proteins containing 12-transmembrane domains.  It is expressed primarily in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. Unique N-terminal and COOH-terminal sequences are responsible for GLUT4’s responsiveness to insulin signaling and membrane trafficking.  The transportation of glucose across the cell membrane occurs via GLUT4’s mechanism of ATP-independent facilitative diffusion. Once glucose influxes into the cell, it can be metabolized for energy or lipid synthesis, or stored as glycogen.

GLUT4 shifts its location between the intracellular domain and the plasma membrane.  By being part of an intracellular tubulo-vesicular network connected to the endosomal-trans-Golgi network (TGN) system, it is able to switch locations based on the presence of stimulation.  In the absence of insulin or exercise, 90% of GLUT4 remains intracellular. In the presence of insulin or exercise, GLUT4 storage vesicles undergo exocytosis to the plasma membrane, as well as the sarcolemma and T-tubules of skeletal muscle cells, where it can carry out its function on glucose transport.  This increase in the number of GLUT4 molecules available at the cell surface increases the maximal velocity of glucose transport rate into cells. Once there is the removal of insulin stimulation, GLUT4 is endocytosis back into the cell by budding of vesicles on the plasma membrane containing clathrin. Upon internalization, GLUT4 becomes a part of early endosomes and re-sorted back into intracellular vesicles.