**Factors that influence airborne transmission**

Airborne transmission depends on several physical variables characteristic of the infectious particle and the environment.

- Temperature: Certain viruses are more active at lower temperatures. For example, influenza tends to spread more easily in cold climate conditions. In contrast, the infectivity of bacterial pathogens decreases in cold temperatures as they are less resistant and thus remain in a state of dormancy.

- Amount of sunshine: Ultraviolet (UV) rays of the sun are harmful to bacteria and viruses. The strength and duration of UV light exposure can determine the survival of infectious pathogens in the air. Countries that have a higher average daily sunshine are thus less prone to airborne transmission.

- Humidity: The percentage of water vapor in the air also determines the effectiveness of airborne droplet nuclei to spread from person to person. It has been studied that high humidity levels are protective against UV light destruction as water vapor forms a protective barrier around the droplet nuclei.

- Wind: Air currents are known to increase the distance traveled by infectious airborne particles. Wind also, however, decreases the concentration of droplet nuclei, thus decreasing the airborne infectivity.

**Other Factors**

- Tropical Storms: Several studies have shown that tropical storms decrease the quantity of fungal spores in the air. The number of fungal spores does, however, increase after a few days.

- Socioeconomic and living conditions: Like infectious diseases that are spread via contact, the role of living conditions and socioeconomic factors also plays a key role in airborne transmission. Housing and the number of people residing in one room/area is an important determinant of airborne transmission. Room ventilation and aeration are also key factors. Airconditioning is also considered a culprit for the increased airborne spread in closed environments.

- Rural vs. Urban: In urban areas, close living conditions result in increased transmission of bacterial and viral pathogens. In contrast, rural areas are more prone to airborne transmission of fungal spores.

- Inadequate sewage and drainage systems: Biowaste accumulation also increases the risk of the formation of airborne particles and thus their spread.

An article published in 2009 highlights how every pathogen has its own set of ideal environmental conditions for airborne transmission. Generalization of the unfavorable conditions for aerosol transmission may be misleading. Each pathogen should be separately studied in this regard.

**Management Principles**

When patients are seen in the emergency room or admitted to the hospital, it is impossible to know immediately if they have an infection that is transmissible via the airborne route.

**Airborne Isolation Room**

This is a single patient room equipped with special air handling (negative pressure) and ventilation capacity. An airborne isolation room is also known as a negative pressure room. This negative pressure room is usually a single-occupancy patient-care room frequently used to isolated individuals with confirmed or suspected airborne infection.

**Elements of an Airborne Isolation Room**

The following are some elements of an airborne isolation room.****

- Negative pressure ventilation that creates inward directional airflow from corners of the room

- The airborne isolation room should have a toilet and sink for the patient and a designated handwashing sink for healthcare workers.

- Have monitoring equipment, including alarms.

- Transmit exhaust of air from the hospital room to the outside of the building

- Recirculate air through a HEPA filter before being returned to the general circulation

- The door to the room must be kept closed to maintain negative pressure even if the patient is not in the room.

- The windows in the room should remain closed at all times; opening the window may cause the reversal of airflow, which counters the benefits of a negative pressure room.

- All healthcare providers who enter the isolated negative pressure room must be fit tested for an N95 respirator.

- Only healthcare providers immunized to the organism in question should enter a room where airborne precautions are in place for varicella or measles. A respirator is not necessary for immunized individuals but is required for non-immunized workers who provide care.

- One should also have a point of care evaluation for every patient interaction so that one can determine the need for additional precautions.

**What is an Anteroom?**

This is relatively clean and is a frequently used area to transition patients/healthcare workers in and out of the airborne isolation room when it is under negative pressure.

- The laundry hamper is usually located inside the patient room.

- The sink is usually in the anteroom location.

- The only items stored in the anteroom are the procedure or surgical masks, N95 respirator, eye protection devices, gloves, and gowns.

- At the handwashing sink, an alcohol-based hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes should be available.

- Posters showing how to perform handwashing must be placed near the sink.