Postbariatric surgery, a patient's perioperative and late postoperative care, is not limited to the surgical team. Given the operation's dietary, physiologic, and psychological effects, the postoperative care of a bariatric surgery patient requires an interprofessional approach. The surgery team monitors closely surgical postoperative complications, as discussed above. Other specialties with involvement in the care of bariatric patients include nursing staff, dieticians and nutritionists, primary care providers, gastroenterologists, and endocrinologists.

Diet initiation and progression take place in collaboration with an experienced dietician, both inpatient and at discharge. Recommended supplements are calcium, vitamin D, iron, folate, and vitamin B12. The frequency of monitoring should be 3 to 6 monthly in the first year, 6 to 12 monthly in the second year, and 12 monthly in the third year post-surgery.

The primary care provider or endocrinologist performs postoperative surveillance and management of comorbidities like diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. Nursing staff will have involvement at every step of the way, from preparing the patient for the procedure, assisting during the operation, and providing post-operative care and monitoring on subsequent visits, informing the surgeon of any concerns that may arise. There are strategies for postoperative screening and supplementation of micronutrient deficiencies outlined by the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS) Integrated Health Nutrition Guidelines and The Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guidelines.

The patient is encouraged to participate in group sessions and support group forums for other similar people that underwent bariatric surgery.