**Incidence and Prevalence**

The transmission of STIs after sexual assault varies widely among populations. They range from high reported rates of 12% for trichomoniasis and 19% for bacterial vaginosis to lower estimates for chlamydia (2%) and gonorrhea (4%). Due to methodological issues, some of these positive cultures may reflect preexisting infections. The literature cannot provide reliable estimate data on the risk for transmission of herpes, hepatitis B, or HIV infection from sexual assault. However, sexual transmission of hepatitis B is common, even in the United States, among non-vaccinated individuals engaging in receptive intercourse with hepatitis B-positive partners, and both hepatitis B and HIV transmission after sexual assault have been reported.

The incidence and prevalence of all sexually transmitted infections in the local area must be considered when determining the most appropriate treatment for a patient. Sexually transmitted infections are common in the United States, particularly in those aged 15 to 24 years. Human papillomavirus has the greatest incidence and prevalence of any STI in the United States.

**Testing**

The CDC recommends selective testing for sexually transmitted infections when individuals present for evaluation after sexual assault.  The majority of advanced practitioner sexual assault response team programs in the United States do not routinely perform STI testing on adults and adolescents. STI specimen collection during a sexual assault examination most often does not detect infections transmitted by the perpetrator but merely reflects infections acquired before the assault, and thus, provides no meaningful information for the criminal investigation. Child victims may be an exception if they present with signs or symptoms of an STI. If authorities suspect ongoing child sexual abuse, the discovery of a sexually transmitted infection may provide laboratory proof of the abuse.

For the vast majority of adults and adolescents routine prophylactic antibiotic treatment against Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, and incubating syphilis renders testing and discovery of preexisting infections costly as management does not usually differ.