TSH binds and activates the thyroid gland. The TSH binds to the membrane receptor on the epithelial cell surface, which activates the adenylate cyclase located in the plasma membrane, which leads to an increase of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels. This leads to the stimulation of additional intracellular signaling events resulting in the formation of thyroid hormone.

Iodide from the plasma is concentrated and absorbed by thyroid cells through the sodium/iodide symporter (NIS) on the basolateral membrane of thyrocytes (follicular cells). This process is dependent on sodium and active transport, meaning it couples inward translocation down its electrochemical gradient with inward translocation of iodide against its electrochemical gradient. The iodide has to be delivered to the TG-enriched colloid at the apical surface; this appears to be a function of another protein, pendrin, which is a chloride/iodide exchanger, which promotes iodide efflux in the colloid rich lumen. Within the thyroid follicle, thyroid peroxidase oxidizes organifies, and couples iodine to tyrosine residues on TG. Defects in any of these steps can result in dyshormonogenetic goiter and congenital hypothyroidism. TG is a glycoprotein with a molecular mass of 660 kDa enriched in tyrosine residues and secreted and stored in the colloid. Initially, thyroid peroxidase forms iodine by oxidation of the iodide ion. When TSH stimulates the thyroid follicle, thyroid peroxidase then organifies or covalently bonds the tyrosine of the thyroglobulin molecule within to colloid to iodine. If one iodine covalently bonds to tyrosine on the thyroglobulin, this forms monoiodotyrosine (MIT). If two iodine covalently bonds thyroglobulin, this forms diiodotyrosine (DIT). Thyroid peroxidase then couples an MIT with a DIT to form triiodothyronine (T3) or couples a molecule of DIT with another DIT to form thyroxine (T4). After the coupling has occurred, TG is taken up by the thyrocyte for lysosomal degradation releasing T4 and T3. DIT and MIT that are uncoupled are deiodinated by a dehalogenase to recycle and conserve any iodide. The thyroid gland secretes thyroxine (T4) which can either convert to T3 in the periphery or reverse T3 (rT3). Triiodothyronine (T3) is active, whereas rT3 is inactive.

The hypothalamic-pituitary axis regulates TSH release. The hypothalamus secretes the thyroid releasing hormone (TRH), which stimulates thyrotrophs in the anterior pituitary to secrete TSH. The anterior pituitary releases TSH and stimulates the thyroid follicular cells to release thyroxine, T4 (80%), triiodothyronine, or T3 (20%). When T4 is released into circulation, it can convert to T3 through the process of deiodination. T4 and T3 can then exert negative feedback on TSH levels, with high levels of T3/T4 decreasing TSH and low levels of T3/T4 increasing TSH levels from the anterior pituitary. T3 is the predominant inhibitor of TSH secretion. Because TSH secretion is so sensitive to minor changes in serum-free T4 through this negative feedback loop, abnormal TSH levels are detected earlier than those of free T4 in hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. There is a log-linear relationship between T3/T4 and TSH, with minor changes in TH results in major changes in TSH.