Treatment in SLE aims to prevent organ damage and achieve remission. The choice of treatment is dictated by the organ system/systems involved and the severity of involvement and ranges from minimal treatment (NSAIDs, antimalarials) to intensive treatment (cytotoxic drugs, corticosteroids).

Patient education, physical and lifestyle measures, and emotional support play a central role in managing SLE. Patients with SLE shall be well educated on the disease pathology, potential organ involvement, including brochures, and the importance of medication and monitoring compliance. Stress reduction techniques, good sleep hygiene, exercises, and emotional support shall be encouraged. Smoking can worsen SLE symptoms, and patients should be educated about the importance of smoking cessation. Dietary recommendations shall include avoiding alfalfa sprouts and echinacea and including a diet rich in vitamin D. Photoprotection is vital. All patients with SLE shall avoid direct sun exposure by timing their activities appropriately, light-weight loose-fitting dark clothing covering the maximum portion of the body, and using broad-spectrum (UV-A and UV-B) sunscreens with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 30 or more.

**Cutaneous manifestations:**Mild cutaneous manifestations can usually be treated with topical corticosteroids or topical calcineurin inhibitors such as tacrolimus. Hydroxychloroquine is the drug of choice for most cutaneous manifestations and is very efficacious. Quinacrine can be used if intolerance or adverse effects of hydroxychloroquine. Methotrexate can be used if no response to hydroxychloroquine. For severe or resistant disease, systemic corticosteroids, mycophenolate mofetil (dual-benefit with underlying lupus nephritis), and belimumab can be considered. Other alternatives include thalidomide, cyclophosphamide, IVIG, dapsone, azathioprine, and rituximab.

**Musculoskeletal manifestations:**Hydroxychloroquine is the initial drug of choice for lupus arthritis. If no response, methotrexate or leflunomide can be considered. Belimumab and rituximab can be considered in refractory cases.

**Hematological manifestations:**Drug-induced cytopenias shall be excluded. Mild cytopenias usually require no treatment. For moderate to severe cytopenias, corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment, and azathioprine or cyclosporine-A can be used as a steroid-sparing agent. Severe refractory cytopenias may require intravenous pulse dose steroids, mycophenolate mofetil, rituximab, cyclophosphamide, plasmapheresis, recombinant G-CSF, or splenectomy.

**Cardiopulmonary manifestations:**Serositis usually responds to NSAIDs or moderate to high dose oral corticosteroids. Hydroxychloroquine and methotrexate can be considered as steroid-sparing agents. Acute lupus pneumonitis requires high dose IV pulse corticosteroids, while plasmaphereses and/or cyclophosphamide may be needed if the diffuse alveolar hemorrhage is present. Interstitial lung disease can e managed by low to moderate dose corticosteroids with immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil. Pulmonary arterial hypertension requires vasodilator therapy, while thrombotic complications such as pulmonary embolism require anticoagulation. Therefore, high-dose corticosteroids are necessary to manage myocarditis and coronary arteritis.

**CNS manifestations:**Accurate diagnosis and ruling out other potential causes is critical before initiating treatment for neuropsychiatric manifestations of SLE. High-dose corticosteroids with immunosuppressive agents such as cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, or rituximab are used for inflammation-related neuropsychiatric manifestations such as optic neuritis, aseptic meningitis, demyelinating disease, etc. Lifelong warfarin is indicated in cases of thromboembolic CNS events associated with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. High-dose corticosteroids can be used in cognitive impairment, although there is no robust data on this.

**Renal manifestations:**Lupus nephritis (LN) shall be confirmed with a biopsy, which confirms the diagnosis, rules out other causes and helps to classify the disease. Class I and II LN shall be treated with the Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockade. Immunosuppression with high-dose corticosteroids followed by azathioprine is indicated only if proteinuria is more than 1 gram/day. Membranous LN (class V) shall also be treated with the Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockade. If proteinuria of more than 1 gram/day is present (which is frequent in Class V LN), induction therapy with high dose corticosteroids and azathioprine (mild disease) or tacrolimus/cyclosporine-A/mycophenolate mofetil/IV cyclophosphamide (moderate to severe disease) followed by maintenance therapy with azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine-A or tacrolimus shall be used.

Corticosteroids shall be gradually tapered during maintenance therapy. Proliferative LN (class III/IV) requires more aggressive therapy. Induction therapy is with IV pulse dose methylprednisolone followed by high dose oral steroids combined with mycophenolate mofetil, IV cyclophosphamide, or azathioprine (only in mild disease in whites). Maintenance therapy with mycophenolate mofetil or azathioprine shall be continued for at least three years. IV pulse cyclophosphamide for one year can be considered maintenance therapy for severe disease. Lupus nephritis patients need very close monitoring of their renal function and proteinuria in addition to other SLE disease activity markers. Flares and incomplete remission are common. Renal replacement therapy and transplant may be needed in some patients.

**Pregnancy manifestations:**Pregnancy shall be considered only if the disease was quiescent at the time and six months prior due to an increased risk of flares otherwise. Contraception, if needed, shall be used until then and shall be progesterone-only contraception. Hydroxychloroquine is considered safe in pregnancy, has been associated with a significant reduction in flares and disease activity, and shall be continued through pregnancy. Azathioprine and low-dose corticosteroids can be used for mild manifestations. Other immunosuppressive agents, including methotrexate, leflunomide, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide, are teratogenic and contraindicated in pregnancy.

Rituximab and belimumab shall also be avoided during pregnancy. Patients with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome shall transition from warfarin to low-molecular-weight heparin and aspirin before pregnancy. For females with positive Anti-Ro or Anti-La antibodies with a history of neonatal lupus in a previous pregnancy, close fetal heart monitoring with weekly or alternate-weekly fetal echocardiography is recommended during the second trimester. First or second-degree heart block shall be promptly treated with dexamethasone, although prophylaxis with dexamethasone is not recommended. A complete heart block is irreversible and requires a permanent pacemaker in the infant. Hydroxychloroquine decreases the risk of fetal heart block.

**Other management considerations:**Hydroxychloroquine shall be used in all patients with SLE given its benefits beyond just managing active manifestations, including anti-thrombotic properties, and preventing flares. Patients on hydroxychloroquine will require regular ophthalmology exams to monitor for the rare but irreversible maculopathy associated with this drug. Corticosteroids are frequently used in SLE, with many patients unable to taper them completely. Long-term adverse effects of corticosteroids shall be considered and monitored, including osteoporosis, glaucoma, cataract, and avascular necrosis. Patients on high-dose corticosteroids will also need antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent infections. Most immunosuppressive agents used in SLE have several potential adverse effects ranging from cytopenias and hepatotoxicity with most to an increased risk of urinary bladder cancer with cyclophosphamide. These patients shall be appropriately and closely monitored for adverse effects of these agents.