**History**

A complete history detailing the nature and extent of nasal symptoms should be obtained. Symptoms of other sinonasal or systemic pathology, including allergies, should be evaluated. Scoring systems such as the NOSE scale can be used to grade nasal obstructive symptoms.

**Physical Examination**

Patients should be thoroughly examined in the outpatient clinic. A full head and neck examination should be carried out, followed by an anterior rhinoscopy with a nasal speculum. Flexible nasendoscopy can be performed to look for signs of sinonasal disease or masses in the posterior nasal space, particularly when the results of anterior rhinoscopy do not correspond to the patient history (e.g., severe nasal obstruction symptoms in the presence of normal-appearing turbinates and a midline anterior septum). When evaluating the nasal septum, the surgeon should look at the quality of the mucosa (assessing for signs of inflammation) and the size and nature of the turbinates, particularly the inferior turbinates. If there is poor access due to overly large turbinates, a turbinoplasty may also be indicated.

The septum should be palpated to evaluate the size, location, and nature of the deviation, noting specifically whether this seems cartilaginous or bony and whether there are any septal perforations, dislocations, or bony spurs. If a prior septoplasty has been performed, septal palpation with a cerumen curette or cotton-tipped applicator to determine how much cartilage remains within the septum is also important. An external examination should be made, noting any additional deformity, the dynamic collapse of the alae with inspiration, and the degree of nasal tip support. Lastly, Cottle’s maneuver should be performed to assess internal valve stenosis.