The standard airway resistance that is present with the laminar flow of normal breathing is largely a function of the Hagen-Poiseuille equation

R = 8hl /πr^4

Where h = viscosity, l = length, and r = radius

Given this equation, it is clear that the radius is the most important factor in airway resistance and that small changes in radius can lead to significant changes in airway resistance. For example, if the radius of the tube doubles, the resistance decreases by a factor of 16.

The medium-sized bronchi collectively have the smallest radius. If we use the principle outlined above, it makes sense that since the medium-sized bronchi collectively have the smallest radius, then it would also be the site of greatest airway resistance. Using this same principle, we can also conclude that the terminal bronchioles have the lowest resistance since, collectively, it has the largest radius.

Airway radius is not static and can be significantly altered by airway smooth muscle, which lines all of our conducting airways, except for the trachea, where airway smooth muscle gets confined to the anterior wall.

Airway resistance also changes between inspiration and expiration. The majority of airways within the lung parenchyma are tethered by alveolar attachments that transmit an outward force on these airways, which increases as the lungs expand. This increasing outward force increases airway radius, thus decreasing airway resistance. On expiration, this outward tethering force diminishes, and inward elastic recoil forces increase, causing a decrease in airway radius, which leads to increased airway resistance.