Standard investigation of BPH may include bedside urine dipstick, post-void residual, IPSS, and urine flow studies to establish if there is evidence of obstructive voiding. Further tests may be indicated depending on the patient/history.

**Blood Tests**

Blood tests, including renal function tests, are useful to establish baseline renal function and can help support the diagnosis of renal failure/acute kidney injury in someone with chronic high-pressure retention or acute retention, for example.

**Urinalysis**

Urine specimen testing can help detect infection, non-visible haematuria, or metabolic disorders (glycosuria). Leucocytes and nitrites are common findings with infection; the presence of proteinuria may point towards nephrological conditions. The American urological association recommend urinalysis using a dipstick test, further tests may be requested based on abnormal dipstick findings (culture, etc.).

**Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA)**

Prostate-specific antigen testing has been shown to predict prostate volume.

**Ultrasound**

Ultrasound scans are used to look for evidence of hydronephrosis and are indicated in patients with high residual volumes or renal impairment. Other indications include suspicion of urinary tract stones or the investigation of haematuria.

**Flow Studies**

Urine flow studies are used to determine the volume of urine passed over time. This can help establish whether there is objective evidence for obstruction to flow. Urodynamic studies are used to see how the bladder empties and fills. They can help further assess patients where the diagnosis is not certain or where a neurogenic/overactive bladder is suspected (i.e., neurological conditions that may affect the bladder, flow studies equivocal, diagnosis not clear).

**Cystoscopy**

Flexible cystoscopy should be used to investigate red flag symptoms such as visible haematuria/suspected bladder cancer and can also be used to look for urethral strictures, which may also result in poor flow/decreased urinary flow studies.