Alcohol use disorder is very common in the U.S. Unfortunately, and most people never come to medical attention until they have a medical problem or get involved with the legal system. The repercussions of alcohol use disorder go way beyond just addiction; the disorder can create havoc in the lives of the family, friends and lead to difficulties in interpersonal and professional relationships. Alcoholics never seek help on their own. The majority of alcoholics never come to medical attention because clinicians never screen them for alcohol use disorder. With an epidemic on the rise, there is now a national agenda to curb alcohol use disorder.  All healthcare workers have a responsibility to watch out for alcoholics and make appropriate referrals.

Primary care workers, nurse practitioners, and pharmacists should educate patients about the harms of alcohol. In-patients should be offered counseling if they are deemed to have alcohol use disorder. Because many of these alcoholics also have psychiatric issues, a mental health nurse should follow them as outpatients and make appropriate recommendations.

Clinicians should urge patients to attend AA and take their family members with them. If this fails, then clinicians may have to try pharmacological therapies. At the same time, cognitive behavior therapy should be offered. An interprofessional team approach should be adopted so that no alcoholic is missed; the key is to educate patients at every opportunity. Alcohol use disorder has no therapeutic benefits, and it creates havoc in families.

**Outcomes**

The prognosis for most patients is guarded, with less than 20 to 30% discontinuing drinking. Unfortunately, in many instances, some of the organ damage is often irreversible. The key is to educate the patient and the family about the destruction that alcohol can cause. Referral to Alcoholics Anonymous is recommended, but data indicate that compliance is often low.