TTP is a serious life-threatening disorder that is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a nurse, hematologist, emergency department physician, nephrologist, neurologist, and internist. Recall that the results of diagnostic testing, like ADAMTS13, may be delayed, and therefore it is the clinical acumen of the healthcare team that can determine a patient's survival or demise. Failure to suspect TTP makes for delayed treatment and a moribund patient. It is recommended that TTP patients be admitted initially to the intensive care setting where close monitoring by critical care nursing and management by an intensivist and co-management by a hematologist would be ideal. Besides corticosteroids, these patients benefit primarily from plasmapheresis (PEX).

If PEX cannot be initiated in a timely manner, then plasma infusion should be performed. Hence, the role of the nurse as well as the apheresis team cannot be understated. Monitoring for response is essential to determine the duration of plasma exchange. Typically, hemolysis markers are checked daily. Plasma exchange usually is stopped once the platelet levels stabilize at above 150,000/microL for more than 48 hours. The prognosis of patients with TTP depends on age, neurological deficits, renal dysfunction, response to treatment, and other co-morbidities. Most patients will require a prolonged stay in the hospital as recovery is gradual.

The apheresis team and clinical nurse are essential in monitoring the patient during treatment to ensure fluid overload and cardiac arrhythmias do not occur. Clinical pharmacists play the crucial role of monitoring patients for treatment side-effects and reconciling medications to prevent adverse outcomes. A well-coordinated interprofessional team can significantly improve outcomes for patients affected with this potentially lethal disease.[Level 5] For those patients with residual organ damage from the thrombogenesis, a stay at a rehabilitation center is in order.