Brachioplasty is a body contouring procedure that can be performed in various approaches, guided by surgeon preference. As a result, there is limited robust evidence to recommend specific techniques or approaches to brachioplasty for all patients; as with many plastic surgery procedures, the tailoring of a surgical plan to each individual patient offers the best chance of a successful outcome.

The most recent meta-analysis of complications of brachioplasty identified the most common complications are unfavorable scarring, recurrence of skin ptosis, and wound dehiscence.

Preoperatively, patients should have an adequate review of their weight stability, BMI, and nutrition profile assessed in consultation with a bariatric dietician or nutritionist. Their comorbidities should be identified and optimized by liaising with relevant specialist colleagues, for example, endocrinologists, cardiologists, and pulmonologists, as appropriate.

Patients with poorly managed or untreated psychiatric disorders should have a consultation with a psychiatrist to optimize their mental health, and similarly, those with BDD or with unrealistic expectations should be reviewed by a clinical psychologist and may not be candidates for brachioplasty or other body contouring procedures. A preoperative assessment for anesthesia with the anesthesiologist is essential to minimize the risk of GA and optimize patients for surgery. Coordinated activity and sharing of information between all interprofessional healthcare team members will facilitate successful outcomes in brachioplasty procedures.