Diuretics play a crucial role in treating edema and hypertension by causing the induction of a negative balance of solute and water. Loop diuretics are physiologically the most potent family of diuretics, as demonstrated by possessing natriuretic and chloriuretic potency of diuretic drug class. These agents potentially increase Na and Cl excretion to over 25% of the filtered load. Although they have no direct epithelial effect on segments such as the thin descending limb of Henle and the thick ascending limb of Henle, many diuretics decrease fluid reabsorption by abolishing the papillary osmotic gradient. Most of the loop diuretics have a direct inhibitory effect on the cotransport process, specifically by interfering with the active chloride transport secondary to the presence of sodium, located on the luminal membrane of the segment. Loop diuretics (furosemide, bumetanide, torsemide, ethacrynic acid) inhibit the concentrating mechanisms in the medullary segment, whereas diuretics such as thiazides are effective primarily in the cortical segment and inhibit the urinary diluting mechanism.

Bumetanide inhibits the reabsorption of sodium and chloride in the ascending loop of Henle and proximal renal tubule, which interferes with the chloride-binding cotransport system. This mechanism increases the excretion of water, magnesium phosphate, sodium chloride, magnesium phosphate, and calcium. It decreases both free water clearance and solute free water reabsorption increases sodium chloride excretion to the distal tubule (natriuresis), calciuria, phosphaturia, and minimal bicarbonaturia. Studies have shown the onset of diuretic action occurs during 0 to 30 minutes following intravenous use and 30 to 60 min following oral administration. The diuretic effect and the total duration of action last for 3 to 4 hours (270 min) with similar net urine output between intravenous and oral administration.