Diagnostic testing is guided by whether incontinence is related to stool consistency

If diarrhea is suspected as a primary reason for incontinence:

- Stool studies for infection, osmolality, fat content and pancreatic insufficiency

- Evaluation of diabetes and thyroid disorder

- Evaluate for bacterial overgrowth and lactose/fructose intolerance

- Colonoscopy to evaluate mucosal disease (IBD/Colitis), mass, ulcer, and stricture.

If incontinence is without any diarrhea then more specific testing should be pursued. The most valuable tests for the evaluation of FI are anorectal manometry and endoscopic ultrasound. Defecography is usually reserved for refractory symptoms or before operative planning intervention.

- Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS) to assess the internal and external anal sphincters. The test is performed with the patient in the lithotomy or left lateral position. The test allows the clinician to measure the thickness of the muscle

- Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

- Anal manometry is used to assess the resting and squeeze rectal pressure. In addition, the technique can be used to assess rectal capacity and compliance.

- Measuring pudendal nerve latency is also done to assess the integrity of the pelvic floor neuromuscular integrity

- Electromyography (EMG) can help assess the electrical activity initiated by the muscle at rest, during voluntary contraction and after a Valsalva maneuver.

- Defecography is done to assess the evacuation of the rectum under fluoroscopy. In most cases, contrast is inserted into the rectum and images are obtained during defecation.