# Introduction

Diseases of the appendix present in two varieties: infectious/inflammatory and neoplastic etiologies. The latter can present in the form of epithelial, neuroendocrine tumors (NETs), lymphoma, mesenchymal tumors, sarcomas, and metastases.

Acute appendicitis is a prevalent cause of abdominal pain, with an estimated lifetime risk of 7 to 9%.

# Anatomy

The vermiform appendix is a vestigial organ located at the terminal end of the cecum.

While the location of the base of the appendix is reliable, its tail is variable in positioning.

# Plain Films

Of all imaging modalities, radiographs have little clinical utility in imaging the appendix. If there is a concern for acute appendicitis, radiographs may rarely demonstrate a calcified fecalith, which is visible in cases of appendicitis; however, this is not a specific finding.

# Computed Tomography

Computed tomography (CT) is one of the primary diagnostic modalities for identifying the appendix and diagnosing any disease present. Diagnosing appendicitis on CT has a sensitivity and specificity of 87% and 76%, respectively.

There has been a debate about the exact criteria for diagnosis; however, as some recent studies argue, a criteria cutoff of greater than 6 mm diameter is too small and leads to negative appendectomies.

For the diagnosis of neoplasms, CT has a sensitivity of 95% in symptomatic patients.

# Magnetic Resonance

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has recently increased in use for the pregnant and pediatric populations due to the lack of ionizing radiation. It has a sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 96% in evaluating for appendicitis, though it has been shown to be slightly more effective in identifying the appendix in adults versus children.

Another primary use for MRI is in staging appendiceal neoplasms, as it is more accurate than CT. The accuracy increases by adding diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), which helps identify highly cellular tumor implants. Solid tumors will demonstrate restricted diffusion, delineating them from the adjacent organs. When included with delayed gadolinium-enhanced imaging with oral and rectal contrast, the sensitivity is 95% and specificity 70%.

# Ultrasonography

Ultrasound (US) has similar indications to MRI, though it remains useful in children who have thinner musculature and less abdominal fat. It has a sensitivity of 55% and a specificity of 95% for diagnosing acute appendicitis.

The exam employs graded compression and evaluates several factors: diameter (over 6 mm), surrounding peri-caecal fat, peri-appendiceal inflammation, free fluid, presence of reactive lymph nodes, and mural hyperplasia.

A common mimic of appendicitis on sonographic imaging is lymphoid hyperplasia, a benign condition causing enlargement of the appendiceal diameter, specifically in the lamina propria.

When investigating for neoplasm, mucoceles may also be visible on ultrasound. They appear as an ovoid cystic mass with variable echogenicity. Typically they will have concentric echogenic layers (“onion skin”), acoustic shadowing from mural calcifications, and the appendix will be pear-shaped. They can also demonstrate regional adenopathy, fat stranding, and free fluid.

# Clinical Significance

Imaging of the appendix is most commonly performed to investigate acute appendicitis. The use of imaging for appendiceal neoplasms, though less commonly done, does have high sensitivity and specificity. If the patient has symptoms, the accuracy is improved further as neoplasms can sometimes produce symptoms of acute appendicitis (which is most common), generalized abdominal pain, palpable mass, obstruction, or distension. Imaging studies can be used to diagnose the tumor, and they can also be used to stage the tumor in the classic TNM staging system. The staging typically takes place via MRI. These studies more often identify epithelial tumors, and the diagnosis of NETs is uncommon due to their relatively small size and nonaggressive behavior. Overall, the definitive diagnosis of neoplasms requires pathologic examination after appendectomy.

On the other hand, appendicitis is regularly diagnosed using radiology studies. In fact, imaging is often the deciding factor between operative and non-operative management. Though the diagnosis can be clinical following a thorough history and physical, imaging is regularly employed to confirm the diagnosis in question. The most commonly used radiographic study is the CT scan, given its speed, sensitivity, and specificity. Though MRI and US are also relatively useful modalities to diagnose acute appendicitis, they have their limitations. Ultrasound is highly operator dependent and tends to work best on individuals with less fat and muscle content in their abdomen (i.e., children). MRI is not always readily available, especially in smaller hospitals or rural settings. It is also a more prolonged study, and it may be more difficult for patients to be still while they are in acute pain, especially children. Currently, the negative appendectomy is less than 12% in men but can be up to 33% in women; accurate imaging studies could reduce the number of unnecessary surgeries performed on patients.