The provider should perform a complete neurovascular examination of the affected extremity. The following imagining should be ordered when indicated:

- Plain films: radiographs-anterior-posterior (AP) pelvis, AP and lateral hip, AP and lateral femur, AP and lateral knee.

- Computed tomography (CT) scan - helps better classify the fracture pattern or delineate a subtle fracture line. It is part of the trauma assessment and can be extended to include the femoral neck.

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) - not generally used in the acute setting but may be used to evaluate for femoral neck stress fractures.

Medical assessment should include basic labs (complete blood count, basal metabolic panel, and prothrombin/international normalized ratio, if applicable) as well as a chest radiograph and electrocardiogram (EKG). Elderly patients with known or suspected cardiac disease may benefit from preoperatively cardiology evaluation. Preoperative medical optimization is vital in the geriatric population.

There are many classifications for femoral neck fracture, including the most common clinical classifications by Garden and Pauwel, which includes the following

**The Garden Classification**

- Type I: Incomplete fracture - valgus impacted-non displaced

- Type II: Complete fracture - nondisplaced

- Type III: Complete fracture - partial displaced

- Type IV: Complete fracture - fully displaced

The Garden classification is the most used system used to communicate the type of fracture. For treatment, it is often simplified into nondisplaced (Type 1 and Type 2) versus displaced (Type 3 and Type 4).

**Pauwel Classification**

The Pauwel classification also includes the inclination angle of the fracture line relative to the horizontal. Higher angles and more vertical fractures exhibit greater instability due to higher shear force.  These fractures also have a higher risk of osteonecrosis postoperatively.

- Type I     less than 30 degrees

- Type II    30 to 50 degrees

- Type III   greater than 50 degrees