In the superior mediastinum, there are two broad categories of nerves passing within the region, nerves that originate superior to the thorax and nerves that originate within the thorax.

The superior thoracic mediastinum contains the left and right phrenic nerves (C3 - C5), the left and right vagus nerves, and other associated vagal branches including the esophageal plexus, the inferior cervical cardiac branches, the thoracic cardiac branches, and the recurrent laryngeal nerves. As for the nerves originating from within the thorax, there is the superior portion of the sympathetic trunk (T1 through T4) and its associated sympathetic branches such as the thoracic cardiac and pulmonary branches.

The anterior mediastinum does not contain any major named nerves.

The middle mediastinum is densely innervated by the autonomic nervous system and somatically innervated by the phrenic nerves. The sympathetic innervation arises from branches of the sympathetic trunk around the T2 through T4 levels while parasympathetic innervation derives from branches of the left and right vagus nerves. Branches of the left and right phrenic nerves provide somatic innervation to the fibrous and parietal pericardial layers.

The posterior mediastinum contains many autonomic and somatic nerves. Sympathetic nerves arise from the sympathetic chain at the T5 to T12 levels and parasympathetic innervation is provided by the left and right vagus nerves which form of the esophageal plexus. The somatic nerves in the posterior mediastinum are the intercostal nerves.