The UGH syndrome is most commonly caused by rubbing of the iris from the anterior chamber intraocular lenses but can occur from any type of pseudophakic lens.

The complication was associated with the copies of lenses that had lenses polished on a substandard level with sharp edges at the footplates. Azar 91z model ACIOL (flexible closed-loop ACIOL) implantation was associated with complications because of the problems of design and manufacturing causing sharp edges, vaulting, excess movements, and irritation of ocular tissue.

Iris-supported IOL with metal loops has been reported to cause UGH syndrome. The Kelman multiflex ACIOL (flexible open-loop ACIOL) has an anterior vault to avoid rubbing the iris in the correct configuration. When Kelman multiflex ACIOL is implanted incorrectly ('upside-down lens syndrome), corneal edema increased IOP, cystoid macular edema (CME), and UGH syndrome may occur.

MA50 intraocular lenses placed in the sulcus were associated with complications like UGH syndrome.

Lenses with imperfect construction, imperfectly positioned lenses, or improperly sized lenses may cause chafing.

Besides this, the technique of scleral fixation with friction knots using single-piece lenses showed a risk of UGH syndrome.

Iris transillumination defects may be noted at the area of iris chafing. Single-piece IOL in the capsular bag may be associated with UGH syndrome in pseudoexfoliation syndrome (pseudophacodonesis due to zonular laxity resulting in chafing of the posterior iris surface and focal capsular fibrosis around the haptic causing iris touch), plateau iris syndrome (with anterior rotation of ciliary processes), and intensive facedown position in yoga with pseudophacodonesis secondary to pseudoexfoliation.

Almost all intraocular implants may be associated with UGH syndrome, including retropupillary iris-claw IOL, iris-sutured IOL, placement of single-piece PCIOL (posterior chamber IOL), or multipiece PCIOL in the anterior chamber, express mini glaucoma shunt, and cosmetic iris implants.

There are reports of late-onset UGH syndrome associated with the Soemmering ring cataract, causing an anterior shift of sulcus-fixated leading to iris-haptic touch.