During fetal circulation, the ductus arteriosus provides blood to the distal extremities of the fetus and the upper part of the body receives its blood supply from the left ventricle to the aorta. After birth, the pulmonary vascular resistance decreases, promoting the closure of the ductus arteriosus. This leads to the inability of the heart to provide blood to the distal part of the body and produces respiratory distress and cyanosis, leading to cardiogenic shock and death if the necessary measures are not instated in time.

**Classification**

According to the Celoria and Patton classification, interrupted aortic arch can be grouped into three types, depending on the site of the disruption

- Type A: The disruption is located distal to the left subclavian artery; this is the second most common disruption represents approximately 13% of the cases.

- Type B: The disruption is located between the left carotid artery and the left subclavian artery; this is the most common anomaly, representing approximately 84% of the cases.

- Type C: The disruption is located between the innominate artery and the left carotid artery; this is a rare type represents approximately 3% of all cases.

These three types of IAA can be sub-classified according to the origin of the subclavian artery:

- Type 1: Normal origin of the subclavian artery.

- Type 2: Aberrant right subclavian artery, found distal to the left subclavian artery.

- Type 3: Isolated right subclavian artery; found originating from a right patent ductus arteriosus.