Accurate prevalence data is difficult to obtain due to issues such as underreporting, use of differing definitions for urinary incontinence, and varying study designs.

It is estimated that around 423 million people (20 years and older) worldwide experience some form of urinary incontinence.

Approximately 13 million Americans experience urinary incontinence. The prevalence is 50% or greater among residents of nursing facilities. Caregivers report that 53% of the homebound elderly are incontinent. A random sampling of hospitalized elderly patients reports that 11% of patients have persistent urinary incontinence at admission, and 23% at discharge.

24% to 45% of women report some degree of urinary incontinence. 7% to 37% of women ages 20 to 39 report some degree of urinary incontinence. Daily urinary incontinence is reported by 9% to 39% of women over age 60. Increased risk of urinary incontinence was associated with pregnancy, childbirth, diabetes, and increased body mass index. 11% to 34% of older men report urinary incontinence, with 2 to 11% reporting daily occurrences. Increased risk is associated with prostate surgery.

The estimated prevalence for the types of urinary incontinence are as follows:

- Stress urinary incontinence – 24% to 45% in women over 30 years

- Urge urinary incontinence – 9% in women 40 to 44 years; 31% in women over 75 years; 42% in men over 75 years

- Mixed urinary incontinence – 20% to 30% of those with chronic incontinence

- Overflow urinary incontinence – 5% of those with chronic incontinence

- Functional urinary incontinence – Uncertain