Myasthenia gravis poses a number of challenges to the anesthesiologist. A firm understanding not only of the disease process but also pharmacologic issues pertaining to treatment is necessary. Greater than 85% of patients with MG are found to have nicotinic ACh-R antibodies, though it is notable that neuronal nicotinic receptors are left unaffected. This indicates the disease affects skeletal muscle only. Disease prevalence is estimated to be around 1 in 7500 patients. Disease incidence is most common in women in their twenties to thirties, whereas men show a bimodal age pattern, with a peak incidence in their thirties and again in their sixties. The course of the disease is marked by exacerbations and remissions. Many triggers of MG exist, including stress, surgery, and pregnancy as well as drugs (antibiotic, rheumatologic, cardiovascular) that can precipitate symptoms or lead to exacerbations.

Classification is primarily based on whether the patient has ocular symptoms only or ocular symptoms with non-ocular weakness. Besides ptosis and diplopia, bulbar involvement is common, which will affect pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles. This can lead to issues with speech, dysphagia, and an increased risk of pulmonary aspiration. As the disease progresses, patients will often have more proximal muscle group and respiratory involvement. Patients with MG are at increased risk for postoperative respiratory failure. Myasthenic crisis, an exacerbation of the disease, can result in significant diaphragmatic weakness requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation. Other autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), thyroid dysfunction, and diabetes mellitus (DM) are present in 10% of patients. Thymomas are common as well, and more than half of patients with MG show some level of thymic follicular hyperplasia. Thymectomy for patients with MG is a relatively common procedure to help relieve symptoms and provide remission for many patients.