Infliximab is a generally safe and well-tolerated medication, but as the dose or the age of the patient (greater than 60 years) increases, there are heightened chances of side effects; some o these adverse events can be life-threatening and are common in the TNF-alpha-inhibitor class of drugs.

- Reports of infections are more common in patients taking additional immunosuppressive therapy. (Black Box warning; prescribers are warned to perform very thorough patient screening.)

- Infusion-related reactions (fever, pruritis, anaphylaxis, etc.)

- Headache

- Nausea

- Abdominal pain

- ALT elevation

- Dyspepsia

- Diarrhea

- Constipation

- Hepatotoxicity - There have been reported cases severe enough to be fatal and to necessitate a liver transplant.

- Heart failure

- Hypertension

- Anemia, leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia - patients should seek immediate medical care if they develop symptoms of an infection.

- Demyelination disease

- Paradoxical reaction

- Tuberculosis reactivation

- Malignancy - half of the cases reported are lymphomas.

- Reactivation of hepatitis B

- Psoriasis

- Lupus-like syndrome

- Vitiligo or other autoimmune disorders - antinuclear antibody has been positive in patients taking infliximab with normal baseline levels.

- Transient vision loss - has been reported within 2 hours of the infusion; stopping the drug is advisable if serious.

Infliximab has been shown to cross the placenta and is present in the serum of babies whose mothers were given infliximab during pregnancy for up to 6 months. Clinicians have seen agranulocytosis and reactions to live vaccines in these infants.

Patients have developed antibodies (human anti-chimeric antibodies) against infliximab, which lowers the efficacy of the drug and causes infusion reactions. To reduce this risk, co-administration of other immunosuppressors like methotrexate should be a consideration.