If the rickets is clinically suspected, biochemical tests and radiological images are the next steps to confirm the diagnosis.

The most important laboratory marker to diagnose the rickets is serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP), which is typically high as this is a disease of abnormal mineralization and increased osteoblastic activity.

Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level is another laboratory marker that helps to diagnose rickets, especially the nutritional deficiency of vitamin D. The active form of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D) has a short half-life (5-10 hours).

Routine screening with serum 25 hydroxyvitamin D levels is not recommended for healthy children.

Serum calcium and phosphate levels could vary depending on the type of rickets - calcipenic or phosphopenic type. Serum calcium and PTH levels are usually normal in phosphopenic type. In calcipenic rickets, serum calcium levels are either low or normal (as a result of compensatory increases in PTH).

Measuring urine phosphate is helpful in evaluating the renal loss of phosphate in the genetic forms of hypophosphatemic rickets and other conditions such as Fanconi syndrome associated with phosphaturia.

Other biochemical investigations include blood urea nitrogen (BUN)/creatinine levels to screen for renal status, and liver enzymes to screen liver function.

The radiological images should include the distal ends of rapidly growing bones in upper and lower extremities

The combination of positive clinical signs, relevant laboratory findings (high ALP, and either hypocalcemia or hypophosphatemia), and typical radiological findings confirm the diagnosis of rickets. The diagnosis is still possible in the presence of normal serum calcium and phosphate levels. Similarly, clinical signs are not recognized in the early stages.