There are two crucial steps in evaluating an insulinoma. The first is to establish the diagnosis with biochemical tests when there is high clinical suspicion, and the second is to localize the tumor.

A 72-hour fast is the gold-standard test for diagnosing insulinoma.

A successful preoperative localization by non-invasive modalities remains around 75%.

When there is a high suspicion of insulinoma with negative non-invasive studies, invasive tests such as endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) or a selective arterial calcium stimulation test (SACST) with hepatic venous sampling could be considered. EUS has a sensitivity of 70 to 95% and is superior to CT for localization.

Histology examination and immunostaining for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and insulin should be done to support the diagnosis of insulinoma.

Tumor size of greater than or equal to 2 cm, Ki67 more than 2%, and molecular features including chromosomal alteration such as 3p and 6q loss and 12 q gain or chromosomal instability, are possible predictors for metastatic disease and poor progression-free survival (PFS).

Malignant insulinomas have evidence of extrapancreatic regional lymph nodes or even remote extension. Certain factors include fasting time for hypoglycemia being under 8 hours, higher blood insulin level (greater than or equal to 28 microUnits/mL), and higher C-peptide level (greater than or equal to 4.0 ng/mL) at the glycemic nadir. These factors, as well as larger tumor size (greater than or equal to 2.5 cm), all correlate with an increased risk of malignant disease.

The recommendation is that all young patients with insulinoma undergo genetic testing. MEN1 syndrome should be considered in patients with family and/or personal histories of other endocrinopathies.