The lips divide into “red” and “white” components, largely as a historical artifact of Euro-centric publications in the aesthetic surgery literature. As these terms are well-entrenched in the medical literature we will use them here for the sake of brevity and comparability to existing publications, to facilitate education and understanding. The red lip is a mucous membrane (representing the wet and dry vermilion; the actual coloration varies according to the genetic background of each patient), while the white lip (cutaneous lip, also variable in accordance with the background of each patient) is a cutaneous structure. The vermilion border represents the mucocutaneous junction (i.e., the demarcation between the red and white lip). The red lip further subdivides into a dry and wet portion, with the former located along the anterosuperior portion of the red lip. This line of demarcation represents the plane of apposition of the lips: the dry portion is external and visible when the mouth is closed and at rest, while the wet is internalized. The upper lip is composed of the philtrum and tubercle centrally, the paired philtral columns laterally, and the white roll of the vermilion border. The orbicularis oris muscle, which is innervated by the motor branches of the facial nerve, maintains oral competence by acting as a circumoral sphincter. The horizontal fibers of this muscle attach to the modiolus and philtral columns, with contraction producing a tightening of the upper lip.

Skin laxity associated with aging causes lengthening of the cutaneous portion of the lip, occurring in concert with shortening of the visible mucosal surface and flattening of the lip overall. The vermillion inverts, resulting in decreased lip pouting. Lips of advanced age take on a two-dimensional, flattened appearance compared to the fuller, pouty, youthful lip. Volume restoration reestablishes the three-dimensional structure of youth. The lower lip is less commonly thin in isolation, largely because it is less prone to shrinkage over time.