Treatment in most cases is conservative. Grade I to II injuries are treated with a conservative approach unless there is an associated injury that is more severe and warrants surgery. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be used to help control pain and swelling. A knee immobilizer and crutches may also be used short-term after injury, with gradually less reliance on these as pain and swelling subside, and the patient can participate adequately in physical therapy. Therapy exercises should include quadriceps strengthening, cycling, and progressive resistance exercises. Patients should gradually progress through a return-to-play protocol that involves increasing the difficulty of the exercise and sports-specific maneuvers. Patients with grade I injuries typically can return to play within ten to 14 days, while those with grade II injuries have more variable timelines for return and should wait until both lower extremities display equal strength, and there is no pain elicited by valgus stress. Recovery for grade I and II injuries with conservative treatment only has shown effectiveness in 98% of athletes.

Grade III injuries may be treated conservatively or operatively. The operative route is especially common for athletes because this severity of the injury can lead to lasting rotational instability. Grade III injuries are also often accompanied by associated injuries that require surgery, such as concomitant ACL tear. Acute tears are typically able to be repaired, while chronic tears may require reconstruction using allograft or autograft. After surgery, the patient should wear a hinged brace locked at 30 degrees of flexion and is to be toe-touch weight bearing for about three weeks. The range of motion exercises may be performed up to 90 degrees, and strengthening exercises should be done while in the brace. After three weeks, weight-bearing can be advanced to full, and the brace can be unlocked to allow for full range of motion. The patient should continue to advance to closed kinetic chain exercises and higher resistance strength exercises.