The structure of the vessels of the vascular system is highly specialized to suit their individual functions and anatomic relationships. These differential changes appear in three shared layers of the vessel wall.

The tunica externa, or tunica adventitia, is the outermost layer of the vessel wall. Responsible for vessel integrity and resisting physical wall strain. The externa houses the vasa vasorum and the nevi vasorum, which are vessels and nerves, respectively that supply the cells of the wall of the vessel itself. These colloquially called the “vessels of the vessel” or “nerves of the vessel.” Collagen is fundamental in the externa and facilitates anchoring of the vessel to nearby structures and tissue.

The tunica media is the middle layer of the vessel wall. The tunica media is generally thicker on the arterial side of the vascular system and contains transversely arranged smooth muscle cells that are capable of changing the caliber of the vessel lumen. The media’s thickness varies widely between vessel types, being quite thick in some arteries to virtually non-functioning in some veins. The tunica media also contains elastic lamellae and is enveloped in the external elastic membrane, a layer of elastic fibers that separates the media from the externa.

The tunica intima is the innermost layer of the vessel wall that has exposure to, and interacts with, the contents of the lumen. The tunica intima is primarily defined by a single layer of simple squamous endothelial cells that is the innermost layer of any vessel. The endothelium gets supported by a basal lamina, also known as the extracellular matrix. Sometimes the tunica intima is surrounded by the subendothelial layer, which can be composed of smooth muscle, collagen, and elastic fibers and can vary in thickness. The tunica interna gets enveloped in the internal elastic membrane, a layer of elastic fibers that separates the interna from the media. It is thickest in the arterial system, specifically the muscular arteries and thin throughout the entire venous system.

While these three common layers are present across the many different vessels of the vascular system, they have differential accentuations or reductions to their tunics to accommodate their role in the vascular system; this is so-called segmental differentiation. The structure of the gross vascular system begins on the arterial system at the outlets of the heart. Blood then flows proximally to distally stepwise through these vessels:

Large arteries, also known as elastic arteries, examples of large arteries include the aorta and the pulmonary arteries. The tunica intima of the large arteries is quite thick with predominant smooth muscle in the subendothelial layer of the tunica intima. Smooth muscle is the majority cell type and is responsible for the secretion of ground substance, housing macrophages, and caliber changes. The adventitia of the large arteries is comparatively thin. Generally, it constitutes less than half of the total vessel wall width. The adventitia houses both the intrinsic vessels (vasa vasorum) and nerves (nervi vasorum) that supply the vessel itself. The vasa vasorum allows oxygen, nutrients, and waste to move from the lumen to the cells of the vessel wall. The flow of the vasa vasorum progresses into a parallel network on the large veins that follow large arteries.

Muscular arteries, also known as medium arteries, are classically defined by a thick layer of transverse or spiraling smooth muscle in the tunica media. The subendothelial layer of muscular arteries is so thin it can be hard to visualize on histology, which leads to the appearance of the media abutting the endothelial lining

Small arteries and arterioles contain one or two layers of smooth muscle cells, which are essential in increasing peripheral resistance. The external elastic membrane is absent in arterioles. Arterioles flow into capillaries.

Capillaries have the smallest vessel diameter, which ranges from 4 to 10 microns. Capillaries have the most reduced vessel wall, comprised of endothelium surrounded by connective tissue. There is a basement membrane that houses pericytes. Pericytes are essential neurovascular signaling cells and respond to blood pressure changes. Capillaries are also highly specialized vessels, with different tunica features dependent on anatomic relationships and function. There are three types of capillaries with highly specialized functions. They are anatomically isolated to respective regions of the body.

The first type of capillary is continuous capillaries. They have an uninterrupted endothelium and a continuous basal lamina. Continuous capillaries perform transcytosis that brings large molecules from the lumen toward the surrounding connective tissue and vice versa. They are present in all three muscle types, connective tissue, skin, lung, and central nervous system.

The second type of capillary is fenestrated capillaries. They have circular fenestrations in the capillary wall with a continuous basal lamina. Found in endocrine organs and locations of metabolic absorption. These include the kidney, pancreas, intestinal tract.

The third type of capillary is discontinuous capillaries. Discontinuous capillaries have a disrupted endothelium that is defined by large gaps in between cells, as well as large gaps in the basal lamina. Discontinuous Capillaries are present in the liver, the spleen, and the bone marrow — all sites of blood formation at one time or another.

Blood then begins its return to the heart through the venous system. It flows distally to proximally from begging by flowing from capillaries into Venules. Venules have a diameter of up to 0.1 mm and are directly continuous with the capillary bed. Despite their direct connection, veins contain a more sparse subendothelial elastic fibers compared to the proximal capillary. Venules also contain pericytes in the basement membrane, which work in cell signaling. As these venules start to develop an appreciable tunica media further upstream and become known as ‘muscular venules.’ The beginning of a tunica externa is also present in muscular venules in some instances.

The flow then flows into small veins. Small veins have a diameter of 0.1mm to 1mm; this is the first class of veins that contain all three tunics that are appreciable on histology. Pericytes are usually no longer observed at this point.

The next vessel in the venous network is medium veins. They have a diameter as great as 1 cm and constitute many of the known ‘named’ veins. The presence of valves classically defines medium veins. These one-way valves are particularly predominant in the lower extremities and block retrograde flow. Medium veins have a much thinner tunica media than is seen in parallel arteries. The adventitia is the thickest layer in medium veins and contains collagen and elastin fibers.

Finally, blood flow directs into one last vessel before arriving back to the heart, the Large Veins. Large veins have a diameter of over 1 cm and include prominent structures like the portal vein, inferior vena cava, and superior vena cava. Large veins lack a clear demarcation between the tunica intima and tunica media with no obvious internal elastic membrane, and like medium veins, they contain a thick tunica externa. The externa also contains longitudinal smooth muscle. However, these general guidelines for the tunics in veins. The distinct layers are not as clearly appreciated as in arteries and highly variable in different persons.