**Clinical Frailty Scale Components**

- Very Fit: People who are robust, active, energetic, and motivated. These people commonly exercise regularly. They are among the fittest for their age.

- Well: People who have no severe disease symptoms but are less fit than category 1. They exercise or are very active occasionally, e.g., seasonally.

- Managing Well: People whose medical problems are well-controlled but are not regularly active beyond routine walking.

- Living With Very Mild Frailty: Previously named "Vulnerable," While not dependent on others for daily help, symptoms often limit activities. A common complaint is being "slowed-up" and being tired during the day.

- Living with Mild Frailty: These people usually have more evident slowing and need help in higher-order instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) such as finance, transportation, heavy housework, and medication management. Typically, mild frailty progressively impairs shopping and walking outside alone, meal preparation, and housekeeping.

- Living With Moderate Frailty: People need help with all outside activities and housekeeping. Inside often have problems with stairs, need help with bathing, and may need minimal assistance with dressing.

- Living With Severe Frailty: Completely dependent for cognitive and physical personal care. However, they seem stable and not at high risk of dying (within six months).

- Living with Very Severe Frailty: Completely dependent for personal care and approaching end of life. Typically they could not recover even from minor illnesses.

- Terminally Ill: Approaching the end of life. This category applies to people with a life expectancy of under six months who are not otherwise living with severe frailty. (Many terminally ill people can still exercise until very close to death.)

Scoring frailty in a patient with dementia: The degree of frailty corresponds to the degree of dementia. Common symptoms in mild dementia include forgetting the details of a recent event, though still remembering the event itself, repeating the same question/story, and social withdrawal. In moderate dementia, recent memory is significantly impaired, even though they seemingly can remember their past life events well. They can do personal care with prompting. In severe dementia, they cannot do personal care without help. In very severe dementia, they are often bedfast; many are virtually mute.