C. trachomatis can lead to many urogenital infections including cervicitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, urethritis, epididymitis, prostatitis and lymphogranuloma venereum. Extragenital infections caused by C. trachomatis include conjunctivitis, perihepatitis, pharyngitis, reactive arthritis, and proctitis.

Most commonly, patients remain asymptomatic reservoirs of the disease. In the minority of patients that are symptomatic, clinical signs depend on the location of the infection. Below are the common signs and symptoms associated with C. trachomatis urogenital infections.

- **Cervicitis:**Approximately 70% of women will be asymptomatic or have mild symptoms such as vaginal discharge, bleeding, abdominal pain and dysuria.

- **Pelvic Inflammatory Disease:**This occurs whenC. trachomatis ascends to the upper reproductive tract. Most commonly these patients will have abdominal or pelvic pain with or without signs and symptoms of cervicitis.

- **Urethritis:**It is most commonly seen in men. There are subtle clinical differences between gonococcal urethritis and chlamydial urethritis, but making a reliable distinction without testing is not possible. It presents with dysuria and urethral discharge which is typically white, gray or sometimes clear, and may only be evident after penile "stripping" or during morning hours.

- **Epididymitis:**Typically, men will present with unilateral testicular pain and tenderness, possible hydrocele, palpable swelling of the epididymis and fever.

- **Proctitis:**Patients complain of rectal pain, discharge and bleeding in the setting of receptive anal intercourse.

- **Lymphogranuloma venereum:**Patients will present with a non-painful, small genital ulcer followed by the development of inguinal lymphadenopathy.