As mentioned earlier antibodies against VGKC complex proteins, CASPR2, and LGI1 are now strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of Morvan syndrome

CASPR2 antibodies are predominantly seen in Morvan syndrome and were often found in association with thymoma cases also. Furthermore, thymectomy and thymoma chemotherapy are likely to trigger the onset of Morvan syndrome which supports the possibility that thymic tumors shelter antigenic targets, particularly CASPR2, and become somehow exposed and potentially vulnerable to antibody attack following thymectomy or thymoma chemotherapy.

The various combinations of LGI1 and CASPR2 antibody binding in Morvan syndrome could contribute to the distinctive multifocal phenotype.

Monoaminergic diencephalic and brainstem nuclei are known to be involved in arousal, and autonomic homeostasis. A disturbance in this homeostasis can cause insomnia, dysautonomia, and less frequently hyponatremia.

Dysfunction in the neurons anywhere in the thalamus, hypothalamus, locus coeruleus, and raphe nuclei could produce insomnia.

The dysautonomia noted in Morvan syndrome is likely generated within the hypothalamus and raphe nuclei.

However, SIADH-related hyponatremia was sometimes found in patients with LGI1 antibodies. The LGI1 antibody binds to hypothalamic paraventricular neurons that produce ADH, which mediates water retention. This suggests that LGI1 antibody binding may increase ADH secretion which in turn causes hyponatremia, although some patients with CASPR2 antibodies do have low plasma sodium due to some unknown mechanism.

It was found that LGI1 or CASPR2 antibodies bind to all these regions and possibly have variable specificities at the subcellular level that may determine the relative functional significance of each antibody. Besides the target antigen distribution, other factors, including the accessibility to circulating antibodies and physiological properties of neuronal populations, may also determine the clinical manifestations.

As mentioned earlier in etiology some patients did also have anti-contactin-2 antibodies, which are only rarely found in LE; contactin-2 is expressed in cardiac conduction tissue and some reports that found anti-contactin-2 antibodies had had cardiovascular instability. Some other patients had reactivities to antigenic targets that were not consistent with LGI1, CASPR2, or contactin-2, leading to the suspicion that different antibody reactivities are present in, at least, some of these patients. Therefore, to facilitate further understanding, more research and data are needed.