The main tool for evaluation is neuropsychological testing. Some neuropsychological testing domains that have shown impairment include episodic memory (learning and recall), executive functions, attention/working memory, information processing, verbal fluency, and fine motor skills.

Another form of evaluation is the use of imaging. In the pre-HIV treatment era, imaging was significant for global brain atrophy. HIV-related encephalitis can be evaluated with FLAIR imaging, which will show focal atrophy in the basal ganglia, thalamus, corpus callosum, and frontal lobes.

A good screening tool is the International HIV Dementia Scale, which tests memory, motor speed, and psychomotor speed. The test includes:

- Memory registration is tested by giving a patient four words and asking them to repeat them. Then the patient is requested to retain the words.

- Motor speed is tested by having the patient tap the first two fingers of their non-dominant hand as quickly as possible. The number of taps in five seconds is counted.

- The psychomotor speed is measured by having the patient use their non-dominant hand to do a series of tasks, for example, having the patient clench their fist, place the palm face down and then place it perpendicularly on the table. The speed and sequence are measured.

- The patient is asked to recall the four words practiced earlier.

Another screening tool is the modified HIV scale, which tests immediate memory and delayed recall. Immediate and delayed memory is tested by asking patients to register four words and then asking them to repeat the words a few minutes later. Executive functioning is tested by copying a cube. Psychomotor speed is tested by asking the patient to write the alphabet in capital letters.

One study showed that clinically three simple questions might be a good screening tool for HIV-associated Neurocognitive Disorder; these include asking whether patients experience memory loss, have difficulty paying attention, and feel slower while reasoning or doing complicated tasks.