Developing a differential diagnosis for a patient's chronic pain is based on assessing the possible etiologies of the patient's pain. Identifying the disease process allows the clinician to develop an appropriate treatment plan.  For example, a patient’s chronic hip and leg pain could manifest osteoarthritis of the hip, lumbar radiculopathy, or sacroiliac joint dysfunction. These underlying pathologies may require very different management options.  Certain diagnoses may be more responsive to the use of an NSAID versus a neuropathic pain medication.  The clinician also has to consider the possible interventions to address a particular diagnosis: surgical intervention, intra-articular steroid injections, epidural steroid injections, nerve blocks, or radiofrequency ablation procedures.

The clinician should also consider overlapping diagnoses.  For example, a patient on chronic opioids may develop opioid-induced hyperalgesia in conjunction with their original presenting pain syndrome. Chronic pain is also frequently accompanied by major depression and sleep disorders. Acknowledging these coexisting conditions can allow a clinician to choose an appropriate pharmacologic option: using an SNRI or TCA to address both neuropathic pain and depression symptoms.  Furthermore, autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus or psoriasis, fibromyalgia, and central pain syndromes, should be considered in states involving widespread chronic pain states. Thus, it is important to remember that chronic pain can be a symptom of one or multiple diagnoses.