The most common form of failed intubation is inadvertent esophageal intubation. This may present in a delayed fashion if adequate pre-oxygenation is performed. It can be difficult in obese patients to recognize distension of the abdomen from gastric expansion, and initial end-tidal CO2 monitors may show a color change or some quantitative end-tidal CO2. Auscultation of breath sounds is notoriously ineffective in definitively determining esophageal intubation due to the proximity of the stomach to the diaphragm. The obvious sign then becomes desaturation despite the external appearance of adequate ventilation. In this case, the endotracheal tube should be removed immediately, and mask ventilation resumed to provide oxygenation. It may be necessary to decompress the abdomen via a nasogastric or orogastric tube to allow effective mask ventilation and decrease the risk of aspiration.

Advancing the endotracheal tube (ETT) distal to the carina may lead to bronchial intubation. Usually, the right mainstem bronchus branches at a more acute angle than the left main stem bronchus thus leading to right mainstem bronchial intubation. A rise of peak pressure may be seen if bronchial intubation occurs. Auscultation of right-sided breath sounds and absent or decreased left-sided sounds can confirm this. It may also become evident when the post-intubation chest x-ray is examined. The ETT may be pulled back carefully until bilateral breath sounds are auscultated.

Displaced vocal cords are another complication, especially in difficult patients. The presence of a displaced vocal cord may not be apparent until extubation. The patient may have persistent hoarseness, stridor, or fail extubation completely due to airway obstruction. This occurs if the ETT lumen catches on an arytenoid and the tube is forced. An ETT which does not pass easily should never be forced into the trachea. Consultation with otolaryngology should be sought immediately if this is identified.

As with any intubation, there is always a risk to the teeth. Care needs to be taken that proper laryngoscope technique is used and the top of the blade does not break a tooth. The fragments may be aspirated, and bronchoscopy is then necessary to retrieve them. Extremely loose teeth should be removed before intubation to avoid this complication. Poor dentition is also a harbor for pathogenic bacteria, and significant pneumonia may arise from aspiration of bacteria or obstruction to the airways.

Other less common complications can arise, such as mediastinal intubation, tracheoesophageal fistula, and tracheal stenosis. The endotracheal tube should never be forced if resistance is felt once the tube passes below the cords. If the tube meets resistance that cannot be overcome with rotation, consideration should be made to using a smaller ETT size.