The management of coronary cameral fistulae depends on several factors including origin of the fistula, i.e., proximal vs. distal, size of the fistula, anatomy of the fistula,  patient’s age, patient’s symptoms, whether or not complications such as heart failure, angina, rupture or endocarditis are present, and the existence of other indications for an invasive procedure.

In the ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines for the management of adults with congenital heart disease, the class 1 recommendations for the management of artery fistula are:

- In patients with a continuous murmur, the exact determination of the origin and termination of the fistula should take place by echocardiography or CT scan/MRI scan

- Regardless of whether symptoms are present or not, large fistulae should be closed either percutaneously or surgically after determining the exact anatomy of the fistula

- Small to moderate size fistulae with complications such as ischemia, arrhythmia, ventricular dysfunction, or endarteritis should be closed wither percutaneously or surgically after determining the exact anatomy of the fistula.

In general, small coronary cameral fistulae should be observed only with close echocardiographic or angiographic follow up to determine the enlargement of feeding vessels over time. Small fistulae have typically benign course, asymptomatic, and even may close spontaneously.**transcatheter embolization**and**surgical closure**. The choice of approach for closure of these fistulae depends on the expertise of the team involved in taking care of the patient. Furthermore, the surgical approach would be more appropriate in patients with large fistulae, fistulae with multiple openings, aneurysmal dilatation, or acute angulations that are not amenable to catheterization.

An important point to mention in the management of coronary cameral fistulae is that prophylactic antibiotics against endocarditis are not recommended for isolated coronary cameral fistulae before procedures associated with causing bacteremia. However, antibiotic prophylaxis would be indicated if there is coexisting cyanotic congenital heart disease.