At present, no specific guidelines are mentioned in the current literature regarding the management of Morel-Lavallee lesions. Multiple low evidence studies show variable results of multiple treatment modalities, including conservative management, sclerodesis, percutaneous aspiration, and open surgery.

**Conservative Management**

In cases of small acute Morel-Lavallee lesions where no capsule is present, nonoperative management can be done. This may involve the application of compression bandaging to soft tissue swelling. However, in chronic cases or large lesions, nonoperative management is not suitable, and surgical intervention is required.

**Percutaneous Aspiration**

Few studies show effective results after percutaneous aspiration of the Morel-Lavallee lesion. However, the recurrence rate is high, especially in lesions with a volume of more than 50 ml, where multiple aspirations are often required.

**Sclerodesis**

This treatment modality has been successfully used in Morel-Lavallee lesions, particularly in cases where percutaneous aspiration fails. The common sclerosing agents include doxycycline, erythromycin, vancomycin, tetracycline, bleomycin, absolute ethanol, and talc. The mechanism of action of the majority of sclerodesis agents includes cellular destruction within the periphery of the lesion, which later on results in fibrosis. Overall efficacy of sclerodesis in managing Morel-Lavallée lesions has been reported as 95.7%.

**Open Drainage and Mass Resection**

The majority of these lesions require open debridement with excision of the pseudocapsule in chronic cases. The end goal in managing Morel-Lavallee lesions is the closure of dead space within the lesion which can be achieved in various ways, including fibrin sealant, quilting sutures, and low suction drains. A single longitudinal incision or multiple small incisions proximally and distally can be used for the open drainage in cases where the overlying skin is viable. If the condition of skin overlying the lesion is necrotic, then dead tissue needs to be debrided, followed by reconstruction of the soft tissue envelope.