Before understanding the pathophysiology of tension pneumothorax, it is essential to understand normal lung physiology. Pleural cavity (or intrapleural) pressure is negative as compared to lung pressure and atmospheric pressure. There is a tendency for the lung to recoil inward and the chest wall to recoil outward. That pressure gradient between the lung and pleural space prevents the lung from collapsing. During a pneumothorax, communication develops between the pleural space and the lung, resulting in air movement from the lung into the pleural space.

Tension pneumothorax is common in ITU-ventilated patients. Tension pneumothorax occurs when the air enters the pleural space but cannot fully exit, similar to a one-way valve mechanism through the disrupted pleura or tracheobronchial tree. During inspiration, a sizeable high-pressure air collection accumulates in the intrapleural space and is not able to completely exit during expiration. This will cause the lung to collapse on the ipsilateral side. As the pressure increases, it will cause the mediastinum to shift towards the contralateral side, contributing further to hypoxemia. In severe cases, the increased pressure can also compress the heart, the contralateral lung, and the vasculature leading to hemodynamic instability and cardiac arrest in some cases.

Traumatic pneumothorax occurs secondary to penetrating (e.g., gunshot wounds, stab wounds) or blunt chest trauma. Depending on the depth of a penetrating chest wound, the air will flow into the pleural space either through the chest wall or from the visceral pleura of the tracheobronchial tree. With blunt force trauma, a pneumothorax can occur if a rib fracture or dislocation lacerates the visceral pleura. An alternative mechanism is blunt thoracic trauma, where the increased alveolar pressure can cause the alveoli to rupture, resulting in the air entering the pleural cavity.