**Phases of the Menstrual Cycle**

Menstrual cycles are described relative to the onset of menses (ie, the shedding of the endometrial lining), with cycle day one being the onset of heavy menstrual bleeding. The menstrual cycle is divided into two primary phases.

The first phase is known as the **follicular phase**in the ovarian cycle or the**proliferative phase**when describing the uterine cycle; it begins at the onset of**menses**and continues until**ovulation**. The second phase, known as the**luteal phase**in the ovarian cycle and the**secretory phase**in the uterine cycle, begins at ovulation and continues until the onset of the next menses. These cycles are regulated by the interplay of estrogen, progesterone, follicular stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) within the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis.

**Physiology of the Menstrual Cycle**

In the follicular phase, GnRH pulses trigger the anterior pituitary gland to release FSH, which stimulates ovarian follicles to mature and produce estrogen. This estrogen stimulates the growth of the endometrium and provides feedback inhibition at the level of the pituitary (meaning that as estrogen levels rise during the follicular phase, FSH levels begin to decline). As FSH levels decline during the follicular phase, most developing follicles undergo atresia, and (usually) a single dominant follicle persists. At the end of the follicular phase, estrogen's effect on the pituitary switches from inhibitory to stimulatory, resulting in a surge of LH from the pituitary, which triggers ovulation.

After the release of the oocyte and under stimulation from LH, the now-empty follicle is transformed into the **corpus luteum**, which begins secreting progesterone. Generally speaking, natural progesterone causes maturation and stabilization of the endometrium. While the follicular phase may last a variable amount of time until a follicle matures and ovulation occurs, the persistence of the corpus luteum (and thus the luteal phase) is generally much more consistent in duration, lasting about two weeks. If pregnancy does not occur within the first few days after ovulation, estrogen and progesterone levels decline in the second half of the luteal phase (approximately days 21 through 28), and this hormone decrease ultimately triggers menses.

Without exogenous hormones, periodic menses are essential to prevent "build-up" and hyperplasia of the endometrium.

**From Menarche to Mature Menstrual Cycles**

The start of menstrual cycles and menses is deemed menarche and typically begins between 10 and 15 years of age.

Despite this, up to 90% of cycles will still be between 21 and 45 days long.

**The Physiology of Medication-Induced Secondary Amenorrhea**

Suppression or cessation of menses is achieved by inducing significant structural changes to the endometrial lining through glandular atrophy or decidualization. Combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs), which include estrogen and progestin, such as OCPs, the transdermal patch, and the intravaginal ring, prevent the growth of the endometrium in two significant ways.

First, they inhibit the release of FSH and LH within the HPO axis; the suppression of FSH decreases estrogen, depriving the endometrium of its primary "growth factor."

Additionally, synthetic progestins do not have the same effects on the endometrium as natural progesterone. Synthetic progestins tend to be more androgenic, and continuous exposure generally leads to endometrial glandular atrophy.

Given these mechanisms of action, there is **no**"build-up" of endometrial tissue within the uterus with contraceptive use. Any bleeding occurs from hormonal withdrawal or breakthrough bleeding from a "fragile" atrophic endometrium rather than true physiologic shedding of the endometrial lining.

The classic use of a placebo week with non-LARC contraceptive methods to precipitate withdrawal bleeding to mimic the "natural lunar cycle" of menses is a historical remnant based on the social and cultural norms of women during the era in which hormonal contraceptives were developed – it is not based on biological need, nor is it required for health.

By causing endometrial atrophy, menstrual suppression may also be beneficial in treating heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, and menstrual-related blood loss in the setting of bleeding diathesis, as discussed in Indications.

Upon discontinuation of CHCs or LARC, normal HPO axis function returns, and endometrial growth resumes, though this may take several months.

The uses and efficacies of each suppression method vary (see Techniques).