The complications from lymphocytosis coincide with the underlying etiology where leukemia is the most common underlying disease.

- Hyperleukocytosis: Defined as a white cell count above 100000 cells/microL. It is more commonly seen in patients diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia but can appear in patients presenting with acute lymphoblastic leukemia as well as CML. Hyperleukocytosis can lead to leukostasis and consequent symptoms like vision loss, stroke, myocardial infarction, etc. Prompt initiation of white-cell lowering treatment (either hydroxyurea or leukapheresis) is required to relieve the symptoms.

- Infectious mononucleosis: splenic rupture and chronic fatigue are short term complications that may happen in patients with infectious mononucleosis. B-cell malignancies are potential long term sequelae of EBV infection, including PTLD, HL, and NHL, which usually occur in the immunocompromised patients.

- CLL: Leukostasis is uncommon in CLL. Autoimmune processes may complicate CLL, including autoimmune hemolytic anemia and immune thrombocytopenia. Hypogammaglobulinemia, with or without recurrent infections, is also common. CLL patients are also at a higher risk of developing secondary malignancies, including solid and hematologic ones.

- DRESS: DRESS patients may have different organ involvement, including liver, lung, and kidneys. Further, these patients are reported to have a higher subsequent incidence of autoimmune diseases as well as future drug reactions to potentially structurally unrelated medications.