Since the beginning of the 1980s, the worldwide prevalence of obesity has doubled. An estimated one in three adults is categorized as overweight or obese, equating to greater than 1.4 billion adults. Given the epidemic rates of obesity and subsequent rise in the prevalence of obesity-related health conditions and comorbidities, there is a global need for effective and safe treatment of this disease. Comorbidities include hypertension, hyperlipidemia, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, orthopedic conditions, gastroesophageal reflux disease, metabolic dysfunction, psychiatric disorders, obstructive sleep apnea, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, and cancers.

While bariatric surgery is considered the most effective treatment modality for morbid obesity, there are restrictions for a patient to be a candidate for surgical intervention. Bariatric surgeries, which range from Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, duodenal switch, laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, to name a few, require a body mass index (BMI) greater than 35 kg/m^2 with associated comorbidities or meeting the BMI criteria for severe obesity with a BMI greater than 40 kg/m^2.

With the parameters mentioned above to meet preoperative criteria, this leaves an intermediate group of patients who are not candidates for surgery but have also failed or not responded well to medical therapies. Patients also are looking for a safe and effective weight-loss therapy that is minimally invasive, like the intragastric balloon. Current treatment modalities for obese patients include lifestyle modifications, pharmacotherapy, bariatric surgery, and endoscopic applications, of which the intragastric balloon is the most widely used.

Intragastric balloon therapies are a minimally invasive and temporary methodology to induce weight loss in obese patients. The soft saline or an air-filled balloon is placed into the stomach typically in an endoscopic fashion. The balloon serves as a restrictive mechanism and promotes the feeling of satiation as it is a space-occupying device. The average gastric capacity is approximately 1200 mL, but an obese patient can stretch this volume threefold. A balloon volume of 400 mL or higher is enough to induce the feeling of satiation.

**History**

The study of intragastric restriction dates to 1939 with the investigation of gastric bezoars by Michael DeBakey. Through his analysis, he concluded that approximately 30% of patients with gastric bezoars and concretions had experienced weight loss.

The failures of the GEGB promoted the 1987 conference titled Obesity and the Gastric Balloon: A Comprehensive Workshop. This obesity congress included 75 international experts from varying fields like gastroenterology, surgery, nutrition, behavioral medicine, and obesity specialists.

Using the characteristics and conclusions from the Obesity and the Gastric Balloon conference, a balloon was developed in 1991 by the BioEnterics Corporation. This balloon contained a saline and methylene blue mixture and would remain in the stomach for a period of six months. Initially, this balloon was used outside of North America in Asia, South America, Europe, and the Middle East. The balloon, called Orbera, eventually received FDA approval in the US in 2015.

Since 2015, different intragastric balloon systems have been introduced to the US and European markets. The usage of these balloons ranges from primary weight loss, a bridging therapy for bariatric surgery, and a weight-loss solution for high-risk patients. Attracting factors to intragastric balloons include the little to noninvasive nature, is limited to a specific time frame, and is reversible. The intragastric balloon also preserves the anatomy of the stomach. It is important to note that weight loss is not comparable to that expected from a surgical procedure. Intragastric balloons can be used as a weight-loss tool but are ineffective for weight maintenance. When making a medical therapy decision with a patient, the advantages and disadvantages must be analyzed individually.