Diagnosing fungal endophthalmitis requires a thorough history and ophthalmic exam with a high index of suspicion. It is difficult to clinically diagnose fungal endophthalmitis, as there are no pathognomonic signs. Exogenous fungal endophthalmitis warrants inquiries about ocular surgeries or penetrating ocular injuries. For endogenous fungal endophthalmitis, a recent history of infections, surgery, hospitalizations, immunosuppressant use, and intravenous drug use should be noted. A diagnosis of fungal endophthalmitis can be reached by performing the following:

- Ultrasound B-scan is routinely used to evaluate endophthalmitis, especially if the view of the posterior segment is obscured. It is nonspecific but provides information, such as the severity of posterior involvement, the foci of the infection, and the presence of retinal detachment or abscesses, which aid ophthalmologists in formulating appropriate surgical plans.

- Cultures of intraocular fluids aid in the diagnosis of patients with negative blood cultures that present with clinical findings consistent with fungal endophthalmitis. Vitreous cultures are limited by low sensitivity. Tanaka et al. found that only 38% of vitreous specimens in their study generated positive cultures.

- Blood cultures and complete workup for systemic infection, including echocardiography to look for heart valve vegetations, should be performed for all suspected cases of endogenous endophthalmitis. It is important to note that negative blood cultures cannot exclude endogenous fungal endophthalmitis. In endogenous Candida endophthalmitis, only 50%-75% of patients have positive blood cultures.

- Every patient diagnosed with systemic fungemia should promptly be referred to an ophthalmologist for a formal ophthalmic exam. If the exam is negative, a repeat exam should be conducted two weeks later.

- Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has limited clinical use, but several studies have described its diagnostic potential in fungal endophthalmitis and its advantages over cultures. PCR produces rapid results with better specificity and greater sensitivity, as it can identify culture-negative cases without fear of contamination yielding false-positive results.

- Measuring levels of intraocular fluid beta-D-glucan was described by Chen et al. in 2020 as having a close association with fungal endophthalmitis and being more sensitive than culture methods. It is limited by an inability to confirm specific fungal species.