The lumbosacral plexus divides into the femoral, lateral femoral cutaneous, obturator, and sciatic nerves that innervate the entire lower extremity.

The femoral nerve provides sensation and motor function to the anterior thigh. It continues as the saphenous nerve, providing sensation to the ipsilateral medial leg and foot and a portion of the ipsilateral great toe.

The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve supplies sensation to the lateral thigh. The sensory component of the obturator nerve supplies the medial thigh; the motor component supplies the thigh adductors. Neither the lateral femoral cutaneous nor the obturator nerve have any sensory or motor input to the leg distal to the knee.

The sciatic nerve runs with the posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh and provides sensory and motor innervation to the posterior thigh. The sciatic nerve continues posteriorly and divides into the tibial and common peroneal nerves, just cephalad to the popliteal fossa, and provides sensory and motor innervation to the anterior, lateral, and posterior lower leg.

Five nerves provide sensory and motor to the foot. The saphenous nerve supplies sensation to the medial foot and a portion of the great toe. The deep peroneal nerve supplies the web space between the great toe and the second toe. The superficial peroneal nerve supplies the majority of the dorsum of the foot and toes, while the sural nerve supplies the lateral foot and a portion of the fifth toe. The posterior tibial nerve divides into the medial and lateral plantar nerves and supplies the sole and plantar surface of the toes.