Trazodone administration is via the oral route. It is available in oral tablets of trazodone hydrochloride 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, and 300 mg in the US. It may be administered after meals to decrease lightheadedness and postural hypotension. Begin with evening administration of 75 mg to 150 mg before bedtime, as a prolonged-release once-a-day administration. This regimen helps optimize its purpose as an antidepressant, eliciting higher compliance.

Studies showed that administering 50 mg to 100 mg per day of trazodone helped nonorganic insomnia due to depressive disorder, with 100 mg dosage as most effective to improve sleep. Trazodone may be available as immediate-release (IR) tablets and, in some countries, prolonged-release tablets, oral drops, and injection solutions.

**Pediatric Patients******

There is a boxed warning on an increased risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviors in pediatric patients with antidepressant medication use. However, effectiveness and safety in the pediatric population have not been established for trazodone.

**Geriatric Patients**

It should be used carefully in elderly patients as serotonergic antidepressants are associated with hyponatremia in elderly patients, who are already at greater risk for this adverse reaction.

**Pregnancy Consideration**

Healthcare providers should register pregnant patients with depression in the National Pregnancy Registry for Antidepressants by calling 1-844-405-6185, which monitors pregnancy outcomes in patients exposed to antidepressants during pregnancy. Published literature on trazodone use in pregnant women has not found any associated risks of miscarriage, major congenital disabilities, and adverse maternal or fetal outcomes.

**Breastfeeding Consideration**

Trazodone is excreted into human milk, and there is a lack of data on its effect on milk production.

**Hepatic Impairment**

Trazodone use is not studied in patients with liver impairment, and it is recommended to use trazodone with caution in this population.

**Renal Impairment**

Trazodone use is not studied in patients with renal impairment, and it is recommended to use trazodone with caution in this population.