There is no known universal underlying cause of SOM.

**Multiple sclerosis:**There are two cases of SOM reported in patients who had a family history of multiple sclerosis. Uhtoff phenomenon or sign is the transient worsening of neurological symptoms related to a demyelinating condition like multiple sclerosis when the body is exposed to heat (hot weather, hot bath, exercise, fever). One case has been described where the SOM episodes were triggered by exposure to heat. The patient did not have multiple sclerosis.

**Brainstem tumors, lesions of the cerebellopontine angle, and head trauma:**cases of SOM have occurred after brainstem tumors and after head or ocular trauma. However, most patients with SOM do not report prior trauma. For example, SOM has been found in a patient with a posterior fossa pilocytic astrocytoma. The symptoms resolved after resection of the tumor. Similarly, SOM has also been seen in a patient with a dural arteriovenous fistula, where the symptoms improved after fistula embolization.

**Trauma and superior oblique palsy:**SOM has been known to arise in the setting of fourth nerve palsy. Midorbital atrophy of the ipsilateral superior oblique muscle has been shown in a subset of patients with SOM. Trauma snd superior oblique palsy may precipitate SOM but is not universally seen.

**Structural compromise of the trochlear nerve by compression or trauma with subsequent aberrant nerve regeneration or ephaptic transmission:**Ephaptic transmission is direct transmission across adjacent neural cell membranes that bypass synapses. Other ephaptic transmission conditions include hemifacial spasm, facial synkineses, epilepsy, and ocular neuromyotonia.

Neurovascular compression of the trochlear nerve by an adjacent artery has been shown to cause recurrent attacks of SOM. Bringewald proposed neurovascular compression of the trochlear nerve as a cause of SOM in 1983. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has demonstrated neurovascular compression of the trochlear nerve root at the brainstem exit zone.

More recently, microvascular decompression at the site of compression, first reported by Samii et al. in 1998 and others since, has led to the resolution of SOM. As with hemifacial spasms, MRIs have shown neurovascular compression on the side of the SOM at the root exit of some of the brainstem. Compression is caused by the neighboring superior cerebellar artery. The pontomesencephalic portion of the superior cerebellar artery crosses above the trochlear nerve.

Variations in the anatomy of this vessel are thought to give more likelihood of compression in some patients. It is believed that compression can lead to focal demyelination with resultant susceptibility of the nerve to ephaptic transmission and secondary aberrant signals caused by the disruption of the nerve causing SOM. So SOM may, in some cases, fall under the umbrella of "neurovascular compression syndromes," where the associated cranial nerves result in recurrent symptoms and signs. Examples of such neurovascular compression syndromes include trigeminal neuralgia, hemifacial spasm, ocular neuromyotonia, and vestibular paroxysmia.

Neurovascular compression is thought to result in axonal demyelination, causing the nerve to become susceptible to ephaptic transmission. These neurovascular compression syndromes will demonstrate sudden attacks which can persist in sleep and will show resolution after microvascular decompression.

Although neurovascular compression has been shown to cause SOM, it should be noted that not all cases of SOM have neurovascular compression. It is thought that some cases of SOM may be associated with recovery from trochlear nerve palsy resulting in aberrant nerve regeneration or ephaptic transmission.