Nasopharyngoscopy can be performed in adults, cooperative children, and babies with parental permission. It is typically done to investigate any area of concern or follow-up in a treated area (surgery/radiotherapy/chemotherapy) that is otherwise difficult to access and visualize.

As there are too many abnormalities and pathologies that are identifiable on scoping, that to mention all would be impossible. Some of the important and commoner ones are listed below.

**Nasal Cavity**

A three-pass technique is used to examine all areas of the nasal cavity.

- Septal deviation, bony spurs, turbinate hypertrophy

- External and internal nasal valve areas

- Nasal obstruction, mucopurulent debris, sinus drainage, mucosal edema

- Bleeding points, septal perforations

- Polyps, adhesions, and crusting

**Posterior Nasal Space**

The Eustachian tube orifices, fossa of Rossenmuller, and adenoidal pad are inspected.

Adenoids should regress in adulthood, and prominent adenoids warrant investigation. Any untoward mass seen should be further investigated.

**The Base of Tongue and Valleculae**

The base of tongue and valleculae are inspected for any masses, cysts, or irregularities. Lymphoid tissues of the lingual tonsils can be found here and often account for the irregularity seen. Any untoward mass seen should be further investigated, as this is a common site for oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

**Epiglottis**

In children, abnormalities of the epiglottis (omega-shaped) and aryepiglottic folds can be seen in laryngomalacia.

Epiglottitis is a contraindication for scoping, unless done in experienced hands in a stabilized patient in an appropriate environment, due to the risk of laryngospasm and airway deterioration.

**Piriform Fossae**

Any pooling of saliva, fullness, or masses seen here requires further investigation.

**Larynx**

Abnormalities of the arytenoids, if any, should be inspected.

Vocal cord movements, swelling, edema, masses, or mucosal changes also require examination. Any stridor or airway concerns again need to be scoped in a safe environment and experienced hands, with support from the anesthetists.