In a large retrospective review, consisting of 130 NORSE cases, an etiology was not identified in 52% of cases despite an extensive evaluation. These cases were termed as “cryptogenic NORSE” or “NORSE of unknown etiology.”

- **Non-paraneoplastic autoimmune encephalitis**- The most frequently detected antibodies include anti-NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor, anti-VGKC (voltage-gated potassium complex), anti-LGI1, and less commonly anti-Caspr2. Other autoimmune antibodies that have been found in patients with NORSE include - Anti-GABA, Anti-glycine, Anti-GAD65, Anti-striational, and steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT).

- **Paraneoplastic autoimmune encephalitis**- Anti NMDA receptor-associated encephalitis is the most common in this category. Young females are predominantly affected, and 50% of cases are associated with germ cell tumors like ovarian teratoma. Other antibodies that have been identified include anti-Hu (small cell lung cancer, neuroblastoma), anti-CRMP5 (small cell lung cancer), anti-Ma2 (germ cell tumor of testis), anti-amphiphysin (breast cancer, small cell lung cancer), and anti-VGCC (small cell lung cancer, thymoma).

- **Infections**- Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is the most common etiology identified in NORSE amongst infectious agents. Enterovirus, Epstein Barr virus (EBV), Varicella zoster virus (VZV), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Bartonella henselae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and arboviruses (West Nile virus) have also been detected in patients with NORSE.

- Some of the rare genetic conditions (POLG131), including mitochondrial defects, have also been associated with NORSE.