**Posterolateral Corner Knee Injuries**

The popliteus is most often injured as part of an associated posterolateral corner (PLC) knee injury. PLC injuries occur secondary to:

- Direct blows to the anteromedial knee

- Varus blows to the flexed knee

- Varus/hyperextension (contact or non-contact injuries)

- Knee dislocations

In any setting of these injuries mentioned above, an urgent evaluation of the patient's neurovascular status of the limb is performed. In the setting of knee dislocations, the vascular status of the limb is assessed, followed by a closed reduction of the knee joint. The vascular status is then reassessed, typically utilizing ankle-brachial index (ABI) measurements. Patients should be admitted for serial observations, and in some situations, either an external fixator must be placed by the orthopedic surgeon or a vascular repair is performed by the trauma/vascular surgeon on call. Concerning the latter two modalities, the external fixator is placed prior to the vascular repair to optimize the knee/limb stability prior to performing the potentially limb-saving vascular repair.

PLC knee injuries are clinically examined utilizing the following exam maneuvers:

- Varus stress at 0 degrees of knee extension: positive laxity indicates injury to the LCL and one of the cruciate ligaments (ACL or PCL)

- Varus stress at 30 degrees of knee extension: positive laxity at 30 degrees indicates injury only to the LCL (much more rare)

- Dial test: External rotation is compared between the normal and injured lower extremity. External rotation asymmetry (> 10 degrees) of the affected side compared to the normal side at 30 degrees only is an indication of PLC injury; If the external rotation asymmetry persists at 90 degrees as well, this would suggest a combined injury to the PLC and PCL.

**Isolated Popliteus Injuries**

The Garrick test can assist in assessing the popliteus muscle as the etiology of the lateral knee pain. The Garrick test consists of the patient lying supine with hips and knees flexed to 90 degrees with subsequent resisted internal rotation and passive external rotation of the knee. If either elicits pain, the test is considered positive and may suggest popliteal etiology, although accuracy has not been evaluated. Symptoms can be reproduced by downhill running with exaggerated stride length. Ultrasound imaging and MRI may also help confirm the diagnosis.

Popliteus tendinopathy is a condition presenting as posterolateral knee pain that can be difficult to single out due to other more common knee pain etiologies in the vicinity. The popliteus inhibits excessive tibial rotation and prevents significant anterior translation of the knee. This mechanism can be pathologically overcome secondary to excessive sprinting or running downhill. Clinicians should advise patients to avoid terrain that has exacerbated their symptoms. They may re-introduce physical activity by running on flat surfaces such as a treadmill, but those who have a more difficult recovery may benefit from a course of physical therapy or a home exercise program. NSAID medication or cryotherapy may be added to the patient's regimen, which could be beneficial during the recovery phase. Lunge exercises also have been shown to improve stabilization of the knee, and the patient may increase weight resistance as pain allows. It is important to gradually increase the workload on the lower extremity to avoid re-injury or exacerbation that may lead to a chronic problem.

Most of these injuries heal without further issue or complication. Recovery time may take anywhere from 3 to 16 weeks, and the patient can resume full physical activity without restriction after completing a functional assessment. Professional, functional assessment has been found to be more reliable in terms of return to restrictionless activity than a set time.