Management of pulsus bisferiens is based on its etiology. Therefore, early diagnosis and referral to cardiologists are crucial to successful management, reducing mortality and morbidity. Mixed aortic valve disease and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with obstruction are the most common causes of pulsus bisferiens.

**Medical Management**

- **Mixed Aortic Valve Disease: **Vasodilators may help symptomatic patients by reducing preload and increasing cardiac output. Rate control and blood pressure control with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) might help. Beta-blockers may be less beneficial in treating patients with aortic regurgitation.

- **Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy (HOCM):**β-blockers are the first line of medical management in HOCM. Calcium channel blockers verapamil and diltiazem are beneficial too and are used as second-line in the treatment.

- **Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA): **Early use of indomethacin, ibuprofen, or acetaminophen to close a PDA soon after birth prevents further complications.

**Surgical Management**

- **Mixed Aortic Valve Disease:**Advances in surgical techniques, specifically those associated with valve repair; improved operative results; and enhanced perioperative management strategies, have contributed substantially to better patient outcomes. Valve-sparing surgical repair is becoming popular as a feasible alternative to routine surgeries. Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has revolutionized patients' treatment with symptomatic, severe aortic stenosis (AS) and now provides the least invasive treatment option for many patients.

- **Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy (HOCM):**Dual chamber pacemaker for severe HOCM and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator insertion may be indicated in the refractory ventricular arrhythmias. The surgical treatment for HOCM is myomectomy, which improves the outcome. Septal alcohol ablation may be effective in 90% of cases of severe HOCM.

- **Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA):**Surgical ligation is indicated in a neonate with significant clinical PDA, but its role is controversial.