The primary education that is given to patients regarding strokes is risk factor modification for secondary stroke prevention and the warning signals for stroke, at which time they should call 911 and go to the nearest stroke center.

Secondary stroke prevention is implemented by addressing modifiable stroke risk factors, which include hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, diet, obesity, and smoking. Smoking cessation counseling is an important component of education, as is counseling regarding lifestyle and dietary modifications. Patients are typically started on aspirin if they had not been on it previously. Their cholesterol and glycosylated hemoglobin levels are closely monitored every few months, and if the patients have hyperlipidemia or diabetes, these are addressed with the appropriate medications. Patients are also advised to closely monitor their blood pressure with an at-home blood pressure cuff, and antihypertensive medications are adjusted accordingly.

As for alarm signs, the acronym FAST has been used for years, which is recently being replaced with BE FAST, which stands for balance, eyes, face, arms, speech, and time. This can be elaborated upon so that patients have a better picture of alarm symptoms and when to return to the emergency department. Balance indicates falling in one direction or dizziness; eyes include sudden unilateral loss of vision or sudden onset double vision; face indicates facial drooping; arms stand for arm weakness or loss of sensation; speech can have multiple meanings including slurring, word-finding difficulty, or difficulty getting words out; and time indicates that "time is brain" and the faster they get to an emergency department, the better.