Acute cystitis is treated with antibiotic therapy. The selection of an antimicrobial agent depends on a patient’s risk factors for infection with multiple drug-resistant organisms. Patients who are at low risk for resistant etiologic organisms are treated with one of the first-line or preferred antimicrobial agents, which include:

- Nitrofurantoin 100 mg twice a day for 5 to 7 days

- Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (SMX-TMP) double-strength twice a day for three days (if local antibiotic resistance is <20%)

- Fosfomycin 3 gm as a single oral dose

- Pivmecillinam 400 mg twice a day for 5 to 7 days (not approved in the US)

**Nitrofurantoin**is generally the first choice antibiotic for simple cystitis. It does not promote resistance or yeast overgrowth, has a high clinical cure rate of 79% to 92%, and can be safely used even in older patients as long as their glomerular filtration rate is >60 ml/min. It has little tissue penetration and therefore is inappropriate for patients with fevers, pyelonephritis, or other evidence of systemic illness.Proteus, Morganella, and Providencia) which produce urease that raises the urinary pH. It has been shown that nitrofurantoin is less effective in UTIs where the urine pH is 8 or higher.

**Sulfamethoxazole-Trimethoprim (SMX-TMP)**is recommended when local resistance to the antibiotic is <20%. It has good tissue penetration, including into the prostate. The overall clinical cure rate is reported as 79% to 100%.

**Fosfomycin**has a similar overall clinical cure rate as nitrofurantoin.E. coli and Enterococcus; therefore, it is not recommended for routine use initially. It can be used for both Gram-negative and Gram-positive organisms, including vancomycin-resistant strains. It is less effective against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas. Also, it is inappropriate for use in real or suspected pyelonephritis due to insufficient renal tissue levels. It is a bacteriocidal drug that is generally underutilized.

It works by interfering with bacterial cell wall synthesis but in a manner distinct from beta-lactams. It is a unique antibiotic with relatively little resistance despite being available since 1969. It has been used off-label for prostatitis and has been shown to increase the immune response. It also penetrates biofilms well. While the usual dose is a single 3-gram packet, up to 3 doses can be used 2-3 days apart in complex situations.

**Pivmecillinam**is not available in the US but is used elsewhere, particularly in Nordic countries, due to its very low reported bacterial resistance.

Complicated infections are generally treated with 10 to 14 days of antibiotics. People with diabetes will be at increased risk for yeast infections during and immediately following antibiotic treatment, so appropriate steps should be taken.

**Antimicrobial selection**should be individualized based on patient factors, including allergies, adverse effects, tolerability, local bacterial resistance patterns, potential drug interactions, cost and insurance coverage, renal function, compliance history, and recent use of a specific antimicrobial agent within the preceding three months. Nitrofurantoin should not be used in patients with creatinine clearance or a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of less than 60 mL per minute, while SMX-TMP should be avoided in places where regional resistance is greater than 20%, as well as in patients with allergies to sulfa. Risk factors for such resistance include recent prior contact with healthcare, use of SMX-TMP within the previous six months, and travel, especially internationally. The suspicion of pyelonephritis or a complicated UTI also precludes the use of nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, norfloxacin, pivmecillinam, and possibly fosfomycin because of their poor penetration into renal tissues.

**Alternative or second-line antimicrobial agents**are used in acute cystitis patients with factors or circumstances that prevent using the first-line agents. A 5 to 7-day course of an oral beta-lactam such as amoxicillin-clavulanate 500 mg twice daily, cefpodoxime 100 mg twice daily, cefdinir 300 mg twice daily, cefadroxil 500 mg twice daily, or cephalexin 500 mg twice daily (although this agent is less well-studied) is usually preferred. If beta-lactam agents are contraindicated, doxycycline (a tetracycline) or a fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, or levofloxacin for three days (simple UTIs) or 7 to 14 days (complicated UTIs) may be used. Global resistance to SMX-TMP and amoxicillin are approaching or exceeding 20%, making these agents less useful in many geographical areas.

Another approach is to start patients initially on a single dose of an IV parenteral agent while in the office or ER, such as ceftriaxone 1 gram, ertapenem 1 gram, or gentamycin/tobramycin 5 mg/kg. (Of these, ceftriaxone is preferred, and the aminoglycosides are reserved for those who cannot be safely given either of the other choices.) This is followed by 10 to 14 days of an oral antibiotic depending on the final urine culture results.

Gentamicin bladder instillations can also be used to help treat UTIs, but this requires catheterization so it is generally not preferred except for selected patients, usually those with neurogenic bladders or on self-catheterization programs.

Mandelamine can be a useful prophylactic agent, especially for recurrent multi-drug resistant infections.

D-mannose has also been used with some success as a non-antibiotic-based UTI prophylactic agent, with some studies and meta-analyses suggesting equivalence with antibiotic prophylaxis.

**Urine culture and sensitivity testing**are required to guide antimicrobial regimens in patients at risk for multiple drug-resistant (MDR) organisms. Risk factors include a previous MDR isolate (resistant to three or more antimicrobial classes), recent stay in a healthcare facility, recent travel to areas with a high prevalence of MDR organisms, or use of broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents in the previous three months. The appropriate empiric regimen includes nitrofurantoin, SMX-TMP, fosfomycin, and pivmecillinam (if available). An alternative approach would be to defer treatment until culture and susceptibility results are available, especially if the use of any of the above first-line agents is precluded for any reason.

Symptomatic treatment with analgesics may be used in patients with severe dysuria. Phenazopyridine is a urinary analgesic used in the short-term treatment of urinary dysuria or discomfort, but it is not therapeutic and will not affect the clinical course of an infection.

**Cystitis in men**is relatively uncommon and not very well studied. In a healthy man without any risk factors for a complicated UTI or any symptoms suggestive of infection outside the bladder, the treatment approach should be the same as in women with a complicated UTI. For men with severe symptoms, anatomical or urologic abnormalities, or suspicion of prostate involvement, fluoroquinolones have been recommended for initial use as empiric therapy, pending culture and susceptibility testing results and local quinolone resistance patterns. Quinolones are preferred initial agents, when possible, due to their broad spectrum of activity and high tissue penetration levels. Doxycycline, SMX-TMP, and cephalosporins may also be used initially, which help minimize quinolone resistance. All men with clearly diagnosed UTIs have generally been considered complicated infections and are at risk for developing chronic prostatitis, which may not become clinically apparent for weeks or even months after the initial infection. For this reason, some recommend using prostate-penetrating antibiotics (doxycycline, SMX-TMP, quinolones) in all men with UTIs for at least four to six weeks to allow for the buildup of adequate antibiotic concentrations inside the prostate and reduce the likelihood of developing subsequent chronic prostatitis.

Patients who do not respond to an appropriate antimicrobial regimen after 48 to 72 hours or who have a recurrence of symptoms within a few weeks will require further evaluation, including consideration of other potential causes or infection with resistant organisms. Urine culture and susceptibility testing should be obtained, and patients must be treated with a different empiric antimicrobial agent with subsequent tailoring of the regimen based on susceptibility results.