AAS can be split into those affecting the ascending and descending aorta. Those involving the ascending aorta are surgical emergencies, and definitive management is surgical. Static AAS affecting the descending aorta are often managed conservatively, with only those that are actively progressing, causing organ or limb malperfusion, unmanageable pain, or risk of rupture requiring urgent surgical management.

Immediate management of AAS in the emergency setting is focused on reducing blood pressure below 120mmHg systolic and the rate of change of blood pressure (dP/dt) to stop the progression of dissection or to prevent aortic rupture. The mainstay of medical management is an intravenous beta-blocker such as Labetalol. For those intolerant of b-blockers, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers may be considered. Vasodilators can be given in conjunction with these.

AAD of the ascending aorta is a surgical emergency that has traditionally been managed with an open approach. The aims of treatment are to eliminate the false lumen by closing or excising the initial intimal tear and any subsequent tears. Alternatively, synthetic grafts can be utilized to reinforce the wall of the aorta. Proximal extension into the aortic valve can lead to aortic valve insufficiency and damage to the coronary arteries. This can be corrected either by resuspension of the valve itself or by replacement of the entire valve. Endovascular repair has been attempted for type A dissections; however, literature on the topic is scarce, with only 92 published cases over the last two decades. The most significant limitation of the endovascular approach is the difficulty in treating dissection involving the Aortic valve and root.

Acute type B dissection is divided into complicated and uncomplicated. Complicated dissection of the descending aorta represents 25% of patients with acute Type B dissection who are either hemodynamically unstable or present with malperfusion to either organ system or limb. Other symptoms to be aware of are unrelenting chest pain, uncontrollable hypertension, or findings of progression on imaging.

Though traditionally uncomplicated type B Aortic dissection has been managed with medical therapy alone, there is a case for prophylactic endovascular treatment to prevent the progression of the disease. Due to a lack of large-scale, long-term randomized control trials for the treatment of such cases, data is currently inconclusive.

IMH, despite lower mortality than AAD, are treated similarly due to the risk of extension to either dissection, aneurysm formation, or aortic rupture. Those affecting the ascending aorta are stented with an endovascular approach when possible, whereas those in the descending aorta are divided between watch-and-wait therapy with the best medical therapy and surgery.

Isolated asymptomatic PAU can be safely treated with medical therapy. Symptomatic PAU is more likely to proceed to aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm formation, or aortic rupture. In these cases, surgical management is required, and due to the co-morbidities and advanced age of patients commonly presenting with PAU, endovascular repair with stent grafts had the greatest reduction in mortality.