**Chemotherapy**

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is a medical emergency with a very high pre-treatment mortality. All-Trans Retinoic Acid (ATRA) is the mainstay in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia and used in all modern regimens. ATRA should be initiated without any delay even before cytogenetic confirmation is obtained. Before the introduction of ATRA in the 1980s, the prognosis of this disease was poor with chemotherapy alone. ATRA was then used in combination with anthracycline-based regimens with increased survival and cure rate. ATO (arsenic trioxide) also induces differentiation of the malignant myeloid clone by dissociating the PML/RAR-alpha-RXR complex from the target genes and found to have a synergistic action with ATRA. ATRA-ATO was also shown to have comparatively lesser toxicities than ATRA-chemo. Hence, ATRA-ATO for induction and consolidation has emerged as the new standard of care for patients with low-(to-intermediate) risk acute promyelocytic leukemia. ATRA- Idarubicin or ATRA - ATO plus gemtuzumab ozogamicin (antibody-drug conjugate) are preferred in patients with high risk without cardiac dysfunction. ATRA-ATO therapy with or without gemtuzumab ozogamicin is also a reasonable choice for patients with severe comorbidities, older adults, patients with cardiac dysfunction who cannot tolerate anthracycline-based regimens or overall poor functional status. Maintenance therapy after the initial consolidation is widely debated. Maintenance may not be necessary for patients receiving intensive induction/consolidation including ATO. Treatment and post-treatment monitoring up to 2 years with PCR are recommended. Treatment of relapsed APL is beyond the scope of this article.

**Supportive Therapy**

Supportive therapy plays a very important role in the survival of patients with acute leukemia. Bleeding diathesis is a known complication, especially in patients receiving treatment and platelets, should be maintained above 30 to 50 × 10/l and fibrinogen above 100 mg/dl to 150 mg/dl, with aggressive blood product support. High suspicion should be maintained for systemic infections as the patients are routinely immunosuppressed. In granulocytopenic patients with fever, an empiric antibiotic regimen to treat gram-negative bacteria should be instituted. Vancomycin should be started, if there is suspicion of catheter-related infection or based on blood cultures or if there is a suspicion of severe unknown infection. Antifungal should be considered if fever persists 5 days after the initiation of empiric antibiotics with appropriate testing.

Because cure rates for APL are high, bone marrow transplantation is not the first option. It is only offered to patients who relapse or are resistant to therapy.

Intrathecal therapy is done in high-risk patients.