The prefrontal association cortex is located in the anterior portion of the cerebral cortex just anterior to the primary motor cortex and next to the premotor cortex. It is bounded posteriorly by the Sylvian fissure. The PFC has significant networks of connections that run to and from sensory association cortices, the limbic system, the cortical regions of other lobes, and the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus. The prefrontal association cortex functions as an integration center for these multiple somatosensory inputs. The PFC is involved in memory formation, planning, execution, higher-order information processing, and suppression of unwanted behaviors. Interestingly, several studies have also shown the significance of the PFC in the regulation of endurance exercises, as evidenced by increased brain activity of this area with functional imaging.

The PFC appears to subdivide into three different regions, namely, dorsal, medial and ventral prefrontal cortices. The dorsal PFC is the superior part; the medial PFC is found surrounding the principal sulcus, and the ventral PFC is found inferiorly around the orbit. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is involved in higher-order processing, whereas the ventral and medial prefrontal cortices play a part in the regulation of emotions. The medial and ventral prefrontal cortices communicate directly with the structures of the limbic system such as the amygdala and cingulate cortex. Thus it is involved in the regulation of emotion and memory.

Anatomically, the medial PFC includes the anterior cingulate cortices (known as Brodmann area 24) and the subgenual cingulate cortex (known as Brodmann area 25). These areas are implicated in neuropathic pains, as evidenced by their hyperactivity during these events. In some instances, they were surgically removed as a treatment for the pain. The anterior cingulate cortex projects to adjacent premotor areas, such as Brodmann area 6d, and is involved in motor responses such as movements of eye and hand. The medial PFC also functions as the main visceromotor output for the PFC. It is worth noting the motor functions of the prefrontal association cortex are the result of projections from Brodmann area 25 to the subthalamic nucleus. Additionally, the PFC has significant projections to limbic areas, the ventral striatum, and the hypothalamus.