The diagnosis is usually made three to eight days after symptoms, and a correct preoperative diagnosis is reported in 30% to 70% of cases. As a result, a high index of suspicion is necessary. Laboratory studies are usually non-specific, as only one-third of patients present with jaundice and/or alteration of hepatic enzymes. Ultrasound can be used to demonstrate fistulas, pneumobilia, impacted gallstones, and residual cholelithiasis or choledocholithiasis, but difficulties of locating stones and distortion by bowel gas make ultrasound suboptimal. Plain abdominal radiographs can also be used for diagnosis, with Rigler’s triad being present in some cases with partial or complete intestinal obstruction, pneumobilia or contrast in the biliary tree, and an ectopic gallstone. The gallstone can change position on serial films. The sensitivity ranges from 40% to 70%.

Computed tomography (CT) scanning is a better entity and has a sensitivity of 93%. Balthazar et al. described a fifth sign: two air-fluid levels in the right upper quadrant on an abdominal radiograph corresponding to the duodenum and the lateral to the gallbladder, yet this sign is only present in approximately 24% of patients at the time of admission. Therefore, if a clinician has a clinical suspicion but the patient has negative x-ray findings, a CT scan should be performed. Findings consistent with gallstone ileus include gallbladder wall thickening, pneumobilia, intestinal obstruction, and obstructing gallstones. Pneumobilia, a non-specific finding, is found in approximately 30% to 60% of patients. A hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) may be performed if there is still a question after CT scanning. However, gallstone ileus is more typically diagnosed intra-operatively when a patient is undergoing laparotomy for small bowel obstruction of unknown origin.