The bony pelvis, comprised of the ilium (iliac wings), ischium, and pubis, forms an anatomic ring with the sacrum. Due to the amount of force that is required to fracture this ring, a fracture in one part of the pelvis is frequently accompanied by a fracture or damage to ligaments or structures within or outside of the pelvis.

The**Young-Burgess****classification**distinguishes various pelvic ring injuries mechanistically, with common fracture patterns correlating with the direction of applied impact at the time of injury.

The three mechanisms of injury described by the Young-Burgess classification are as follows: anterior to posterior compression injuries (APC), lateral compression injuries (LC), and vertical shear injuries (VS)

**Anterior to Posterior Compression injuries (AC)**

In anterior to posterior compression type injuries, ligamentous structures fail from an anterior to posterior direction. First, there is damage to the symphyseal ligaments at the pubic symphysis. This is followed by disruption of the ligaments of the pelvic floor, that is the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments.  And finally, there is disruption of the posterior sacroiliac complex. The progression of this injury pattern divides APC type pelvic ring injuries into 3 types:

- **APC Type I:**APC I injuries are defined by a disruption of the symphyseal ligaments only and are typically caused by isolated disruption of the symphyseal ligaments.

- **APC Type II:**APC II injuries are defined as a disruption of the symphyseal ligaments and the ligaments of the pelvic floor (sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments).  On radiographs, this manifests as a widening of the symphyseal ligaments by more than 2.5 cm.

- **APC Type III:**APC III injuries are defined as the disruption of both the anterior and posterior sacroiliac ligaments, including the posterior sacroiliac complex, the strongest ligaments in the body.APC III injuries have the highest rate of mortality, blood loss, and need for transfusion of all pelvic ring injuries

**Lateral Compression injuries (LC)**

Fracture is more common in lateral compression type injuries than in anterior to posterior compression type injuries. Classically, coronal plane fractures of the rami are observed in lateral compression type injuries compared to vertical fractures seen with APC type injuries.  These rami fractures are typically accompanied by fractures of the sacral ala or the iliac wing.

- **LC Type I:**Presents as rami fractures with ipsilateral sacral ala fractures, resulting from a lateral impact over the posterior aspect of the pelvis.****

- **LC Type II:**Results of a lateral compression injury with a more anteriorly directed force compared to LC I injuries.  Typically presents as rami fractures with ipsilateral crescent fracture of the ilium.

- **LC Type****III:**Colloquially described as "windswept pelvis."  Results from the highest energy mechanism of all lateral compression type fractures.  Presents as an ipsilateral disruption lateral compression type I or II injury with a contralateral external rotation type injury resembling an APC type injury.The most common identifiable cause of death in patients with lateral compression fractures is closed head injury

**Vertical Shear (VS)**

Vertical shear injuries are a result of an axial load to one hemipelvis. These injuries are more commonly seen with falls from height or motorcycle collisions where one leg is more likely to be forcefully loaded compared to the other.  The iliac wing is driven up relative to the sacrum, with disruption of the symphyseal ligaments, pelvic floor, and the strong posterior sacroiliac complex.