**Macroscopic Findings**

Classic adamantinoma usually presents as a cortical, well-demarcated, yellowish-grey, lobulated tumor of a firm to bony consistency with peripheral sclerosis. It may be a single lesion or occasionally multifocal. Macroscopically detectable cystic spaces are commonly filled with straw-colored or blood-like fluid.

**Histological Findings**

Classical adamantinomas are characterized by easily recognizable epithelial and osteofibrous components that may be mixed in various proportions and differentiation patterns. The four main differentiating patterns of classic adamantinoma are:

- Basaloid

- Tubular

- Spindle cell

- Squamous

The first two patterns are most commonly encountered, but all patterns may be present. The spindle-cell component is more often observed in recurrences, lining cystic spaces, and metastases. The osteofibrous component is composed of storiform-oriented spindle cells. Woven bone trabeculae are usually present in, or next to the center of the lesion prominently rimmed by osteoblasts and with varying amounts of transformation to a lamellar bone at the periphery of the tumor. Foam cells or myxoid change may be present, and mast cells or multinucleated giant cells are occasionally detected. Mitotic activity is usually low. A fifth histological pattern, the so-called osteofibrous dysplasia-like variant, is characterized by a predominance of osteofibrous tissue, in which small groups of epithelial cells are only encountered by careful search or immunohistochemistry.

Extensive sampling of adamantinoma is significant, especially in the differentiated form where the epithelial component is only focally encountered.

**Immunohistochemical Study**

The fibrous tissue is positive for vimentin. The epithelial cells show coexpression of keratin, EMA, vimentin, p63, and podoplanin.