When approaching a laceration, a basic understanding of the anatomy of the skin can aid in understanding the depth of lacerations. Also, a knowledge of the stages of wound healing will assist in patient education and follow up care.

The skin is made up of three layers:

- Epidermis: most superficial layer, contains no nerve endings or blood vessels. There are four layers to the epidermis in all areas except in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, where there are five layers.

- Dermis: Contains nerves, vessels, glands, and connective tissue.

- Fascia: a combination of connective tissue and adipose tissue.

The four stages of wound healing are:

- Hemostasis: Beginning immediately, the contracture of smooth muscles and tissue compressing small vessels. Platelets also begin to aggregate, activating the clotting cascade to produce initial fibrin clots.

- Inflammation: Beginning immediately and lasting up to 30 days, Neutrophils activated through the complement cascade begin phagocytosis of dead tissue. After the first 72 hours, macrophages respond and continue phagocytosis for the duration of this stage.

- Proliferation: Beginning at day seven and lasting the next several weeks, angiogenesis begins taking place, accounting for underlying erythema seen at the site. Also, during this time, fibroblasts begin to replace the inflammatory mass, and collagen is laid down to replace fibrin clots.

- Maturation: beginning after several weeks, this stage can last from 6 to 12 months. Collagen is remodeled from type III to type I. At this stage, the scar should flatten, and the underlying erythema will resolve. Patients should be advised at this stage to massage the scar as well as avoid direct sunlight to reduce the risk of hyperpigmentation of the scar.