The diagnosis of locked-in syndrome can often be difficult since the condition shares many features with other mute conditions.

Medical states such as coma, persistent vegetative state, akinetic mutism, and catatonic states are the main confounding conditions.

The differential diagnosis of locked-in syndrome includes:

- Persistent Vegetative State: where patients have preserved eye-opening but no awareness of the self and surroundings, the language comprehension is not intact, there is no voluntary facial or body movements, but respiration is intact.

- Akinetic mutism: there is preserved consciousness, with a decreased motor response (without paralysis), and intact brainstem reflexes. The eye movements are intact; there is the slowness of speech, and greatly diminished ability to produce spontaneous speech.

- Coma: there is impaired consciousness, with no voluntary motor movements. There is a variable ability to maintain respiration and also variably preserved brainstem reflexes.

- Brain death: there is impaired consciousness, with no voluntary motor movements, inability to maintain respiration, and absent brainstem reflexes.

- Catatonia: is often associated with a previous psychogenic history. There is preserved consciousness and brainstem reflexes accompanied by rigidity, mutism, echolalia, and posturing.

- Cervical spinal cord injury: there is a variable to complete quadriplegia (with upper motor neuron signs of hyperreflexia, hypertonicity). The motor functionality to the face is retained, eye movements are intact, as well as consciousness, orientation, and language. The respiration may be variably intact.

Radiography and early physical exams should be used to localize the structures damaged. Loss of facial expressions, dysphagia, lack of neck movement and tone, and lack of the gag reflex indicates a corticobulbar lesion at the ventral structures of the midbrain or pons.

Surdyke et al. (2017) published a case in which a small algorithmic model was used to rule out other related causative agents.

Additionally, in a condition as complex as LIS, care should be taken to obtain a thorough history to exclude a potential intoxication. A detailed drug history should examine depressive drugs, anesthetics, and poisons that may temporarily mimic a locked-in state. Curare, a reversible nicotinic acetylcholine receptor inhibitor, has been described as a drug that may cause complete quadriplegia and respiratory failure mimicking a variable form of locked-in syndrome.