The complications of eating disorders can be classified as acute or chronic physical complications and psychological comorbidities.

**Acute Complications**

Usually correlate with the rate of weight loss.

- Cardiovascular - bradycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias, pericardial effusion, heart failure, and myocardial fibrosis and pulmonary edema

- Haematological - anemia, impaired immunity

- Cognitive deficits with memory and concentration impairment

- Other complications -  Peripheral neuropathy, proximal myopathy, hepatitis, pancreatitis, constipation

- Frequent vomiting associated with eating disorders can cause poor dental health. One-third of bulimia nervosa patients have enlargement of the parotid gland.

- Hyponatremia can be caused by the use of diuretics, vomiting, and excessive water intake. During the phase of refeeding, hypokalemia is common. Aggressive nutrition therapy could cause a hypophosphatemia-induced refeeding syndrome characterized by rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, ileus, metabolic acidosis, hypotension, arrhythmias, cardiac failure, seizures, coma, and sudden death.

- Patients with eating disorders can have a multivitamin deficiency, including thiamine, niacin, vitamin B6, B12, vitamin C, D, E, K, and folate. They can also have iron, zinc, magnesium, and copper deficiency.

- Anorexia nervosa is complicated by dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis causing hypothalamic amenorrhea and dysregulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis causing hypercortisolemia and growth hormone resistance.

****Chronic Complications****

- Growth and development may be slowed. Puberty can also be delayed.

- Eating disorders could cause amenorrhoea in females and impotence in males. If the women with eating disorders become pregnant, she faces a higher rate of obstetric complications.

- Bone mineral density is decreased, and greater risk for fractures.

- Binge eating could pose a risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes.

**Psychiatric Comorbidity**

Common in eating disorders.

- Anxiety disorders

- Depression with suicidal thoughts

- Compulsive behaviors, such as skin-picking, hair-pulling, and compulsive exercise

- Impulsive behaviors, such as self-harm, aggression, alcohol use, and drug use

- Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, and avoidant personality disorder are common with eating disorders.

**Refeeding Syndrome**

- Refeeding syndrome is clinical and metabolic changes arising from aggressive nutritional rehabilitation of a malnourished patient. The most common complication is hypophosphatemia. Fluid overload common in refeeding syndrome.

- The following factors help in preventing refeeding syndrome,

- 
              
- The initial protein intake should be 1.2 grams per kilogram of ideal body weight per day. 
              
              
- A low-calorie intake of 30 kcal/kilogram/day during the first week
              
              
- Phosphorus should be supplemented to maintain serum levels above 3.0 mg/dL.

- Monitoring for Refeeding

- 
              
- Clinical Monitoring -
              
              
- 
                  
- Continuous cardiorespiratory monitor
                  
                  
- Focus on cardiac and neurologic
                  
                  
- Strict intake and output
                  
                  
- Calorie count
                  
                  
- Daily weights
                  
                

              
              
- Biochemical Monitoring (At baseline and at least daily)
              
              
- 
                  
- Measure phosphorus, magnesium, potassium, glucose, sodium, and renal function
                  
                  
- Zinc and pre-albumin levels are also measured.

- Treatment of refeeding syndrome

- 
              
- Rehydrate carefully and correct the electrolyte imbalance. 
              
              
- Administer thiamine before feeding at the dose of 100 to 300 mg per day oral or 50 to 100 mg/day intravenous.
              
              
- Start feeding at lower calories of 10 kcal per kg/day and gradually increase over seven days.