# Continuing Education Activity

Felty syndrome (FS) is a rare extra-articular manifestation of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis (RA) characterized by RA, neutropenia, and splenomegaly. Severe or recurrent infection is of particular concern due to neutropenia, especially in the skin and respiratory system. This activity focuses on increasing awareness about this rare condition among clinicians and discussing the importance of interprofessional care involved in treating patients with FS.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the clinical presentation and the laboratory markers needed to make the diagnosis of Felty syndrome. 
- Identify the ways to differentiate between Felty syndrome and pseudo-Felty syndrome. 
- Review the stepwise approach to the treatment and management of Felty syndrome.
- Outline inter-professional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to enhance outcomes in Felty syndrome.

# Introduction

Felty syndrome (FS) is an uncommon extra-articular manifestation of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis (RA) characterized by RA, neutropenia, and splenomegaly. Felty syndrome was first described in 1924 at Johns Hopkins hospital by the American physician, Augustus Felty. He described five unusual cases with common features of chronic arthritis of about four years duration, splenomegaly, and striking leukopenia. The term was first used by Hanrahan and Miller in 1932 when they described the beneficial effect of splenectomy in a patient with features similar to the five cases reported by Felty. While Felty syndrome characteristically demonstrates chronic arthritis, splenomegaly, and neutropenia; completion of the triad is not necessary for the diagnosis. Neutropenia, however, is a hallmark feature of the disease and cannot be absent.

# Etiology

There is strong evidence suggesting the presence of HLA-DRB1 allele shared epitope as a risk factor for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody development. Rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-CCP positivity are associated with an increased risk of development of extraarticular RA (ExRA).

# Epidemiology

Prevalence of Felty syndrome in patients with rheumatoid arthritis is reported to be around 1% to 3%.

# Pathophysiology

The exact pathophysiology of Felty syndrome is not clear, and it may be multifactorial. It is thought to involve both humoral and cellular immune mechanisms, which contribute to survival and proliferation defects of neutrophils resulting in neutropenia.

# History and Physical

Described as a manifestation of severe RA; Felty syndrome usually occurs in patients with severe, long-standing, erosive, and seropositive arthritis. However, the diagnosis of Felty syndrome can precede arthritis symptoms in a few cases.

Patients usually present with an infection because Felty syndrome is otherwise asymptomatic. The most common type of infection is dermatological and respiratory. Many patients have other extra-articular manifestations. These have been reported as rheumatoid nodules (74%), hepatomegaly (68%), lymphadenopathy (42%), Sjogren syndrome (48%), pulmonary fibrosis (50%), pleuritis (22%), peripheral neuropathy (14%), leg ulcers (16%). Systemic symptoms, including fever and weight loss, may also be present.

# Evaluation

**Complete Blood Count**

Complete blood count with differential shows an absolute neutrophil count of less than 2000/microliter, which is a hallmark feature and required for the diagnosis of Felty syndrome, accounting for an increased risk of bacterial infections. Diagnosis of Felty syndrome can sometimes be made earlier if the patient’s blood counts are under surveillance for another reason, such as medications' toxicity monitoring. There is no correlation between splenic enlargement and degree of neutropenia.

**Serology**

Laboratory findings of RA, like positive rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-CCP, are almost always present in FS. Antinuclear antibodies, anti-histone antibodies, and HLA-DR4 can also be present.

**Imaging**

Plain radiographs of small peripheral joints may show severe joint destruction. Imaging of spleen with ultrasound or radionuclide scan can be done to detect splenomegaly.

**Bone Marrow Biopsy**

Bone marrow biopsy shows myeloid hyperplasia in most cases with increased granulopoiesis and relative excess of immature forms described as “maturation arrest.”

**Histology**

Splenic histology in autopsies and post-splenectomy cases has shown non-specific findings such as congestion of venous sinusoids, reticular cell hyperplasia, and germinal cell hyperplasia.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment for Felty syndrome focuses on controlling the underlying RA and treating the neutropenia to prevent infections.

The goal is to achieve a granulocyte count of more than 2000/microliter. Neutropenia without evidence of infection is not an indication for treatment; however, the presence of neutropenia in patients with RA can help in adjusting disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD) therapy. Improvement of the neutrophil count with the treatment of RA indicates a component of FS. Patients with neutropenia should undergo a thorough examination to look for signs of infection. The presence of systemic symptoms should prompt treatment. Care of neutropenic patients involves good dental and oral hygiene as well as scheduled age-appropriate immunizations. The clinician should initiate appropriate treatment of infections with broad-spectrum antibiotics, and neutropenic precautions are necessary. An infectious disease specialist consult can be helpful.

There are no randomized control studies available for the treatment of Felty syndrome, and most of the data directing treatment are from observational studies. Low dose oral methotrexate is considered first-line treatment. It has demonstrated benefit in the improvement of neutrophil count and helpful in preventing recurrence of infection. Studies have shown that a dose of less than 7.5mg/week results in prompt improvement of neutrophil count within 4 to 6 weeks. Because the effect of methotrexate is dose-dependent with noticeable change seen after 4 to 8 weeks, an adequate trial with a maximum tolerated dose should be considered before deeming it unresponsive.

Other DMARDs have been reported to be beneficial in some reports. A case report described a patient with RA who developed Felty syndrome while on MTX therapy and then severe cutaneous allergy to etanercept, but subsequently, significant improvement in neutropenia with leflunomide.

Initially, glucocorticoids can be used in patients with Felty syndrome to provide a rapid improvement in neutrophil count. Because of the immunosuppressive effect, however, long term use is generally not advised, and use should be avoided in patients with active infection.

Splenectomy in a patient with Felty syndrome was first tried by Hanrahan and Miller in a 50-year-old woman who had marked improvement in neutropenia and arthritis over five months follow up. After this, splenectomy was the main treatment option for Felty syndrome.

# Differential Diagnosis

The most important differential to consider in patients with RA and neutropenia is LGL leukemia. Also termed "pseudo-Felty syndrome," it can present as neutropenia with or without splenomegaly. Most patients with LGL leukemia have an associated autoimmune condition, particularly RA; therefore, it can be challenging to distinguish FS from LGL leukemia. Immunophenotyping showing cytotoxic T lymphocytes with CD 2, 3, 8, 16, and 57 surface marker positivity together with bone marrow biopsy and peripheral smear showing increased LGL cells can help in differentiating the two diseases. Many consider these two to be part of the same disease continuum rather than separate entities. The involvement of a hematologist to rule out hematological malignancy as the cause of neutropenia is important.

Other causes of neutropenia and splenomegaly should be evaluated and ruled out. Medications are an important cause to consider. Methotrexate can cause bone marrow suppression and neutropenia in patients with RA. Similarly, TNF inhibitors can cause neutropenia. Worsening of neutropenia after temporary cessation of these agents provides a clue to the diagnosis of Felty syndrome. Viral infections like EBV and HIV can present with neutropenia and splenomegaly. If suspected, serological tests can help rule out these conditions. Other autoimmune conditions such as lupus, which can have similar features as an extra-articular RA, can usually be distinguished through clinical features and serological tests.

# Prognosis

The severity and extra-articular manifestations of RA has been decreasing gradually since the methotrexate, and biologic treatments became available for the treatment of RA.

# Complications

The most important complication of Felty syndrome is severe or recurrent infections, particularly of respiratory tract and skin, because of neutropenia. Other complications like anemia due to splenic sequestration and hemorrhage due to severe thrombocytopenia can also occur. Variceal bleeding due to portal hypertension is possible. Treatment modalities like splenectomy for refractory neutropenia can increase the risk of infections post-surgery and have been fatal in a few cases. G-CSF carries a small risk of exacerbation of underlying autoimmune disorder.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although it is a rare disease, Felty syndrome should be on the differential diagnosis of any patients who present with RA and neutropenia, because the consequence of any treatment delay is potentially fatal. The clinician should be mindful that neutropenia may become masked in patients with acute infection. No specific treatment exists for patients with Felty syndrome. Although many options are available for treatment, randomized trials are lacking because of the rarity of the disease. The basis for treatment recommendations is only a few observational studies. This diagnosis, therefore, poses a therapeutic challenge in an acute setting, especially in resource-limited situations and refractory neutropenia. In the non-acute settings, all patients with asymptomatic neutropenia should be advised about good oral and dental hygiene and should be closely monitored with adjustment in their anti-rheumatic medications to improve the neutrophil count, which can help prevent infections.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Felty syndrome is a rare disease, therefore a high degree of suspicion is required to make the diagnosis early and minimize its complications. The management of Felty syndrome should involve an interprofessional team. Apart from the involvement of a rheumatologist, a hematologist's input is valuable to rule out hematological malignancies as the cause of neutropenia. An infectious disease specialist should be involved earlier in the care to decrease the risk of infections.

The clinical pharmacist can assist the providers in monitoring hematologic parameters for the patient with RA, with or without therapy, to help in early detection of the disease and for the alteration of therapy when needed. The pharmacist should also assist the medical team by providing patient education on the different drugs used to treat Felty syndrome, their benefits, and adverse effects. Pharmacists need to verify dosing (particularly with MTX), check for drug interactions in the patient's medication regimen, and inform the clinician should they encounter any concerns.

The primary care nurse can help the providers make the diagnosis in patients with RA by obtaining a detailed interval history for possible recurrent infections, gastrointestinal bleeding, and splenic pain. Nurses can also assist the team in monitoring, verifying patient compliance, and helping assess treatment effectiveness.

Instituting a collaborative interprofessional team can help in the early detection and treatment of FS. Open communication between interprofessional team members across disciplines is vital to improving outcomes. [Level V]