vWF multimers have repeating domain sequences with specific functions for each domain. Large vWF multimers, by nature of having more sites for adhesion, are more effective during hemostasis than the smaller varieties with less binding capacity.

- SP is the signal peptide to initiate post-translational processing

- D1 and D2 are the vWF propeptide domains that interact with D’ to allow proper alignment during vWF dimerization.

- D’ and D3 interact with D1 and D2 during dimerization and interdimeric cross-linking, p-selectin on the surface of platelets and endothelial cells, and factor VIII both within WBP and in the circulation.

- A1 domain binds GP1b on platelets and collagen in the subendothelial matrix as well as several other proteins such as histones, heparin, osteoprotegerin, and beta-2 integrin receptors on leukocytes.

- A2 domain is crucial in regulating vWF activity; it serves as the mechanosensitive switch that unfolds when exposed to shear stress to expose other vWF binding domains. A2 is also the cleavage site for the zinc protease ADAMTS13, which regulates the size and pro-thrombotic activity of vWF.

- A3 domain binds extracellular matrix collagens.

- C domains bind with fibrin plasma complement proteins and interact with GPIIb/IIIa during platelet adhesion.

- CK (cysteine knot) domain is important for multimerization and post-translational folding.

To facilitate hemostasis, platelet activation stimulates alpha-granules to release vWF, while endothelial cells utilize a mixture of basal secretion and induced release. In response to vascular injury, WPB undergoes exocytosis, and vWF multimers exposed to shear stress unfold at the A2 domain. Unfolded vWF multimers form long bundles which anchor to subendothelial collagen and expose binding sites for nearby platelets. The A1 domain of vWF interacts with platelet GP1b receptors to initiate platelet aggregation and activation, which leads to alpha granule content release.

Plasma vWF functions as a molecular carrier and binds with factor VIII at its D’D3 domains. This prolongs the half-life of factor VIII such that it is more readily available to participate in the intrinsic coagulation cascade. Clearance of vWF complexes is multifactorial and varies between individuals based on age, weight, and blood type but occurs through endothelial cells, hepatocytes, and macrophages in the liver and spleen binding and internalizing the vWf complex, thereby removing it from the circulation.