Those suffering from accidental hypothermia will typically have a history of cold exposure. Obtaining a core temperature is essential to diagnose and manage hypothermia effectively. Oral temperature is only useful to rule out hypothermia as most commercially available thermometers cannot read under 35 C. Tympanic thermometers are also unreliable. Epitympanic thermometers, when used correctly, reflect the carotid artery temperature and can be reasonably reliable. Both rectal and bladder temperature measurements are reasonable in conscious individuals with mild to moderate hypothermia but may not be appropriate for critical patients during rewarming as they lag behind true core temperature. Neither are they appropriate in the pre-hospital setting as they may further expose the patient and cause a further drop in temperature. Esophageal temperature measurement is the most accurate when done correctly with the probe in the lower third of the esophagus; this should only be performed in patients with an advanced airway in place.

Mild Hypothermia 32 to 35 C:  Presentation can often be subtle with vague symptoms such as hunger, nausea, fatigue, shivering, and pale-dry skin. Often, they will have increased muscle tone, increased blood pressure, tachycardia, and tachypnea from the body’s attempts to promote thermogenesis. Patients are frequently shivering, but if energy stores have been depleted, they may not be shivering, meaning you cannot rely on this finding. They will often have a decline in cognitive abilities, memory, and judgment, with some experiencing ataxia and dysarthria.  The patient may experience “cold diuresis” due to peripheral vasoconstriction leading to increased diuresis and volume depletion.

Moderate Hypothermia 28 to 32 C: The patient will continue to have cognitive decline and be lethargic. Increased CNS depression may lead to hyporeflexia with pupils less responsive and dilated. They may become hypotensive with bradycardia and bradypnea. Shivering typically ceases between 30 to 32 C, and paradoxical undressing may be observed.  Susceptibility to dysrhythmias increases, with atrial fibrillation being the most common.

Severe Hypothermia, less than 28 C: Cerebral blood flow continues to decline until patients become unresponsive. Blood pressure, heart rate, and cardiac output continue to decrease. Increased susceptibility to atrial and junctional dysrhythmias is present. Pulmonary congestion, extreme oliguria, and areflexia may occur. Ultimately, cardiorespiratory failure results.

All patients with suspected hypothermia should have a complete history and physical exam to exclude local cold-induced injuries and assess for signs of trauma or other illness that may have caused their exposure to the cold. Also, be aware of vital signs inconsistent with the degree of hypothermia as this may be the only clue to an alternate diagnosis such as hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, sepsis, hypoglycemia, carbon monoxide poisoning, alcohol abuse, malnutrition, unintentional/intentional overdose.

Hypothermia may be related to medications including beta-blockers, clonidine, neuroleptics, meperidine, and general anesthetic agents. Ethanol, sedative-hypnotics, and phenothiazines also reduce the body's ability to respond to low ambient temperatures. Beta-blockers may blunt the effects of the catecholamine surge.