Infliximab is a biological, TNF-alpha-inhibiting monoclonal-antibody drug.

The United States Food and Drug Administration approved infliximab in 1998 for the following indications (with doses mentioned):

- For moderate to severe, active Crohn disease in adults and children (six years and above) who have had a non-satisfactory response to conventional therapy, the induction dose is 5 mg/kg, given as intravenous therapy at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, followed by maintenance therapy at the same dosage every eight weeks. In patients who do not benefit from the lower dose, 10 mg/kg is considered.

- For moderate to severe, active ulcerative colitis in adult patients with an unsatisfactory response to conventional therapy, the usual dose is 5 mg/kg intravenously (IV) at 0, 2, and 6 weeks as the initial dose, followed by 5 mg/kg every eight weeks for maintenance.

- For moderate to severe, active rheumatoid arthritis, induction therapy at 3 mg/kg is given at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, followed by maintenance therapy every eight weeks.

- With active ankylosing spondylitis, a dose of 5 mg/kg IV is given at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, followed by dosing every six weeks.

- With active psoriatic arthritis, a dose of 5 mg/kg IV is given at 0, 2, and six weeks, followed by dosing every eight weeks.

- For chronic severe plaque psoriasis in adult patients, a dose of 5 mg/kg IV is given at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, followed by dosing every eight weeks.

Although there is little supporting data, studies have shown that infliximab is not effective in very young patients. A study published in 2014 showed a remission rate of 36% in one year in patients younger than seven years compared to a remission rate of 88% in older children. The remission achieved in older children is comparable to that achieved in adults.

It is also used off-label (not FDA-approved) to treat the following conditions:

- Bechet disease

- Relapsing polychondritis

- Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

- Pyoderma gangrenosum

- Pustular psoriasis

This drug may be given in combination with methotrexate to avoid possible immunologic responses by the host, which would decrease or blunt the drug's effect. Treatment for rheumatoid arthritis is the only indication the FDA requires concurrent methotrexate use.