Urinary stasis, such as benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or neurogenic bladder disorder, is the primary cause of bladder calculi. Most such stones are newly formed in the bladder, although some may come from the kidneys either as a stone or a sloughed papilla. Stones originating from the kidney that are small enough to pass through the ureters can easily traverse the urethra unless there is significant bladder dysfunction or outlet obstruction. Stones that remain in the bladder will develop layers of additional stone material that may or may not be identical to the original core material.

Any foreign body left in the bladder that is not spontaneously expelled will eventually form layers of stone material and develop into calculus. One example would be a surgical staple or permanent suture. This is why absorbable suture material is recommended whenever urinary surgery is performed.

A retained double pigtail stent will also form stone material if left in the urinary tract long enough. Another example would be a fragment from a Foley catheter balloon that "fell out" but had a balloon rupture with a retained fragment left in the bladder. For these reasons, it is important to inspect any Foley catheter that has been pulled out, or that has "fallen out" to make sure that there are no missing fragments that might develop into a stone. If this cannot be done or it appears there might be a missing balloon fragment, cystoscopy should be performed.

Foley catheters are associated with more bladder stones than intermittent catheterization. In one study of patients with spinal cord injuries, 36% developed bladder calculi over an eight-year period of follow-up. Improved urologic care of these patients reduced the bladder stone formation rate to about 10%.

Radiation therapy, schistosomiasis, bladder augmentation surgery, urethral strictures, and the presence of bladder diverticula are other predisposing factors to bladder stone formation.