**Commonly Used Lasers**

Carbon dioxide (CO2) lasers are historically the most commonly used lasers in otolaryngologic surgery. The infrared light produced is not visible to humans at 10,600 nm and produces intense thermal injury as its chromophore is water.

Specifications of these and other commonly used lasers (KTP, Ho:YAG, Nd:YAG, Argon, pulsed dye) are discussed elsewhere in StatPearls and are beyond the scope of this review.

Numerous endotracheal tubes were designed to withstand laser damage, maintain the integrity of their components, and minimize the risk of airway fire. Please refer to the individual product data sheets before using any new endotracheal airway tube. Below are a few examples of the most common designs of laser-resistant tubes.

- Soft and flexible white rubber tubes covered with copper foil (e.g., Rusch Lasertubus) are resistant to CO2, Nd/YAG, and Argon lasers. These are most often double-cuffed for additional protection.

- Silicone-made tubes wrapped in aluminum foil (e.g., Laser shield by Xomed ) resist CO2 and potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) lasers.

- Stainless steel corrugated spiral ETTs (e.g., Mallinckrodt Laser Flex) are suitable for CO2 and KTP lasers. The metal core is non-flammable and kink resistant. The risk of reflecting a laser beam is very low, yet the metal may conduct heat to surrounding tissues and materials.

- Red rubber tubes, especially if wrapped with aluminum or copper foil (e.g., Sheridan Laser-Trach), have a long-standing record of safe use with CO2 and KTP lasers but have been largely supplanted by the products above.

Many of these tubes have two cuffs, and current American Society of Anesthesiologists guidelines recommend these to be filled with saline, as this conveys additional protection against fire in case the laser beams pop the cuff. Adding methylene blue (or other biocompatible dye) to the saline in the cuff balloon can aid in detecting cuff perforation.

The surgical team should use flame-resistant surgical drapes if possible, though covering exposed skin with saline-soaked sterile towels is far more common and is effective.

Personnel present in the room must wear wavelength-specific protective eyeglasses to prevent possible laser radiation exposure and irreparable corneal or retinal injury, and signage indicating laser use should be placed on the outer face of all doors to the operating room. In general, clear glass or plastic goggles are used when working with a CO2 laser; amber or orange filters for KTP and argon lasers; green or clear filters for Nd:YAG; blue for Dye lasers.

High-efficiency masks should be used to protect the staff from smoke plumes. These result from tissue vaporization and contain fine microparticles (mean size 0.3 micrometers) capable of depositing in the lower airways and alveoli, potentially posing risks of affecting mucociliary clearance, interstitial pneumonitis, bronchiolitis, and mutagenicity. This is of particular concern when treating papillomatous disease, as there is a hypothetical risk of seeding papilloma.