The boundaries of the infratemporal fossa with the pterygoid plexus sitting within divide into six landmarks. The posterior surface of the maxilla marks the boundary anteriorly, the tympanic plate and styloid process posteriorly, the ramus of the mandible laterally, the lateral pterygoid plate medially, medial pterygoid muscle attached to the medial surface of the ramus inferiorly. Finally, superior boundaries include the infratemporal surface of the greater wing of the sphenoid as well as the temporal fossa. The pterygoid plexus drains the nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, and nasopharynx, to name a few, and contains tributaries correlating with the branches of the maxillary artery including the superior and inferior alveolar vein, sphenopalatine, deep temporal, and buccal veins to name a few. Posteriorly, the pterygoid plexus drains via the maxillary vein. The maxillary vein joins the superficial temporal vein to become the retromandibular vein and eventually drain into the external jugular vein upon combining with the posterior auricular vein. Similarly, the pterygoid plexus communicates with the facial vein through the deep facial vein as well as communication with the inferior ophthalmic vein through the inferior orbital fissure. The pterygoid plexus also communicates with the cavernous sinus in the cranial cavity by an emissary vein through foramen ovale.

The pterygoid plexus functions to return the blood to the heart; this occurs during the movement of the lateral pterygoid, generating a pumping action of the blood back to the heart.