**Non-Pharmacologic Management**

There is some debate about the appropriate treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome. A randomized control trial conducted in 2011 in the United Kingdom compared the effectiveness and safety of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), graded exercise therapy (GET), adaptive pacing therapy (APT), and specialist medical care in the management of chronic fatigue syndrome. Overcoming fatigue and improvement of physical function were taken as measures of effectiveness, while safety assessment comprised recording all adverse effects. The results showed that CBT and GET improved outcomes when used together, whereas APT was not a helpful addition.

Further analysis of the available data questions the statistical significance of the benefit of CBT and GET.

Treatment for any comorbid condition should be undertaken to minimize symptom burden.

During the CBT sessions, the therapist emphasizes the role of the thought process and its impact on the patient's actions and feelings and recognizes behaviors that cause them to feel more tired and minimize them. Multiple trials and Cochrane reviews have shown the positive benefits of CBT on improving fatigue, mood, and post-exertional malaise in both adolescent and adult patients.

GET involves a supervised, gradual increase in the duration and intensity of physical activity. After the PACE trial, this therapy got much publicity, which showed effectiveness for fatigue and functional impairment with the GET.

Activity management is also called pacing. The goal is to learn to balance rest and activity to avoid flare-ups. These can be caused by exertion that patients cannot tolerate.

**Pharmacologic Management**

**Pain Medications**

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including COX-2 inhibitors, are used due to their action in relieving pain and associated inflammation.

**Tricyclic Antidepressants**

Multiple tricyclic antidepressants have shown varying degrees of success in improving sleep, pain levels, and fatigue severity.

**Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRI) and Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRI)**

Many SSRIs like fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine have been used to treat depression and anxiety, which either accompany the disease process of chronic fatigue syndrome or occur as a consequence. SNRIs have the added benefit of providing neuropathic pain relief besides the antidepressant effect. However, neither SSRIs nor SSNRIs directly affect the underlying pathophysiology of the disease process.

**Antiviral Therapy**

Several antiviral medications have been tried in these patients, but most of these studies have been inconclusive.

**Immunoglobulin**

A systemic review conducted by Whiting et al. in 2001 evaluated five randomized controlled trials on the use of immunoglobulins in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. It revealed positive results in four of them.

**Corticosteroids**

Multiple RCTs and systemic reviews performed with steroids in 2005 showed varying responses. One systemic review conducted in 2015 showed a weak benefit from low-dose hydrocortisone, but the effect was only short-lived and was associated with adverse effects.

**Complementary and Alternative Medicines**

Systemic reviews of the studies using essential fatty acids, magnesium, acetyl-l-carnitine, vitamin B12, and antioxidants have shown only partial response and require further studies to establish a definitive relation.

**Newer Treatments and Trials**

**Rintatolimod**

Rintatolimod is a newly approved immunomodulator and an antiviral drug for treating chronic fatigue syndrome in Canada and Europe.

**Rituximab**

Rituximab is an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody causing the depletion of B cells. An initial small double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 30 patients with CFS receiving rituximab showed some benefit, leading the researchers to hypothesize that B cells might have a significant role in the pathogenesis of some patients with chronic fatigue syndrome.

**Fecal Microbiota Transplantation**

Alteration in gastrointestinal (GI) microbiota in CFS patients has been hypothesized as one of the etiologies.

Even though there has been some success with the fecal microbiota, it is still too early to conclude anything. However, it opens doors for future research in this direction.