The presentation of a woman with a uterine rupture is highly dependent upon whether they have a labor epidural, a scared or unscarred uterus, and the location of the rupture.

For women with a suspected uterine rupture, the initial assessment is for hemodynamic stability. Blood pressure and heart rate should be obtained to assess for hypotension and tachycardia. Common symptoms of hypotension include lightheadedness, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and anxiety. Most of the bleeding associated with a uterine rupture is intraabdominal and cannot be detected by the patient. When vaginal bleeding occurs, it is helpful to differentiate between light spotting and significant blood-soaked linen.

Bladder injury is not uncommon with uterine rupture.

Patients with a uterine rupture may describe acute onset abdominal pain that begins with a “ripping” sensation. Subsequent contracts are often quite painful. Chest pain may occur if blood enters the peritoneum. Blood in the peritoneum can irritate the diaphragm and cause referred to shoulder or chest pain similar to ischemic cardiac pain. A labor epidural may mask the pain associated with a uterine rupture and lead to delayed diagnosis.

The fetal heart rate provides insight into both the health of the fetus and the health of the woman—the fetal heart rate is one of the most sensitive indicators of maternal end-organ perfusion. Reduced blood flow to the fetus can present as fetal bradycardia, reduced variability, or late decelerations. Fetal bradycardia is the most common abnormality associated with uterine rupture.

Palpating the abdomen to localize the area of most pain and guarding can be helpful in women with a suspected uterine rupture. A uterine rupture should cause midline pain. Most women with a uterine rupture will have a tender abdomen, even when receiving labor epidural analgesia. Palpation of the abdomen can also provide insight into whether the contraction pattern or uterine shape has changed. Uterine contraction amplitude may decrease, and contractions may stop altogether in women who experience a uterine rupture.

An internal examination can identify products of conception, fresh blood, or clots in the vaginal canal. In a uterine rupture, the vaginal canal is usually not full of blood—unless the tear extends into the vagina or cervix. Speculum examination may help diagnose non-pregnancy related bleeding such as a laceration or abnormal cervical growth. A vaginal exam can also identify loss of fetal station (movement of the fetal presenting part towards the abdominal cavity), which can occur with a uterine rupture if part of the fetus enters the peritoneum.