The variable progression following the diagnosis of ASC-US poses a management challenge. There is a possibility of overtreatment, and at the same time, also the risk of progression to higher grade precancerous lesions or even invasive cancer with conservative treatment, especially if close follow-up is not carried out.

The diagnosis of ASC-US begins to gain clinical significance when it is associated with a positive hrHPV diagnosis. Both reflex HPV DNA testing and co-testing have reported a high incidence of hrHPV in ASC-US specimens.

An initial ASC-US may warrant no further management except to repeat Pap cytology alone or do an acetic acid-guided visual inspection (VIA) with colposcopy or in combination with HPV genotyping (DNA or mRNA) where feasible.

The American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP) has recently published (in April 2020) the 2019 ASCCP risk-based management guidelines for abnormal cervical cancer screening tests and cancer precursors. One of the essential changes from prior management guidelines is that patient's risk of CIN3+, determined by current test results and past history (including unknown history), has become a key factor on which recommendations of colposcopy, treatment, or surveillance are based.

In patients younger than 25 years with LSIL, ASC-US HPV-positive, or ASC-US without HPV testing, repeat cytology at 1 year is preferred, and if the result is NILM/ASC-US/LSIL, another repeat cytology is needed in 1 year, after that if the result is negative, then routine age-based screening is resumed. If HPV testing was first done for a patient with ASC-US, and the test was negative, there would be no need for the repeat cytology described above, and routine age-based screening could be directly resumed. Colposcopy is indicated if the first one-year repeat cytology shows HSIL/ASC-H/AGC/AIS, and also when the second one-year repeat cytology shows ASC-US or more severe lesions.

As per the new 2019 ASCCP guidelines, practitioners should start using CIN3+ risk estimates (based on HPV testing/co-testing and past history) when a patient reaches the age of 25 years. Previously (before the recent guidelines update), patients aged 25 years and older with ASCUS have two management options, one option is to do HPV testing (preferred), and if the test is positive, colposcopy is indicated, while patients with negative HPV test will have repeat cytology in three years. The second option is to repeat the cytology in one year, and if an abnormality is detected, then colposcopy is indicated. If the one-year repeat cytology is negative, then the patient can return to routine age-based screening. But per the new guidelines, a colposcopy can be deferred for certain patients if they have only minor screening abnormalities indicating HPV infection, provided that the risk of having CIN3+ is low. For example, a patient who tested HPV positive with low-grade cytologic abnormalities (LSIL/ASC-US), and has a past history of documented negative screening HPV test or co-test, can now be managed by repeating HPV testing or co-testing at 1 year. Practitioners can start managing their patients based on these new 2019 ASCCP guidelines using the tables of Egemen et al. or by using an app or website that will be designed and made available at the ASCCP website.

SIL treatment options include ablation methods such as cryotherapy or thermocoagulation, while HSIL (CIN 2+) is best treated by large loop excision of the transformation zone/loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LLETZ/LEEP) or laser or cold knife conization in cases of adenocarcinoma in-situ (AIS).

Apart from surgical interventions, certain pharmacological approaches have been employed under various randomized controlled trials (RCTs), with some showing promising outcomes at phase II.