The BDG is done with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) support at most institutions. CPB is instituted with cannulae in the aorta, superior vena cava (SVC), and the right atrium (RA). Mild hypothermia is utilized (32-34**°**C) during repair, and aortic cross-clamping is avoided for a primary BDG without additional intracardiac procedures. Following the institution of CPB, the BT shunt, or primary right ventricle (RV) to pulmonary artery (PA) conduit, is occluded and then promptly divided and oversewn. The common surgical technique includes transection of the SVC from its RA junction, with the integrity of the sinoatrial (SA) node maintained. The RA is then oversewn, and the SVC is anastomosed to the right PA. Inadequate SVC size or suboptimal flow characteristics in the central branch PAs can lead to compromised Glenn shunt flow.

Often, patients have some degree of pulmonary atresia, either congenitally or secondary to the incorporation of the pulmonary valve into neonatal palliation during stage 1 repair. The pulmonary valve leaflets are sewn together to avoid pulmonary valve sinus thrombus formation, which can cause a shower of retrograde emboli into the single systemic ventricle. In patients with tricuspid atresia, RV hypoplasia, or Ebstein’s anomaly, a “pulsatile Glenn” shunt refers to some ejection of blood from the pulmonary ventricle through the PA, which is instrumental in elevating PA pressure and producing a higher pulse pressure. This configuration is utilized in patients where the RV is too hypoplastic to receive all SVC and inferior vena cava (IVC) blood flow. At the time of surgery, a clinical decision must be made as to whether to maintain or eliminate additional pulmonary blood flow (APBF) via a BT shunt or PA band. Multiple analyses have shown that APBF is associated with higher PA pressure, improved oxygenation, and an increased incidence of chylothoraces and pleural effusions.

During BDG repair, additional surgical interventions including PA augmentation, correction of residual coarctation following Stage I repair, atrial septectomy, AV valve annuloplasty, or regurgitation repair may be appropriate. For patients with HLHS, aortic reconstruction and atrial septectomy often accompany the BDG procedure. Patients with heterotaxy syndrome add another layer of complexity to surgical correction. These patients often have bilateral SVCs, and the left SVC is anastomosed to the left PA. At the time of the BDG, heterotaxy patients also require revision of anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, necessitating aortic cross-clamp placement. In heterotaxy patients with an interrupted IVC, the suprahepatic IVC is absent, and systemic blood below the diaphragm returns via collateral circulation via the azygos or hemiazygous circulation. The SCPA will then divert all caval blood flow to the BDG circuit, known as the Kawashima procedure.

Some surgeons opt to perform the “hemi-Fontan” procedure instead of the standard BDG, which involves anastomosis of the SVC to the PA, and the RA to the PA confluence. Anastomosis to the left PA is augmented with a homograft patch, which creates direct blood flow from the upper RA to the PAs. This procedure may cause SA node injury, although it may make the final stage of Fontan completion more straightforward. An isolated BDG can also be performed via a shunt from the SVC to the RA with partial heparinization. Surgical intervention without CPB is undertaken to avoid hypoxic-ischemic brain injury during occlusion of the SVC.

Classically, BDG is performed with the aid of CPB to ensure a pristine surgical field and a uniform anastomosis, as well as the avoidance of neurologic injury during SVC clamping. During SVC clamping, parameters of cerebral perfusion, such as near-infrared spectroscopy, SVC pressure, and systemic pressure, should be monitored. Off-pump BDG has been successfully utilized for isolated BDG, although risks include decreased cerebral oxygenation, global electroencephalographic slowing, and up to a 50% reduction in middle cerebral artery blood flow velocity during SVC clamping.

Intraoperatively, all standard non-invasive monitors, in addition to an intra-arterial catheter is placed following tracheal intubation. Cannulation of the jugular or subclavian veins is avoided due to concern for thrombosis. The femoral vein is usually cannulated for central venous access, while a small catheter is placed in the internal jugular vein to monitor PA pressure for 12-24 hours postoperatively. As PBF is the result of venous diversion from the upper body, most patients exhibit favorable hemodynamics. A vasopressor may be necessary in some instances, but not always. Infants with some degree of diastolic dysfunction receive an inodilator, such as milrinone.

Intraoperative TEE is utilized to assess volume status, ventricular contractility, atrioventricular valve integrity, and anastomotic patency. CVP should be maintained at 15-20 mmHg to enable passive pulmonary perfusion and maintain cardiac output. The transpulmonary gradient, which is the difference between the CVP and left atrial pressure, determines the pulmonary blood flow. The normal transpulmonary gradient should be between 5-8 mm Hg, and an elevated transpulmonary gradient indicates high pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and need to be addressed by avoiding hypoxia/acidosis or using nitric oxide. A shortened inspiratory time and prolonged expiratory time should be maintained when the patient is mechanically ventilated. Hemodynamic goals in these patients include maintenance of inotropy, but the reduction of PVR and SVR, which augments preload and avoids a reduction in cardiac output. The patient may require cardiac pacing postoperatively; sinus rhythm also maintains preload and cardiac output. Although extubation is preferred, this should be weighed against premature extubation leading to hypercarbia, hypoxia, and acidosis, which can lead to worsening PVR.

Postoperatively, PVR should be minimized to allow forward passive flow through the pulmonary circuit. Before termination from CPB, the patient’s endotracheal tube should be carefully suctioned and cleared of secretions. Doppler flow studies have shown that PBF occurs during the expiratory phase of positive pressure ventilation following a BDG. Thus respiratory rate and inspiratory time should be limited to 1 second.