On presentation, more than half of the patients with Cushing disease have a microadenoma with a diameter of less than 5 mm.

Biochemical diagnostic tests to confirm hypercortisolism include salivary and blood serum cortisol testing, 24-hour urinary-free cortisol testing, and low-dose overnight dexamethasone suppression testing.

The low-dose dexamethasone, 1 or 2mg, suppression tests (DSTs) are standard screening tests to differentiate patients with CS of any cause from patients who do not have Cushing Syndrome (CS).

The overnight 1 mg DST consists of administering 1 mg of dexamethasone at 11 PM to midnight and measuring the serum cortisol at 8 AM the next morning. A cortisol level of less than 1.8 mcg/dL (or 50 nmol/L) is considered a normal response.

In 2 mg DST, dexamethasone 0.5 mg is administered by mouth at six-hour intervals for 48 hours. The serum cortisol level is measured 6 hours after the last dose of dexamethasone is given. Like 1 mg DST, a cortisol level of less than 1.8 mcg/dL is considered a normal response. This test's sensitivity and specificity are 100% and 88%, respectively, with a positive predictive value of 92% and a negative predictive value of 89%.

Two or more positive initial screening tests in a patient with a high pretest probability of Cushing disease confirm the biochemical diagnosis of Cushing syndrome.

For the high-dose 48-hour dexamethasone suppression test, a plasma cortisol level above 1.8 mcg/dL (measured 48-hours after either administration of dexamethasone 2 mg by mouth every 6 hours for 48 hours, or 48-hours after one dose of 8 mg is given) is indicative of Cushing disease.

Pituitary MRI may show the ACTH secreting tumor if present. However, MRI fails to detect a tumor in 40% of patients with Cushing disease. The average size of the tumor that was detected on MRI was about 6 mm.

The most accurate test used to differentiate a pituitary adenoma from ectopic or adrenal Cushing syndrome is inferior petrosal sinus sampling.