**Diaphragm Formation**

- Septum transversum

- Pleuro-peritoneal membrane

- Mesentery of esophagus

- Mesoderm of the body wall

**Insertion**

The diaphragm inserts into a central tendon. The top surface of the tendon is partially connected to the lower surface of the fibrous pericardium. Muscle fibers arising from the right crus traverse up on the left side and encircle the orifice of the esophagus in a sling-like loop. These fibers act as a sphincter and likely assist in preventing the regurgitation of the stomach contents into the thoracic part of the esophagus.

**Origin of Diaphragm**

**Sternal**

The sternal part originates as 2 fleshy slips from the back of the xiphoid process.

**Costal**

The costal part originates from inner surfaces of the cartilages, adjacent parts of the lower sixth ribs on each side. It interdigitates with transversus abdominis.

**Lumbar**

The medial lumbocostal arch is a tendinous arch in fascia covering psoas major. Medially, it attaches to the side of the body of vertebra L1. Laterally, it connects to the front of the transverse process of vertebra L1.

The lateral lumbocostal arch is a tendinous arch in fascia covering the upper part of quadratus lumborum. Medially, attach to the front of the transverse process of vertebra L1. Laterally, it connects to the lower border of the 12th rib.

The right crus arises from the anterolateral surface of the bodies of the upper three lumbar vertebrae and also the intervening intervertebral disc

The left crus arises from the corresponding parts of the upper 2 lumbar vertebrae.

Medial margin of two crura forms a tendinous arc across the front of the aorta called the median arcuate ligament.