# Definition/Introduction

The Somogyi effect, also known as the "chronic Somogyi rebound" or "posthypoglycemic hyperglycemia," was a theory proposed in the 1930s by Dr. Michael Somogyi, a Hungarian-born professor at Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States.

However, more recent studies involving continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) have disputed this theory. Also, clinicians have observed that patients with early morning hyperglycemia tend to have high blood glucose measurements at night rather than low.

# Issues of Concern

**Somogyi Phenomenon vs. Dawn Phenomenon**

A phenomenon known as the dawn phenomenon was introduced by Dr. Schimdt in the 1980s, stating that morning hyperglycemia is due to the decreased levels of endogenous insulin secreted at night.

The Somogyi phenomenon states that early morning hyperglycemia occurs due to a rebound effect from late-night hypoglycemia. However, the dawn phenomenon does not include hypoglycemic episodes to be a factor.

**Insulin Release and Insulin Resistance**

With recent studies attributing early morning hyperglycemia to hypoinsulinemia, there is an observable pattern in which the body secretes insulin. The theory is insulin gets secreted in a circadian pattern, with the lowest concentrations between midnight and 6 AM and the highest concentrations between noon and 6 PM.

The Somogyi phenomenon has been a proposed phenomenon in insulin-dependent diabetic patients. The thinking is that these patients should monitor their blood glucose levels and adjust insulin dosages as necessary to prevent hypo- or hyperglycemic episodes.

In an individual that does not have diabetes, the blood glucose and insulin concentrations stay flat and constant throughout the night, with a transient increase in insulin just before dawn to prevent hepatic glucose production through gluconeogenesis and prevent hyperglycemia.

Insulin resistance, seen in diabetes or metabolic syndrome, has been associated with constant exposure to high insulin levels.

# Clinical Significance

The Somogyi phenomenon had been considered in the past; an essential consideration for the proper diagnosis and management of blood glucose levels is vital for the body’s metabolic demands. The post-hypoglycemic hyperglycemia raises the question of whether a patient’s insulin levels should be adjusted in the evening to prevent hyperglycemia in the morning. As this is something ideally avoided, the Somogyi phenomenon occurs too infrequently to make this standardized practice.

**Hypoglycemia vs. Hyperglycemia**

Glucose control is vital for brain metabolism and function, as it is the primary substrate for proper brain activity. The body has different regulatory molecules that act to decrease the likelihood of low blood glucose. The first response thought to activate due to low blood glucose is the counterregulatory hormone mechanism.de novo production of glucose, which occur in the liver.

Hyperglycemic episodes are also to be avoided. Symptoms to look out for include polyuria, polydipsia, weakness, tachycardia, and hypotension.

In an interprofessional team, there are many things to consider in managing a patient’s blood glucose concentrations. Theoretically, the risks of adjusting a patient’s insulin in case they undergo the Somogyi phenomenon could risk the potential consequence of increasing a patient’s chance of becoming severely hypoglycemic.

It is essential to coordinate care by involving the patient in discussions regarding proper glucose management. Lifestyle modifications and being aware of the symptoms of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia require discussion in great detail with the patient. It will allow them to make well-informed decisions regarding their food choices, lifestyle habits, and activity levels.

**Controversy**

The importance of maintaining proper blood glucose levels in any patient is apparent from both ends of blood glucose level abnormalities. Using the Somogyi phenomenon as a precaution for standard in practice does not have enough evidence. Instead, this theory can be used to help monitor patients’ blood glucose levels throughout different times of the day to see if they fit the theory.

Clinical studies suggest that underdosing of insulin from the previous night fails to prevent hyperglycemia.

In a study done at the Washington University School of Medicine to test the hypothesis of the Somogyi phenomenon, the conclusion was that the nocturnal hypoglycemia did not cause daytime hyperglycemia.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

All interprofessional healthcare team members who interact with patients with diabetes should be aware of the Somogyi phenomenon and the dawn effect and be able to explain them to their patients if it comes up during patient counseling, as patients may have heard of it and ask questions. Interprofessional healthcare team members can explain that it is no longer considered valid and direct the patients toward more scientifically back resources to help manage their condition.