**Flap Design**

An oral surgical flap is defined as a section of mucoperiosteal tissue that is surgically detached from the underlying bone to improve surgical access. This flap should have its own blood supply.

Most importantly, the lower third molar is closely situated to the lingual nerve, which is protected only by thin mucosa on the mesial aspect of the mandible. A two-sided or three-sided flap, also known as Ward's incision, is the ideal design of choice, with the distal relieving incision positioned buccally to avoid damage to the lingual nerve. The distal relieving incision is made 45 degrees to the distobuccal cusp of the lower third molar.

Previously, lingual nerve protection by way of raising a lingual flap and retraction of the lingual tissues with a Howarth's or similar was practiced to prevent damage to the lingual nerve. Blackburn (1989) demonstrates that this increases the risk of lingual nerve damage and, as such, is no longer indicated.

**Surgical Removal**

Following the creation of a suitable mucoperiosteal flap, the tissues are retracted using an appropriate instrument, such as a Rake retractor or Minnesota retractor. In addition to the retraction of the soft tissue flap, the purpose of the retractor is to protect the surrounding soft tissues, such as the lips and buccal mucosa.

A buccal gutter is then made using a fissure or round bur on a surgical handpiece to create space for movement of the mandibular third molar. In some instances, this is sufficient to facilitate the elevation of the tooth out of the socket. However, in other cases, the tooth will need to be sectioned before extraction. This typically follows the sequence of decoronation of the tooth, where the coronal portion is removed, followed by the division of the roots, which are delivered separately.

Decoronation of the tooth involves using a fissure or round bur perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth at the level of the furcation to divide the crown from the roots. A thin instrument such as a Couplands size one is placed into this groove and twisted to disimpact the coronal portion of the tooth. Once the crown is removed, the roots can now be visualized and should be divided in the same manner, using a round or fissure bur to create a groove into which a thin metal instrument is placed and twisted to separate the roots. The roots should then be delivered separately.

The socket should be irrigated and carefully debrided to sound bone, avoiding the apical aspect of the socket to prevent damage to the inferior alveolar nerve. Closure of the socket is typically achieved with resorbable sutures.