A variety of risk factors are linked to both hypertrophic scars and keloids. A very important, common, risk factor in clinical practice is tension on the wound. Hypertrophic scars and keloid scars often develop on areas of the body that undergo the most skin tension. These include the back, chest, and upper arms, or the occurrence of any scar over a bony or soft-tissue prominence. In contrast, hypertrophic scars rarely develop in areas with little skin tension such as the upper eyelids. In patients prone to keloid development, however, keloid can develop with any scar.

Certain systemic factors can increase the risk of hypertrophic scars. One study showed that hypertension is associated with increased keloid severity. Another systemic risk factor is inflammation. Systemic inflammation is seen after burn injuries further increasing the risk of developing hypertrophic scars and keloids for up to 1 year.

Multiple episodes of trauma to the same area are also a risk factor for hypertrophic scarring and keloid scars. One example is the use of earrings. Each time a person puts on or takes off the earing there can be some amount of trauma to the area. The site of ear piercings is a common area for the development of keloids, and there is an unclear association with nickel or other metals commonly used in ear jewelry. Burn wounds are prone to hypertrophic scarring, especially if they affect the deeper dermis (second and third-degree burns). One study found that hypertrophic scarring was much more likely in burn wounds that took three weeks or more to heal. Infection is another risk factor for hypertrophic and keloid scars. In addition, genetics can play a role in hypertrophic scars or keloids. Certain single-nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with keloid scars in persons of Japanese descent.