According to the Ottawa Ankle Rules, the clinician should not order ankle radiographs unless there is pain or tenderness in the ankle malleoli along with one of the following:

- The presence of tenderness at the tip of lateral or medial malleolus within or 6 cm above these structures

- Patients should not be able to bear their weight after the injury weight-bearing.

**Radiological Features**

**Plain-film Radiographs**

Ankle X-ray is the best initial investigation, requiring three views:

- Anterior-posterior view: assesses the soft tissue swelling and checks for any subtle fractures.

- Mortise view: this view is done by putting the foot in 15 to 20 degrees of internal rotation. It evaluates the talus positioning and the syndesmosis widening.

- Lateral view: serves to assess fractures in the lateral view and for determining any effusion in the ankle joint

Sometimes the tenderness is present in the proximal leg in addition to the widening of the syndesmosis, without obvious fracture in the ankle; however, there is a fracture in the proximal fibula. It provides a clue to the rupture of the syndesmosis. This presentation calls for a radiograph of the proximal tibia and fibula to diagnose a specific injury called a Maisonneuve fracture, which is a spiral fracture in the proximal third of the fibula.

Usually, weight-bearing films, if possible, are the best option to diagnose syndesmotic injuries.

**CT**

- CT is mostly for potential posterior malleolar fractures and to give an idea about the degree of impact.

**MRI**

- MRI is only indicated to assess soft tissues, i.e., cartilage or ligament injuries.

**Ultrasound**

- Ultrasound is also sometimes useful for ligament assessment, but the results are user-dependent

**Classifications**

The most common classification systems used to explain ankle fractures are the Lauge-Hansen and Danis-Weber systems. Each has its uses in classifying these fractures to identify the best way to treat the injury.

The Lauge-Hansen classification attempts to identify the fracture pattern based on the motion of the talus in the ankle joint. The classification system is broken into four groups: supination-adduction, pronation-abduction, supination-external rotation, and pronation-external rotation. Each mechanism of injury is associated with specific fracture patterns.

The Danis-Weber divides the lateral malleolus into three distinct areas and classifies the fracture of the lateral malleolus based on where the fibula was fractured. This classification is more basic and is more relevant when it comes to operative decision-making.