For saline prostheses, the most common sign associated with implant rupture is the evidence of volume diminution, which can be acute or gradual. There is rarely pain with a saline implant rupture outside of the infrequent post-traumatic ruptures. In silicone prostheses, some degree of chest wall pain may be present as the granulomatous inflammatory reaction takes place. A saline implant rupture is easy to detect on physical examination. It is often referred to as a deflated breast. It decreases in size over the course of a few days. If the saline implant deflates within a few days of insertion is it suggestive of iatrogenic damage or an improperly closed valve. For a mature implant, a recent history of trauma could be the cause of the rupture; but in the absence of this, manufacturing defects may be responsible, or late-stage implant failure may indicate the end of the lifespan of the implant. Silicone implant rupture is difficult to detect on physical examination, with a majority of cases being intracapsular; further evaluation with imaging is often required. Extracapsular silicone implant ruptures can sometimes produce a palpable mass or irregularity of the breast as inflammation and granulomatous tissue form; alternately, they may present with vague pain or tenderness symptoms or may be completely asymptomatic. Lymphoma has also been reported in association with a certain subset of breast implants, so the astute surgeon must always remember to query the patient regarding axillary or local masses and systemic symptoms that could herald lymphoma.

Pertinent questions for the suspected implant rupture are therefore:

- When was the implant placed?

- What type of implant was placed (if known)?

- Onset/duration of any symptoms

- Fevers/chills, or B-symptoms

Pertinent physical examination findings include:

- Breast shape and symmetry

- New breast masses

- Associated lymphadenopathy in the axillae or elsewhere

- The texture of the breast implant in question versus the contralateral breast implant

- Skin changes in the affected breast versus the contralateral breast

- Nipple discharge