Treatment of OG is multifactorial, consisting of surgical, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy treatment methods.

Surgical treatments are approached on a case-by-case basis. Tumor location, patient comorbidities, and other surgical risk factors are used to decide on the type of surgery. Complete, or gross total, resection is the primary treatment of choice. This leads to increased overall survival time and can be curative. Thus all attempts are made to achieve this level if possible.

Surgical resection techniques depend on the location of the OG, as the eloquent cortex and vital structures need to be spared. The location of craniotomy utilized for each approach and access will vary, and some surgeons prefer to perform the resection on an awake patient in order to stimulate, test, and map adjacent parenchyma to help determine the extent of tissue that can safely be removed. Intraoperative imaging techniques, such as intraoperative MRI or ultrasound, have also been used to assist in improving the extent of resection. These adjunct imaging techniques may be more efficacious than standard stereotactic navigation but also increases operative time and may require special equipment and training. The use of 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) fluorescent dye can also be a helpful surgical tool. 5-ALA is a heme precursor that has been shown to cause fluorescence in malignant tissue by creating fluorescent porphyrins and can be evaluated intraoperatively. It has also been shown to have statistically significant improvement in the extent of resection of high-grade gliomas over conventional stereotactic navigation, and overall similar in efficacy to intraoperative MRI, though it has only been shown in smaller sample sizes.

Radiation oncology with radiotherapy (RT) also plays an important role in the treatment of OG, most often after surgical resection. There does not appear to be a difference in overall survival between early or delayed postoperative RT, but an increased time to progression has been shown with early treatment, in addition to better seizure control following surgery.

Standard focal or limited field hyperfractionated RT is typically employed. The field consists of the resection bed, area of residual enhancement on T1 post-contrast imaging, and a margin of up to 3 cm, including the adjacent T2/FLAIR hyperintensity that may represent infiltrating disease. This margin is modified to minimize the involvement of critical structures or if microscopic/infiltrating disease is thought to be less likely.

RT is usually withheld from children to minimize some of the negative long-term effects of radiation, such as cognitive impairment, personality changes, hypopituitarism, motor and coordination abnormalities, and the development of other neoplasms.

In addition to RT, chemotherapy is a commonly used adjunct, demonstrating increased survival in RT/chemotherapy groups compared to RT alone.

An additional, non-cytotoxic treatment is approved for use in the USA, Canada, and parts of Europe for recurrent glioblastoma but may also have a beneficial use for anaplastic OGs that demonstrate increased vascularity as evidenced by enhancement and peritumoral edema on MRI. Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and these antibodies bind to the VEGF receptors decreasing neovascularization, permeability and help to stabilize the blood-brain barrier. This eventually leads to less peritumoral edema and decreased need for corticosteroids, improving symptoms, and in some studies, progression-free survival, though this treatment overall appears limited to recurrent disease, palliative treatment, and in patients suffering from radiation brain necrosis.