**CD**

Gluten-sensitivity is the major cause of CD. Gluten-sensitive enteropathy causes changes in intestinal anatomy, and these changes will disappear after gluten avoidance.

**NCGS**

Non-celiac gluten sensitivity is the terminology used to describe a diagnosis for "individuals who do not have celiac disease or wheat allergy, but who have intestinal symptoms, extraintestinal symptoms, or both, related to ingestion of gluten-containing grains, with symptomatic improvement on their withdrawal." The etiology of non-celiac gluten sensitivity remains unknown.

Also known as “non-celiac wheat sensitivity,” it is probably the most common gluten-related ailment with a prevalence of 0.5% to 13% in the general population. There are no biomarkers for the disease, and diagnosis by exclusion requires celiac and wheat allergy to be ruled out. Therefore, many patients suffer symptoms that might be interpreted as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) for years. Health issues might encourage them to go for a gluten-free diet, and the improvement might make them think they have the CD.

FODMAPs (fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols) present in gluten-containing grains have been identified as a possible cause of gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms in people with NCGS, in place of, or in addition to, gluten. FODMAPs cause mild wheat intolerance, usually limited to GI symptoms.

**Gluten Ataxia**

There is no specific knowledge of how gluten ataxia happens, but antibodies have been postulated to affect the cerebellum to cause the damage. In some hereditary ataxia syndromes, CD antibodies are more commonly found than in the normal population. A gluten-free diet might help some patients and reduce the neurologic deficits, but it’s not universally helpful, and occasionally, the cerebellum damage will be irreversible and cause atrophy and degeneration.

**Dermatitis Herpetiformis**

Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is an uncommon cutaneous eruption associated with gluten sensitivity and CD, characterized by intensely pruritic, inflammatory papules and vesicles on the forearm, knees, scalp, or buttocks.