**Normal Findings**

Urine is normally sterile. However, there is a possibility of contamination. Hence, samples from patients without UTI symptoms with low colony counts certainly below the threshold for bacteriuria, and no detection of organisms, are considered to be normal samples.

**Critical Findings**

- **UTI**: UTI symptoms. Gold standard confirmation is the urine culture.

- **CA-UTI:**According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America's (IDSA) 2010 guideline for diagnosis of CA-UTI, it is defined as patients with an indwelling catheter with the presence of symptoms or signs compatible with UTI with no other identified source of infection. They must also have greater than or equal to 1000 CFU/ml with more than one bacterial species in a single catheter urine specimen or in a midstream voided urine specimen in patients whose urinary catheter (urethral, suprapubic or condom) has been removed within the past 48 hours. According to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the patient must meet the following three criteria: 1) The patient must have an indwelling urinary catheter in place for more than 2 days on the date of the event, 2) The patient has a fever (of greater than or equal to 38 degrees Celsius, costovertebral angle (CVA) pain or tenderness, suprapubic tenderness, urgency, frequency or dysuria, and 3) The patient has a urine culture with no more than two species of organisms identified, at least one being a bacterium of greater than or equal to 1000 CFU/ml.

- **CA-ASB:**Positive urine culture in the absence of UTI symptoms.

- **Bacteriuria**: The most commonly used cut-off for significant bacteriuria is greater than or equal to 100,000 CFU/ml of urine.

The most common cause of UTIs in both inpatient and outpatient settings is Escherichia coli, accounting for the overwhelming majority of cases. E. coli is followed by coagulase-negative staphylococci, Klebsiella species, Proteus species, and Enterobacter species.