# Continuing Education Activity

Pituitary apoplexy is an infarction or hemorrhage of the pituitary gland. This condition most often involves a pre-existing pituitary adenoma. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and management of pituitary apoplexy, and highlights the role of the healthcare team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of pituitary apoplexy.
- Review the appropriate evaluation steps for pituitary apoplexy.
- Outline the management options available for pituitary apoplexy.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of patients with pituitary apoplexy and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Pituitary apoplexy is a condition in which there is a hemorrhage or infarction of the pituitary gland. This disorder usually occurs in a pre-existing pituitary adenoma.

# Etiology

A pre-existing pituitary adenoma is usually found in cases of pituitary apoplexy. In the majority of the cases, the patients are unaware of the tumor.

Sheehan syndrome occurs in postpartum women in which there is necrosis of the pituitary gland secondary to ischemia after significant bleeding during childbirth. It will present with adrenal insufficiency, hypothyroidism, and hypopituitarism, but rarely with visual changes. Most of the time, this entity is not included as a pituitary apoplexy as the gland did not have a pre-existing tumor, and visual symptoms are extremely rare.

# Epidemiology

The reported incidence of pituitary apoplexy varies significantly from 1.5-27.7% in cases of pituitary adenoma, but many of them do not distinguish between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. When symptomatic cases only are included, the incidence approaches 10%.

Most patients fall in the age range of 37-58 years.

# Pathophysiology

Hemorrhage produces an acute expansion of the tumor, which produces many of the symptoms. Visual symptoms are caused by direct compression of the optic nerves or chiasm, and hormonal dysfunction is caused by the sudden interruption of the release of the hormones.

Several theories had been proposed to explain the ischemic and hemorrhagic changes found in the tumor and the normal gland. Although they are proposed as separate mechanisms, probably each theory contributes to some process, and the combination of them is what ultimately produces the apoplexy. One theory postulates that the compression of the superior hypophyseal artery and its branches against the diaphragma sella leads to ischemia of the anterior pituitary gland and the tumor.

# History and Physical

A sudden-onset headache located behind the eyes is the most common symptom.

In pituitary apoplexy, the most impacting clinical problem is the lack of secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which occurs in more than two-thirds of the patients with apoplexy. The lack of secretion causes a cessation of cortisol secretion by the adrenal gland, which produces a variety of symptoms called "adrenal crisis."

# Evaluation

Computed tomographic (CT) scan: Non-contrast head CT scan is usually performed first as it is easier to obtain. It will show a sellar/suprasellar mass associated with intralesional hemorrhage. Ischemia or necrosis of the gland/tumor can not be identified. Contrast examination is done afterward to delimit the size of the tumor as the hemorrhagic products, and contrast-enhancing areas are hyperdense to the brain.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): Brain MRI is performed to improve the definition of the lesion. MRI is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice.

Hormonal evaluation: Pituitary hormonal evaluation is required, as nearly 80% of patients present with a deficiency of at least one of the anterior pituitary hormones.

Grading system: A 5-grade classification based on the clinical presentation spectrum had been recently proposed for treatment decisions and outcomes.

# Treatment / Management

Immediate medical management of patients with pituitary apoplexy includes a careful assessment of fluids and electrolyte balance, ensure hemodynamic stability, and replacement with corticosteroids.

Management of the mass is controversial as some advocate early transsphenoidal surgical decompression in all patients, whereas others adopt a conservative approach for those patients without visual acuity or field defects and with normal consciousness. Emergency surgery should be reserved for patients with progressive deterioration of consciousness, hypothalamic involvement, and progressive visual worsening. It has been demonstrated that a significant postoperative clinical improvement is a consequence of a surgical procedure performed as soon as possible.

Pediatric pituitary tumor apoplexy has a more aggressive natural history in comparison to adults, and early surgery may reduce its occurrence and improve outcomes.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several conditions have to be excluded as they can present with similar visual, ophthalmoplegic, and headache symptoms that occur in pituitary apoplexy. Some of the conditions will only require medical treatment, while in others, the surgical treatment is completely different.

- Rathke's cleft cyst

- Temporal arteritis

- Aneurysm

- Craniopharyngioma

- Subarachnoid hemorrhage

- Meningitis,

- Cavernous sinus thrombosis

- Basilar artery infarct

- Hypertensive encephalopathy

- Ophthalmoplegic migraine

- Retrobulbar neuritis

# Prognosis

Pituitary apoplexy can be a life-threatening condition if not detected and treated. The overall mortality is 1.6% to 1.9%.

Visual acuity, visual field defects, and ophthalmoplegia improve in the majority of the patients after both conservative and surgical decompression. After surgery, such improvement can be observed in the immediate postoperative period and often continues for several weeks after surgery. Visual recovery has been reported to be less likely in patients presenting with monocular or binocular blindness. Although visual outcome appears to be better with early intervention as compared to late,

Gross total resection and short duration of preoperative headaches are predictors for improvement in postoperative headaches.

# Complications

- Visual loss

- Adrenal crisis

- Ophthalmoplegia

- Increased intracranial pressure

- Ptosis

- Diabetes insipidus

- Bilateral cerebral infarcts

# Consultations

- Neurosurgery

- Hospitalist

- Ophthalmology

- Endocrinology

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with pituitary apoplexy may have a long residual endocrine deficiency and should have an assessment of pituitary function at 4 to 8 weeks after the event. Assessment of visual acuity, eye movements, and visual fields is mandatory. An MRI scan is recommended at 3 to 6 months after an episode to evaluate for residual tumor, and thereafter an annual MRI scan should be considered for the next 5 years.

Those patients with a known tumor should be educated about the possibility of hemorrhage. They should be encouraged to attend their endocrinologist and neurosurgeon scheduled visits. Any acute visual change or significant headache should alert them to seek immediate medical evaluation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pituitary apoplexy frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as headache, vomiting, and nausea. Sometimes, visual problems alert the patient of a more serious problem. The diagnosis is difficult to recognize without proper imaging studies.

While the neurosurgeon is almost always involved in the care of patients with pituitary apoplexy, it is important to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include an endocrinologist and ophthalmologist. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional team as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family. Those patients with adrenal crisis have to be monitored in an intensive care unit until hemodynamically stable. In the postoperative period for pain, wound infection prophylaxis, and hormonal replacement, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, hormonal replacements, and appropriate antibiotics. The neuroradiologist also plays a vital role in determining if pituitary apoplexy is secondary to hemorrhage or ischemia. Without providing a proper history, the neuroradiologist may not be sure what to look for or what additional radiologic exams may be needed.