In the majority of patients, the management of stable SVT is a stepwise approach that should begin with vagal maneuvers to attempt conversion to sinus rhythm; this is most commonly performed in the emergency department, but may also be done in appropriate clinic settings if the provider is comfortable with the situation. Successful vagal maneuvers are the first-line treatment for multiple reasons, including their low risk, cost, and ease of administration. The procedures should be performed by an ACLS certified provider, in conjunction with at least one nurse. Pharmacists can be involved if medical adjuncts will be in use, or if the vagal maneuvers are unsuccessful and care requires escalation. Informed consent is necessary for vagal maneuvers, but is not required to be in written form. Nursing staff will be on hand to assist the clinicians with any monitoring or other measures. Cardiology specialty-trained nursing staff would be the optimal choice. If the team plans to attempt chemical or electrical cardioversion, written consent is needed if the patient is stable. Vagal maneuvers, chemical cardioversion, and electrical cardioversion all require a controlled setting with full resuscitation equipment, including airway and sedation materials immediately available. In the setting of unsuccessful conversion, expert advice or evaluation by a cardiologist is necessary. [Level 1] Utilizing an interprofessional team approach offers the best opportunity for success when emp[loying vagal manoeuvers in cases where they have benefit. [Level 5]