Appendicitis used to be the main reason why people develop a liver abscess, but that has decreased to less than 10% since better diagnosis and management of the disease has become available. Nowadays, biliary tract disease (biliary stone, strictures, malignancy, and congenital anomalies) are the major causes of pyogenic liver abscesses.

Half of the bacterial cases are developed by cholangitis. Less often, causes are hepatic artery bacteremia, portal vein bacteremia, diverticulitis, cholecystitis, or penetrating trauma.E.coli,
Klebsiella, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and anaerobic organisms but are generally polymicrobial. If strep or staph is isolated solely, the focus should be on finding another source of infection (endocarditis) that has hematogenously spread to the liver. Klebsiella pneumoniae is a prominent etiology in Southeast Asia and is thought to be related to or associated with colorectal cancer there as well.

If the source is an anaerobe, the most common organism is Entamoeba histolytica. It affects the liver by first causing amebic colitis, then seeding the portal system and migrating to the liver and causing an amebic liver abscess. Although rare in the United States, it can still be found in immigrants or travelers from other countries.

Another rare but important parasitic organism is Echinococcus granulosus, which causes a hydatid cyst of the liver. Infection is caused by the metacestode stage of the tapeworm Echinococcus which is part of the Taeniidae family. Patients typically present with symptoms that include abdominal pain, diarrhea, and hepatomegaly. Hydatid cysts are acquired from dogs and can take a while to cause symptoms in the host. Most cases are discovered in the late stages and incidentally.