Four types of histamine receptors have been pharmacologically recognized, all of which are G protein-coupled receptors.

H1 receptors are widespread throughout the body, including neurons, smooth muscle cells of the airways, and blood vessels. Activation of the H1 receptors causes the stereotypical allergic/anaphylactic physiological reactions: increased pruritus, pain, vasodilation vascular permeability, hypotension, flushing, tachycardia, and bronchoconstriction. Also, H1 receptors regulate sleep-wake cycles, food intake, thermal regulation, emotions/aggressive behavior, locomotion, memory, and learning.

H2 receptors are found mostly in the gastric mucosa parietal cells, smooth muscle cells, and heart. Activation of the H2 receptors mediates gastric acid secretion, vascular permeability, hypotension, flushing, headache, tachycardia, and bronchoconstriction. Clinical relevance of H2 receptors is unclear as they have few measurable effects on airway functions.

H3 receptors are found mostly in histaminergic neurons, which moderate histamine, dopamine, serotonin, noradrenaline, and acetylcholine release in the central nervous system. The identification of H3 receptors played a key role in the understanding of the complexity of histamine-mediated systems. H3 receptor activation can also inhibit neurogenic sympathetic vasoconstriction in the nasal mucosa.

H4 receptors are present in the bone marrow and peripheral hematopoietic cells. They play a role in the differentiation of myeloblasts and promyeloblasts and chemotaxis. The H4 receptor is also a G protein-coupled receptor and has a close association with the H3 receptor, and its mRNA is located in the highest levels in the spinal cord. H4 receptors are characterized as the immune system histamine receptor due to its important roles in inflammatory disorders and autoimmune diseases.

Also, histamine receptors play an important role in immunomodulation. Histamine regulates the activity and differentiation of T cells, B cells, monocytes, and dendritic cells in lymphatic organs and tissues during allergic inflammation. For example, Th1 cells have a high H1-R prevalence and a low H2-R prevalence. Activation of Th1 cells by histamine leads to increased synthesis and release of interferon-gamma. On the other hand, Th2 cells have a low H1-R prevalence and a high H2-R prevalence. Th2 cell function is suppressed in the presence of histamine, leading to a decrease in cytokine release.