The history of a rabies-infected patient may be simple and straightforward with a known bite from a rabid animal. Unfortunately, it may be challenging to obtain a history pointing towards rabies due to the potential for a long incubation period and multiple potential transmission methods.

There are five stages of rabies following inoculation: incubation; prodrome; acute neurologic illness; coma; and death.

Incubation is the period defined as an inoculation to the first onset of symptoms and can range from days to years.

The prodrome phase includes nonspecific symptoms similar to flu-like illnesses with gastrointestinal symptoms, myalgias, and fevers being some of the possible symptoms.

The third stage of rabies is when neurologic symptoms occur. These are classified into one of three categories: encephalitic (also considered "furious"), paralytic (also considered "dumb"), and a rare non-classic form.

- The encephalitic form is most common and presents in approximately 85% of cases. These patients may exhibit hydrophobia or aerophobia, which is when spasms develop as a result of stimuli such as swallowing liquids (hydrophobia).  Agitation and changes in mentation can occur during the encephalitic form, with the potential for autonomic dysfunction, increased deep tendon reflexes, nuchal rigidity, and finding positive Babinski sign. Other examination findings outside the nervous system can include tachycardia, tachypnea, and fever.   This progresses rapidly to hyperactivity.

- The paralytic form of rabies is less common and noted to occur less than 20% of the time. These patients may be confused with Guillain-Barre syndrome as the classically associated hydrophobia, and irritability is not seen. Weakness is a hallmark, though patients may also have altered mentation, ongoing fevers, and bladder dysfunction.

- The final form of rabies is considered non-classic and is rare, generally associated with seizures and more profound motor and sensory symptoms.

Stage 4 of rabies is the coma stage and usually begins within ten days of stage 3. Patients may have ongoing hydrophobia, develop prolonged apnea periods, and have flaccid paralysis.

Following the onset of stage 4, without supportive care due to cardiopulmonary failure, most patients experience death within two to three days. Even with supportive therapy, virtually zero patients survive rabies.