The innate and adaptive immune system forms the basis of immunity in human beings. Innate immunity is a generalized and non-specific response to pathogens, while adaptive immunity induces pathogen-specific, more sophisticated, and long term responses.

Helper T cells activate macrophages and cytotoxic cells and stimulate antibody synthesis in B lymphocytes. Cytotoxic cells are involved in the direct killing of intracellular pathogens, and the elimination of mutated and cancerous cells. These immune responses are generated by T cells when they recognize an antigen, which is presented to them by antigen-presenting cells. The antigen is a peptide fragment generated by antigen-presenting cells when they degrade the foreign protein. To be recognized by a T cell, the antigen must bind a protein called the Major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Cytotoxic T cells recognize antigen bound to MHC protein type 1.

T lymphocytes originate from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and migrate to the thymus to maturate. They enter thymus at corticomedullary junction and move towards the cortex while undergoing developmental changes to accumulate in the subcapsular zone. These newly arrived intrathymic immature T cells are known as double-negative cells because they lack expression of CD4, CD8, and T cell receptors on their surface. These cells differentiate to express CD4 and CD8 on their surface and have a T cell receptor. Due to the expression of both surface markers, these cells are referred to as double-positive cells.