**Corneal Scraping**

Scraping is usually indicated under the following scenarios:

- Large central corneal infiltrate with significant stromal involvement or melt.

- Chronic and unresponsive keratitis to broad-spectrum antibiotics

- Previous history of corneal surgery.

- Atypical clinical features

- Significant multiple infiltrates in different locations of the cornea.

Scraping is performed under topical anesthesia (preservative-free) with 0.5% proparacaine or proxymetacaine 0.5%. The preservative-free formulation is preferred as a preservative may lower the bacterial viability for culture. Tetracaine can also be employed as it has a greater bacteriostatic effect. They are taken with the help of a disposable number 11 or 15 Bard-Parker blade, or 26 G bent hypodermic needle or sterile kimura or platinum spatula. Before performing scraping, the loose mucus, dead and necrotic tissue is removed from the ulcer surface. The sample is obtained from the margin and the base. The material obtained is smeared onto one or two glass slides for microscopic evaluation along with a Gram stain. An upper side surface is provided on the slide for labeling with a pen or a pencil as a convention. The sample is allowed to dry and then placed on the slide carrier. Repeat scraping is performed, and the sample is placed on various culture media like blood agar, chocolate agar, potato dextrose agar, brain heart infusion broth, Lowenstein Jansen media, etc. If the patient has previously used antibiotics, scraping can be delayed for at least 12 hours. Recently calcium alginate swabs with trypticase soy broth have been employed to obtain corneal specimens for obtaining a higher yield of bacteria. We have to be careful while obtaining specimens in case of corneal melt, descemetocele, and deep stromal keratitis cases.

The culture agar media is inoculated in the form of conventional multiple C markings without cutting the agar. In liquid media, the spatula or needle is dipped in the media deeply.

**Various Strains Used for Bacteria**

- Gram stain - gram-positive bacteria appear purple and gram-negative as pink.

- Acridine orange - Bacteria appear as yellow-green

- Acid Fast - Mycobacterium appear as pink

**Various Culture Media for Bacteria**

- Blood agar (35 degrees) - Aerobic and facultative anaerobic bacteria

- Chocolate agar (35 degrees) - Aerobic, anaerobic, Neisseria, Moraxella and Haemophilus

- Thioglycolate broth (35 degrees) - Aerobic bacteria and anaerobic bacteria

- Sabouraud’s dextrose agar (Room temperature) - Nocardia

- Brain heart infusion broth (Room temperature) - Nocardia

- Middlebrook Cohn agar (35 degree with 3 to 10% CO2) - Mycobacterium and Nocardia

- Cooked meat broth (35 degrees) - Anaerobic bacteria

- Thayer martin blood agar (35 degrees) - Neisseria

- Lowenstein Jensen media (35 degrees with 3 to 10% CO2) - Mycobacterium species

**Modified Jones severity grading of bacterial keratitis**



Mild

Moderate

Severe

Size

<2 mm

2-5 mm

>5 mm

Depth

< 20 percent

20-50 percent

>50 percent

Infiltrate

Superficial

Extends to mid stroma

Deep stromal

Scleral involvement

Not present

Not present

May be involved

**Jones Criteria for Culture Positivity**

- Clinically infective ulcer plus the isolation of bacteria (colony count 10 or more) on one solid and one additional culture media

- Isolation of bacteria on any two solid media

- Isolation of bacteria in on one media along with positive scraping

**Conjunctival Swab Culture**

In severe cases when culture growth is negative, conjunctival swab culture can be a vital adjunctive diagnostic modality. Calcium alginate swans yield the best results.

**Contact Lens Culture**

Contact lens, solution and, cases can also be cultured to yield significant information provided they have not been cleaned by the patient.

**Culture and Sensitivity Reports**

Culture and sensitivity reports help in targeted antibacterial therapy. It also helps in determining bacterial antibiotic resistance and susceptibility. Sometimes the clinician needs to switch between antibiotic regimens based on antibiotic sensitivity reports.

**Paracentesis**

Anterior chamber paracentesis is sometimes needed when scraping where cultures and negative, and there is a progression of ulcer despite best antibacterial therapy. It will also assist in distinguishing bacterial from other microbial keratitis cases. A side port is made, and a 0.1 to 0.2 ml sample is obtained with the help of a 25 G needle.

**Corneal Biopsy**

A corneal biopsy is performed when smear and culture results are negative two times, and there is a clinical progression of ulcer despite best antibacterial therapy. It is obtained with the help of a poly filament braided 6-0 or 8-0 silk sutures from normal to abnormal areas.

**Ultrasound B Scan**

It is usually performed after therapeutic keratoplasty when the fundus evaluation is not possible due to corneal edema, haze, fibrinous membrane, hyphema, or exudates in the anterior chamber. This diagnostic modality helps rule out retinal detachment, choroidal detachment, endophthalmitis, panophthalmitis, nucleus or lens drops, and vitritis.

**Newer Diagnostic Modalities**

Immunohistochemistry, enzyme immunoassay, polymerase chain reaction, and radioimmunoassay are recent upcoming modalities but still have a limited role in diagnosing bacterial keratitis.