The history and physical are essential because of a wide range of differential diagnoses in peripheral edema. Therefore, the timing of the edema, any changes in position, whether unilateral or bilateral, medication history, and evaluation for systemic diseases are crucial. Acute swelling of the limb within 72 hours is more common in deep venous thrombosis (DVT), cellulitis, acute injury from trauma, or recent initiation of new medications like calcium channel blockers. The chronic accumulation of more generalized edema over days, weeks, and months is usually due to underlying systemic conditions like congestive heart failure (CHF), liver disease, and renal disease.

Dependent edema is more common in venous insufficiency, which usually improves with elevation and worsens with dependency. Edema due to a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure, like malabsorption, liver failure, and nephrotic syndrome, does not change much with the position. Unilateral edema suggests local insults like DVT, cellulitis, venous obstruction, or lymphatic obstruction from tumor and radiation treatment. On the other hand, bilateral edema suggests systemic diseases such as CHF, liver failure, kidney disease, or severe malabsorption syndromes.

The detailed physical exam can help immensely to differentiate systemic causes such as CHF (common findings are jugular venous distension, dyspnea, bilateral crackles, and history of heart disease), liver disease (jaundice, ascites, history of hepatitis, and alcohol use disorder), renal disease (proteinuria, oliguria, history of uncontrolled diabetes and hypertension), thyroid disease (fatigue, anemia, weight gain). Edema should be assessed for pitting, tenderness, and skin changes. Also, in the early stages of lymphedema, pitting occurs due to an influx of protein-rich fluid into the interstitium before fibrosis of the subcutaneous tissue; therefore, lymphedema should be considered in the differential in pitting edema. Tenderness is common in cellulitis and DVT, while edema in systemic diseases like CHF, renal, and liver disease is usually non-tender. Acute DVT and cellulitis can increase the temperature of the skin over the affected area due to the activation of cellular and humoral factors. Chronic venous insufficiency is often associated with a brawny reddish texture due to the deposition of hemosiderin. In later stages, patients can develop venous ulcers that may progress to deep, weeping erosions.

Myxedema, due to hypothyroidism, presents with generalized thick skin with yellow to orange discoloration associated with nonpitting periorbital edema.