T. gondii is an obligate intracellular parasite that infects warm-blooded animals, including humans. It has a complex lifecycle, requiring a definitive host and an intermediate host to complete sexual and asexual cycles respectively. Members of the family Felidae are the only known definitive hosts for this organism. Cats can become infected by ingestion of infected oocysts or tissue cysts via the consumption of intermediate hosts. Infected cats shed millions of unsporulated oocysts in the feces for about 1 to 3 weeks. Oocysts from take 1 to 5 days to transform into infectious oocysts, which can remain infective in the environment for about a year.

When improperly cooked meat or food contaminated with cat feces is ingested, the outer cyst wall surrounding sporozoites and bradyzoites are proteolyzed by gastric juice in the alimentary canal. These uncoated sporozoites and bradyzoites enter the gut epithelium and differentiate into tachyzoites. Tachyzoites are rapidly multiplying forms of T. gondii. Tachyzoites can penetrate any nucleated cell, including dendritic cells, monocytes, and neutrophils resulting in dissemination. With the onset of the host immune response, these tachyzoites are repressed and eventually converted into slow replicating forms termed bradyzoites. Bradyzoites form a thick cyst wall around them, forming a tissue cyst enclosing thousands of bradyzoites. These cysts remain in a dormant form in the immunocompetent host. However, they can get reactivated when the host immune system is compromised.

Humans can contract T. gondii infection in four ways:

- Foodborne transmission - Ingestion of tissue cysts via consumption of undercooked/raw meat

- Zoonotic transmission - Ingestion of oocysts via consumption of food and water contaminated with feline feces.

- Vertical transmission - Infected mother causes congenital infection through the placenta.

- Transmission via organ transplantation or blood transfusion.