The mechanism of noncompetitive inhibition has been understood using the Michaelis-Menten model of enzyme kinetics for a century now. In noncompetitive inhibition, the inhibitor binds at an allosteric site separate from the active site of substrate binding. Thus in noncompetitive inhibition, the inhibitor can bind its target enzyme regardless of the presence of a bound substrate. Put differently; the inhibitor has the same affinity for both the enzyme and enzyme-substrate complex. Binding of the inhibitor to the enzyme or enzyme-substrate complex inactivates the enzyme, disallowing the production of its end product. Inactivation of the enzyme decreases the maximum rate of the reaction (Vmax), defined as the rate of the reaction at a substrate concentration that fully saturates all active sites of the specific enzyme. The Michaelis constant (Km) is the substrate concentration at which the reaction rate is half of Vmax. Km can also be interpreted as an inverse measurement of the enzyme-substrate affinity. In noncompetitive inhibition, the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate (Km) remains unchanged as the active site is not competed for by the inhibitor. Increasing substrate concentration to overcome the decrease in Vmax caused by noncompetitive inhibition is fruitless, as competition for the active site between inhibitor and substrate is not the limiting issue. The decrease in Vmax and the unchanged Km is the primary way to differentiate noncompetitive inhibition from competitive (no direct change in Vmax, increased Km) and uncompetitive (decreased Vmax and Km).

Before the convenience of powerful software used today in enzyme kinetics, data from enzymatic activity and inhibition was plotted on graphs to get a better understanding of the results. In education, a Lineweaver-Burk plot is the most frequent graph. Lineweaver-Burk plots are characterized by 1/V (V being velocity) plotted on the y-axis and 1/[S] ([S] being substrate concentration) on the x-axis. After plotting the data points, the x-intercept represents 1/-Km, while the y-intercept represents 1/Vmax. In non-competitive inhibition, when comparing pre- and post- inhibition plots, an increase in the y-intercept is seen (Figure 1). This graph correlates with the decrease in Vmax (increase in 1/Vmax) caused by inhibition. The x-intercept remains unchanged, as the apparent affinity of the enzyme for its substrate (Km, and thus 1/-Km) is not changed. The changes (or lack thereof) in Vmax and Km and their graphical depictions on the Lineweaver-Burk plot are the primary way to differentiate noncompetitive inhibition from competitive and uncompetitive inhibition.