Management of patients exposed to riot control agents should begin with the customary resuscitative priorities of securing the airway, ensuring adequate oxygenation and ventilation, and supporting hemodynamics. The face should be wiped with a moist towel to remove any particles before being washed. Copious water irrigation with soap should be used to remove contaminants. If there is significant skin breakdown, saline irrigation is the best choice.

Management of ocular exposures involves copious irrigation with water or saline. Irrigation should occur for at least 10 to 20 minutes but can continue longer if the patient continues to have ocular symptoms. Remove contact lenses before irrigation. A topical anesthetic should be used to reduce pain and blepharospasm, and improve irrigation.

The majority of respiratory symptoms following exposure to these agents are mild and self-limited, most resolve within 10 to 20 minutes after removal from exposure. Management of respiratory symptoms is largely supportive. Suctioning is an option for patients with copious secretions. If bronchospasm is present, beta-agonists and steroids can be administered. Patients with asthma, emphysema, or bronchitis may present with an acute exacerbation. Very rarely, these agents can precipitate laryngospasm, causing respiratory failure, requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. Late findings are rare but may include reactive airway dysfunction and pulmonary edema. Treatment of acute lung injury is supportive and may include supplemental oxygen, non-invasive ventilation, or mechanical ventilation depending on the severity.

Gastrointestinal symptoms are uncommon, but some patients will have nausea and vomiting. If oral exposure to the spray occurred this may increase the likelihood of gastrointestinal symptoms. Symptomatic treatment with intravenous rehydration, antiemetic agents, and electrolyte replacement is generally adequate. Given that the gastrointestinal symptoms are typically minor and self-limited, decontamination techniques including gastric lavage or activated charcoal are not necessary.

In law enforcement or military training environments, amphoteric chelating irrigation fluid may be useful as pre-treatment. In one study, police officers prophylactically exposed to the solution had less facial pain after entering a CS cloud and returned to action sooner.