The molecular basis underlying the formation of the branchial arch derivatives is dependent on a vast array of genes that facilitate proper growth. This section will highlight many of the important genes identified in this process.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are a group of genes that serve to facilitate proper growth and segmentation along an anterior-posterior axis. These genes express in branchial arches 2 through 6, and each arch associates with an individual group of Hox genes. Transcription regulation of Hox genes throughout development is influenced heavily by retinoic acid (RA) and its interaction with retinoic acid response elements (RARE) found in the promoter region of Hox genes.

Dlx genes help to establish the pattern and polarity of both neural crest cell-derived facial bones and the first branchial arch. Similar to the relationship of RA to Hox genes, endothelin signaling serves to regulate Dlx gene expression as an upstream regulator. Studies involving various Dlx gene deletions in mice suggest that regulation of the formation of the lower jaw is by Dlx transcription factor activity.

Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) is another signaling regulator that plays a role in pharyngeal segmentation and lateral migration of endodermal cells. This process helps to facilitate the formation of pharyngeal pouches through the evagination of the endoderm tissue towards the ectoderm. This process of endodermal tissue migration is referred to as 'outpocketing' and is crucial for branchial arch segmentation through the approximation of endoderm and ectoderm.