Ethanol follows zero-order kinetics. Alcohol absorption occurs mostly in the proximal part of the small intestine, but a little fraction is also absorbed by the mucosal layer of the mouth, esophagus, and stomach. Alcohol metabolism mostly occurs in the liver, with a rate of oxidation per unit time yielding a linear curve. Physiological conditions like starvation lower the rate of metabolism of ethanol, whereas insulin enhances it. Alcohol metabolism occurs via an oxidative and non-oxidative pathway. Various enzymes play a role in the oxidative pathway. They are alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) (present in the cytosol), aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) (present in mitochondria), cytochrome P450 (CYP2E1) (present in microsomes), and catalase (present in peroxisomes). The non-oxidative pathway includes the enzymes fatty acid ethyl ester synthase (FAEES) and phospholipase D (PLD). Both of these pathways are interrelated since drugs inhibiting the enzymes in the oxidative pathway drive the metabolism through the non-oxidative pathway.

In the oxidative pathway, ethanol is first converted to acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), present in the cytosol. NAD+ serves as an electron carrier for this reaction and gets reduced to NADH. This process significantly reduces hepatic cytosol, paving the way for hepatocyte damage by reactive oxygen species **(**ROS) and other byproducts of alcohol metabolism. The drug fomepizole competitively inhibits ADH, thereby preventing the formation of toxic metabolites.

Acetaldehyde is further oxidized by acetaldehyde dehydrogenase to acetone. Acetone finally oxidizes to CO2 in the heart muscle, skeletal muscles, and brain. Interestingly, a drug called disulfiram competitively inhibits acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, thereby delaying the clearance of acetaldehyde, causing dire symptoms like nausea, vomiting, chest and abdominal pain, dizziness, and worsening hangover. This mechanism of the drug has an application in treating alcohol use disorders. Several drugs exhibit the same property as disulfiram. They are metronidazole, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, chloramphenicol, quinacrine, first-generation sulfonylureas, griseofulvin, and some cephalosporins like cefotetan and cefoperazone.

The non-oxidative pathway involves the formation of fatty acid ethyl esters (FAEE) and phosphatidyl ethanol in the end. FAEE causes tissue damage wherein phosphatidyl ethanol forms at the expense of depleting phospholipase D (PLD), which participates in cell signaling.