The foot consists of multiple bones and articulations. Overall, there are 26 bones, 33 articulations, and 3 functional and anatomic regions. The hindfoot consists of the talus and calcaneus, while the midfoot consists of the navicular, the cuboid, and the 3 cuneiforms. The Lisfranc joint, or forefoot, consists of 5 metatarsals and 14 phalanges. The articulations between the hindfoot and the midfoot make up the midtarsal or Chopart joints. They are made up of the talonavicular and the calcaneocuboid joints. The articulations between the midfoot and the forefoot are termed the Lisfranc joints and consist of 5 tarsometatarsal joints. These three articulations are the tarsometatarsal articulation, intermetatarsal articulation, and the intertarsal articulations. Flexion and extension primarily occur at the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) and interphalangeal (IP) joints.

**Subtalar / Peritalar Dislocation**

A subtalar dislocation occurs when both the subtalar (talocalcaneal) and talonavicular dislocate.

**Midtarsal (Chopart) Joint Dislocation**

Chopart joint dislocations are common injuries seen following substantial trauma to the midfoot area of an inverted ankle.

**Lisfranc/Tarsometatarsal Dislocation**

The Lisfranc/tarsometatarsal joint is comprised of the articulations between the first 3 metatarsals and the 3 cuneiform bones: medial, intermediate, and lateral.

**Total Talar Dislocation**

A total talar dislocation is a rare form of foot dislocation where the talus dislocates from all three of its articulations: the talonavicular, talocalcaneal, and tibiotalar joints. Such dislocation is usually the result of substantial trauma to an inverted and plantar-flexed foot, often in the form of a motor vehicle collision or falls from a substantial height.