One persistent argument associated with this nerve is its name. There has been some debate on how to refer to it properly in scientific terminology. While some argue it should remain as the terminal nerve after its location by the lamina terminalis, others have proposed other nominations. There have been several suggestions, including CN0, CN XIII, and others.

Aside from the anatomical nomenclature issues, the reality is that CN0 can function as an important topic for medical teaching. Not only is CN0 anatomically relevant for its long history in the scientific literature, but it is also clinically relevant for its relationship to normal and abnormal development and function, as illustrated by its potential role in KS, commonly caused by a genetic mutation in the kisspeptin or GnRH signaling pathways. Embryologically, the development of CN0 occurs synchronized to the sensory structures of the olfactory system. Developmental disturbances in stages 17 and 18 have been linked to physiological abnormalities of the HPA axis, as described in KS. Also, traumatic avulsion of the olfactory network also plays a role in depression concomitant with anosmia in patients who experience sufficiently traumatic forces commonly associated with automobile collisions. Depression with anosmia has also been linked to symptoms such as reduced sexual drive and impaired recognition of emotion in others.

Medical and health sciences students will benefit from a better understanding of the basic science and clinical aspects associated with traditional cranial nerve teaching, along with the growing body of scientific evidence on CN0. Finally, CN0 is important in principle as a topic of ongoing scientific debates that shape the nature of the evidence-based practice that underpins medicine. Scientific knowledge evolves, resulting in changes to standards of practice and treatment options requiring medicine students to be "lifelong learners" for their patients' benefit.