Glucose metabolism takes place in the cytosol without the need for oxygen by a process termed glycolysis. It yields a small amount of ATP, and the three-carbon compound pyruvate. After the transportation of pyruvate into the mitochondria, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) facilitates the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and CO2. Each molecule of acetyl-CoA entering the TCA cycle yields 12 ATP molecules. The (PDC) has three protein subunits and requires five cofactors for its enzymatic function. The requirement of cofactors ensures the ability of the complex to be regulated. In high blood sugar levels, most acetyl-CoA will be derived from glucose, more specifically, pyruvate. However, in starvation or fasting states, beta-oxidation contributes to the production of acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA undergoes oxidation to CO2 in eight steps, and the energy produced from these reactions is stored in NADH+H+, FADH2, and GTP. NADH+H+ and FADH2 then oxidize in the electron transport chain (mitochondrial respiratory chain), terminating in ATP synthesis.

Intermediated from the TCA cycle are precursors for both catabolic and anabolic processes. It connects several metabolic processes (e.g., glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, ketogenesis, lipogenesis).

These three mechanisms regulate the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC): covalent modification being the primary form of regulation, allosteric regulation, and transcriptional regulation. The covalent modification takes place when the first subunit of the PDC, pyruvate decarboxylase, is phosphorylated. This phosphorylation results in decreased PDC activity and an increase of ADP or pyruvate (signaling the requirement for more acetyl-CoA in the TCA cycle, which downregulates PDC). Calcium ions upregulate phosphatase’s activity; phosphatase, in turn, dephosphorylates PDC rendering it active. Allosteric regulation of PDC entails the direct mechanism of substrate activation or product inhibition. For instance, when there is an excess release of Acetyl-CoA from E2 or NADH from E3, these products act to inhibit PDC directly. In contrast, an increase in the levels of CoASH (precursor to acetyl-CoA) or NAD+ will directly activate PDC. The last type of regulation of PDC activity is transcriptional regulation, which is dependent on the number of enzymes produced in fasting and fed conditions. In the fed state, enzyme production increases due to the effect of insulin, but it reduces in fasting states.