The cardiac action potential lasts approximately 200 ms and is divided into 5 phases: (4) resting, (0) upstroke, (1) early repolarization, (2) plateau, and (3) final repolarization.

Approximate resting membrane potential (RMP): -90 mV

- Phase 4 - RMP due to activity of the Na/K ATPase pump. The exchange of three sodium ions out for two potassium ions maintains the negative intracellular potential.

- Phase 0 - depolarization to approximately +52 mv due to sodium influx via fast sodium channels

- Phase 1 - partial repolarization due to the closure of fast sodium channels and efflux of potassium and chloride

- Phase 2 - plateau phase maintained by the influx of calcium. Potassium efflux also occurs.

- Phase 3 - repolarization back to RMP due to potassium efflux and closure of sodium and calcium channels

The generation of a cardiac action potential is involuntary and proceeds via a process known as excitation-contraction coupling (ECC). Action potentials travel along the sarcolemma and into the t-tubules to depolarize the membrane. Voltage-sensitive dihydropyridine (DHP) receptors on t-tubules allow calcium influx into the cell via L-type (long-lasting) calcium channels during the plateau phase (phase 2) of the action potential. This increased concentration of intracellular calcium triggers the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release more calcium through the ryanodine receptor, in a process known as calcium-induced calcium-released.

The released calcium attaches to troponin C, causing tropomyosin to detach from the myosin-binding sites on actin. Actin and myosin then form a cross-bridge, and contraction occurs. Cross bridges last as long as calcium is attached to troponin.

Unlike the cardiac muscle cells, the pacemaker cells' action potential is divided into 3 phases instead of 5, as phases 1 and 2 are absent. Pacemaker cells are comprised of sinoatrial (SA) and atrioventricular (AV) nodes which are known to spontaneously fire, sending electrical activity throughout the heart, and do not require stimulation to initiate their action. This autorhythmicity transpires because of funny current channels, which allow sodium ions to continuously leak into the cell (Phase 4), slowly raising the membrane potential until a certain threshold is reached, causing depolarization of the cell. This subsequently opens calcium channels causing calcium ions to enter the cell, further raising the membrane potential (Phase 0). After a positive membrane potential is sensed, potassium channels open, causing an outward flow of ions, bringing the membrane potential back down to its resting potential (Phase 3).