The HIV virus is neuroinvasive, neurotropic, and neurovirulent for cells of the central and peripheral nervous systems. However, underlying etiologies for neuropathy depend on the immune status of HIV patients. Inflammatory neuropathies occur at a higher CD4 count, and opportunistic infections lead to neuropathies at a lower CD4 count.

Classically, progressive polyradiculopathy is associated with cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in patients with HIV. Nevertheless, its association with other infectious etiologies has also been demonstrated, such as a varicella-zoster virus (VZV), mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB), treponema pallidum, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), toxoplasma, cryptococcus, and herpes simplex virus.

Infective and lymphoma-related etiologies are usually subacute and progressive. Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy (CIDP) and diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis (DIL) are less commonly seen. Rarely, two types of subacute lumbosacral polyradiculopathy syndromes are seen with HIV seroconversion, known as HIV associated variant of Guillain Barre syndrome (GBS), a type of acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy and another type with motor axonal GBS.

Idanivir-induced epidural lipomatosis has also been reported, which led to lumbar polyradiculopathy and resolved with the discontinuation of the drug.

A clinical course with milder features was also observed in a few studies, which was more benign and had lesser neurological deficits and with CSF findings, unlike those seen in CMV infection, with either spontaneous recovery or quick recovery after surgical decompression.

Thus, while investigating known HIV-positive patients, it is essential to exclude etiologies with a similar presentation in the general population, especially in patients with a well-controlled disease under highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).