**Conventional Steps of Phacoemulsification**

**Marking the Eye and Time-Out**

Before starting the surgery, it is essential to mark the eye with a pen or sticker to avoid operating on the wrong eye. The marking can be a tick or a cross, or a circle. The mark can be placed above the eyebrow or below the cheek. The time out is when the surgeon reviews the patient details like name, place, age, correct eye, and IOL power to avoid mistakes while operating.

**Globe Exposure**

After draping and administering anesthesia to the eye, a speculum should be applied to hold the eyelids apart. The speculum should be applied wide enough to allow easy instrumentations. The surgeon can operate from the superior side or temporal side. The axis of astigmatism should also be considered while placing the incision as it needs better exposure in that area.

**Side Port Incisions (Paracentesis)**

Side port incisions are made on either side approximately 2 to 3 clock hours from the main precise corneal incision. The paracentesis is performed with a 15-degree blade or MVR blade. The paracentesis is helpful for insertion of the second instrument like rhexis needle, viscoelastic, iris hooks, rhexis forceps, and other intracameral additives. The incisions are made parallel to the iris plane.

**Clear Corneal Incision**

The clear corneal incisions are placed temporally or superiorly approximately 2.2 to 3.2 mm wide. The incision is large enough to accommodate the handpiece of phaco and IOL. The objective of establishing a clear corneal incision is that it should be self-sealing, water-tight without any leakage, and minimizes astigmatism during the surgery. There should be minimal manipulation of the incision to fish mouthing of the incision, and care should be taken to avoid wound burn from the phaco probe. The incision can be uniplanar, biplanar, or tri-planar.

**Sclerocorneal Tunnel Incision**

A sclerocorneal tunnel incision is used when PMMA rigid IOL insertion is planned, or there is a need to convert a clear corneal phaco to sclerocorneal during a complication. One advantage of this incision is that it reduces surgically induced astigmatism.

**Continuous Curvilinear Capsulorrhexis (CCC)**

After a clear corneal incision, the next step is to perform a rhexis to expose the lens for emulsification. CCC helps the surgeon to stabilize the nucleus, perform controlled maneuvers inside the capsular bag, prevent radial tears and rhexis run out. The ideal size of CCC for phacoemulsification is 5 to 5.5 mm to accommodate a 6 mm optic of the IOL.

**Hydrodissection**

This is one of the most critical steps in phacoemulsification to separate the cortex from the posterior capsule. A correctly performed hydro dissection will facilitate nucleus rotation, trenching, and nuclear breakdown. Hydrodissection is performed using a 2 ml or 5 ml syringe with a 25-30 G cannula. After lifting the capsular flap, saline-injected to separate the cortex from the capsule. The passage of a wave of dissection from one end to the other indicates adequate hydrodissection. In a mature and sometimes brown cataract, the nucleus is free from the cortex, and there is no need to perform a hydrodissection.

**Hydrodelineation**

This separates the endonucleus from the epinucleus and is indicated in posterior polar cataract cases. The separation of endonucleus from epinucleus creates a golden brown ring. Hydrodelineation has a limited role in phacoemulsification.

**Nuclear Rotation**

After an adequate hydrodissection, nucleus rotation becomes accessible within the capsular bag. When the nucleus rotates freely, it becomes easier to perform divide and conquer, stop and chop, and direct chop techniques of phaco. If the dissection is not proper, it will stress the zonules and result in zonular dialysis.

**Techniques of Nucleus Break and Removal**

The various steps include pre-phaco, sculpting, trenching, cracking, chopping, holding, and emulsification.

**Plane of Phacoemulsification**

The plane of phacoemulsification can be the posterior chamber, iris plane, or anterior chamber.

**Posterior Chamber**

The nucleus cracking and emulsification is performed in the posterior chamber. The significant advantage is less risk and trauma to the corneal endothelium. The disadvantage is the risk of posterior capsular rent.

**Iris Plane**

The nucleus is prolapsed anteriorly, and phaco is performed at the iris plane. This technique is helpful for beginner phaco surgeons and in cases with pre-existing zonular weakness. The disadvantage is being closer to the endothelium may result in endothelial damage.

**Anterior Chamber**

This is also known as the suprascapular approach. In this, the nucleus is prolapsed in the anterior chamber and emulsified in the anterior chamber. This is advantageous in cases of posterior capsular rupture and cases with zonular weakness. The disadvantage is the risk of endothelial trauma and a high chance of aspirating the iris tissue. It is recommended to coat the endothelium with viscoelastic before performing anterior chamber phacoemulsification

**Techniques of Nucleus Cracking**

**Divide and Conquer Nucleofractis**

Divide and conquer nucleofractis is a valuable technique for all cataracts except very soft nuclei. In this, a deep central groove is made in the form of a plus sign of adequate depth to facilitate bimanual mechanical cracking. Signs of adequate depth include the appearance of a red glow, a deep grove of 2-3 phaco tip diameter, and loss of striations.

**Stop and Chop**

In this technique, a central deeper linear groove is made. The nucleus is divided into two heminuclei by mechanical cracking using a Sinskey chopper in the left hand and a phaco probe in the right hand.

**Direct Chop**

In this technique, a central deep crater is formed. The nucleus is cracked into multiple pieces by engaging the phaco probe deep in the nuclear material under a high vacuum and mechanically cracking the piece with a Sinskey hook.

**Chopping Techniques**

**Horizontal Chop**

In this technique, the central groove is not fashioned. The phaco probe is deeply buried in the center of the nucleus under a high vacuum, and the chopper or a sinskey hook is inserted in the endonucleus under the anterior lens capsule and brought towards the central phaco tip. This, in turn, facilitates cracking.

**Vertical Chop**

In this technique, the phaco tip is buried deeply in the central part of the nucleus, and the chopper is impaled adjacent to the phaco tip. The phaco tip is lifted slightly, and the chopper is depressed and nuclear pieces are cracked.

**Irrigation and Aspiration (I/A)**

Irrigation and aspiration is a technique for the removal of epinucleus and cortical matter from the capsular bag. Coaxial I/A or bimanual I/A can perform this. A bimanual Simcoe cannula can also be used to remove the cortex. This technique is also helpful for polishing the capsule and removal of viscoelastic after putting IOL in the bag.

**IOL Implantation**

The final step in phacoemulsification is the insertion of a foldable IOL with the help of IOL injectors. In uncomplicated cases, the aim is to place the IOL in the capsular bag. However, IOL can be easily implanted in the sulcus with sufficient capsular support in case of a complication. The IOL implantation should be performed under liberal viscoelastic cover. After implantation, the viscoelastic is removed with I/A to avoid secondary glaucoma. This is followed by anterior chamber formation and injection of intracameral moxifloxacin.