The primary objective in treating Ludwig angina is to secure the airway, as asphyxiation resulting from airway obstruction is the leading cause of mortality. The next steps include controlling the infection with intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics and surgical drainage in some cases of well-established infections. Intravenous steroids and nebulized adrenaline can be adjuvant treatments to improve facial and airway edema and antibiotic penetration.

**Airway Management**

If hypoxic, patients must receive supplemental oxygen.

Blind nasotracheal intubation, which involves passing an endotracheal tube without a direct view of the larynx, should be avoided in cases of Ludwig angina. This procedure can potentially induce bleeding, rupture abscesses, exacerbate edema, and lead to laryngospasm.

**Intravenous Antibiotics**

Once the airway is secured, broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics serve as the first-line treatment.

Furthermore, clinicians should consider MRSA coverage for immunocompromised patients, those at increased MRSA risk, or those with prior history of MRSA infection. MRSA coverage includes the addition of vancomycin IV or linezolid IV to the mentioned antibiotic coverage. Table 1 summarizes the recommended antibiotic regimes (see Media File 4).

**Intravenous Steroids**

Intravenous steroids and nebulized adrenaline (epinephrine) can be used as adjuvant treatment, reducing edema and cellulitis, facilitating intubation, and increasing the penetration of antibiotics into the fascial spaces.

**Surgical Drainage**

Although the evidence is controversial, early surgical decompression of the submandibular space may improve airway status.

Surgical decompression is indicated in cases of Ludwig angina when there is a visible abscess on imaging, presence of fluctuance on examination, or when antibiotic treatment has proven ineffective.