Management of CM-II depends on the extent of the malformation and the neurological impairments associated with it. Often, surgical interventions are required. Some procedures include treatment for hydrocephalus, closure of open neural tube defects, and decompression of posterior fossa structures. Certain medical problems such as neonatal feeding difficulties, apnea, respiratory failure, and neurogenic bowel require nonsurgical management.

Surgical intervention to repair myelomeningocele is commonly required. Some evidence has demonstrated benefits in performing the procedure on the in utero fetus.

Hydrocephalus is a common problem encountered in the management of CM-II. The timing and need for surgical intervention in patients are primarily determined by neuroimaging findings and the severity of symptoms. Urgent surgical intervention is required in patients with rapidly progressive hydrocephalus. Another important indication for surgery is if a patient is symptomatic and has hydrocephalus. Some symptoms include vomiting, developmental delays, headaches, focal neurologic deficits, and papilledema. An additional indication includes progressive ventriculomegaly and clear evidence of an obvious obstruction on imaging. The most common surgical intervention is the placement of a shunt. This prevents the CSF from accumulating, allowing the CSF to flow from the ventricles to the peritoneum and then get absorbed. This procedure helps improve neurological function.

Surgery to restore normal CSF flow by decompressing the craniocervical junction may also be required. Posterior decompression is the most common procedure using a suboccipital craniectomy with or without duraplasty. Most surgeons favor a posterior fossa decompression with the duraplasty. Potential complications include CSF leak, meningitis, pseudomeningocele formation, and acute postoperative hydrocephalus. Another possible procedure includes anterior foramen magnum decompression (typically via transoral odontoidectomy), an alternative surgical technique typically used when posterior decompression fails.