The clinical presentation of marasmus varies greatly depending on the severity and duration of calorie restriction. Furthermore, the age of the patient and whether or not the marasmus is associated with vitamin and mineral deficiencies will contribute to different presentations of marasmus.

Marasmus will present with a failure to thrive. In infants, it may be associated with irritability and apathy. Furthermore, infants may have sunken fontanelles as a result of dehydration. The general appearance is shrunken and wasted due to reduced levels of subcutaneous fat.

Marasmus may also be associated with hypotension, hypothermia, and bradycardia.

The child will be less than 60% of the weight for age. Long-standing marasmus is associated with growth stunting; this may lead to the weight for height being within the normal range. Marasmus is frequently associated with symptoms of anemia and rickets.

As marasmus progresses, several body systems may be affected. An impairment in cardiovascular function can contribute to hypotension, hypothermia, and bradycardia.

As marasmus tends to be associated with other micronutrient deficiencies, it is important to recognize that these may also present in a child with marasmus. The child may suffer from dry eyes and the development of Bitot spots secondary to vitamin A deficiency. The nails may have a spoon-shaped appearance (koilonychia) secondary to iron deficiency and anemia. Hypocalcemia may lead to the presentation of Chvostek or Trousseau signs. Over a long period of time, a deficiency in calcium and vitamin D may lead to the development of associated rickets or other bone deformities.

It is important to note that in marasmus, the signs indicative of kwashiorkor such as edema, scarcity, dermatosis, depigmentation of hair, and cheilosis are not present.