A thorough history and physical is essential to the evaluation of this condition and to help in distinguishing it from mimics. Although microscopic identification of nematocyst cnidocytes from skin scrapings has been successfully performed in studies,

Testing should be performed to help identify alternative causes of patients’ symptoms and to identify complications associated with Irukandji syndrome. Prior to the initiation of any diagnostic testing, however, it is crucial to assess and stabilize a patient’s airway, breathing, and circulation.

Electrocardiographic (ECG) changes have been shown to occur with Irukandji syndrome including atrial and ventricular ectopy, atrioventricular conduction defects, ST-segment elevation, T-wave abnormalities, and cases of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia.

Cardiac enzymes should be sent to identify myocardial damage, which is not uncommon with the disease process and could represent severe pulmonary edema, demand ischemia, or associated cardiomyopathy.

A chemistry panel, including a renal function panel, can help identify cases of renal failure that have been shown to occur. A serum lipase can help make the diagnosis of pancreatitis associated with the syndrome.

A chest X-ray is useful to visualize the degree of pulmonary edema or to help differentiate the etiology of chest pain or dyspnea in an undifferentiated patient.

Drug screens can sometimes be helpful when there is not a clear history in an undifferentiated patient showing signs consistent with the sympathomimetic syndrome. However, urine drug screen results should never be relied upon to guide treatment as a negative test result does not rule out any presentation, and a positive test result does not exclude other pathology. Also, urine drug screens often display false-positive results due to cross-reactivity with other agents, as well as false-negative results due to various factors, such as the timing of metabolism and misinterpretation of results.

If a patient is showing signs of headache, altered mental status, or acute encephalopathy, computed tomography (CT) imaging of the brain should be considered, as both cerebral edema and intracranial hemorrhage have been associated with Irukandji syndrome.

In summary, it is recommended to obtain the following tests in the evaluation of a patient in whom you are considering the diagnosis of Irukandji syndrome:

- Electrocardiogram

- Cardiac enzymes

- Chemistry

- Blood count

- Liver enzymes

- Lipase

- Chest X-ray

- Bedside echocardiogram if acute heart failure is suspected

- CT imaging of the brain in cases of headache or acute encephalopathy