Over 90% of endometrial cancers are epithelial malignancies, in other words, carcinomas. Endometrioid carcinoma histotypes constitute the majority of endometrial carcinomas, and low-grade (FIGO Grades 1 and 2; see above: Etiology) endometrioid carcinomas account for 80% to 90% of all endometrioid carcinomas, serving as the prototype for the WHO (2014) classification of type 1 endometrial cancers. High-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC) are the prototype for the WHO (2014) classification of type 2 endometrial cancers. About 75% of type 2 endometrial cancers are morphologically high-grade serous (greater than 50%), clear cell (12% to 14%), or undifferentiated (5%) carcinomas. They can also be composed of mixed elements of serous, clear cell, or endometrioid carcinoma (7% to 8%). Carcinosarcomas constitute most of the remaining type 2 endometrial epithelial malignancies.

Type 1, low-grade endometrioid carcinomas are generally confined to the uterus when they are diagnosed and have relatively favorable prognoses compared with HGSC and other type 2 endometrial carcinomas, which have significantly poorer prognoses and often are disseminated when diagnosed. The epidemiologic and clinical factors associated with type 1 endometrial carcinomas are different and distinct from type 2 endometrial carcinomas. A majority of endometrial low-grade endometrioid carcinomas show MSI and carry PTEN mutations in contrast to endometrial HGSC in which nuclear pleomorphism is common, and TP53 mutations are nearly ubiquitous. The clinical behavior and some epidemiologic aspects of endometrial high-grade (FIGO Grade 3) endometrioid carcinomas are similar to type 2 endometrial HGSC, and aberrant p53 IHC staining may be found in some poorly differentiated endometrioid carcinomas (see: Etiology, Epidemiology, above, and Management, below). Endometrial carcinomas with high grade solid, endometrioid and/or transitional cell-like (SET) morphologies behave clinically like other type 2 carcinomas and, like morphologically pure HGSC, many HGSC-SET carcinomas demonstrate evidence of TP53 mutations. Carcinosarcomas make up most of the remaining type 2 endometrial epithelial cancers.

Endometrial stromal sarcomas comprise less than 1% of all uterine malignancies and less than 10% of endometrial cancers. The WHO (2014) classifies endometrial sarcomas into:

- Endometrial stromal nodule (ESN)

- Low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LG-ESS), usually with less than 5 mitoses per 10 high power fields, which have similar morphologic and IHC characteristics with ESN

- High-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (HG-ESS), differentiated from LG-ESS by a high mitotic rate greater than 10 mitoses per 10 high power fields, distinguishing IHC patterns and defined by YWHAE-FAM22 gene rearrangements

- Undifferentiated uterine sarcomas (UUS), which are highly pleomorphic sarcomas arising in the endometrium with the exclusion of other uterine sarcomas but sometimes in association with LG-ESS and differentiated by the IHC results and the lack of YWHAE-FAM22 gene rearrangements found in HG-ESS

Typically, ESN and LG-ESS usually show strongly positive diffuse staining for ER and PR and CD10 in IHC but are negative for Cyclin D1; while HG-ESS with YWHAE-FAM22 translocations usually shows diffuse positive nuclear staining for Cyclin D1, but ER, PR, and CD10 staining are absent or only weakly and focally positive. UUS arising in the endometrium may be negative or show weakly positive patchy staining for ER, PR, and CD10, but endometrial UUS can have diffusely present Cyclin D1 staining sometimes coexisting with CD10. ESN is often confined to the endometrium or have limited invasion with good prognosis. LG-ESS usually are intrauterine with greater than 90% 5-year survival, but lymphatic and/or distant metastases may accompany deep invasion or adnexal involvement, thereby worsening the prognosis. HG-ESS with YWHAE-FAM22 translocation may present with localized or metastatic disease and generally carry prognoses between LG-ESS and the less favorable prognoses associated with more aggressive UUS. The most common clinical presentations of endometrial stromal sarcomas are abnormal vaginal bleeding and pelvic-abdominal mass and/or pain.