Hippocrates first described the term primary congenital glaucoma when he noted abnormally enlarged eyes in infants. Later on, the pathogenesis of increased intraocular pressure and angle abnormalities were correlated with this entity. Primary congenital glaucoma is also referred to as developmental glaucoma, as it might not always present immediately after birth. Depending on the age of onset, the primary congenital glaucomas have been divided into the following types.

- True congenital glaucoma – Also known as newborn glaucoma. In this type, the child is either born with ocular enlargement or enlargement of eyes is noticed within one month of life. It is believed that the IOP is raised in the intrauterine life itself. These cases account for approximately 25 percent.

- Infantile glaucoma – This type includes patients who manifest between 1 and 36 months of life. It accounts for approximately 65 percent of patients with primary congenital glaucoma.

- Juvenile glaucoma – This group includes patients with signs of raised intraocular pressure manifest after three years of age but before adulthood. This accounts for about 10 percent of cases.

Another classification system has been defined based on the area of dysgenesis known as Hoskin classification.

- Trabeculodysgenesis – Defect lies in the development of trabecular meshwork

- Iridotrabeculodysgenesis – Includes hypoplasia or hyperplasia of the stroma, anomalous iris vessels, or structural defects in the form of coloboma or aniridia.

- Corneotrabeculodysgenesis – This includes complex cases of congenital glaucoma like Axenfield, Rieger, or Peters anomaly.

Hoskin's classification type 1 is labeled as primary congenital glaucoma, while types 2 and 3 are labeled as secondary congenital glaucoma.