**Ratio and Proportion Method**

The Ratio and Proportion Method has been around for years and is one of the oldest methods utilized in drug calculations. Addition principles are a problem-solving technique that has no bearing on this relationship; only multiplication and division are used to navigate our way through a ratio and proportion problem, not adding. An example listed below will help us provide a better explanation using a fraction or a colon format:

A provider orders lorazepam 4 mg intravenous (IV) push for a CIWA score of 25. On hand, the clinicians has 2 mg/mL vials. How many milliliters are required to carry out the ordered dose?

- Have on hand/Quantity you have = Desired Amount/x

- 2 mg/1 mL = 4 mg/x

- 2x/2 = 4/2

- x = 2 mL

In colon format, you would use H:V::D:X and multiply means DV and Extremes HX.

- Hx = DV, x = DV/H, 2:1::4:x, 2x = (4)(1), x = 4/2, x = 2 mL

**Desired Over Have or Formula Method**

Desired over Have or Formula Method uses a formula or equation to solve for an unknown quantity (x), much like ratio proportion. Drug calculations require the use of conversion factors, such as when converting from pounds to kilograms or liters to milliliters. Simplistic in design, this method allows us to work with various units of measurement, converting factors to find our answer (as cited in Boyer, 2002) [Lindow, 2004]. Useful in checking the accuracy of the other methods of calculation as above mentioned, thus acting as a double or triple check.

- A basic formula, solving for x, guides us in the setting up of an equation: D/H x Q = x, or desired dose (amount) = ordered dose amount/amount on hand x quantity.

For example, a provider requests lorazepam 4 mg IV Push for a patient in severe alcohol withdrawal. On hand, the clinician has 2 mg/mL vials. How many milliliters should they draw up in a syringe to deliver the desired dose?

- Dose ordered (4 mg) x quantity (1 mL)/have (2 mg) = amount you want to give (2 mL)

Remember, units of measurement must match such as milliliters and milliliters, or you will need to convert to like units of measurement. In the example above, the ordered dose was in mg, and the have dose was in mg; both would cancel out, leaving milliliters (answer called for milliliters), so no further conversion is required.

**Dimensional Analysis Method**

An order placed by a provider for lorazepam 4 mg IV PUSH for CIWA score of 25 or higher, follow CAGE Protocol for subsequent dosages based on CIWA scoring.

- On hand, the supply is with 2 mg/mL vials in the automated dispensing unit.

- How many milliliters are needed to arrive at the ordered dose?

- The desired dose gets placed over 1 remember, (x mL) = 4 mg/1 x 1 mL/2 mg x (4)(1)/2 x 4/2 x 2/1 = 2 mL, the clinician kept multiplying/dividing until they got the desired amount, 2 mL in this problem example

- Notice the fraction was set up with mg and mg strategically placed so like units could cancel each other out, making the equation easier to solve for the unit you desired or milliliters.

Zeros can be canceled out in the same way as like units. Look at the example listed below for clarification:

- 1000/500 x 10/5 = 2, the 2 zeros in 1000 and 2 zeros in 500 can be crossed out since like units in numerator and denominator, leaving 10/5, a much easier fraction to solve, and the answer makes sense.

Having addressed zeros, the following is a look at 1.

- If you multiply a number by a 1, then the number is unchanged.

- In contrast, if you multiply a number by zero, the number becomes zero.

- Examples listed below are as follows: 18 x 0 = 0 or 20 x 1 = 20.