Median nerve injury and the associated pain, paraesthesias, and upper extremity weakness that occurs require prompt treatment ranging from night splints to surgery. The cause of median nerve injury may be due to a myriad of diagnoses, including idiopathic, injury, overuse, and type two diabetes. The history and physical exam may usually reveal nerve impairment without imaging studies.

It is crucial to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists. The diagnosis can be made by any healthcare provider, most commonly by primary care physicians. However, several other sub-specialties encounter and are involved in the care of median nerve entrapment, including but not limited to physiatrists, neurologists, sports medicine physicians, orthopedists, hand surgeons, and radiologists. Conservative management plays a primary role, especially in the acute phase. Physical and occupational therapists are vital members of the interprofessional group during the healing process both for conservative management of median nerve injury and in postoperative recovery after median nerve decompression. In cases where evidence is minimal or not definitive, expert opinion from the specialist may help to recommend the type of imaging or treatment. If the clinician first attempts steroid injections to ward off surgery, the pharmacist can assist with the dosing and preparation of the drug. Continued neuropathic pain can also be addressed pharmaceutically, making pharmacists an essential contributor to the team.

The outcomes of a medial nerve injury depend on the cause and severity. Nurses can also coordinate postoperative physical therapy, with both the therapist and nurse providing information on patient progress to the clinical team.

Prompt consultation with an interprofessional team of specialists is the recommendation to improve outcomes with these conditions. Collaboration, shared decision making, and communication between interprofessional team members are key elements for a good outcome. [Level 5]

The earlier signs and symptoms of a complication get identified, the better is the prognosis and outcome. [Level 3]