Bacteria are not present in the vitreous or aqueous humor of a healthy eye, but seeding into the eye can occur either from an exogenous or endogenous source. Exogenous seeding is the most common cause of bacterial endophthalmitis and comes from the exterior ocular surface during penetrating ocular trauma, surgery, or intraocular injections. Although rare, bacterial endophthalmitis can also result from hematogenous spread from infections elsewhere in the body or intravenous drug use. Approximately 40% to 80% of all endophthalmitis cases are caused by cataract surgery; of these cases, 70% are the result of coagulase-negative Staphylococci, 10% are from Staphylococcus aureus, and 9% are from Streptococci. The second most common cause of endophthalmitis occurs after intravitreal injection, with coagulase-negative staphylococci and streptococci being the primary pathogens. Penetrating eye trauma is the third most common cause and constitutes anywhere from 2% to 15% of all cases of endophthalmitis.

Coagulase-negative staphylococci predominate this category, but other bacteria such as Bacillus, gram-negative bacilli, and fungi can cause infection. Bleb-related endophthalmitis is the fourth most common cause with the bacterial etiology in descending order of Streptococcus pneumonia, enterococci, or Haemophilus Influenzae. Keratitis resulting in organisms penetrating the cornea is the fifth most common cause, but 50% of keratitis-related cases are due to fungi with S. aureus, streptococci, and Pseudomonas, causing a minority of these infections. Endogenous blood-borne endophthalmitis is the rarest cause, with Klebsiella pneumonia being the most common aggressor, followed by Candida, streptococci, S. aureus, and E. coli.