A thorough understanding of the anatomy of the eyelid and the periorbital area is crucial for successful lower blepharoplasty surgery. Surgeons must understand the effect of surgical rearrangement on eyelids' function, shape, and position. Solid anatomical knowledge and understanding of the aging process help surgeons minimize these complications and achieve optimal results.

The skin of the eyelid is the thinnest in the body. There is a clear distinction between the thin eyelid skin, which lacks any subcutaneous fat, and the thicker cheek skin with well defined subcutaneous layer. The lower eyelid is divided into two lamellae. The anterior lamella is formed of skin and orbicularis oculi muscle, whereas the posterior lamella includes trasoligamentous sling, capsulopalpebral fascia, and conjunctiva. The septum is referred to as the middle lamella as it separates the anterior and posterior lamella. The grey line is a central fine line that serves as a guide for identifying the dissection plane between anterior and posterior lamella.

The palpebral fissure is the interval between the eyelid margins. When lids are open, it measures around 30mm in the horizontal plane and 10 mm in the vertical plane. The lower eyelid is situated at or 1 mm above the lower limbus, while the upper eyelid covers 2 mm of the upper limbus. The commissures are the junction points between the upper and lower eyelid, and they create medial and lateral angles representing medial and lateral canthus, respectively.

In most patients, the lateral canthal angle is positioned at 2 mm superior to the medial canthal angle. If a line is drawn between medial and lateral canthi, it will show an upward inclination to the lateral side. This is called positive canthal tilt. A negative canthal tilt is present when the medial canthus is superior to the lateral canthus. This should be carefully examined and highlighted to the patient in the initial preoperative visit. Negative canthal tilt is associated with a high risk of postoperative eyelid malposition. Therefore, lateral canthal support either in the form of canthopexy or canthoplasty is needed for such cases. Another factor that may lead to poor postoperative results has a negative vector. These patients with prominent globe exceeding the maxilla in the midline sagittal plane are also at a higher risk of lower eyelid malposition.

Scleral triangles are the visible parts of the sclera on both sides of the cornea. They are bound by the upper lid margin, lower lid margin, and corneoscleral limbus. The apex of the triangles is the medial and lateral canthal angles. The size of the medial scleral triangle is constant. In contrast, the larger lateral scleral triangle varies with the changes in the lower eyelid position, and it is the primary determinant of eye shape. Patients should be preoperatively counseled about the shape of scleral triangles and how surgery can affect them. The lower eyelid crease is less well-defined compared with the upper eyelid crease. It is mainly formed by the dermal insertion of lower lid retractors. It is situated 5mm from the medial lid margin and slopes slightly towards the lateral side.

**Muscle**

Orbicularis oculi muscle lies immediately beneath the skin and is the main protractor of the eyelid. It can be subdivided into three parts: pretarsal, preseptal, and orbital part. The pretarsal and preseptal parts cover the tarsus and the spetum, respectively, while the orbital part extends from the eyelid to cheek, temple, and forehead. The capsulopalpebral fascia and inferior tarsal muscles are the main retractors of the lower eyelid. They are analogous to the levator aponeurosis and the Müller's muscle in the upper eyelid.

**Tarsus**

The tarsal plate is part of the posterior lamella. It forms the tarsoligamnetous sling along with the canthal tendons. This represents the main skeleton of the eyelid. Orbicularis oculi muscle is firmly attached to the anterior surface of the tarsus while the conjunctiva is fixed to its posterior part. It usually becomes lax with aging, which leads to distraction of the eyelid from the globe. The lower eyelid tarsal plate is around 25 mm long, 1 mm thick, with a height of 4 mm. It attaches to the medial and lateral orbital walls by canthal tendons. Both canthi are made up of anterior and posterior reflections. The medial canthus reflections attach to the anterior and posterior lacrimal crest. While the anterior reflection of the lateral canthus inserts in the lateral orbital rim and the posterior reflection inserts on the Whitnall's tubercle 5 mm from the lateral orbital rim.

**Postseptal Fat Compartment and Midface Fat**

There are two post-septal fat compartments in the upper eyelid (central and nasal fat pad) and three compartments in the lower eyelid (nasal, central, and temporal fat pads). In the lower eyelid, the nasal compartment is partially separated from the central compartment by the inferior oblique muscle. Care should be taken not to inadvertently stitch the inferior oblique as this may lead to postoperative painful diplopia, requiring urgent surgical intervention. The central and the temporal fat pad is divided anteriorly by the arcuate expansion.

In addition to the post-septal fat pads, two extra fat compartments exist in the mid-face. Suborbicularis oculi fat (SOOF) lies deep to the orbicularis oculi muscle in the preperiosteal membrane, anterior to the orbital rim. It becomes atrophied and ptotic by age which exposes the infraorbital rim. It is thinner at the anterior nasolacrimal crest and thicker in its temporal part. This layer is encountered during suborbicularis dissection below the level of the inferior orbital rim. The septum separates SOOF from orbital fat, and the orbicularis oculi muscle separates it from the malar fat pad. The ROOF (Retro-orbicularis Oculi Fat pad) is similar to the SOOF. It is present in the upper eyelid deep to the orbicularis oculi muscles and superficial to the orbital fat pad. With the aging process, it becomes atrophied and contributes to eyebrow ptosis, which can be corrected during a brow lift.

**Conjunctiva**

In the lower eyelid, the inferior conjunctival fornix is 10mm from the lower eyelid margin. This is relatively constant during eye closure as the main movement is from the upper eyelid.

**Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage**

The eyelids have a complex, rich vascular network. It is formed by anastomosis between both external carotid and internal carotid arteries. Branches of the ophthalmic artery(internal carotid artery) connect to the terminal branches of the facial artery, internal maxillary, and superficial temporal arteries (external carotid artery). This forms two arcades in the lower eyelid and three arcades in the upper eyelid.

Most of the blood flow comes from nasal anastomosis, which is the main cause of postoperative hematoma. The lower eyelid arcades are situated 3.8mm from the eyelid margin. Therefore, it is important to place a blepharoplasty incision at least at 4mm from the ciliary margin to preserve these arcades. This maintains a robust blood supply to the lid, and the surgeon can then safely interrupt the blood supply laterally if needed, e.g., in cases that need canthoplasty. Venous drainage occurs through an anastomosis between superficial facial veins (mainly the facial vein) and deep orbital veins (mainly superior ophthalmic veins). The orbital veins have no valves. Any infection in the "triangle of death" (apex is the mid-forehead, passing across the two medial canthi, and the base is the mid nasal dorsum) can easily spread to the cavernous sinus. The lymphatic drainage of the lower eyelid follows different lymphatic channels according to its site. Medial lymphatics drain the lower eyelid, medial canthus, and conjunctiva and go to the submandibular glands. The lateral lymphatics drain the lateral canthus and upper eyelid to the superficial parotid lymph nodes.

**Nerve Supply**

The sensory supply of the inferior eyelid is mainly through the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve (V2), while the upper eyelid's sensory innervation is through the ophthalmic division (V1). The maxillary division becomes the infraorbital nerve in the posterior orbit which then emerges through the infraorbital canal, while the ophthalmic division divides into supratrochlear and supraorbital nerves. These three nerves are the target for anesthetic neve block. Orbicularis oculi receive motor innervation through various branches of the facial nerve, including frontal, zygomatic, and buccal branches. The majority of the nerve supply comes from the medial side of the orbicularis.

**Aging Process**

With aging, the skin of the lower eyelid loses its elasticity which leads to folding and redundancy (dermatochalasis). Loss of integrity of the orbital septum causes herniation of fat compartments in the lower eyelid. Laxity of the lateral canthal tendon affects the lower eyelid position and the shape of the palpebral fissure. Patients with a prominent globe may exhibit a round palpebral fissure with increased lateral scleral triangle and potential scleral show. In contrast, in patients with a shallow globe, both the palpebral fissure and the lateral canthal triangle narrow. Moreover, The tarsoligamentous laxity affects the tone and behavior of the orbicularis oculi muscle. It often atrophies by age which may eventually lead to ectropion and watery eyes. Less commonly, hypertrophy of the orbicularis oculi can be seen, especially in the Asian population, which may predispose to entropion and smile lines.

The aging change of the midface is related to the deflation of the fat compartments of the midface and the sagging effect of gravity. This can vary from mild aging changes confined to the lower eyelid to more significant changes affecting the lower lid, lid-cheek junction, and mid-face area. This can be presented as tear trough deformity, nasojugal groove, deepening of the nasolabial fold, and malar mounds. While early cases can be managed by blepharoplasty alone, more severe cases will need blepharoplasty and midface lift.