Research shows that changes to the dorsal raphe nucleus carry implications in major depressive disorder (MDD) and suicidality. MDD ranks as the leading cause of disability in developed countries, according to the World Health Organization. Genetic polymorphisms affecting the availability of tryptophan, activity of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 monoamine oxidase which degrades serotonin, 5-HT1 autoreceptors, and serotonin transporters all confer risk for depression, particularly with the onset of symptoms early in life. In later life depression, volume loss of the dorsal raphe, as well as decreased connectivity to the posterior cingulate cortex, is more strongly implicated.

Based on this understanding, SSRIs are considered first-line treatment for MDD. The mechanism of action for this drug is to increase the synaptic concentration of serotonin by binding and inhibiting the presynaptic serotonin reuptake transporter and decreasing responsiveness of 5-HT autoreceptors. The thinking is that this increased serotonin concentration, specifically in limbic synapses, results in a more positive appraisal of emotional information. Over time this change gradually results in a clinical antidepressant effect as conscious cognitive processing becomes altered and previous emotional associations are modified. This clinical effect typically takes place over 4 to 6 weeks.

The fact that other treatment modalities for depression target dopamine, norepinephrine, and catecholamine transmission implies that the serotonergic system is one of the multiple components in the pathogenesis of depression. For example, in patients who respond well to selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, the depletion of catecholamines rather than serotonin is more closely linked to symptomatology. Furthermore, some patients experience improvement of symptoms when SSRI therapy is augmented with a second agent such as a dopamine agonist, highlighting a multifactorial etiology. Current research explores novel targets to alleviate MDD symptoms and to do so more rapidly.

Alterations in serotonin pathways are also implicated in chronic pain syndromes, given the known process of pain modulation at the dorsal horn level of the spinal cord due to descending projections from the raphe nuclei. For this reason, SSRIs and TCAs may be considered to treat fibromyalgia, chronic pelvic pain, diabetic neuropathy, and headache syndromes.