**Usefulness of Egophony in Daily Clinical Practice**

A study among 52 men with symptoms of lower respiratory tract infection presenting in the emergency department of a Veterans Affairs medical center was conducted to determine the reliability of chest examination and assess the degree of agreement between three examiners. Twenty-four were diagnosed with pneumonia on X-ray. The results showed auscultatory percussion, egophony, and rales were among the most helpful maneuvers with the highest specificity.

On the other hand, a literature review of 40 publications on the reliability and validity of respiratory physical examination showed low-to-fair inter-examiner agreement rates for egophony and other signs like bronchophony, pectoriloquy, vocal resonance, and pleural friction rub. To assess the pre-test probability of a condition like pneumonia, it is not certain if using a combination of physical signs (consolidation: dull to percuss, egophony, bronchophony) increases the likelihood ratio (multiplication of each of their likelihood ratios).

**Important Clinical Findings in Pneumonia**

On inspection, diminished chest movements may be seen on the affected side. A vocal fremitus may be palpated along with a dull note on percussion on the affected side. Bronchial breathing sounds may be present on auscultation. Vocal resonance is increased on the affected side which may be associated with bronchophony, egophony, and whispering pectoriloquy.

**Important Clinical Findings in Pleural Effusion**

On inspection, a fullness of intercostal spaces with diminished chest movements on the affected side may be seen. On palpation, vocal fremitus is decreased on the affected side. The trachea may be shifted to the opposite side in the presence of a large effusion, and the apical impulse may not be palpable. A stony dullness is usually present on percussion of the affected side. As explained, an egophony can be auscultated on the upper border of the effusion with diminished breath sounds and vocal resonance on the affected side.