**Patient Rights under HIPAA**

HIPAA rules give patients rights, some of which they may not be not aware of. The most important rights of patients under HIPAA include the following:

- Right to receive a notice of privacy practices

- Right to restrict PHI disclosures

- Right to state how they want PHI to be handled and communicated to others. For example, the patient may want any message from the pharmacist or the hospital to be sent by mail to his private home and not left on his home phone number

- Right to inspect and review their PHI. If the patient perceives there to be anything erroneous in the PHI, they do have the right to request a change. The provider may accept or deny this request. For example, a nurse may have been diagnosed with bipolar disorder and after treatment may want this diagnosis to be deleted from the medical chart. This is not a request that can be accepted.

- Right to obtain a copy of their PHI

- Right to receive an accounting of where PHI disclosures have been made

- The right to report to the office of civil rights if the patient believes there has been any violation of disclosure

**HIPAA and Communication With Patients**

HIPAA recommends disclosing a minimal amount of information to ensure the privacy of patients. When speaking to a patient in a room with other patients, it is important not to divulge specific information other than greetings. If one has to communicate the results of a biopsy or surgery, then one may ask the patient to come to a private room for discussion. Even then, only disclose what is relevant. If the healthcare provider is faced with a situation where there are other patients, for example, in the recovery room or intensive care unit (ICU), the discussion should be broad and not detail any specific procedure or diagnosis. Similarly, in outpatient clinics, one should never discuss PHI in the hallway but wait until the patient is seated in a private room.

HIPAA permits disclosure of PHI to a spouse, parents, legal guardians, and other caregivers who are involved in the patient’s care without having a formal agreement from the patients. If there is ever a need to discuss something specific regarding the patient when other individuals are present, ask the patient if he or she has any objections.

**When Can Information Be Shared?**

Healthcare workers need to be aware that all PHI for clinical purposes is covered under HIPAA and includes the following:

- Discussing diagnosis, workup, and treatment with other healthcare providers

- Performing imaging and laboratory test and disclosing this information to other providers

- Providing results of imaging test, or discuss the patient history when submitting surgical samples to those who perform further diagnostic tests

- When referring a patient to another facility or obtaining a consult

- When calling the pharmacist over the phone to dispense medication to a patient

As long healthcare providers are offering treatment, they are not restricted by HIPAA, as long as the patient has not made a request not to disclose data to any particular healthcare provider. However, caution must still be used. For example, when asking a phlebotomist to start an intravenous line on a patient needing chemotherapy medication, a provider does not have to divulge why the patient needs an intravenous line to the technologist.

- Similarly, when healthcare providers consult with other providers, the HIPAA privacy rule does not prohibit them from engaging in such conversations. However, these conversations should be held away from the public and in private rooms. One should not obtain a telephone consult from a phone line in the cafeteria where others can hear the conversation.

- Healthcare staff may communicate verbally at the nurse desk to coordinate activities.

- Also, a healthcare provider may discuss a patient's medical status over the phone with a provider, patient, or other family members.

- Healthcare workers may discuss a patient's medical condition in an academic institution, or during rounds.

- In emergency situations, the law does permit entities to engage in communication as required to ensure the proper delivery of healthcare.

**Email Communications**

All healthcare institutions should establish specific guidelines on email communication from patients. Some of the recommendations include the following:

- The patient name should not be inserted in the subject guideline

- Make sure that the patient email is correct

- Only transmit the bare minimal information in an email

- Have a standard disclaimer at the end of every email

- All emails must be encrypted

- Do not use your non-work email to communicate with a patient. For example, you should never use commercial email accounts, but use the email system set up by the institution****

**Faxes**

Like emails, there should be specific policies and guidelines regarding the use of faxes to transmit medical information. Some of the recommendations include the following:

- All fax machines must be located in a secure area away from the public, patients, and most healthcare workers

- The first page of the fax should always be a disclaimer indicating what to do if the fax is sent to a wrong number

- Unless an emergency, faxes should only be sent during working hours. The reason is that if any faxes arrive, they can be picked up and not left lying on the fax machine container

- When sending faxes, it is important to correspond to the other party to ensure that they have picked up the fax****

**Computers**

Today, computers play a critical role in healthcare and store a vast amount of PHI. Hence, these devices must be secure. Some of the recommendations for computer use include the following:

- The computers should be kept in a place where they are not accessible to the public or patients

- The screen should not be visible to the patients or public

- Each time, a healthcare provider should log in and log off, even if they are only gone for a few minutes

- All healthcare workers should have a unique password

- The password should never be shared with anyone else

**Clergy and Other Religious Figures**

The HIPAA privacy rule permits religious figures and clergy to be informed of individuals belonging to their denomination that are in a hospital, as long as the patient has first been informed and has no objection. Patients should be asked about these preferences when they are first admitted to the hospital and asked to sign a paper regarding who they want as a visitor and who should be notified.

During an emergency, or when the patient is incapacitated and has not been able to provide consent, disclosures can still occur. However, the disclosure has to be consistent with the individual's best interest in mind. One has to use not only good judgment but also involve administration and risk management in decision making. Everything should be documented as to why a particular course of action was undertaken.