The hyperpigmentation of Becker melanosis usually remains stable; although, there are reports of the pigmentation fading spontaneously in some cases. Treatment is mainly indicated for cosmetic reasons, especially the rapid transformation of the lesion during adolescence. The hyperpigmentation and the hypertrichosis respond to lasers. Different types of lasers have been found to be effective in BM like the Q-switched Ruby laser, Q-switched Nd YAG, long-pulsed Alexandrite and various types of fractional ablative lasers. The most commonly used lasers are the q-switched ruby and the Q-switched Nd YAG lasers. However, both are associated with a high rate of recurrence. Hypertrichotic lesions have been reported to respond to combinations of fractional lasers (like the 1550 nm non-ablative laser) with hair removal lasers. Multiple sessions are required for optimum results. Electrolysis has also been reported to be effective in treating the hypertrichosis associated with Becker melanosis.  Sun protection is advised as sun exposure might make the lesions appear darker. Acneiform lesions have been found to respond to topical retinoids. In patients with associated breast hypoplasia, a novel yet effective treatment is breast lipofilling which is fat grafting to treat the cosmetic defect related to ipsilateral breast hypoplasia, which can be associated with Becker melanosis.Cosmetic camouflage can be useful in addressing the psychosocial issues and quality of life in patients who have lesions in relatively exposed areas