There are four major functions of the facial nerve:

- General somatic efferent (motor supply to facial muscles)

- General visceral efferent (parasympathetic secretomotor supply to submandibular and sublingual salivary glands and the lacrimal gland)

- Special visceral afferent (taste sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue)

- General somatic afferent (cutaneous sensations from the pinna and the external auditory meatus).

**Motor Pathway**

The upper motor neuron is located in the facial motor area of the precentral gyrus. The axons from the upper motor neuron travel along the ipsilateral corticobulbar tract to the lower pons, where most fibers cross to the other side and synapse with the lower motor neuron. The main motor nucleus (lower motor neuron) divides into four subnuclei; dorsal, intermediate, lateral, and medial. The dorsal subnucleus innervates the facial muscles of the ipsilateral upper quadrant and receives corticobulbar input from both hemispheres. Conversely, the lateral subnucleus is connected to contralateral corticobulbar fibers only, and it innervates muscles of the ipsilateral lower quadrant of the face (Figure 1).

**Parasympathetic Pathway**

The superior salivatory and lacrimal nuclei make up the parasympathetic nuclei of the facial nerve. They are in the lower pons, posterolateral to the facial motor nucleus. Efferent fibers from the hypothalamus supply the superior salivatory nucleus. In addition, the nucleus of the solitary tract delivers information regarding taste to the superior salivatory nucleus. The superior salivatory nucleus supplies the sublingual and submandibular salivary glands, as well as the palatine and nasal glands. The inputs to the lacrimal nucleus are from (a) the hypothalamus (emotional response) and (b) the sensory trigeminal nerve (reflex lacrimation secondary to eye irritation). The parasympathetic efferent pathway to the facial nerve from the brainstem is through the nervus intermedius.

**Sensory Pathway**

The sensory nucleus, located posterolateral to the motor nucleus and parasympathetic nuclei in the pons, receives taste information from the palate, floor of the mouth, and anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The first-order neurons of the taste fibers are in the geniculate ganglion, and the taste fibers synapse in the nucleus of the tractus solitarius (second-order neuron) in the brainstem. Axons of the second-order neurons cross to the contralateral side and ascend through the medial lemniscus to the thalamus, where they synapse with the third-order neuron. Efferents from the third-order neurons ascend through the internal capsule and the corona radiata, terminating in the taste area of the sensory cortex in the postcentral gyrus and the insula. Some projections reach the hypothalamus.

General sensory fibers also have their first-order neurons located in the geniculate ganglion and the second-order neuron located in the spinal trigeminal nucleus. The sensory and parasympathetic fibers of the facial nerve are collectively bound in a fascial sheath; these structures together have the name 'nervus intermedius.'