- COVID-19 has wreaked havoc across the world and has overwhelmed many healthcare systems, and will continue to remain a threat to global public health until the majority of the world’s population gets vaccinated against this illness.

- Close follow-up of all COVID-19 patients during recovery is needed to develop a team approach to understand and manage this complex and evolving health crisis.

- Management of post-acute COVID-19 syndrome requires a holistic and interprofessional team approach that includes physicians across specialties (primary care, pulmonology, cardiology, infectious disease), physiatrists, behavioral health experts, physical and occupational therapists, and social workers.

- The survivors of COVID-19 require rehabilitation focusing on cardiopulmonary sequelae, psychological burden, and fatigue at a much larger level because of the current global pandemic.

- Primary care providers should recognize this syndrome as early as possible and rule out other potential implicating diagnoses and refer patients to post COVID-19 care clinics if available.

- Patients with this syndrome should be educated about the importance of self-monitoring at home and, if possible, should be followed by a home health aide on a regular basis.

- Considering post-acute COVID-19 syndrome is commonly associated with the involvement of multiple organ systems that include neuropsychiatric abnormalities, patients suspected to have this syndrome should be referred to a behavioral health specialist and, if indicated, a neurologist in a timely manner.

- There should be close communication between the primary care physician, specialist physicians, and behavioral health experts to outline the best possible care individualized to each patient, all coordinating activity and communicating as an interprofessional team.

- Such an interprofessional team approach enhances improved patient care outcomes and reduces unnecessary hospitalizations, thus preventing exhaustion of healthcare resources that have already been under considerable strain throughout this pandemic.