Infections are the most common pathologies seen in patients. It can either occur as otitis externa, otitis media, tympanitis, or labyrinthitis. Otitis externa is mainly due to the disruption of protective barriers leading to infection of the external ear. The two main pathogens that cause it are Pseudomonas aeruginosa and staphylococcus aureus. In contrast, otitis media is a middle ear infection. It is mostly seen post upper respiratory tract viral infection. The post-infection edema could obstruct the eustachian tube leading to the accumulation of the secretions in the middle ear. This favors the growth of microbial agents. It can also have a bacterial origin by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis, and non-typeable Haemophilus influenza.

Labyrinthitis is caused due to viruses such as herpes simplex virus, adenovirus, etc. It causes an inflammation of the vestibular nerve presenting as peripheral vertigo in the patients.

Cholesteatoma is a benign collection of keratinized squamous epithelium in the middle ear. It is caused due to prolonged negative pressures that lead to the retraction of the tympanic membrane or a perforation in the tympanic membrane, which causes the keratinized squamous debris to accumulate.

Meniere's disease is another common disease caused by fluid build-up in the endolymphatic system.

Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo presents as a spinning sensation secondary to calcium debris (canalithiasis) within the semicircular canals disrupting the endolymph movement in the canals.