Briding the healthcare disparities in the AIAN community needs a multifaceted approach. Some of this has been possible through the enactment of many historical acts that have not only brought more clarity and commitment on the part of the federal government but have also recognized the sovereignty of the tribal nations and have provided them with more authority to guide their local health system according to the needs of the community. The provisions of the health care delivery system for the AIAN community have evolved due to numerous legislative measures. It is now called the “I/T/U” system, where “I” represents IHS, “T” stands for the tribal 638 programs, and “U” stands for the urban health centers.

**The Four Historical Acts**

- The Snyder Act:

- Enacted in 1921, this was the first law that allowed Congress to appropriate funds directed towards healthcare for the AIAN community.
- The funding authority for many of the current activities of the IHS is rooted in the Snyder Act.

- Transfer Act:

- Passed in 1954, this act made the Indian Health program the responsibility of the Public Health Service.
- The language of the act recognized the sovereignty of the indigenous tribes and afforded them some degree of self-determination in health policy decision-making.
- The authorities contained in the Snyder Act were also transferred to the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare (now Health and Human Services).

- Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act:

- Passed in 1975, this act is considered one of the most crucial healthcare reforms for the AIAN community.
- This act allowed the indigenous tribes to assume the management of BIA and IHS programs. 
- Under the "638 contract," responsibility for any program, function, service, or activity of the IHS can be taken over by the tribe.
- The act provides several financial and administrative advantages to the tribes.

- 'Carry over' funding: Any funding left at the end of the fiscal year can carry over to the next year without any explanation required from the tribal organization. 
- Third-party Revenue: The revenue collected from public or private funding is separate from the dollars obtained in grants through 638 funding agreements and is independent of the 638 funding agreement.
- Eligibility for grants: The act made tribes eligible for several federal grants, which are not available to IHS (being a federal agency).
- Contract support costs: Helps the tribes by supporting the indirect costs. This support is not available to IHS independently. 


- In essence, the act allows the tribe the flexibility of spending healthcare dollars the way they envision it and has many substantial provisions that help in obtaining federal grants to supplement funding for the IHS.

- Indian Healthcare Improvement Act:

- Passed in 1976, this act brought more clarity to the US federal government's role in providing healthcare to the AIAN community. 
- Title V of the Indian Healthcare Improvement Act established the Urban Indian Health Programs. Today, 34 such programs exist in the US.
- The act also reauthorized the provision to the IHS and tribal 638 health programs to bill Medicare and Medicaid. This step was crucial in providing ease of access to AIAN patients who depend on Indian health programs for medical services.

**The impact of the Affordable Care Act**

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) is a major health insurance reform that bought several advantages to the AIAN community.

- It led to the permanent reauthorization of the Indian healthcare improvement Act,

- The ACA extended the current law and provided authorization to several new programs and services within the IHS.

- The ACA allows provisions that help extend preventive care to the AIAN community by making the health insurance companies pay for preventive services, including cancer screening. For example, when a screening colonoscopy was not available through IHS, it was challenging to get one through the contract system. The ACA remedies this challenge and makes the insurance company liable to cover the cost of screening colonoscopy.

**Indian Health Services**

The IHS is a federally funded program that provides healthcare to the AIAN community. They provide primary care services and limited dental services to nearly 2.6 million AIAN citizens and descendants. The establishment of IHS has attempted to bridge the gap in the disparities. For instance, since the IHS came into being, the overall mortality rate has dropped by 15 years. However, several parameters in the AIAN community continue to show poor outcomes and reveal the stark disparity in healthcare. In this review, we will discuss the disparities in healthcare for the AIAN community.

Currently, the IHS funds 41 urban Indian health organizations. These organizations operate in various cities throughout the United States, providing care to the AIAN community that lives in the urban area. Apart from the medical services, the programs also extend dental services, community services, HIV and sexually transmitted disease education, alcohol and drug use prevention. Apart from this, they also provide prevention services, mental health services, nutrition education, counseling, pharmacy services, health education, optometry services, social services, and home health care.

When IHS came into being, the disparity in the health of the AIAN community seemed insurmountable. The infant mortality rate (IMR) was three times higher than other races, and life expectancy was nine years lower than the average population. A quarter of all deaths occurred in infancy before attaining one year of age. Maternal deaths associated with childbirth were three times higher than NHW. Infectious diseases like diarrhea, tuberculosis, chlamydia eye infection were rampant. Despite the chronic issues faced by the IHS (listed above), there are some notable achievements of the organization in reducing the disparities in the healthcare of the AIAN population.

- In the first 25 years of its existence, the IMR dropped by 82%, whereas the maternal mortality rate (MMR) dropped by 89%. By 1992, the IMR in the AIAN community was only 4% higher than the general population, and the MMR was 12% lower than the general population.

- Similarly, the death rate from tuberculosis dropped by 96%, and the deaths from diarrhea and dehydration dropped by 93%.

- The AIAN community's rate of improvement outpaced other underserved communities (between 1980-1994, IMR dropped by 50% in the AIAN community, compared to a 25% drop in the African-American community).

- Mortality from dehydration has dropped from 138% in the earlier years to less than 15% in the early 1990s.

- Although non-communicable diseases have risen in the AIAN community, the IHS has been phenomenal in implementing a sanitation program and immunization programs that have brought down the mortality rates from communicable diseases.

**Approaching a Patient from the AIAN Community**

The approach to the AIAN population is multifaceted. Psychological/Psychiatry support is a critical part of providing healthcare to the AIAN community. It is important to understand the cultural differences that exist amongst various tribes as well the differences that exist in the belief of people from the AIAN community. Although many tribes may have adopted Christianity, their culture is still deep-rooted in their traditions. It is important to understand these differences and apply them when serving the AIAN community.

The American Psychiatric Association has listed a few steps in approaching patients from the AIAN community. It is important to understand the cultural beliefs of any native/tribe that the healthcare providers are serving. The psychiatric assessment of a patient belonging to the AIAN community starts by knowing the history of the indigenous people.

- PTSD should be high on the list given the history of trauma (loss of sacred lands, forced assimilation, loss of family, etc.).

- All providers (doctors, nurses, support staff, etc.) must understand that mistrust for IHS clinics runs high in the AIAN community.

- Evaluation should be thorough to avoid stereotypes and misdiagnosis. If an indigenous person does not speak the native language, it does not mean that they do not practice their culture. Avoiding stereotypes at all points helps in preventing misdiagnosis.

- Allow the patients to tell their story with extreme sensitivity towards their culture and identity. It is critical in establishing a rapport with the patient and understanding their background.

- Soft-hand off should be practiced between primary care provider, therapist, and psychiatrist. The therapeutic process should be tailored according to the individual and not according to the facility. Starting at lower doses is always advisable to prevent the negative effects of polypharmacy.

- The accessibility of care should be made clear to the patients with a thoughtful discharge process.