The hair follicle cycles through three different growth phases: anagen, catagen, and telogen.

- The anagen phase is the proliferation phase, and it occurs when the hair follicle is growing a new hair shaft. The length of this phase can vary. For hair on the scalp, the growth phase can last 2 to 6 years, whereas, for eyebrows and eyelashes, hair may only need a few months to grow. This is the only phase during which the inferior segment of the hair follicle is present. To signal the beginning of the anagen phase, the dermal papilla signals to the multipotent epithelial stem cells in the bulge. Once these stem cells are stimulated, the inferior segment of the hair follicle can now grow downwards, forming a bulb around the dermal papilla. Now, the dermal papilla can signal matrix cells in the bulb to proliferate, differentiate, and grow upwards, forming a new hair.

- The catagen phase is also known as the transition or regression phase. It is the shortest of all three phases, and may only last a few weeks. During this phase, cell division in the matrix ceases, and the inferior segment of the hair follicle begins to regress. Eventually, the inferior segment of the follicle no longer exists, and the dermal papilla has moved upwards to contact the bulge once again. During this process, a club hair is formed with a white, hard node on the end.

- Finally, the telogen phase ensues, which is referred to as the resting phase. Club hairs, which are essentially dead, are held. On the scalp, these club hairs are typically held for about 100 days. Eventually, these hairs are released and shed so that the anagen phase can begin again with a new hair.

- At birth, all hairs begin in the anagen average; the human scalp contains over 100,000 hairs. At any one point in time, most hairs (85% to 95%) are commonly found in the anagen phase. These hairs can grow approximately 1 cm per month. Meanwhile, hair loss is continuous, with people losing about 100 hairs per day on average. With shampooing, the number of hairs lost can double.