Diagnosis is typically made by history and physical examination.

Physical examination begins with an inspection of the eyelids, the lacrimal puncta, and the conjunctiva to rule out gross abnormalities. The lower eyelid may present with mild redness and an increase in the size of the tear film (tear meniscus). Massage of the lacrimal sac may provoke reflux of tears and/or mucous onto the eye through the puncta.

**Additional Tests to Consider**

- Lacrimal irrigation consists of inserting a tube (known as a cannula) into the puncta and canaliculi with saline irrigation. Complete reflux from the opposite punctum of the same eye is diagnostic of dacryostenosis or a common canalicular obstruction.

- The fluorescein test consists of the application of fluorescein dye into the eye and to observe after 5 minutes: normally, the dye should drain into the nose within five minutes if the lacrimal drainage system has no obstruction. In case of obstruction, a large amount of the dye persists or escapes over the lower eyelid and down the cheek.

- Dacryocystography: standard conventional radiography obtained after injecting a contrast agent in the lacrimal system, is considered the standard diagnostic tool.

- In order to exclude tumors in the lacrimal passage or a pathological change in the nose or sinuses, a CT scan can be done. Moreover, a CT scan is useful to rule out nasal pathologies (septal deviation, hypertrophy of the turbinates, sinusitis, concha bullosa) that can aggravate the symptoms of lacrimal stenosis and to plan a surgical procedure.