# Continuing Education Activity

Despite its ability to cause life-threatening diseases, strongyloidiasis is one of the most neglected tropical diseases. Moreover, Strongyloides infection can last the host's lifetime due to its ability to cause autoinfection of the host. The helminth S. stercoralis mainly infects humans but also occurs naturally in domestic dogs, cats, and primates. Manifestations of infection can range from asymptomatic to life-threatening complications and require a high degree of suspicion to make the diagnosis. This activity examines the pathogenesis, disease manifestations, and management of strongyloidiasis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients affected by this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Review the life cycle and mechanism of infection of Strongyloides stercoralis.
- Describe the clinical presentation of a patient infected with Strongyloides stercoralis.
- Summarize the medical management of a patient infected with Strongyloides stercoralis.
- Outline the importance of the interprofessional team in advancing care for patients infected by Strongyloides stercoralis.

# Introduction

Strongyloides stercoralis, commonly known as threadworm, is a soil-transmitted human parasite belonging to a group of nematodes called roundworms. Although prevalent almost worldwide, except only in the far north and south, the global burden of this parasitic infection is still underestimated because of the unavailability of precise data from endemic areas.S. stercoralis, therefore, becomes one of the most overlooked parasitic infections among the "neglected tropical diseases" (NTDs).

The helminth, S. stercoralis, mainly infects humans but also occurs naturally in domestic dogs, cats, and primates.S. stercoralis present with varying degrees of clinical manifestations ranging from asymptomatic carriers to acute strongyloidiasis and disseminated infections.

Strongyloidiasis is the term used to indicate infection by Strongyloides stercoralis. It differs from other helminth infections by its ability to cause overwhelming hyperinfection in immunocompromised individuals.

# Etiology

Strongyloides stercoralis is a soil-transmitted helminth. It is classified as a roundworm or nematode. There are more than 50 species of Strongyloides. Most of them do not infect humans. Strongyloidiasis, the disease caused by S. stercoralis in humans, is contracted mainly through the transcutaneous route.

Host factors such as HIV infection, human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) infection, and alcoholism have been reported as risk factors for Strongyloidiasis. The most prominent risk factors for severe disease include immunosuppressive therapies (including corticosteroid use), diseases like diabetes, HIV, HTLV infection, and alcoholism.

# Epidemiology

Strongyloides stercoralis is prevalent in almost every part of the world except Antarctica. According to one study, this soil-transmitted nematode is estimated to have infected 370 million people globally, especially in the tropical and subtropical regions, where 10 to 40% of the population is affected.

Worldwide and local prevalence of Strongyloides is seriously underestimated because of the low sensitivity of tests and poor reporting in high-incidence countries. It is more frequently found in warm, moist areas and areas with poor sanitary conditions. Some studies have reported incidences as high as 91% in Gabon and 75% in Peru, but the prevalence varies widely depending on the diagnostic methods used.

In developed countries, Strongyloidiasis is more frequently seen in farmers and miners, as well as immigrant populations, tourists, and military personnel returning from high-prevalence areas. In the United States, the highest incidence is in immigrants from Africa and Asia (46% in one study evaluating Sudanese refugees), followed by Central and Latin America.

There is a slight predilection for the male sex. This is thought to be due to increased exposure to the source of infection due to involvement in farming, fieldwork, etc.

# Pathophysiology

**Life Cycle ofStrongyloides stercoralis**

The distinctive nature of the life cycle of this human parasite is attributed to its ability to cause autoinfection. Its life cycle comprises a free-living phase and a parasitic phase.

**Parasitic Phase**

Infection occurs through skin contact with soil containing filariform (infective) larvae. After penetrating the skin, larvae travel to the lungs, where they mature. It then travels up the trachea and is eventually swallowed. In the alimentary canal, the larvae invade the mucosa of the proximal small intestine. Here they mature and lay eggs.

**Autoinfection**

Some rhabditiform larvae mature inside the intestinal lumen into filariform larvae. These newly hatched larvae can then penetrate the intestinal mucosa or the perianal skin and complete an autoinfection cycle. This allows the organism to perpetuate the infection inside the host.

**Hyperinfection**

Hyperinfection syndrome is the most severe manifestation of the disease, with high mortality rates. This occurs in chronically infected individuals that become immunosuppressed or in acutely infected immunosuppressed patients.

# History and Physical

In most cases, Strongyloidiasis is asymptomatic, especially in immunocompetent individuals.

**Acute Infection**

Acute infection may show an itchy serpiginous skin rash in the area where the larvae penetrate the skin. When filariform larvae in fecal-contaminated soil enter the body through skin penetration, intense pruritus, congestion, and edema is noted at the portal of entry.

Larva currens or “running” larva is a pathognomonic dermatologic manifestation of strongyloidiasis and can be seen with autoinfection as well. Larva currens manifest as a raised, pink, pruritic, serpiginous streak and can progress approximately 5 to 15 cm per hour.

Passage of the larvae through the lungs can give a dry cough and cause a Loeffler-like syndrome with dyspnea, wheezing, eosinophilia, and migratory pulmonary infiltrates. The larvae travel through venules and lymphatics to enter pulmonary circulation producing pulmonary hemorrhages and cough. Eosinophilic infiltration of the alveolar spaces often results in pneumonitis as well.

Intestinal symptoms include diarrhea, vomiting, and epigastric pain.

Hyperinfection syndrome presents with fever, gram-negative bacteremia, and sepsis with signs of end-organ damage (hemoptysis, gastrointestinal bleeding, ileus, hyponatremia).

**Chronic Infection**

Strongyloides stercoralis can also cause chronic infections, which can persist for years in humans. Chronic Strongyloides stercoralis infections present with cough, rhonchi, dyspnea, abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea, and/or constipation.

**Hyperinfection**

Hyperinfection is caused by accelerated autoinfection of the parasite within the host leading to a high parasite burden and severe disease. The signs and symptoms of hyperinfection are similar to symptoms of increased larval migration within the organs. Disseminated disease occurs with hyperinfection syndrome leading to the spread of larvae to distant organs such as the liver, pancreas, kidneys, mesenteric lymph nodes, brain, and skeletal muscles.

# Evaluation

Definitive diagnosis of Strongyloides stercoralis requires the detection of larvae in the stool specimen; however, this method is limited due to scanty and intermittent excretion of larvae in most cases of strongyloidiasis. Intestinal biopsy, when performed, can sometimes demonstrate parasites in the gastric crypts or duodenal glands, as well as eosinophilic infiltration of the lamina propria.

The sensitivity and specificity of these tests, however, are not high. The standard stool examination has a sensitivity of only 21%. Stool concentration methods, such as the Baermann technique (72% sensitive) or agar plate culture (89% sensitive), can still fail to yield a diagnosis despite consecutive samples.

With the above limitations in mind, the gold standard tests for S. stercoralis diagnosis are yet to be developed. In most cases, both stool and serologic evaluation is indicated. PCR and RT-PCR tests have been developed and show promising results with nearly 100% specificity and very high sensitivity, but they are not widely available.

Peripheral eosinophilia is a common finding in patients with chronic infections.

The diagnosis of chronic strongyloidiasis is especially challenging due to low parasitic load, which results in low sensitivity of stool microscopy and low specificity of serology.

As discussed above, the sensitivity of stool microscopy and serology is low, especially in patients with acute or chronic infections. It is useful to note that serologic tests have a high negative predictive value and are quite useful in excluding strongyloidiasis.

Hyperinfection can be diagnosed by studying stool, body fluids, and/or tissue with adequate sensitivity because, in this state, the host generally has a high burden of readily detectable parasites.

# Treatment / Management

The goal of treatment is to eradicate the parasite completely and is indicated for symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals regardless of their immune status.

Uncomplicated strongyloidiasis is treated with ivermectin (200 micrograms/kg for two days), thiabendazole (25 mg/kg/day for three days), or albendazole (400 mg twice a day for 3-7 days).

Patients with evidence of hyperinfection syndrome are treated with ivermectin for at least two weeks or until stool is negative for two consecutive weeks.

Of the agents outlined above, the preferred therapy is ivermectin.

Treatment may be prolonged in immunocompromised individuals. Stopping or decreasing immunosuppressive therapy should be considered, and treatment should ideally be continued until larvae are undetectable in stool, urine, and sputum for at least 14 days.

# Differential Diagnosis

For pulmonary symptoms:

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)

- Pneumonia

- Bronchial asthma

- Pneumonitis

For gastrointestinal symptoms:

- Acute appendicitis

- Intestinal obstruction

- Inflammatory bowel syndrome

- Proctitis

- Loffler syndrome

- Peritonitis

# Prognosis

With treatment, the prognosis of acute and chronic infections is generally favorable. However, in patients with hyperinfection syndrome and disseminated infection, the mortality rate is reported to be as high as 70 to 100%.

A 2006 study from Hong Kong evaluated the clinical course and outcome of disseminated strongyloidiasis over a 10-year period. Seven patients were identified, of which 5 had pulmonary involvement at the time of presentation and subsequently died despite anthelmintic therapy and aggressive supportive therapy. Pulmonary and bowel symptoms were prominent in this series, and peripheral eosinophilia was universally absent.

# Complications

As outlined above, the most dreaded consequence of Strongyloides stercoralis infection is hyperinfection syndrome, which is associated with severe disseminated disease and frequently leads to multiorgan failure with eventual death despite anthelmintic therapy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prevention of chronic and disseminated strongyloidiasis should be considered in patients at high risk for the disease. This includes the screening of asymptomatic patients, especially those with exposure to endemic areas. Serologic testing in asymptomatic individuals is warranted in patients:

- Patients with exposure to endemic areas that now require immunosuppressive therapies

- Those who have relevant environmental exposure and are now becoming organ donors

- Military personnel with a history of service in endemic areas, regardless of how remote the exposure was

- Immigrants and refugees from endemic areas

As with other soil-transmitted helminth infections, prevention of disease incidence in endemic areas is undertaken by sanitation, access to clean water, hand washing, and general hygiene.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of strongyloidiasis require a high degree of clinical suspicion and careful care coordination among interprofessional healthcare team members to ensure early diagnosis, appropriate treatment, and effective eradication of the disease. The pharmacist plays a crucial role in ensuring medication compliance to ensure eradication occurs with the first treatment course. Subsequent monitoring of all patients is required to ensure that larvae are no longer detectable in the body fluids; nurses participate extensively in monitoring, answering patient questions, reporting/charting therapy progress for the clinician team, and educating patients regarding the need for effective therapy despite minimal symptoms. Response to treatment should be followed up with serial stool exams or anti-Strongyloides titers for one to two years in all patients.