Management of dyskinetic CP centers around the management of symptoms and aims at improvement in the quality of life for the patient. This involves the management of dystonia and choreoathetosis, as well as helping with associated pain, disability, and discomfort.

There are medications that are often used in the treatment of dyskinetic cerebral palsy; however, most of them show low efficacy. The most commonly used drug in DCP is oral baclofen, a GABA-B agonist. Trihexyphenidyl****is often used for dystonia. Efficacy for both of these drugs in DCP is, however, low.

For dystonia: dopamine agonists (levodopa), anticholinergics (trihexyphenidyl, benztropine), benzodiazepine receptor agonists (diazepam, clonazepam), GABA-B receptor agonist (baclofen), monoamine blockers (tetrabenazine), and voltage-gated sodium channel blockers (carbamazepine).

For chorea: benzodiazepine receptor agonists (diazepam, clonazepam), dopamine antagonists (pimozide, haloperidol), monoamine blockers, and calcium channel blockers (levetiracetam).

An alternative that is sometimes used instead of oral medication, which generally has low efficacy with more side effects, is intrathecal baclofen. It can be administered at a lower dosage and with fewer side effects. There have been studies demonstrating a decrease in dystonia.

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been used increasingly in those with dyskinetic cerebral palsy. It is often used to decrease dystonia. Though it does decrease dystonia in those with DCP, there is less benefit in quality of life and functionality compared to that seen in patients with primary (inherited) dystonia.

Botulinum toxin is another treatment often used in the management of dystonia in DCP. There is some evidence that it decreases pain and dystonia in those with DCP However, as with DBS, there is more evidence of its therapeutic value in those with primary dystonia.