**Strategies to Decrease Sexual Harassment and Retaliation**

Prevention is the best tool for the elimination of sexual harassment. Prevention requires the construction of inclusive and comforting workplaces where inappropriate behavior, such as sexual harassment, is not tolerated. An employer should take all steps necessary to prevent sexual harassment from occurring. Measures should include raising the subject, expressing strong disapproval, developing appropriate sanctions, informing employees how to report, and developing methods to empower all to be a part of the solution.

According to the EEOC's best practices for use in the workplace, the following five core principles have generally proven effective in preventing and addressing harassment:

- Committed and engaged leadership;

- Consistent and demonstrated accountability;

- Solid and comprehensive harassment policies;

- Trusted and accessible complaint procedures; and

- Regular, interactive training tailored to the audience and the organization.

**Leadership, Accountability, and Workplace Culture**

Leadership should develop an overall strategy that promotes diversity, inclusion, and a belief that all employees deserve respect. Leaders should ensure that the entire management team leads by example and models appropriate behavior.

The cornerstone of a successful harassment prevention strategy is the commitment to create and maintain a harassment-free culture. Workplace culture is heavily influenced by what are perceived to be rewarded or punished behaviors. Employers should demonstrate that they take workplace harassment seriously through proper prevention and appropriate response to harassment and alleged inappropriate behavior. For example, employees should be encouraged to report harassment claims and know their efforts are appreciated because the entire team plays a role in maintaining a harassment-free work environment. Claims should be investigated promptly, and those who engage in harassment should receive consistent discipline appropriate for the harassment's severity.

Best practices dictate that leadership should allocate sufficient resources and staff time for effective harassment prevention and engage all organizational leaders in prevention and correction efforts. Harassment risk factors should be identified, and steps taken to eliminate those risks. To maintain a harassment-free workplace, leadership should continually monitor the work environment and conduct a sexual harassment climate check throughout the year. For example, staff could discuss the topic at meetings, in-services, and through newsletters or other staff communications.

Dismantling a culture that exempts punishment or freedom from consequences may be necessary.

**Written Harassment Policy**

Employers should establish a clearly written comprehensive harassment policy and regularly communicate it to all parties. The policy should be available in the languages commonly used. The policy applies to all employees regardless of their position in the hierarchical structure, applicants, and non-employees who play a role in the work environment. Examples of non-employees who interact with employees are security guards, food service staff, contractors, the board of directors, repair workers, oversight committees, delivery personnel, sales representatives, and hospital volunteers. Within the policy, employees should be encouraged to report inappropriate conduct, even if they are unsure it constitutes harassment. In addition, employers should ensure that they do the following with their written policies:

- Provide all policies to employees upon hire and during trainings;

- Post policies centrally in locations such as the employee handbook, the company’s website, near time clocks, break rooms, and other commonly used areas; and

- Review policies periodically and update them as needed.

Additionally, a comprehensive harassment policy includes the following:

- Description of prohibited conduct, including specific examples;

- Processes for employees to informally share or obtain information about harassment without filing a complaint, eg, phone line, employee assistance team, or chat on internal website;

- Details of the organization's harassment complaint system, including, if possible, several easily accessible reporting avenues;

- Assurance that leadership will provide prompt and thorough investigation as well as prompt appropriate corrective action if the harassment did occur;

- Confidentiality assurance of parties involved, such as the reporter, alleged victims, alleged harassers, and witnesses, as possible and permitted by the law;

- A clear, unequivocal statement prohibiting retaliation, assuring that those who report and participate in investigations will not be subjected to retaliation and are protected under federal law. [See EEO Retaliation Law)

**Harassment Complaint Systems**

Effective reporting systems for harassment allegations are critical. The system should include ways for those who have experienced alleged harassment and those who have observed prohibited conduct to report the behaviors. When employees know that questions and complaints are welcome and early reporting is preferred, all are empowered to work as a team to achieve the goal of a harassment-free workplace. Leadership should ensure that all employees who receive, investigate and resolve complaints are well-trained, objective, and neutral. They also need the authority to act accordingly and have the resources to resolve complaints appropriately. All concerns and complaints should be taken seriously with swift responses.

A multifaceted reporting system is best. Besides the traditional method of reporting to the employee's supervisor or a designated human resource person, other reporting avenues, such as a hotline, an online process, and multiple individuals within management and human resources designated to receive the complaints. Senior leadership needs a clear avenue to report inappropriate behavior within the reporting process. Designated personnel should maintain an environment where all parties feel comfortable reporting prohibited behavior.

Effective designated reporting personnel treat all parties involved with respect and are impartial. They must document every complaint from initial reporting through resolution. Documentation of the detailed steps taken during the investigation, their findings and recommendations, and corrective actions are crucial to the process and future harassment prevention.

An effective complaint system includes alternative ways to resolve disputes regarding behaviors that are not necessarily prohibited but could eventually escalate to that level. Designated personnel could facilitate communication among the parties and assist in preventive measures, so hopefully, there is a win-win for all involved. All parties involved should know their involvement is confidential within relevant legal responsibilities. Critical to the process is the assumption that all alleged harassers are presumed innocent and not prematurely disciplined until the investigative findings are conclusive for harassment.

When harassment is inconclusive, the resolution of the complaint is communicated to the complainant and the alleged harasser. When harassment is conclusive, preventative and corrective action is taken, disciplinary measures can be put in place, and education regarding zero tolerance for retaliation should occur. If retaliation takes place, at a minimum, sanctions are imposed.

Appropriate corrective disciplinary action may include counseling, further training, or closer supervision of the employee if the behavior is concerning but does not violate policy or the law. At times, restructuring the work environment or reporting relationships is necessary. Corrective disciplinary action may also result in termination of employment. After corrective action is taken, the complainant should not be forgotten. Regular follow-up with the complainant to ensure their environment remains harassment-free is advised.

**Harassment Training Programs**

Regular comprehensive training ensures that employees understand the policies, expectations, prohibited conduct, consequences of misconduct, and ways to prevent inappropriate behavior. Respect in the workplace training is beneficial to help team members recognize a respectful and inclusive work environment.

Additional training for supervisors is recommended because they have greater responsibilities than other employees when maintaining a harassment-free environment and responding appropriately to prohibited behavior and complaints. [See EEOC Olguin Task Force Testimony, supra note 9] Non-managerial personnel, such as team leaders, may also benefit from additional training.

Training is most effective if senior leaders champion it. From the CEO to the human resources personnel, all employees should see a unified front with all leadership engaged in the process. Training should be reinforced regularly, easy to understand, and easily accessible to employees at every level within the hierarchy. The training is most effective when tailored to the specific workplace, the individual's role, and the workforce's daily experiences. Interactive training with active engagement is preferable.

Successful training includes employees' rights and responsibilities when they are aware of potential prohibited conduct, regardless of whether or not they were subjected to inappropriate behavior. Successful training also includes the following:

- Encouragement of early reporting before conduct rises to prohibited harassment;

- Specific steps of the complaint process and voluntary alternative dispute resolution;

- Confidentiality assurance, when applicable by law;

- Possible consequences for those who engage in prohibitive behavior;

- Ways to openly discuss topics and ask questions; and

- Contact information for designated personnel who can assist and handle the complaint and resolution processes.

Effective training for supervisors and managers includes details on how to identify, prevent, stop, and correct prohibited behaviors. Instruction on identifying risk factors, minimizing the risks, addressing harassment when they see it, and reporting behaviors appropriately are essential to prepare supervisors and managers for their role within the organization to ensure a harassment-free environment. Leadership should know precisely what conduct is protected from retaliation under federal law. These conducts include expressing intent to complain about harassment, filing a complaint, resisting sexual advances or intervening to protect others, and participating in a harassment investigation.



**What Should You Do When Harassment Occurs**

If you experience, witness, or become aware of unwelcome sexual conduct, know that:

You have the right to tell the person to stop. The behavior should stop upon request. The conduct may be illegal if the behavior does not stop or retaliation occurs.

You have the right to report sexual harassment. The reporting option chosen may depend on the nature or severity of the unwelcome behavior. Individuals who report sexual harassment or participate in investigations are protected from retaliation. The behavior may be reported to a supervisor, management, or human resources member who knows the internal complaint and resolution process.

The EEOC enforces Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the federal law that makes sexual harassment or retaliation illegal. Victims may file a charge any time within 300 days of the incident. The EEOC has the authority to investigate employers who have 15 or more employees.

**Legal Remedies Available**

After the EEOC completes an investigation, the employee who filed the charge (complainant) may file a lawsuit in federal court. The EEOC may help all involved settle through an informal process referred to as a conciliation if they determine there is reasonable cause to believe the violation occurred. Complainants who prevail in federal court may be awarded remedies allowed under Title VII to make the employee “whole.” Remedies may include compensation for back pay or lost benefits, clearing a personnel file, damages, hiring, promotion, reinstatement, punitive damages, and attorney’s costs.

**Individual Precautionary Measures for Sexual Harassment in Medicine**

An individual team member's ability to perform work effectively depends on a favorable work environment. When harassment occurs, team dynamics break down, and ultimately patient care is adversely affected. Clinical care and medical training require highly functional teams for optimal performance. Individual action plans should be developed to safeguard team members in threatening situations from patients, peers, and superiors