ADPKD:****

Imaging of patients with ADPKD can be tedious because of the enlarged, distorted kidneys and variably sized cysts and their mass effects on adjacent structures.

Ultrasound is cheap, easy, fast, and lacking in ionizing radiation, and is an excellent choice for regular follow-up of these cases. Simple cysts appear anechoic on ultrasound, while complex cysts may show anechoic material and thick septa or calcifications, which require careful assessment to rule out hemorrhage, infection, or renal malignancy. Ultrasound is also used to assess cysts in other organs like the liver.

CT is a very sensitive tool in imaging renal cysts. Any complex cysts showing thick enhancing septa and a solid nodule are viewed with caution and classified according to Bosniac classification.

MRI is as informative as CT with the added benefit of lack of ionizing radiation. Simple cysts appear hyperintense on T2 and hypointense on T1. Hemorrhage in a cyst appears hyperintense on T1; calcification shows blooming on GRE or susceptibility-weighted images. A complex cyst may show thick enhancing septa or enhancing solid nodules which raise suspicion for malignancy.

Recently,  image-based renal and cyst volumetry measurement has been implemented in several institutions and utilized as an indicator for the assessment of treatment response or disease progression.

ARPKD:

In the perinatal and neonatal period ultrasound typically shows bilateral smooth enlarged kidneys with loss of corticomedullary differentiation. CT shows smooth enlarged kidneys with a striated pattern of contrast excretion.

Those children who survive the neonatal period and present later with portal hypertension in the infantile or juvenile period, usually have less involvement of kidneys. Their renal ultrasound is usually normal or may show minimal cysts.

Genetic testing of an affected sibling with ARPKD is another tool in the evaluation of these families and patient's at risk.