Acute toxicity is approached by strict airway management, activated charcoal if the patient presents early, seizure management with the use of benzodiazepines, and pyridoxine administration. This helps with the rapid restoration of GABA stores.

Elevated serum aminotransferase levels develop during the first few weeks of therapy and are termed as mild INH hepatotoxicity. In most cases, such toxicity is self-limiting, and the adaptive response allows the continuation of the agent as long as patients remain asymptomatic without a progressive elevation in aminotransferase levels. However, it is very important to know that INH should be immediately discontinued if there are hepatitis-related symptoms or progressive elevation in aminotransferase levels. The onset of any symptoms of hepatitis such as anorexia, nausea, jaundice, and fatigue in a patient with abnormal liver biochemical tests should prompt cessation of INH forthwith.

The exact level of aminotransferases at which INH should be discontinued is unclear. It is generally recommended that if the total bilirubin is greater than 3 mg/dL and liver enzymes are over 5 times the upper limit of normal, INH (including other anti-tuberculosis medications) should be discontinued. If the bilirubin is less than 3 mg/dL and liver enzymes are less than 5 times the upper limit of normal, therapy can be continued, but liver enzymes should be checked in 3 days for reassessment. If liver enzymes continue to worsen or patients develop symptoms of hepatitis, therapy should be discontinued; otherwise, close monitoring is recommended. Once the liver enzymes return to baseline (or less than twice normal), the potential hepatotoxic drugs can be restarted one at a time with careful monitoring between resuming each agent. Rechallenge with INH may be done cautiously with serial monitoring of liver biochemical tests in patients with a strong indication for therapy and who have not had a severe hepatoxicity with INH. Many public health programs that require INH prevention for a positive tuberculin skin test or a blood test for diagnosing Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection include monthly liver enzyme monitoring; although, there is limited evidence of benefit for such practice. Monitoring of liver biochemical tests while on therapy is generally recommended in patients with chronic liver disease or age above 50 years as these individuals are at a higher risk for developing hepatotoxicity.

Though there are no specific therapies for INH induced liver damage, some studies have shown a mortality benefit in using corticosteroids and N-acetylcysteine early in the course of liver injury. In rare instances, the hepatotoxicity from INH can be very severe prompting the need for an emergency liver transplant.

Peripheral neuropathy is avoided and treated with daily pyridoxine administration along with INH.