**Routes of Transmission**

Pathogens associated with healthcare-associated infection (HAI) may have different routes of transmission. The most common route of transmission is through contact, whereby the organisms are transmitted by direct or indirect contact. Common microorganisms that may be transmitted through contact are multidrug-resistant bacteria (such as MRSA, ESBL-producing Gram-negative organisms, VRE), C. difficile, and rotavirus. Droplet transmission may occur when microorganisms are transmitted from the respiratory tract by large droplets (greater than 5 microns) and travel less than 3 feet. Examples of infectious pathogens that are transmitted via the droplet route include influenza, Bordetella pertussis, and Neisseria meningitidis. Airborne transmission involves the transmission of organisms from the respiratory tract by small droplets (less than 5 microns) that travel long distances. Chickenpox virus, tuberculosis, measles, and the novel SARS-COV-2 virus may be transmitted through the airborne route.

**Central Line-Associated Blood Stream Infection (CLABSI)**

CLABSI occurs in the setting of a central venous line (CVC) and is the most preventable type of HAI. In the United States, 55% of ICU patients and 24% of non-ICU patients have CVC.S. aureus (23%), Candida species (13%), coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (12%), Enterococcus species (12%), Streptococcus species (12%), E.coli (8%), Bacteroides species (6%). However, other studies still show coagulase-negative Staphylococci as the most common organism.

Risk factors for CLABSI may be divided into host and catheter factors. Host factors include immunocompromised statuses such as chronic illness, neutropenia, malnutrition, parenteral nutrition, extremes of ages, and bone marrow transplantations. Catheter factors include prolonged hospitalization before catheterization, prolonged time of catheterization, multi-lumen CVC, type of catheter material, multiple CVC, urgent insertion, and lack of sterile barriers or breaks in the aseptic technique. There exists some debate about whether femoral CVC carries an increased risk of CLABSI as compared to subclavian or jugular sites.

**Catheter-Associated Urinary tract Infection (CAUTI)**

CAUTI is a urinary tract infection that occurs in the setting of an indwelling urinary catheter, which may be inserted for numerous medical indications. Approximately 15 to 25% of hospitalized patients in the United States have a urinary catheter. CAUTI can be classified as extraluminal or intraluminal. Extraluminal infections occur when bacteria track along the extraluminal surface of the catheter and enter from the urethral meatus to the bladder. Intraluminal infection arises when there is urinary stasis, usually due to blocked drainage or ascending infection from the intraluminal side of a contaminated catheter. Bacteria and fungal pathogens typically use biofilm formation to facilitate growth and spread along with the indwelling device.E.coli as the most common CAUTI pathogen, followed by Klebsiella pneumonia/oxytoca, Enterococcus species, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Candida species.

The most critical risk factor for CAUTI is the duration of catheterization. Operative or insertion protocol, such as nonadherence to aseptic techniques, is another modifiable risk factor. Patient characteristics that predispose to increased risk are female sex, paraplegia, cerebrovascular disease, older age, diabetes mellitus, history of UTI in the preceding year, and recent antibiotic use within 90 days.

**Skin and Soft Tissue Infection (SSI)**

SSI occurs in 2-5% of patients undergoing surgery and usually manifest within 30 days of surgery or 90 days of implanted devices.

Procedure-related risk factors include the duration of surgery, wound class, hypothermia and hypovolemia during surgery, hypoxemia, the urgency of surgery, more than one intervention/surgery, necessity for blood transfusion, and the type of prosthesis implanted. The most critical risk factor is the duration of operation due to the time that the tissue is exposed to the environment leading to an increased chance of contamination.

The wound class is also an important consideration, dirty, contaminated, and clean-contaminated wounds have the greatest risk compared to clean wounds.

Common SSI pathogens are E.coli, S. aureus, Klebsiella species, Enterobacter species, Enterococcus species, Streptococcus species, Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus.

**Pneumonia**

Hospital-acquired pneumonia is pneumonia that develops after 48 hours of admission. Ventilator-associated pneumonia develops after 48 hours of endotracheal intubation. Approximately 5 to 15% of mechanically ventilated patients develop VAP.

Patients develop HAP as a result of aspiration, inhalation of contaminated aerosols, bacterial translocation, and via hematogenous spread. Pathogens commonly associated with HAP and VAP include S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Candida species, Klebsiella oxytoca and pneumoniae, Streptococcus species, and Enterobacter species. Multi-drug resistant organisms are commonly seen in VAP. Host susceptibility depends on local factors, such as underlying lung disease, or systemic factors, such as immunosuppression, neutropenia, age greater than 70, dysphagia, and recent abdominal or thoracic surgery.

Mechanical ventilation, sedation, supine positioning, poor oral care, physical deconditioning, and reintubation are risk factors for VAP.

**Clostridioides difficile Infection (CDI)**

C. difficile is the single most common organism encountered in HAI.C. difficile produces toxins that act on intestinal epithelial cells leading to tissue injury and result in diarrhea. The most critical risk factor for healthcare-facility onset C. difficile infection (HO-CDI) is antibiotic use and environmental contamination, both of which are modifiable risk factors. Other frequently seen risk factors include increasing age, hospitalization, multiple comorbidities, use of gastric acid-suppressing medications, and immunosuppression.