Peripheral arterial disease is a progressive systemic disease with poor long-term outcomes. Although symptoms of claudication remain stable for many years, these patients are at high risk of fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events. Interprofessional coordination is necessary for identifying patients at risk of disease, preventing secondary progression, and presenting patients with various options for their disease. Primary care providers are essential for patient education regarding risk factors for cardiovascular disease and management of tobacco abuse, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Cardiologists should be involved, given nearly 75% of patients with PAD die from cardiovascular events. Vascular surgeons and endovascular specialists' input provides patients with various options for refractory disease. Vascular medicine specialists and podiatrists are very frequently vital members of the interprofessional team. Nurses are valuable for their familiarity with the patient and updates on how the patient's condition has progressed. Pharmacists are needed for patient and physician education on potential medication side effects and drug-to-drug interactions.

Current guidelines by the American College of Cardiology recommend patients with symptoms of IC undergo ABI testing (Level II). Patients diagnosed with PAD and unresponsive to exercise therapy should receive cilostazol for symptomatic improvement and increased walking distance. [Level I] Endovascular procedures are recommended in patients who have not responded to exercise and pharmacological therapy and who have debilitating symptoms.