Nephrocalcinosis falls into the following classifications:

Molecular or chemical: an increase in intracellular calcium concentration which is quantifiable but not microscopically or radiologically visible

Microscopic: Deposits visible by light microscopic examination of kidney biopsy specimen but not radiologically visible

Macroscopic: calcification visible radiologically

It usually involves the renal medulla and much less often the cortex.

Conditions associated with cortical nephrocalcinosis are:

- Cortical necrosis such as occurs in pregnancy

- Transplant rejection

- Chronic glomerulonephritis

- Trauma

- Tuberculosis

- Oxalosis

Oxalosis is one condition which can cause both medullary and cortical nephrocalcinosis.

The most common cause of nephrocalcinosis is hypercalciuria with or without hypercalcemia. The metabolic abnormalities of hypercalciuria, hyperphosphaturia, and hyperoxaluria are often associated with nephrolithiasis and patients often present with both conditions. Calcium phosphate and calcium oxalate crystals form when the concentration of the solutes exceed the saturation limit in the tubular fluid. In a study by Evan AP et al., Randall's plaques were noted in the inner medullary interstitium as part of the basement membranes of the thin limb of the loop of Henle where the tubular fluid is saturated.

Light microscopy in nephrocalcinosis shows intracellular, tubular, and interstitial basophilic calcifications. Calcium phosphate deposition is accompanied by lymphocyte predominant interstitial infiltrate and interstitial fibrosis.