Cases of damage to the long thoracic nerve result in a phenomenon known as winged scapula, which is due to paralysis of the serratus anterior or trapezius muscles. Procedures in the thoracic region, including radical mastectomy, transthoracic sympathectomy, transaxillary thoracotomy, misplaced intercostal drains, video thoracoscopy port insertion, axillary lymph node dissections, chest tube placements, and resection of the first rib, increase the risk for proximal injury of the long thoracic nerve. Moreover, young children undergoing a posterolateral thoracotomy incision for closed heart procedures, or any other procedures requiring separation of the serratus anterior muscles from the latissimus dorsi, are susceptible to long thoracic nerve injury and subsequent winging of the scapula. Hence, understanding the anatomical course of the long thoracic nerve is essential in increasing the surgical success rate and decreasing the risk of unintentional nerve damage. Physiological variants in the course of the long thoracic nerve positionally to the middle scalene muscle may lead to iatrogenic nerve injury and subsequent scapular winging as it has been documented that the nerve roots may be found anterior, posterior, or through the middle scalene muscle.

Further, with a winged scapula, the serratus anterior muscle is not functioning synchronously with the other muscles of the shoulder girdle. This condition predisposes to abnormal movements of the scapula relative to the long thoracic nerve. For instance, when a patient is under general anesthesia, there is reduced control of the shoulder girdle muscles, and passive adduction of the arm (such as when a patient’s arm is raised and crossed over his or her chest) may cause the scapula to shift anteriorly. This could cause creasing the of the muscle and compression of the long thoracic nerve and its blood supply.