Patients who have preexisting risk factors for type 2 DM are more prone to develop NODAT. NODAT risk factors subclassify into two groups of nonmodifiable and modifiable risk factors.

**Nonmodifiable Risk Factors**

**Age**

Age is among the greatest risk factors in the development of NODAT. Studies demonstrated that the incidence of NODAT is 2.2 times higher in transplant recipients who are more than 45 years of age compared to younger adults.

**Ethnicity**

NODAT is more common in the Black and Hispanic population compared to the White population. This difference in the incidence of NODAT can be due to the genetic diversity and variable effects of immunosuppressive agents on various ethnicities. As an example, tacrolimus has been reported to be a more potent cause of NODAT in the Black population.

**Family History of Diabetes Mellitus and Genetic**

Genetic factors are known to be important in NODAT. Based on the evidence, NODAT is more common in people with a history of diabetes in their first-degree relatives. The development of NODAT has genetic links to the alleles of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) A28, A30, B27, and Bw42. The association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and risk for NODAT has been documented in multiple studies. Also, studies show that the association of the R325W polymorphism in the SLC30A8 zinc transporter gene with the R/r inheritance relates to a higher risk of NODAT. Other specific gene variants which are associated with NODAT are KCNQ1, TCF7L2, KCNJ11-Kir6.2, and NFATc4. TCF7L2. These variants relate to impaired insulin secretion and an accelerated rate of gluconeogenesis. Pathogenesis of NODAT in kidney transplant recipients demonstrates a relationship to significant variations of IL-7R, IL-17E, IL-17R, and IL-17RB.

**Pre-diabetes Status**

Abnormal glucose tolerance is another risk factor for NODAT. Patients with pre-diabetic conditions such as fasting blood sugar levels between 90 and 100 mg/dL need to be monitored closely post-transplant and advised on lifestyle modifications to avoid weight gain, which on its own can tip the patient to develop diabetes mellitus.

**Modifiable Risk Factors**

**Obesity**

Obesity confers a significant modifiable risk factor for the development of NODAT. It acts by upregulating of inflammatory markers and C-reactive protein levels. Adipose tissue increases the production of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), which causes defects in the phosphorylation of the glucose receptor and decreases the expression of insulin-sensitive glucose transporters. This mechanism leads to insulin resistance and DM. Furthermore, adipose tissue induces IL-6 synthesis, which is associated with glucose intolerance. Increasing in adipose tissue results in the reduction of adiponectin, a hormone that reduces the risk of DM. In transplant recipients, the level of adiponectin is low before transplant, which in turn is a risk factor to develop NODAT.

**Post-transplant Medications**

Corticosteroids are traditionally associated with hyperglycemia and DM by decreasing peripheral insulin sensitivity, inhibiting pancreatic insulin production and secretion, increasing hepatic gluconeogenesis, and promoting protein degradation to free amino acids in muscles. The diabetogenic effect of corticosteroids in developing NODAT has been suggested to be related to both the dosage and the duration of therapy. In general, post-transplant steroid therapy increases the risk of NODAT by 42%. While a steroid-free regimen reduces the NODAT risk, glucose tolerance can significantly improve by reducing the daily dose of prednisone to 5 mg or lower post-transplantation. Using a higher dosage of prednisolone, such as 0.01 mg/kg/day, will increase the risk of NODAT by 5%. Calcineurin inhibitors (CNI) are given to most transplant recipients and are associated with hyperglycemia. CNI reduces the number of glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT-4) receptor molecules on the adipocytes. GLUT-4 is an insulin-regulated protein, and its task is to transport the glucose into adipocytes and striated muscle cells. A decrease in the number of GLUT-4 receptors leads to a reduction of glucose uptake by these cells, which resultant hyperglycemia. Also, CNIs decrease the pancreatic beta-cell density by interfering with the activated T-cell signaling in pancreatic beta-cells. As a result, this pathway activates the mutated genes responsible for DM and leads to reduced insulin synthesis. Studies report that the incidence of NODAT is significantly higher in patients who got treatment with tacrolimus compared to those who have had therapy with cyclosporine. Tacrolimus acts by inhibiting T-cell activity, which results in inhibition of interleukin-2 synthesis, and leads to a failure of T-cell production. Beyond the mechanism mentioned above, tacrolimus also causes hyperglycemia by reducing glucokinase activity in pancreatic islets leading to suppression of glucose-induced insulin release. The effect of tacrolimus in the development of glucose intolerance is reversible with drug discontinuation. Sirolimus is another immunosuppressant that has been associated with NODAT, especially when used in combination with CNI. There is no known recognized association between mycophenolate mofetil and azathioprine use and the development of NODAT.

**Hypomagnesemia**

Hypomagnesemia after transplant is another risk factor for NODAT. CNIs can induce hypomagnesemia by inhibition of the renal magnesium transporter, resulting in renal magnesium wasting.

**Viral Infections**

Infection and inflammation are two other factors that contribute to glucose intolerance and the development of DM. HCV infection has a diabetogenic effect by causing insulin resistance and decreasing hepatic glucose uptake and glycogenesis. Also, HCV has a cytopathic effect on pancreatic beta cells. Studies show that the incidence of NODAT is 25.6% in those who are HCV-positive, while it is 14.4% in those with no HCV infection.