Hemorrhoidal disease can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from other anorectal pathologies and, as such, may be treated incorrectly. The disorder is best addressed by an interprofessional team dedicated to anorectal conditions.

All members of the interprofessional team evaluate patients with hemorrhoids in different settings, such as the office, emergency department, or urgent care. An understanding of the degree of prolapse of internal hemorrhoids is essential and helps the healthcare professional choose the adequate treatment, the need for referral to a colorectal specialist, and provide an appropriate education. Correct diagnosis of an acutely prolapsed incarcerated internal hemorrhoid leads to proper treatment promptly, which increases overall patient safety and satisfaction.

Several vital clinical recommendations are published for practice:

- Increasing fiber intake is useful as a first-line medical treatment option.

- Grades 1 to 3 hemorrhoids can have successful treatment in an office setting with rubber band ligation.

- Excisional hemorrhoidectomy should be reserved for grade 3 or 4, recurrent, or symptomatic hemorrhoidal disease.

The primary care physician, nurse, and pharmacist should encourage the patient to avoid constipation, drink ample water, be physically active, add fiber to their diet, and refrain from using narcotic pain medication. Interprofessional team management involving clinicians, nursing, and pharmacy can drive better patient outcomes. [Level 1]