A thorough history can point towards the cause of the hearing loss. When obtaining the child's pertinent history, it is essential to ask about speech and language development and whether the appropriate milestones have been reached. Whether the child had preceding or recurrent upper respiratory tract infections must be ascertained, as this may suggest an otitis media with effusion. A conductive hearing loss can manifest as inappropriate behavior or inattention in the classroom.

Other essential things in the history of children and adults include the onset of hearing loss, whether there was any trauma, and the presence of associated symptoms such as vertigo, otorrhoea, otalgia, and facial weakness. It would be prudent to ask about nasal discharge and weight loss in the older patient, indicating a postnasal space tumor. A child with a history of otitis media during the first two-three years of life are at risk for a mild-to-moderate conductive hearing loss affecting phonological production. They can have difficulty perceiving strident or high-frequency consonants, such as sibilants. During speech they typically fail to produce these consonants, since they do not perceive them. This failure of sound production is called stridency deletion.

It is important to ask about family history and birth history to exclude any familial syndromes. Otosclerosis has an autosomal dominant with an incomplete penetrance mode of inheritance. It usually presents in the third decade of life and is twice as common in women as men. It has a gradual onset, and the hearing loss is bilateral in 80% of cases.

A full otolaryngology examination is mandatory for patients with hearing loss. Both ears must be examined with an otoscope or microscope. The examiner can see an obstruction of the ear canal with cerumen, debris, or a foreign body. Stenosis of the canal, which may be congenital or the consequence of repeated infections, can be seen. The tympanic membranes must be visualized to exclude acute infections, effusions, perforations, hemotympanum, or the presence of a cholesteatoma. Approximately 90% of patients with otosclerosis have normal tympanic membranes, while 10% have a pink tinge called Schwartz’s sign.

Weber and Rinne tuning fork tests are useful screening tests, which can be carried out in the clinic to see whether hearing loss is conductive or sensorineural.