The principal clinical value of measuring serum alkaline phosphatase lies in the diagnosis of cholestatic liver disease—some of the highest elevations in alkaline phosphatases present in patients with cholestasis. Usually, four-fold of the upper limit of normal or greater elevation occurs in up to 75% of the patients with cholestasis, either intrahepatic or extrahepatic.

Moderate elevation (up to four times the upper limit of normal) of serum alkaline phosphatase is nonspecific as it can occur in a variety of conditions affecting the liver including cirrhosis, chronic hepatitis, viral hepatitis, congestive heart failure, and ischemic cholangiopathy.

Primary or metastatic cancer raises serum alkaline phosphatase levels by local bile duct obstruction and increasing leakage of the liver isoenzyme.

Abnormally low levels can be useful clinically as they are seen in Wilson's disease, especially when presenting in a fulminant form with hemolysis. Zinc is a cofactor of Alkaline phosphatase, which gets displaced by copper in Wilson's disease, a disorder of copper overload, thereby leading to low levels.

Transient very high levels of ALP (up to 30 times URL) have been recorded in children, but the clinical significance of this finding is unknown. This has been called transient hyperphosphatasaemia and may be either the bone or the liver isoenzyme.

An extensive evaluation is often not needed in those patients who have only a mild elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase (less than 50% elevation). Such patients may be observed clinically with periodic monitoring of serum liver biochemical tests. Whenever alkaline phosphatase levels are abnormally elevated, further evaluation should take place to determine whether the source is hepatic or non-hepatic.

Right upper quadrant ultrasonography is often the first imaging study ordered. If the bile duct has become dilated, either endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is done depending on the clinical indication. If the bile duct does not show dilation, testing for serum antimitochondrial antibody (AMA) is the suggested next step to evaluate for primary biliary cholangitis (PBC).