The management of pertussis is best done with an interprofessional team that includes the pharmacist and nurses. With a strong anti-vaccine movement, patient education is key. Parents and caregivers have to be informed that the adverse effects of the vaccine are rare. In an era of anti-vaccination sentiments, clinicians should educate the public that the vaccine is safe and effective.

Pertussis immunity wanes significantly about seven years after vaccination and about 15 years after natural infection. As a result, the CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends routine booster immunization, starting at ages 11 to 18 years. A study of almost 70,000 patients showed no significant adverse effects for patients receiving Tdap instead of Td as a tetanus booster; in patients requiring a tetanus booster in the emergency department, adding the acellular pertussis component could be considered, especially in pregnant women. Mothers are often identified as the source of pertussis infection in newborns who have not completed their vaccination series, and preliminary data suggest that infants of mothers vaccinated against both influenza and pertussis may be at lower risk for contracting pertussis.

Pertussis is a reportable infection in the US, and even one case must be reported immediately, and control measures to prevent transmission should be in place. Open communication between the interprofessional team is vital to ensure that patients are treated with optimal care and that vaccination protocols are in place.