**ICD functions
**

**Sensing**

Sensing in implantable devices refers to the ability to pick up intrinsic signals from the heart and interpret them properly, in such a way that allows the device to respond appropriately. The ICD system needs to be sensitive enough to detect the VF wavelength that occurs in a tenth of millivolts, and also not to over-sense the T wave, far fields, or myopotential. This is usually achieved through a digitally modified signal algorithm. The peak signal amplitude of the sensed ventricular event during refractory period is stored to determine the threshold start, and when the sensed refractory period expires, the threshold start (which is a percentage of the peak sensed ventricular event, usually 50%) determines the sensitivity setting of the next cycle. Three maximum sensitivity settings are used in ICD, two are used for the pacemaker function of the ICD, and the third is the threshold start for the defibrillation function.

**Arrhythmia Detection**

Proper ICD therapy is a matter of life. Most of the ICDs have three broad detection categories: normal sinus rhythm, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. These rhythms are defined by rate; the device looks at the corresponding cycle lengths or millisecond (ms) intervals to make its determinations.

Most ICDs now offer three-tiered therapy to terminate the tachycardia:

- Anti-tachycardia pacing (ATP)

- Cardioversion or low-energy shocks

- Defibrillation or high-energy shocks.

Detection is usually defined according to the ability of the ICD to detect the rate of the arrhythmia.

- Defibrillation only configuration detects only the sinus rhythm as a rate less than 200 bpm and VF with a rate more than 200 bpm. It offers the only defibrillation to rates above 200 bpm.

- Defibrillation and single tachycardia zone: In this kind of configuration, the ICD is able to identify three detection rates, sinus rhythm with a rate less than 120 bpm, VT as a rate between 120bpm to 200 bpm, and VF at a rate of more than 200 bpm. It offers ATP for VT detection zone and defibrillation for VF detection zone.

- Defibrillation with two tachycardia zones:

- The ICD has the sinus rate of less than 120 bpm, slow VT at tachycardia zone A with a rate between 120bpm to 160 bpm, fast VT 160 bpm to 200 bpm, and the VF zone at a rate of more than 200 bpm.The ICD usually uses the average interval together with the current interval. If the current interval meets the average rate, then the interval is binned; if the current rate does not meet the average interval, then the rate is binned to the faster rate. This helps in overcoming the occasional single-beat rhythm variation from resulting in therapy delivery.

- There are two methods for counting the sensed events and to bin them to the accurate rate zone. The first method is the consecutive interval counting, determined by a programmable number of events needed to satisfy detection, within the tachycardia zone, each interspersed non-tachycardia beat causes counting to be reset to zero. The other method is X of Y counting method, the continuous rolling window of detection that is updated with each new ventricular heartbeat. Detection is initially satisfied when X number out of the total number of beats in the window Y are classified to a tachycardia zone. X of Y scheme is the counting method of choice for VF zone detection. Also, VT can have some variation in its cycle length. An X of Y counting method may compensate for potential transient drops below the rate cutoff and prevent delayed detection and delivery of therapy.

**SVT/VT Discrimination**

In addition to rate detection, rhythm detection is also crucial in therapy-delivering. Heart rate is not the only factor that detection in VT zones may be reliant upon. SVT discriminators are algorithms available in Tach A and Tach B zones. (SVT discriminators cannot be used in the fib zone).

- Rate branch: Rate Branch is one of the discrimination methods, by simultaneous counting of both atrial and ventricular events, in case of supraventricular events the atrial events are more than ventricular events, then the device diagnoses this as atrial flutter or AF. This is an SVT, and the ICD would automatically inhibit therapy. On the other hand, if V is greater than A, that is, the ventricular rate was more rapid than the atrial rate, the ICD would categorize this as VT and advance to deliver therapy.

- Interval stability: Interval stability is another method to overcome rapid ventricular rate associated with the chronic Afib patients, tachycardia originating in the ventricles usually has a more regular, albeit rapid rhythm. Thus, interval stability is a special SVT discriminator which assesses the stability of the ventricular rate. Interval stability in the form of regular R–R intervals is diagnosed as a VT (therapy is delivered), while instability in the R–R intervals is diagnosed as AF with rapid ventricular response, inhibiting therapy. The programmable setting for the interval stability of the R-R interval may be a delta or an interval of 80 msec, if R-R interval changes by  more than 80 msec the diagnosis of Afib is set up, and thus, therapy is inhibited, while if R-R variability is less than the programmable delta, then the diagnosis of VT is established, and therapy is delivered.

- Sudden onset: This algorithm is used in case of confusing VT and sinus tachycardia, sinus tachycardia is characterized by gradual onset due to the physiological demand, on the other hand, VT starts abruptly. Sudden onset algorithm looks at the change (delta) in interval measurement from the non-tachycardia to the binned tachycardia event. VT is diagnosed when the change is more than the programmed value.

- Morphology discrimination: This algorithm needs a highly expert clinician who uses the own patient's rhythm as a template during programming session to discriminate between supraventricular ORS morphology that uses the His-Purkinje conduction system to match it to the arrhythmia interval detected to make a matching score of the arrhythmic ORS complex.

**Therapy**

Ventricular tachyarrhythmia therapy in an ICD may be programmed for each zone of detection. For VF zone, therapy occurs in the form of defibrillation. Shocks to terminate tachycardias in this zone may occur regardless of the timing in the cardiac cycle, and up to a maximum of 25 J to 42 J stored energy in contemporary devices. Some ICD models may deliver up to eight shocks per arrhythmia episode.

ATP may end arrhythmia in VT zone; the ventricular pacing is delivered in a burst at a cycle length shorter than that of the tachycardia (typically 10% to 20% shorter). The tachycardia may be terminated by rendering its circuit refractory at a critical point. ATP burst options include pacing at a fixed cycle length, pacing at a progressively shorter cycle length (“ramp”) with each impulse, and pacing with a combination of both. The number of pacing impulses within each burst and the number of burst attempts are also programmable. Cardioversion is the next level for VT termination; each shock is synchronized to occur on R wave in the cardiac cycle, the initial shock energy is usually low and is increased in subsequent shocks.

**Bradycardia Pacing**

ICD systems have similar bradycardia pacing capabilities as a conventional pacemaker. Whether or not backup pacing function is required for the defibrillator patient may frequently depend on the reason the ICD was implanted, and the future needs for medication that may precipitate significant Bradyarrhythmias.