Penicillamine is available in 250 mg tablets and 125 mg and 250 mg capsules.

**Wilson Disease**

- Adult dosing: 750 to 1500 mg/day divided three or four times daily. The dose that gives an initial 24-hour urinary copper excretion of more than 2 mg/day should be kept constant for three months; dose adjustments are made on the 24-hour urinary copper excretion and free serum copper levels. The maintenance dose should give a free copper serum level of less than 10 mcg/dL.

- Pediatric dosing: The recommended off-label dosing for pediatric cases of Wilson disease is 20 mg/kg/day divided into 2 to 3 doses. The maximum dose is 1000 mg per day. As with adults, dose adjustments are made on the 24-hour urinary copper excretion and free serum copper levels.

**Cystinuria**

- Adult dosing: 500 mg by mouth daily; start with 250 mg daily, increase the dose gradually. The maximum dose is 4000 mg daily.

- Pediatric dosing: 30 mg/kg/day by mouth divided into two or three doses daily. The maximum dose is 4000 mg per day. The initial dose is usually 250 mg/day, gradually titrated upward to reduce the risk of adverse effects. The goal is to limit the excretion rate of cysteine to 100 to 200 mg/day.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)**

- Adult dosing: The typical maintenance dose is 500 to 750 mg daily in divided dosages; some patients may require up to 1500 mg daily to obtain a therapeutic benefit. Start with 125 to 250 mg daily for the initial four weeks, increasing by the same amount every 4 to 12 weeks until achieving remission. The minimum maintenance dose for symptomatic suppression should be used, and therapy should be discontinued if the patient shows insufficient benefit within 12 months.

- Pediatric dosing: Typical maintenance dosing is 15 to 20mg/kg/day. Start at a lower dose of 2.5 to 5mg/kg/day and increase every four weeks over three to six months.

**Lead Poisoning**

- It can be a treatment for lead poisoning if no other preferred chelating agents are available. For adults, the daily oral dose is between 1000 and 1500 mg daily in divided doses until the urinary lead stabilizes at less than 0.5 mg/day.

Penicillamine should be administered on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after meals. Some protocols recommend taking the drug at least 2 hours before meals in cases of lead poisoning. It is also advisable to take the medication at least 1 hour apart from other medications or zinc-containing products and if the patient is consuming milk or antacids. It is a strong recommendation to supplement the patient with pyridoxine. In patients with Wilson disease, 25 to 50 mg/day of pyridoxine is advised. A multivitamin regimen without copper can also be an option. In patients with rheumatoid arthritis or cystinuria, the recommendation is to take 25 mg of pyridoxine per day. The last dose of the day should be taken at least 3 hours after dinner. It is recommended to administer penicillamine with pyridoxine dosed at 25 mg per day for both adults and children, especially in patients with nutritional deficiencies.

Dosing should be decreased if the patient is having surgery and maintained at the reduced dose until wound healing is complete.

Renal and hepatic dosing: For rheumatoid arthritis patients, penicillamine is contraindicated in renal impairment. For other indications in patients with renal impairment, if creatinine clearance is greater than 50, caution is advised, and if creatinine clearance is below 50, penicillamine use should be avoided. The drug should also not be used in cases of peritoneal or hemodialysis. Hepatic dosing is undefined.