Laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) is a common ophthalmologic surgical procedure used to correct refractive error. LASIK was patented in 1989 by Dr. Gholam Peyman.

**A Historical Perspective**

Understanding the impact of LASIK in refractive correction requires knowledge of its development. The first significant breakthrough in refractive therapy came in the 1930s, with radial keratotomy by Dr. Tsutomu Sato in Japan. By making incisions deep into Descemet’s membrane, the flattening of the cornea helped correct myopia. However, many complications, like corneal decompensation, came from these deep incisions. Alternative methods were developed, such as the hexagonal keratectomy by Dr. Antonio Méndez in Mexico.

Keratomileusis is the medical term for corneal reshaping, which came about in the 1950s and ’60s with the work of Spanish ophthalmologist José Barraquer. His technique initially involved the microkeratome, a mechanical instrument that, with its oscillating sharp blade, cuts the top layer of the cornea away to create a lenticule and reveal underlying stroma. An additional cut through the stroma was made, and the lenticule was sutured back into place. This technique came to be known as anterior lamellar keratoplasty (ALK).

The excimer, or “excited dimer” laser and its medical use, was discovered in 1970 by Dr. Stephen Trokel and Dr. Rangaswamy Srinivasan in the early 1980s.

LASIK is essentially a combination of ALK and PRK, which was first utilized in the early 1990s.