Therapies for the treatment of failed back surgery syndrome broadly split into conservative (physical therapy or medication) and aggressive (interventional or surgical) management. Conservative management should always be the first option before invasive techniques in patients without indications for emergency surgery.

Studies of conservative treatment specifically for failed back surgery syndrome are rare, and the studies that do exist are often contradictory.

Strong Level II (small randomized controlled trial [RCT]) evidence exists for the efficacy of active physical therapy in patients with gabapentinoids.

Interventional treatment for failed back surgery syndrome is highly dependent on the sub-etiology of the patient’s pain and the detection of specific deformities on imaging. If facet joint arthropathy is identified, procedures such as medial branch blocks or radiofrequency ablation can be performed to relieve the pathology. Radiofrequency ablation must be performed in a continuous mode with a large-bore needle placed parallel to the nerve to maximize the chances of interrupting a significant segment of the nerve and thus achieve prolonged pain relief. Likewise, adhesiolysis has been shown to be an effective treatment for FBSS where epidural fibrosis is a major contributing factor.

Neuromodulatory therapies for failed back surgery syndrome, such as spinal cord stimulation (SCS), involve the implantation of a stimulatory device to mediate the patient’s pain. Strong evidence from large randomized trials exists for the superiority of SCS over conservative management and repeated surgery for FBSS.

Lastly, reoperation may be an option for patients with clearly identified pathologies that may be relieved with surgery. As noted above, reoperation generally correlates with inferior outcomes and higher morbidity compared to implantable technologies such as SCS. However, the presence of certain symptoms, such as bowel/bladder impairment, motor weakness, or neural deficit warrants immediate surgical intervention.