Critical illness neuropathy is a primarily axonal sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy which will be apparent on electrodiagnostic studies. In both motor and nerve conduction studies, distal fibers will be more affected than proximal fibers. CIP and CIM are difficult to differentiate. Patients that are not comatose and can tolerate an EMG may be tested for MUAP recruitment or direct muscle stimulation. A purely sensory phenomenon, although rare, can help distinguish between CIP and CIM. On muscle biopsy, the myosin/actin ratio can be used to diagnose CIM in conjunction with histopathological findings such as myonecrosis, loss of thick myosin filaments, non-necrotizing myopathy, and atrophy.

**A. Nerve conduction studies**

**1. Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies**

There is a reduction of conduction amplitude and absent sensory nerve conduction studies (SNAPs)

**2. Motor Nerve Conduction Studies**

There is a reduction of conduction amplitude and absence of compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs)-

B. **Needle Electromyography**

Abnormal spontaneous potentials may be present in distal muscles, including positive sharp waves (PSWs) and fibrillation potentials (fibs). PSWs appear with an initial sharp downward deflection with a subsequent upward (negative) phase with a duration of 10 to 30 milliseconds. PSWs often sound like "dull thuds." Fibrillation potentials can have triphasic or biphasic spikes with a duration of 1 to 5 milliseconds and sound like "rain on a tin rooftop." These spontaneous potentials indicate that there is significant denervation of the muscles tested. Individual motor units may show decreased recruitment and an increase in the frequency of firing. In chronic conditions, motor unit action potentials (MUAPs) may be large and polyphasic.

****C. Summary of electrodiagnostic criteria****

****1. Critical Illness Polyneuropathy****

- Reduced amplitudes on CMAP

- Reduced amplitude on SNAP, with rare exceptions (e.g. pure form of motor CIP has preserved SNAPs)

- Normal velocity and normal latency.

- Normal action potential excitability during direct muscle stimulation

- Fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves

- Decreased motor unit recruitment upon voluntary muscle contraction

- Large, polyphasic MUAP spontaneous potentials

**2. Critical Illness Myopathy**

- Preserved sensory response (>80% of LLN)

- Reduced motor responses (compound muscle action potential <80% LLN)

- Normal repetitive nerve stimulation

- Small, short-duration, polyphasic MUAP with early full or normal recruitment or interference pattern; in later stages, recruitment may be affected

- Reduced or absent action potential excitability during direct muscle stimulation

- Fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves

- Decreased motor unit recruitment upon voluntary muscle contraction