An important technique for CLC instruction and refinement is blindfolding of the team leader, known as the blindfolded code training exercise. This method of instruction is cost-effective and requires the team leader to utilize critical thinking skills and a sound conceptual framework to organize the management of patient resuscitation. Trainees in emergency medicine, anesthesia, and critical care specialties need extensive training in leadership strategies and CRM to perform in high-acuity situations effectively. It is unclear how to teach techniques to improve real-time ineffectual behavior or bad habits that may persist despite structured learning in the simulation lab.

The theory of neuroplasticity, or the brain’s ability to evolve and reorganize neuronal activity over time, has been suggested as a means to improve communication in the field of medicine. After blindfold placement, other senses become heightened once the team leader loses his/her sense of sight, known as cross-modal neuroplasticity.  Functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain has revealed augmentation of other senses when the examinee gets deprived of one. Researchers found that blind adults processed auditory and tactile stimuli in the visual cortex, as compared to patients with sight who did not experience this phenomenon. This suggests that deprived areas of the brain can become amenable to alternative sensory stimulation.

Medical education may not be taking full advantage of the concept of cross-modal neuroplasticity in regards to developing advanced means of communication amongst teams. The lack of visual cues in an arrest situation requires trainees to develop highly attuned communication skills. The blindfolded code training exercise exemplifies the importance of strong leadership skills during a team simulation, allowing trainees to integrate the leadership and communication training they have received. Closed-loop commands are useful in such a setting as members of the resuscitation team cannot perform maneuvers or initiate patient management without explicit orders from team leaders.