It is evident from all guidelines worldwide that chronic atrophic gastritis or intestinal metaplasia patients are at risk of gastric adenocarcinoma. The aim is to identify advanced stages of gastritis with atrophy and intestinal metaplasia in the antrum and the corpus mucosa to prevent progression to high-grade dysplasia and invasive carcinoma. High-quality endoscopy is the gold standard.

**Pepsinogen Levels**

Low pepsinogen 1 levels and a low pepsinogen 1/pepsinogen 2 ratio can predict advanced atrophic gastritis and should be followed by endoscopy. It was concluded that a combination of pepsinogen, H. pylori status, and gastrin-17 levels is a good diagnostic test for the diagnosis of atrophic gastritis in populations at high risk of GC.

In a meta-analysis of a study population of more than 32000 individuals to identify individuals at risk of GC and CAG, the risk of development of GC from a positive pepsinogen test

A value of .3+ had a sensitivity of 57% and specificity of 76%.

**Endoscopy**

The recent update in guidance on the investigation and management of gastric precancerous lesions (GPL) relate to publications from the European Society of Gastroenterological Endoscopy in association with European Societies (management of epithelial precancerous conditions and lesions in the stomach (MAPS II) and the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA).

The European and British guidelines focus on the diagnosis, treatment, and surveillance of atrophic gastritis, IM, and dysplasia, whereas the American guidelines focus on the management of individuals with IM.

First-time biopsies should be followed by mapping biopsies according to the Sydney protocol for gastritis from at least two topographic sites, antrum x2 (A1 lesser curve of the antrum & A2 greater curve of the antrum), incisura angularis (A3), anterior and posterior corpus x2 and for H. pylori. This is because of the irregular spread of gastritis. Also, any morphologically abnormal lesion like an ulcer, raised surface, or polyp adjacent to the atrophic areas should be biopsied separately and sent for histological assessment in a separate vial.

**Endoscopy Techniques**

Conventional chromoendoscopy (CE) with the application of dyes like indigo carmine, methylene blue, acetic acid, and hematoxylin is highly accurate in the detection of preneoplastic gastric lesions.

High definition chromo-endoscopy is better than high definition white light endoscopy for the diagnosis and the mapping of the extent of gastric precancerous lesions (GPLs).

White light endoscopy (WLE) is not good enough, but HD WLE has shown promising results but not reliable enough to offer as protocol.

Narrowband imaging is shown to be more sensitive for detecting AG and IM compared to HD white light endoscopy and also the better visual diagnostic ability for detecting early cancer. Some centers are using a combined HD WLE with narrowband imaging to achieve a better yield of targeted biopsies.

The Updated Sydney protocol showed the incisura angularis region has the highest incidence and severity of IM. Incisura increased the high-risk stages of OLGA/OLGIM stages. Incisura and more extensive biopsies could be useful where CE is not available.

**Low-Grade and High-Grade Dysplasia**

High-quality chromo-endoscopy is recommended if biopsies show low-grade or high-grade dysplasia. The individual may need intensive surveillance endoscopy or referral for endoscopic resection.

It is important to note that the OLGA system evaluates the whole spectrum from gastric atrophy, fibrosis, pseudo-pyloric metaplasia, and intestinal metaplasia in contrast to the OLGIM system that only evaluates IM.

OLGA and OLGIM both advise testing for and treating H. pylori in patients with GPL. This also applies after the endoscopic excision of GPLs. Both assessment systems also agree IM, whether it is extensive/ colonic (incomplete) type or IM with a family history of GC, are considered high risk for GC. In both assessment techniques, IM subtyping is also not essential but would be useful for surveillance.

European guidelines advise short interval repeat endoscopy with Sydney Protocol of biopsies in those accidentally found to have CAG. In contrast, the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) does not recommend a short interval endoscopy. This should be high-quality guide-targeted biopsies and virtual chromo-endoscopy.

The guidance by the AGA is based on shared decision making between clinician and patient for routine surveillance endoscopy of 'high risk for GC' patients and takes into consideration race/ethnicity as a risk factor. The rationale by AGA is that none of the randomized controlled trials suggest endoscopic surveillance reduces the risk of GC in individuals with GPL. The rationale of European Societies is that there is sufficient data from observational cohort studies to justify more stringent surveillance.