**Macroscopic examination:**

Mucoepidermoid carcinomas are well-demarcated oval or round tumors usually soft in consistency sometimes hard or elastic, measuring 3 cm on average. They show a gray-white to pink-tan, sometimes mucinous and varyingly cystic cut surface. High-grade tumors are more infiltrative.

**Histologic examination:**

The World Health Organization has proposed subclassification of mucoepidermoid carcinoma into low-grade and high-grade.

Low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma is distinguishable from high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma based on the following characteristics:

- Cytological atypia

- Mitotic activity

- Cellular necrosis

Low-grade tumors are composed of three cell types: mucin-secreting, squamous, and intermediate cells, and often show cystic patterns with solid areas. Tumor islands contain both cystic and solid patterns. Cystic components consist of cytologically bland columnar cells with mucin and rare mitoses. Solid components, consisting of squamoid and/or intermediate cells, typically surround the cystic areas. Intermediate cells are oval or polygonal with round nuclei, eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm, and rare necrosis. Stromal calcification and ossification, often with a granulomatous reaction are present around areas of mucous extravasation.

High-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma is mainly composed of atypical squamoid and intermediate cells, with frequent mitosis and necrosis, accompanied by variable numbers of mucin-secreting cells. High-grade tumors are rare, and the diagnosis should be determined after careful exclusion of adenosquamous carcinoma. Criteria more typical of high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma include:

- Exophytic endobronchial growth

- Surface epithelium lacking the changes of carcinoma in situ

- Absence of individual cell keratinization and squamous pearl formation

- Transitional areas to low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma

**Immunohistochemistry:**

Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells show positive immunostaining for p63, p40, pan-cytokeratin, CK7, CK5/6 and Muc5Ac whereas TTF-1, CK20, SOX 10, androgen receptor, calponin, SMA, and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain and napsin A are not expressed.