The average length of the vertebral column in males is about 71 cm and in females about 61 cm. This involves a large area for many muscles to attach to the skeletal backbone. The main purpose of these muscle attachments is to support the trunk and hold the body upright. There are 3 sets of muscles:

- Extensors: The erector spinae are a group of muscles are located posterior to the spine. These include the iliocostalis and spinalis in the thoracic region and interspinales in the lumbar region. They attach from the sacrum, medial iliac crest, vertebral transverse and spinous processes to the angle of the ribs and transverse and spinous processes of the vertebrae. They function to help to stand and lift objects. Other extensors in the thoracic region include semispinalis and rotatores muscles. In the lumbar region, the longissimus lumborum and iliocostalis lumborum play a role in extension.

- Flexors: These are attached anteriorly to the spine. These muscles primarily comprise the abdominal muscles. These allow us to flex, lean forward, and arch the lower back.

- Oblique muscles: These muscles are attached laterally to the spine. They function to rotate the spine and maintain proper posture. Among these, the quadratus lumborum originates from the posterior border of the iliac crest and inserts on the inferior border of 12th rib and L1 through L4. They function to flex the vertebral column laterally. Other muscles include iliocostalis lumborum, intertransversarii lateralis, and intertransversarii medialis.