**First Trimester**

The first 14 weeks of pregnancy are exciting for parents but an important time for screening by their practitioners. The first obstetrical visit should include a general physical examination and pelvic examination. Baseline vital signs along with the physical examination aid a practitioner in assessing the overall physical wellbeing of the gestating mother. At this time, chronic medical and psychological problems can be addressed by the practitioner as well as a prior obstetrical/gynecologic history. The pelvic examination should include cervical cytology (i.e., Pap smear) if one has not been collected within the past 12 months and the female patient is greater than or equal to 21 years old. Testing for Neisseria gonorrhea and Chlamydia trachomatis should also be performed. The uterus, adnexa, and cervix should be palpated in a bimanual pelvic examination to determine if masses or other abnormalities are present.

One of the most important things to determine during the first trimester is a gestational age and estimated due date.  Often, the gestational age is calculated from the last menstrual period if it is known by the patient.  If the last menstrual period is not known or the uterine size does not correlate with the estimated due date by the last menstrual period, an ultrasound for dating takes place.  Ultrasound in the first trimester gives the most accurate gestational age and estimated due date.  The ultrasonographer will assess live fetal status by measuring cardiac activity as well as assess the number of fetuses, amniotic sacs, and placentas.  The ultrasonographer will calculate an estimated gestational age by measuring the crown-rump length of the fetus.  This examination will also detail if uterine or adnexal abnormalities are present.

Laboratory tests are often performed during the first prenatal visit.  An assessment of Rh factor and abnormal antibodies, serological tests for syphilis and rubella and either a hemoglobin or hematocrit are required in most institutions.  The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) also recommends screening for hepatitis B and HIV.  Patients with chronic medical conditions should have additional testing specific for the evaluation of that condition.  Aneuploidy screening can begin as early as ten weeks gestation with cell-free DNA in women with prior aneuploidy and women =35 years old.  First-trimester aneuploidy screening generally occurs between weeks 11-13 and includes nuchal translucency measurement on ultrasound and maternal serum-free BhCG and PAPP-A to detect Down's syndrome and Trisomy 18.

**Second Trimester**

Laboratory and ultrasound assessments of fetal genetic disorders and structural abnormalities typically take place between 15-20 weeks gestation in the second trimester.  Since 1984, screening for Down's syndrome has been primarily maternal serum alpha protein levels (MSAFP) levels since a report then found that there was lower MSAFP found in women carrying a Down's syndrome affected fetus.  Elevated hCG, elevated inhibin A and lower levels of unconjugated estriol are also linked with an increased risk of a Down's syndrome affected fetus creating the quad screen.  Elevated MSAFP is associated with fetuses affected by open spina bifida.  More recently, screening for genetic disorders trisomies 13, 18 and 21 have been performed using maternal serum cell-free fetal DNA which is considered a non-invasive prenatal test (NIPT).  In 2012, ACOG published guidelines on NIPT use which includes women with prior aneuploidy and women =35 years old.

According the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM), second trimester ultrasound assessments should include:  (1) fetal cardiac activity, number, presentation; (2) estimate of amniotic fluid volume; (3) placental location, appearance, and relationship to the internal cervical os; (4) imaging of the umbilical cord, and the number of vessels in the cord; (5) gestational (menstrual) age (via biparietal diameter, head circumference, femoral diaphysis length, abdominal circumference, or average abdominal diameter); (6) fetal weight estimation; (7) maternal anatomy (uterus, adnexal structures, cervix); (8) and fetal anatomic survey.  The fetal anatomic survey includes assessment of: head, face, neck, chest (including a four-chamber view of the fetal heart), abdomen, stomach, kidneys, bladder, abdominal cord insertion site, spine, extremities, and sex.

In the late second trimester (26-28 weeks gestation), most institutions will perform and oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) to screen for gestational diabetes.  The testing can be done with either a 1 hour 50-gram glucose load or a diagnostic 2 hour 75-gram glucose load.

**Third Trimester**

Third-trimester prenatal testing generally focuses on maternal wellbeing and reducing fetal morbidity/mortality.  Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococci beta-hemolytic, GBS) is a major cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality.  Vaginal screening for GBS typically takes place in the late third trimester (34-37 weeks gestation) so that mothers positive for the bacterium can receive treatment during labor before delivery.  Many institutions also require repeat evaluations of hemoglobin/hematocrit, syphilis serology, and HIV screening.