**PAPVC**

Surgical treatment is indicated with the development of symptoms, significant left to right shunt, or evidence of right ventricular dysfunction. Otherwise, patients can be managed conservatively with close follow-up.

Depending on the anatomy and associated heart defects, the surgical techniques can vary.

**TAPVC**

Corrective surgery is indicated in all patients with TAPVC as soon as possible, once the clinical condition is stabilized.

Initial medical management with supportive measures can include supplemental oxygen, inotropic support, and mechanical ventilation. Balloon atrial septostomy may be needed rarely in case of restricted patent foramen ovale. In patients with obstructive TAPVC, sometimes stents are placed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory for stabilizing the neonate. This is not a ductal dependent cyanotic lesion, and there is no indication for starting prostaglandins.

**Surgery**

TAPVC to coronary sinus: The common wall between the coronary sinus and left atrium is excised, which allows the drainage of blood from pulmonary veins to the LA. The orifice of the coronary sinus is then closed. ASD, if present, is also closed.

In Infracardiac and supracardiac TAPVC, an anastomosis between the left atrium and the pulmonary venous confluence is created. The vertical vein is ligated mostly in the same surgical setting unless there is significant pulmonary hypertension. Various other techniques, including intra-atrial rerouting, have also been used in complex and mixed type TAPVC.