Thyroid storm is a rare, life-threatening medical emergency that is difficult to diagnose. Thus, an interprofessional healthcare team that includes an intensivist, cardiologist, endocrinologist, internist, emergency department physician, and infectious disease expert is recommended. These patients are best managed in the ICU and monitored by ICU nurses. Nurses must be fully aware of the potential complications and notify the physician if there is any change in the hemodynamic status. Pharmacists can also weigh in to see if the patient is taking any thyrotoxic medications. The situation requires open communication channels between all professionals to bring about the best possible outcome. [Level 5]

Treatment of thyroid storm consists of supportive measures like intravenous (IV) fluids, oxygen, cooling blankets, and acetaminophen, as well as specific measures to treat hyperthyroidism. If any precipitating factors, for example, an infection, are present, they must be taken care of first. Patients with thyroid storm must be admitted to the intensive care unit with close cardiac monitoring and ventilatory support as needed.

The pharmacist may need to prepare a special formula of iodine that can be administered intravenously. The use of radiocontrast dyes may help some patients. In some cases, plasmapheresis may be life-saving. The nephrologist/hematologist must be involved early in the care of these patients and anticipate the need for plasmapheresis. The team must communicate to avoid the high mortality of thyroid storm.

The outlook for patients with thyroid storm is guarded and depends on patient age, the number of organs involved, comorbidities, need for mechanical ventilation, renal failure, and response to treatment.