In most instances, the disease follows a progressive course, and the patients often have associated co-morbidities, so the involvement of multiple disciplines and interprofessional communication among healthcare team members is of prime importance. While the nephrologist is almost always involved in treating patients with glomerulonephritis, the role of clinicians cannot be undermined, considering that the patients usually have other diseases simultaneously. Patients presenting in the outpatient departments with proteinuria/hematuria or both would need further evaluation.

A renal biopsy following the initial laboratory and radiological investigations may be needed to reach a diagnosis. This requires a collective approach involving histopathologists, immunologists, radiologists, and at times, surgeons. Nurses are essential in dispensing appropriate treatment and assisting with educating the patient and family. Patients with chronic disease need an assessment of renal function at regular intervals, so linking up with a local community doctor is important. Those with markedly decreased renal function require dialysis with appropriate scheduling, so interacting with the dialysis unit is pivotal. Pharmacists can review patient medications and note those that can tax the renal system, as well as manage medications around dialysis sessions for those patients. All interprofessional team members must follow and monitor the patient, record their observations in the patient's medical record, and communicate with other team members as necessary for potential therapeutic interventions. Prompt consultation with specialists is recommended to improve outcomes, and timely interprofessional communication is imperative to ensure quality health care. [Level 5]