Many conditions lead to false-positive findings on PET/CT. Nuclear medicine physicians or radiologists interpreting the scan should be familiar with the pitfalls seen on the FDG PET/CT as these can have serious implications for the management of the patients.

Inflammation and infection show increased FDG uptake, which can mimic the neoplastic process. Chronic granulomatous disease is one of the most challenging causes of false-positive PET/CT. The granulomatous disease can show enlarged FDG avid lymph nodes, most commonly within the chest but essentially anywhere, and can mimic lymphoma.

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) uptake in subcutaneous tissues can complicate image interpretation. BAT can be mistaken for lymph nodes and lead to false-positive results. BAT can also interfere with adequate evaluation of the underlying structures, especially in patients with neck and chest lymphadenopathy. Various pharmacological drugs can reduce the BAT uptake on FDG PET and includes ß blockers like propranolol, fentanyl, and benzodiazepines like diazepam. Avoiding exposure to cold temperatures and providing warm blankets also reduces BAT uptake.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) can cause a transient increase in FDG uptake in the bone marrow and spleen. A short delay of about two weeks is recommended between the administration of GCSF and follow-up PET/CT. GCSF is a glycoprotein that stimulates the production of neutrophils and the proliferation of granulocyte. Chemotherapy can cause bone marrow suppression, and patients with neutropenia receive GCSF. GCSF is often administered as primary prophylaxis with chemotherapy to prevent febrile neutropenia.

Some chemotherapeutic drugs can cause transient increased FDG uptake in the bone marrow. A delay of 4-6 weeks after chemotherapy is recommended for the PET/CT.

Benign thymic hyperplasia presents as triangular bilobed shape metabolic activity in the retrosternal anterior mediastinum on FDG PET/CT in patients less than 13 years of age. Benign thymic hyperplasia can also be seen in the patient population older than 13 years of age due to the chemotherapy-induced immunological rebound phenomenon. Thymic hyperplasia is commonly seen in children and young adults undergoing chemotherapy for lymphoma and melanoma. Hyperplasia of the thymus is also reported after treatment of other malignancies. Additional treatment and biopsy are unnecessary for metabolically active benign thymic hyperplasia.