The standard ASA (American Society of Anesthesiology) monitoring tools intra-operatively is five leads ECG (electrocardiogram), pulse oximeter, non-invasive blood pressure, and temperature. In addition to the standard tools, other invasive and non-invasive monitoring devices are used as per the surgery. Major hemodynamic variation is anticipated in transplant surgeries, and invasive arterial blood pressure shows real-time values. Liver transplant patients are prone to severe hemodynamic fluctuation.

Stroke volume variation and pulse pressure variation are dynamic metrics to assist the volume status of the patient. Depending on institution protocol, the patient can have one or two arterial lines (one radial and other brachial or femoral). A central line is inserted for central venous pressure monitoring, vasopressor, and inotropes administration. In some cases, when there is severe pulmonary hypertension, portopulmonary shunts, or diminished right heart function, a pulmonary artery (PA) catheter is inserted for pulmonary pressure monitoring. TEE (Transesophageal echocardiogram) is used in some cases of liver transplantation for monitoring of right and left heart function, diagnosing volume status of the patient, early diagnosis of cardiac clots, and guiding placement of PA catheter. TEE is contraindicated in grade III and IV esophageal varices.

Intra-operative arterial blood gas analysis and thromboelastographic studies (TEG) are beneficial in liver transplant surgeries. The arterial gas analysis provides information on acid-base and electrolytes in the body. TEG studies help to understand the coagulation cascade and which hemostatic component deficiency is contributing to coagulopathy. Therefore, assisting in the repletion.

Neuromuscular block monitoring is done with a train of four studies. It also guides with reversal and extubation of patient, especially in kidney and liver transplants where metabolism of drugs is prolonged due to suppress organ function. The bispectral index aids in decreasing awareness during anesthesia and assists in titrating drugs. Jugular venous oxygen saturation is used to monitor cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption, especially in the anhepatic and neohepatic phases of liver transplantation. There is a significant fluctuation of cardiac output, leading to impaired cerebral blood flow.