All patients with autism spectrum disorder should have a thorough medical assessment, including standard psychiatric assessment, physical examination, hearing screening, eye examination for signs of tuberous sclerosis, and genetic testing. Medical geneticists have recommended chromosomal microarray as the standard of care for the initial evaluation of children with ASD or other developmental disabilities.

Additional evaluations may be indicated if the child has any unusual features such as significant family history, dysmorphology, or a history of regression. Other potential organic etiologies such as infections, endocrinopathies, metabolic disorders, trauma, or fetal alcohol syndrome should also prompt further evaluation. Landau-Kleffner syndrome, which is a neurodevelopmental disorder associated with highly distinctive EEG abnormalities, should be considered to rule out. Neurologic consultation, neuroimaging, EEG, and additional laboratory tests may be indicated depending on history or physical examination.

For diagnostic evaluation, most patients with ASD need to see specialists such as a psychiatrist, psychologist, developmental-behavioral or neurodevelopmental pediatrician, or neurologist. Earlier clinical diagnosis is essential to facilitate the initiation of services. A detailed history of behavioral symptomology, as well as direct observation of symptoms, is necessary to make a diagnosis since there are no diagnostic laboratory tests available at this time.

Psychological assessment is indicated for treatment planning and helps to determine the areas of strength and weakness. Measurements of cognitive ability and adaptive skills are useful in designing intervention programs. Intelligence tests may show different and significantly scattered results. Unusual forms of abilities or special interests may be present, particularly in higher functioning children. However, the single-minded pursuit of these interests may negatively influence learning abilities. Receptive and expressive vocabulary, as well as social and pragmatic language, are measured to assess communication. Occupational assessment may be indicated to evaluate sensory and motor deficits. Finally, sleep evaluation is also an important component of assessment. Careful planning with multidisciplinary coordination helps optimize outcomes.