The blood supply to the foot begins primarily with the popliteal artery. The popliteal artery branches off the large superficial femoral artery, giving rise to the three main branches supplying the lower leg and foot. The three branches from proximal to distal are the anterior tibial artery, peroneal artery, and posterior tibial artery. The anterior tibial artery continues distally to supply the anterior and dorsal portions of the foot. Once the anterior tibial artery passes under the extensor retinaculum, it becomes the dorsalis pedis. This artery is commonly palpated for a pedal pulse. The dorsalis pedis continues under the extensor hallucis longus and passes between it and the extensor digitorum longus.

The dorsalis pedis has three lateral branches: the proximal and distal tarsal arteries and the arcuate artery. The two medial branches of the dorsalis pedis are the medial tarsal arteries. The arcuate artery branches at the level of the first tarsal-metatarsal joint and courses over metatarsals two through four to give rise to the second, third, and fourth dorsal metatarsal arteries. The first dorsal metatarsal artery branches directly off the dorsalis pedis. The metatarsal branches supply the dorsal interosseous muscles of the foot. The peroneal artery supplies the lateral leg muscles and the posterior foot. Finally, the posterior tibial artery supplies the posterior and lateral leg as well as the plantar surface of the foot.

The venous system of the lower limbs is composed of deep veins (which run between the muscles) and superficial veins (which constitute a complex network just below the skin). The two systems are joined by transfascial valved communications that constitute a real system, that of the perforating veins. The perforating veins favor the outflow of blood that flows in the system superficially (about 10%) towards the deep system.

In the sole, there is a sort of sponge consisting of a complicated intertwining of superficial and deep veins, which, at each step, are emptied by compression on the ground. Thanks to this mechanism, the blood is pushed over the ankle up to the calf.

The venous system originates in the microcirculation from the arterial capillaries (afferent branch) to continue with the venous capillaries that converge first in the collecting venules and then in the collecting veins, thus constituting the initial efferent branch of venous macrocirculation.

In the anterior region, the dorsal venous network of the foot through the intercapitular veins that pass through the interdigital spaces; the digital veins, joining two to two in the interdigital spaces, originate the metatarsal veins that are directed in the deep plantar venous arch, converging in the lateral plantar veins; these, after joining posteriorly with the medial plantar veins, originate the two posterior tibial veins. The anterior tibialis originates from the deep veins of the dorsal region of the foot. The medial marginal vein of the foot ascending anterior to the medial malleolus forms the internal or great saphenous vein. The lateral marginal vein of the foot ascending anterior to the lateral malleolus forms the small saphenous vein.

The lymph drained from the lower extremities begins in the foot, where lymph nodes are divided into superficial (epifascial) and deep (subfascial) nodes; the epifascial and subfascial nodal networks are connected by anastomoses. In general, the epifascial system drains the skin and subcutaneous tissues, whereas the subfascial system directly drains the joints, muscles, and bones.