Anomalous coronary arteries can be a diagnostic challenge. They may occur either singly or in combination with other congenital heart disorders. The incidence of anomalous coronary vessels has been reported to be about 0.1% to 0.3% in necropsy reports. Although rare, they can often present with hemodynamic abnormalities. Many coronary anomalies are first identified on an angiogram because of their anomalous course.

**Type of Coronary Anomalies**

High Takeoff: where the origin of the LCA or RCA is above the usual anatomical location. These anomalies may present with difficulty in cannulation during angiography.

Multiple ostia where the RCA and the conus branch may arise separately, or the LAD and left circumflex may arise with no left common coronary artery.

Single Coronary Artery: when there is only one coronary artery arising from the aortic trunk. It may be the RCA or the LAD.  If the single coronary passes between the aorta and pulmonary artery, it can be compressed and present with sudden death.

Anomalous origin of the coronary artery from the pulmonary artery is the most serious congenital coronary artery anomaly. Most infants are symptomatic at birth. In the most common type, the left common coronary arises from the pulmonary artery with the RCA arising normally. These patients need some procedure to convert it into a dual coronary artery system. The bypass can be conducted with a saphenous vein graft or internal mammary, but the small size of the coronary is a major limiting factor. Rarely, this can present in adolescents and adults.