Multiple modifiable factors exist which can alter the outcome of abdominal surgeries and can influence the prevention (or formation) of wound complications, including fascial dehiscence. For the elective patient setting, smoking cessation before surgical intervention is optimal.

For the damage-control or open abdomen patients, closure of the abdomen as soon as clinically safe is the recommended course; more than four reoperations before closure has been found to be associated with a significant increase in the rates of failure of primary fascial closure.

Incision type has been considered to be a risk factor for the development of dehiscence. Data is not strong; however, trends towards a lower rate of fascial complications have occurred for transverse or oblique incisions as opposed to the midline or paramedian incisions.

For all fascial closures, attention to the surgical technique is essential. Care should be taken to snugly approximate fascial edges without strangulating tissue. Knots should be securely tied. Monofilament suture has been found to be associated with lower rates of subsequent dehiscence as compared to multifilament suture.

The use of retention sutures (internal or external) is a long-standing topic of discussion in the surgical realm, particularly in terms of fascial dehiscence and evisceration. Classic teaching states that retention sutures prevent evisceration, however, do not serve to prevent fascial dehiscence; a recent small randomized series contradicts this finding with a decrease in dehiscence rates noted in the retention suture group.

Patients should be educated on wound care and concerning findings. Many surgeons will implement activity restrictions following abdominal surgery to prevent failure of the fascial closure. These tend to vary in length by surgeon and procedure. No strong evidence exists to support these recommendations as unavoidable activities of daily living (i.e., getting up from chair, coughing, straining with Valsalva) may equal or exceed the intraabdominal pressures generated with lifting;