The function of evidence-based medicine is to bring together three different entities: the patient's preferences, the healthcare professional's clinic judgment, and the best available, relevant, scientific information to provide improved medical care.

There are numerous criticisms of evidence-based medicine

**Publication Bias**

Evidence-based medicine is based on published results, giving more weight to class I and II evidence. Many studies have shown that positive results are more likely to be published than negative results. This leads to a publication bias of positive result studies that can skew the available evidence. Additionally, studies funded by companies are more likely to get published to push for the use of the studied medication or device, which can also skew the available evidence.

**Randomized, Controlled Trial Bias**

Evidence-based medicine places the highest weight in randomized controlled trials. Although such randomized controlled trials may provide strong evidence, a randomized controlled trial may not always be possible or feasible. If a disease process has a very low prevalence, it may be extremely prohibitive or impossible to obtain a sufficient number of participants for a study.

For example, progeria is a rare disease with an incidence of around one in four to eight million live births and an average lifespan of 14 years.  With a global population of around 7.6 billion and an annual birth rate of 18.5 births per 1,000 people per year, there would only be around 100 to 400 total individuals with progeria in the world. It is impractical to conduct a randomized controlled trial with so few patients and produce meaningful results.

As a second example, consider the ethical implications of randomized controlled trials. In a paper by Smith et al. (2003), they argue that we take for granted that parachutes help prevent injuries and save lives after a person jumps out of an airplane. This common-sense observation has not yet been studied and proven with a randomized controlled trial. The article argues that people should accept certain common-sense ideas, and randomized, controlled trials are not always necessary. After all, can researchers easily find evidence-based medicine purists who would be willing to sign up for a randomized, cross-over, placebo-controlled trial testing the utility of parachutes to decrease injuries or death after jumping out of an airplane?

Finally, there are many, many more clinical questions than there are randomized controlled trials. The many suitable questions for a well-designed and well-conducted randomized controlled trial far exceed the available resources to conduct the trials. We must admit that resources are limited, and spending time on every possible clinical question or configuration of clinical importance may not be practical or advisable. Research should rather devote such resources to focusing on higher-impact clinical questions.

**Lag Time**

A well-designed and well-conducted randomized controlled trial take time to design, carry out, and report. There can be significant changes in the medical landscape between when the trial is designed and initiated, and when the results are published. More than once, a study has sought to examine a chemotherapy regimen for specific cancer only for that chemotherapy regimen to be antiquated and supplanted by the time the trial results are published.

**Values**

Although patient values are explicit to the model of evidence-based medicine, many healthcare practitioners omit or minimize patient values. It is not uncommon for the healthcare provider to recognize the medical issue, perform the review, evaluate and assimilate relevant scientific information, and implement an intervention without considering the patient's values. It is easy for providers to be swept away in trying to implement the "best evidence" or "best practices" before understanding how these either fit or contradict the patient's values.