# Continuing Education Activity

Over 70% of adults in the United States are overweight or obese. This significantly increases the risk of developing several chronic diseases and levies an enormous cost to the healthcare system. While a nutritious diet and active lifestyle are the foundation of optimal weight and good health, the appeal of a quick fix is strong. Approximately one-third of adults in the United States have used dietary weight-loss supplements. While a nutritious diet and active lifestyle are the foundation of optimal weight and health, the appeal of a quick fix is strong. This activity reviews the types, indications, contraindications, actions, and adverse effects of available non-prescription weight-loss supplements and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with overweight and obesity.

**Objectives:**
- Review data on the efficacy of various dietary weight-loss supplements.
- Explain the mechanisms of action for dietary weight-loss supplements.
- Identify contraindications to common dietary weight-loss supplements.
- Summarize the risks associated with dietary weight-loss supplements and key patient counseling points.

# Introduction

Over 70% of adults in the United States are overweight or obese.

# Function

**Beta-Glucans**

Beta-glucans are soluble fibers found in bacteria, yeast, fungi, and grains such as oat bran and barley. They are glucose polysaccharides fermented by the gut microbiota.

**Camellia Sinensis**

Camellia sinensis is the active ingredient found in the green tea plant. This popular plant is thought to aid in weight loss through anti-lipidemic effects.

Consumption of green tea as a beverage is generally regarded as safe in moderate amounts, and the extract appears to be well-tolerated when used for prolonged periods.

**Chromium Picolinate**

Chromium is an essential mineral associated with reduced hunger levels and food intake, likely via its action on insulin-sensitive signaling pathways in the brain.

**Citrus Aurantium**

Citrus aurantium, also known as bitter orange, is derived from a fruit-bearing tree indigenous to Southeast Asia. Due to its sympathomimetic properties, bitter orange gained popularity as a weight-loss supplement after ephedra was banned because of adverse cardiovascular effects.Citrus aurantium has alpha and beta-adrenergic effects and is purported to increase metabolic rate and lipolysis.

There are safety considerations regarding this supplement when used for weight loss. In patients taking diabetes medications, concurrent use of bitter orange may have an additive hypoglycemic effect, and blood glucose should be monitored closely. Bitter orange inhibits CYP3A4 metabolism, and patients taking medications that are CYP3A4 substrates should use the supplement with caution.

**Coleus Forskohlii**

Coleus forskohlii is a member of the mint family and has been used for centuries for its medicinal properties. Forskolin is derived from the roots of the Coleus forskohlii plant and promotes the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue by stimulating cyclic AMP.C. forskohlii supplementation.

**Conjugated Linoleic Acid**

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) is found in dairy and meat products. In supplement form, it is usually synthesized from safflower and sunflower oils. Animal studies suggest that CLA promotes lipolysis, increases apoptosis in adipose tissue, inhibits lipogenesis, and reduces food intake.

Adverse effects are generally mild, such as constipation and diarrhea. There are concerns that CLA may worsen insulin sensitivity and cholesterol levels, which are often already abnormal in overweight and obese individuals.

**Fucoxanthin**

Fucoxanthin is a carotenoid found in brown seaweed and other algae. Preclinical data suggest that fucoxanthin might be effective for treating obesity through its anti-lipidemic properties. Only two clinical trials have been conducted using fucoxanthin. In a 16-week double-blind placebo-controlled trial, 151 non-diabetic, obese, pre-menopausal women with and without non-alcoholic fatty liver disease were given a combination of fucoxanthin with pomegranate seed oil (PSO) at different doses (300 mg algae containing 2.4 mg fucoxanthin plus 300 mg PSO versus 200 mg algae containing 1.6 mg fucoxanthin plus 200 mg PSO).

**Garcinia Cambogia**

Garcinia cambogia is a fruit-bearing tree native to Southeast Asia and India. The plant’s active compound, hydroxy citric acid (HCA), has several potential mechanisms for mediating weight loss. HCA is thought to decrease fatty acid synthesis and lipogenesis, suppress appetite by increasing serotonin availability in the brain and increase hepatic glycogen synthesis, thus increasing satiety. In a 2011 meta-analysis, HCA decreased weight by 0.88 kg on average compared to a placebo.

Furthermore, safety has been questioned due to reports of associated liver toxicity. While most of these cases occurred in patients taking combination products, three have occurred with Garcinia cambogia alone, and patients with liver disease should be cautioned.

**Glucomannan**

Glucomannan is a soluble fiber commonly derived from the Amorphophallus konjac root. Because human salivary and pancreatic amylase cannot split β-1,4 linkages, glucomannan passes relatively unchanged into the colon, where the gut microbiota ferment it.

Glucomannan appears to be well tolerated for short-term use. Minor adverse gastrointestinal effects include belching, bloating, frequent loose stools, flatulence, constipation, and abdominal discomfort.

**Green Coffee Extract**

Green coffee beans are unroasted mature or immature coffee beans. They are high in polyphenols, which have purported positive biologic effects, including anti-inflammatory activities and anti-diabetic, anti-lipidemic, and anti-hypertensive effects.

**Guar Gum**

Guar Gum is a soluble fiber supplement derived from the Indian bean Cyamopsis tetragonolobus and is generally found in food products as a thickening agent. Guar gum is purported to promote weight loss by acting as a bulking agent in the gut, which results in delayed gastric emptying and increased satiety. Several studies have evaluated the effect of guar gum on weight reduction. A meta-analysis of 11 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials of guar gum at dosages of nine to thirty grams daily for three weeks to six months found no significant difference in weight loss compared to placebo.

Reported adverse effects include gastrointestinal complaints, such as abdominal pain, flatulence, diarrhea, nausea, and cramps. More research is needed to support the use of guar gum as a weight-loss supplement.

**Hoodia Gordonii**

Hoodia gordonii is a succulent plant native to Africa. It contains a steroidal glycoside that acts centrally on the hypothalamus to suppress appetite.H. gordonii found no significant improvement in energy intake, body weight, or fat percentage compared with a placebo.H. gordonii, with altered skin sensation, headache, dizziness, and nausea among the most commonly reported symptoms.

**Irvingia Gabonensis**

Irvingia gabonensis, also known as African mango, is a fruit native to Africa and commonly consumed in African cuisine.I. gabonensis on weight and found beneficial results. A 2013 systematic review of the efficacy of I. gabonensis for weight management reported significant reductions in body weight, waist circumference, and total cholesterol.I. gabonensis taken twice a day over 90 days and found improved and statistically significant differences in waist circumference, serum glucose, and triglycerides.I. gabonensis appears to be safe and well-tolerated. The most common side effects include headache, flatulence, and difficulty sleeping.

**Phaseolus Vulgaris/White Kidney Bean**

Phaseolus vulgaris is a legume cultivated worldwide and marketed as a weight-loss supplement for its carbohydrate-blocking effects. Studies show that Phaseolus vulgaris inhibits pancreatic amylase, which decreases the gastrointestinal absorption of dietary starches. There have been several published clinical trials and reviews that show mixed results regarding weight loss efficacy.P. vulgaris for four to thirteen weeks significantly reduced body fat but not body weight.P. vulgaris with a hypocaloric diet over twelve weeks showed a modest yet significant reduction in body fat and body weight. This indicates that P. vulgaris has a possible modest effect on body fat and weight, but more data is needed to confirm this benefit.

Reported adverse effects of P.vulgaris include headaches, soft stools, flatulence, and constipation.P.vulgaris have been reported. The long-term effects are unknown.

**Probiotics**

Probiotics are bacteria and yeasts that have historically been used to confer a beneficial effect on gastrointestinal health. Since manipulation of the intestinal microbiome has been linked to changes in energy balance and metabolism, probiotics have garnered interest in their potential role in promoting weight loss. The data, however, have been underwhelming. In one systematic review and meta-analysis, probiotics were associated with a significant but small weight loss compared with placebo (weighted mean difference of 0.6 kg). Subsequently, a 2021 systematic review found no significant decrease in body weight with probiotic supplementation.

Probiotics have a very good safety profile in healthy individuals. However, they should be used cautiously in patients with central venous catheters or immunodeficiency since there have been rare reports of fungemia and pathogenic colonization.

**Psyllium**

Psyllium seed is a soluble fiber supplement derived from the husk of Plantago psyllium. Psyllium is purported to promote weight loss by acting as a bulking agent in the gut, which results in delayed gastric emptying and increased satiety. Fiber-enriched meals decrease the hunger hormone ghrelin and increase the satiety hormone peptide YY.

Psyllium is less readily fermented and does not cause as much flatulence and abdominal distension as other fiber supplements. Still, the most commonly reported side effects are gastrointestinal, including flatulence, abdominal pain, diarrhea, constipation, and nausea. Generally, psyllium is well tolerated for short-term use without serious adverse effects.

**Raspberry Ketone**

Raspberry ketone is the natural aromatic substance found in red raspberries and is used by the food industry for flavoring. Animal studies have found that raspberry ketone down-regulates key genes responsible for adipogenesis while up-regulating genes that regulate fatty acid oxidation.

# Issues of Concern

Weight-loss dietary supplements are regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Unlike over-the-counter and prescription medications, the FDA does not classify dietary supplements as drugs. Therefore, these supplements do not require FDA approval before marketing, and the manufacturer determines the product's safety and efficacy. However, the FDA does not allow supplements containing pharmaceutical ingredients or those that claim to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent disease.

When evaluating the evidence for dietary weight-loss supplements, additional data are needed to more clearly understand the efficacy, dosing, and safety of each ingredient. Human studies are limited, and data are often extracted from animal and laboratory research. Most human trials are small and of questionable quality, limiting interpretation. Many supplements marketed for weight loss contain multiple ingredients, making it impossible to isolate each ingredient's effect. Studies often use different formulations, combinations of ingredients, and variable dosages, all of which complicate the analysis of the supplement's safety and efficacy.

# Clinical Significance

Americans spend over $2 billion a year on weight-loss dietary supplements. These supplements are costly and can contain dozens of ingredients, including plant components, herbs, dietary fiber, caffeine, and minerals. The proposed mechanisms of action vary for each supplement. These include blocking the absorption of fats and carbohydrates, reducing appetite and increasing satiety, increasing thermogenesis, and changing metabolism to improve body composition. There are concerns over the efficacy, safety, and purity of the compounds in supplements, which are usually marketed without substantiating data. The FDA regulates dietary supplements as foods, not drugs.

People considering using weight-loss supplements should talk with their healthcare providers to discuss potential benefits and risks. This is especially important for patients with comorbid conditions who are taking prescription medications. Yet fewer than one-third of U.S. adults who use weight-loss dietary supplements discuss this with a clinician.

The evidence supporting the use of weight-loss dietary supplements is limited, inconclusive, and unconvincing.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Weight-loss dietary supplements are widely used and available worldwide. Patients considering these supplements should talk to their healthcare providers. The entire healthcare team must understand the ingredients, risks, and potential benefits of supplements and assess patients accordingly.

Healthcare providers must consider what is known and unknown about each ingredient in a product before recommending its use. Manufacturers market supplements with a variety of claims, many of which have not been substantiated. Some preparations contain multiple ingredients that can cause harm by interacting with medications or causing organ dysfunction. Patients with hypertension, diabetes, cardiac, renal, and liver disease should consult their physicians before using any supplement, especially those marketed for weight loss.

Clinicians should complete a thorough history of prescription and over-the-counter medications and dietary supplements at all patient encounters. This list should be updated regularly and documented in the medical record. Patients should be encouraged to lead a healthy lifestyle with nutritious dietary choices and regular exercise to enhance their weight loss efforts. The interprofessional healthcare team should support the patient's weight loss journey to improve clinical outcomes. [Level 2]