# Continuing Education Activity

Central toxic keratopathy (CTK) was initially described as a complication of LASIK surgery, and the vast majority of published reports are associated with excimer laser ablation. This activity discusses the etiology, pathophysiology, and debated management by an interprofessional team of central toxic keratopathy (CTK) and its relation to diffuse lamellar keratitis (DLK). Additionally, it reviews physical exam findings and the prognosis of patients with CTK.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the typical clinical picture associated with central toxic keratopathy (CTK).
- Summarize the underlying pathophysiologic changes in CTK.
- Explain the various treatment regimens for CTK. Summarize the differential diagnosis in a patient with CTK.
- Review the role of the interprofessional team in the care of central toxic keratopathy.

# Introduction

Excimer laser ablation is an increasingly popular option for the correction of mild to moderate refractive errors in the United States. It is generally regarded as safe, with an overall annual complication rate of less than 0.8% since 2010.

# Etiology

The etiology of CTK is still unelucidated. However, there are several hypotheses, including a reaction to a component of surgical gloves, meibomian gland secretions, povidone-iodine, or marking pen ink.

As the etiology of CTK is only speculative, there are no proven risk factors that lead to its development. However, CTK's initial description as a complication of LASIK surgery, and the vast majority of published reports are associated with excimer laser ablation. Therefore, patients undergoing refractive laser correction seem to be at the greatest risk. Additionally, since a majority of cases of CTK correlate with preceding DLK (95% in the initial study by Sonmez et al.), or persistent, and therefore coexistent, (64%), risk factors associated with DLK may also have an association with CTK.

# Epidemiology

To the author's knowledge, there has yet been no study completed to assess epidemiologic data for cases of CTK. However, in LASIK treated eyes, one study reported that out of 522 eyes, four developed CTK (0.77%), and in another study of 17100 eyes, nine developed CTK (0.05%).

# Pathophysiology

Pathophysiologic changes in CTK are a topic of interest, as the mechanisms that cause this rare syndrome remain incompletely established. However, some aspects of the underlying physiologic mechanisms are understood, and there have been many proposed theories.

One principal aspect of the disease is central corneal thinning or flattening, up to over 100 micrometers in one case.

The loss of stromal tissue is likely due to one of two possible mechanisms; either there could be apoptosis of keratocytes, enzymatic degradation of the stromal matrix, or a combination of the two. A lack of associated inflammation has made keratocyte death by apoptosis the predominant theory, and the striae and opacity that characterize the disease may be the gross visualization of this microscopic process.

Additional theories to account for the fluctuations in corneal curvature include the idea that keratinocyte injury and subsequent cytokine release cause changes in interstitial fluid pressure and corneal micro-edema. Fluid accumulating more prominently in the mid-periphery as opposed to the central cornea (due to its more rigid collagen matrix composition) causes changes in tissue tension. Thus the stromal bed flattens as a result of stretching.

An additional hypothesis proposes an immunologic process may also be present, as confocal imaging has shown potential immune complexes within the stroma.

A final theory revolves around a DLK based inflammatory model inciting CTK. It proposes that the release of collagenase and various proteases from damaged keratinocytes may cause the observed stromal thinning.

# History and Physical

Patients who develop CTK may initially present with DLK and associated inflammation after having undergone excimer laser ablation. Thus, patients may complain of nonspecific findings such as pain, photophobia, halos, floaters, a foreign body sensation, and/or blurry vision, which is common to this pathology. However, DLK is not necessary for diagnosis.

On the slit lamp exam, the prominent finding in CTK is a non-inflammatory central or pericentral amorphous corneal opacity involving the stroma. This condition leads to a decreased visual acuity in the affected eye(s), generally within nine days of surgery. The cloudiness (distinct from the hazy cornea that is occasionally associated with PRK surgery) reportedly persists for 2 to 18 months before resolving spontaneously. Though most opacities largely clear within a year, residual stromal thinning and decreases in uncorrected visual acuity may remain.

A complete ocular exam with OCT in cases of CTK may also show an inverse dome-shaped appearance of the opacity with backscattering within the central cornea and increased homogenous internal reflectivity that extends from the anterior to the posterior stroma.

# Evaluation

There is no confirmatory imaging or diagnostic test available for CTK, and the diagnosis is clinical. A triad of findings including a non-inflammatory central corneal opacity with or without striae, corneal thinning, and a hyperopic change in visual acuity can lead clinicians to make a diagnosis. In patients who have recently undergone excimer laser ablation and/or presented with DLK in the preceding days, the diagnosis may be more definite. When considering cases without a history of excimer laser ablation, a high index of clinical suspicion is necessary to identify and diagnose these patients correctly.

# Treatment / Management

Whereas steroid-based treatment was the initial recommendation, the newer understanding that CTK is a distinct syndrome that is likely non-inflammatory in nature has caused a dramatic shift in management. Though topical steroids do have an important use in the treatment of DLK stages I-III which may precede, or coexist with CTK, steroids may worsen disease progression in patients with CTK.

While there is no standard of care for the treatment of CTK, other medical management options may be beneficial. As keratinocytes regenerate and produce stromal extracellular matrix, metalloproteases may slow healing and contribute to the development of CTK.

Since the opacity is not limited to the interface and expands down into the stroma, in addition to the fact that stomal loss is a prominent aspect of the disease, invasive flap lift, and irrigation are generally not recommended for fear of further tissue loss and thinning. However, some authors have proposed that surgical interventions do have a place in management

Regardless of the decision to manage solely by medical means, or to implement a surgical intervention as well, patients should be followed closely with serial topography, tomography, confocal microscopy, and OCT imaging to better monitor corneal thickness and changes in visual acuity. Additionally, monitoring patients in this way may contribute to a greater understanding of the underlying pathophysiology and long-term effects that may result from CTK.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for CTK is varied and based on conditions that may present with central or paracentral opacifications or changes in visual acuity. As stated above, the previous thinking was that CTK was a severe form of DLK. While we now better understand the difference between the two pathologies, distinguishing CTK from DLK by the localization, response to steroids, or hyperopic changes is important as the two may coexist. Additionally, unlike DLK, in which the opacification remains contained within the interface, the amorphous opaqueness of CTK can be found expanding into the corneal flap anteriorly, and residual stromal bed posteriorly.

Infectious keratitis may also result in a dense central opacity with infiltrate. However, CTK does not result in an infiltrate due to the lack of inflammation and also lacks the characteristic off-yellow dullness of inflammatory lesions. Furthermore, infectious keratitis may present with other signs that are not associated with CTK, such as a progressive spread, conjunctival hyperemia, purulent discharge, inflammatory cells, and an anterior chamber reaction.

Corneal cross-linking (CXL) and photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) are also associated with postsurgical haze, which can be confused with CTK. Post-procedural haze differs in its time course and generally develops more than a month after surgery, whereas CTK most often presents within nine days.

In patients with previous LASIK surgery, epithelial ingrowth may occur, resulting in opacification. These opacifications are distinguishable from CTK due to their delayed onset and peripheral location around the flap edges.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for patients with CTK may be fair to good, as the central opacity eventually clears to a degree, and stromal thickness increases with time. However, residual hyperopic defects often remain, which may be disappointing for patients whose initial desire to undergoing excimer laser ablation was uncorrected emmetropia. However, patients may undergo post-surgical enhancement after the opacity remits to reduce residual striae and correct persistent hyperopia without the recurrence of CTK.

# Complications

Undiagnosed or poorly managed cases of CTK may result in worse outcomes for patients. As stated earlier in the text, continued steroid treatment may also delay or worsen the disease.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Since the etiology of CTK is uncertain, and reports exist of cases with no identifiable inciting factor, no definitive statements are possible about avoiding or decreasing the likelihood of developing CTK. However, the vast majority of cases are associated with excimer laser ablation and elective visual corrective surgery. Though these complications are rare, patients undergoing these surgeries should be made aware of the risks and potentially unfavorable outcomes associated with these procedures during the process of informed consent.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- CTK is a distinct entity from DLK with a different pathophysiologic process with no apparent signs of inflammation.

- CTK generally manifests within nine days of excimer laser ablation, though there is documentation of other etiologies.

- Clinical signs include a central or paracentral amorphous opacity with striae, hyperopic shift, and stromal loss. The opacification may clear significantly without treatment, and the stroma will regenerate to a degree; however, hyperopia and striae may remain.

- The best treatment for CTK is subject to debate, and its general rarity makes well-controlled treatment studies difficult. However, most clinicians do not recommend invasive intervention. Steroids are universally understood to be of little or no benefit and are not warranted. Other corneal protective agents may be of use.

- After the opacity resolves to a degree, patients who had CTK may undergo enhancement procedures to correct hyperopia and clear striae without disease recurrence.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although not explicitly stated, patients with CTK are most commonly identified in routine follow up after excimer laser ablative surgeries. In cases that present elsewhere (e.g., to their primary care physician for changes in vision and a corneal opacity), ophthalmic consultation is warranted. Clinicians should consider CTK as a potential cause in these cases even if a history of ocular surgery is not present in the recent past.