The function of intraocular lenses is to correct aphakia caused by removing the crystalline lens. Before the invention of IOLs, the removal of cataracts led to the patient being highly hyperopic. Spectacle lenses of + 10 D to + 12 D were routinely prescribed for distance. Near vision usually needed another +3 D (+13 to +15 D). The spectacles were heavy, cosmetically unsightly, and had high spherical and chromatic aberrations.

The indication of an intraocular lens is the visual correction of aphakia after cataract extraction.

**Lens materials**- Monofocal intraocular lenses may be made of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), which is rigid. Foldable IOL materials include silicone, hydrophobic acrylic materials, and hydrophilic acrylic materials.

The refractive indices of different IOL materials are:

- PMMA: 1.49

- Silicone IOL: 1.41 - 1.46

- Hydrophilic acrylic: 1.44 – 1.55

- Hydrophobic acrylic: 1.43 - 1.46.

The central, usually round part of the IOL is called an optic. The optic size varies from 5.25 mm to 6.5 mm. The total length of the IOL includes the total diameter of central optic and peripheral haptics. It varies from 12 to 13.5 mm. The optic may be plano-convex, biconvex, or concavo-convex (meniscus IOLs used to manage pathological myopes).

The anterior surface may be spherical or aspheric. The lens optic and the haptic may be made up of a single material (single piece IOL), or the haptics may be made of a separate material including polypropylene and nylon in a three-piece (multi-piece or 3-piece) IOL. The haptic may be J or C shaped. The haptic may be plate-shaped.

Monofocal intraocular lenses may be implanted after intracapsular cataract surgery. Anterior chamber IOL (Kelman multiflex type), in which the haptics are fixated in the angles of the anterior chamber, is most commonly used nowadays if an anterior chamber lens is implanted. It has 4 point fixation in the angle of the anterior chamber. Earlier, there were many models of anterior chamber lenses such as Choyce Mark IV, Sputnik lens, and Singh and Worst iris claw lens.

The original Ridley lens was replaced by different models of lenses. Lens materials, shape, and size have undergone many modifications. The purpose of an intraocular lens is to correct aphakia. The lens material has to be inert. The shape should ensure proper placement and avoid decentration in the long term and should not cause loss of corneal endothelium while implanting or in the long- term.