The most commonly reported adverse effects are generally mild and include shivering/chills, diarrhea, abdominal pain, hyperthermia, nausea, vomiting, flatulence, constipation, dyspepsia, headache, breakthrough bleeding, and menstrual irregularity. Less reported mild side effects include syncope, lethargy, weakness, and vertigo.

Moderate to severe reactions are less common and include hypotension, sinus tachycardia, fetal bradycardia, uterine contractions and pain, vaginal bleeding, edema, myocardial infarction, uterine rupture, cervical laceration, fetal death, teratogenesis, pulmonary embolism, anaphylactoid reactions, and thrombosis.

The most frequently encountered side effects include self-limiting diarrhea and abdominal pain, thought to be secondary to exposure to the misoprostolic acid released during its metabolism. The basis for this line of reasoning is the observation that symptom severity tends to correlate with misoprostolic acid’s peak plasma concentration.

Fever and chills are relatively common and thought to be secondary to the effect of prostaglandin on the hypothalamus. These mild side effects occur most commonly when misoprostol is administered in relatively large doses, such as to treat postpartum hemorrhage.

Congenital defects correlate with exposure to misoprostol in early pregnancy. However, no data shows misoprostol to be directly related to embryotoxic/fetotoxic or teratogenic effects. Mutagenetic studies have been negative. Defects appear to be due to a decrease in fetal blood supply during contractions induced by misoprostol. Additionally, there seems to be a relationship between the time of exposure and the range of defects observed. The most common defects are in the central nervous system and limbs. Mobius syndrome also correlates with misoprostol exposure.

The use of prostaglandins in cervical ripening correlates with an increased risk of tachysystole, non-reassuring fetal heart rate, and fetal hypoxemia.

There is a risk for uterine rupture with misoprostol use. This risk tends to be highest when misoprostol is used for labor induction in the third trimester, especially in conjunction with other risk factors such as previous caesarian section. Rupture is rare during a first-trimester medical abortion using misoprostol. However, as with all uterine ruptures, there is a risk for subsequent uterine infection.