The etiology dictates the management of postmenopausal bleeding.

**Atrophy**

Bleeding is usually self-limited and requires no treatment. Vulvar and vaginal atrophy may be treated with lubricants during intercourse, topical hormones (estrogen, DHEA), oral hormonal receptor modulator (ospemifene), etc.

**Polyp**

Removal of the polyp may resolve the bleeding. Endometrial polyps are often benign, but they can contain hyperplasia or malignancy approximately 5% of the time.

**Submucous Leiomyoma**

Fibroids may be removed using a hysteroscope or laparoscope or they may be ablated with various devices (some currently investigational). Some lesions are amenable to uterine artery embolization. Ultimately, if minimally-invasive approaches are unsuccessful and the patient is significantly bothered, definitive management with hysterectomy can be considered.

**Cervicitis:**Treatment of cervical infections is recommended, as indicated by the organism.

**Cervical Cancer:**Treatment is based on stage and may include surgery or radiation.

**Endometritis:**Administration of doxycycline can be considered. In addition to antibiotic effects, doxycycline may have anti-inflammatory effects.

**Endometrial Hyperplasia or Malignancy**

Can be managed medically or surgically, depending on the severity. There are two ways of classifying hyperplasia, the WHO94 schema (which classifies hyperplasia based on nuclear atypia and glandular complexity) and the endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia diagnostic schema (which classifies hyperplasia as either benign, premalignant, or malignant). The EIN schema is preferred.

- **Benign Endometrial Hyperplasia**: Observation, may resolve

- **Endometrial Intraepithelial Neoplasia**: Hysterectomy (total abdominal, vaginal, and minimally invasive total) is preferred. Endometrial ablation, morcellation, or supracervical hysterectomy should never be performed.
- Medroxyprogesterone acetate
- Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate
- Megestrol acetate
- Micronized vaginal progesterone
- Levonorgestrel intrauterine device

- **Endometrial Adenocarcinoma**: Hysterectomy with comprehensive staging is recommended. Comprehensive staging consists of a total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, and collecting pelvic washings for cytology. Staging allows for appropriate diagnosis, determination of prognosis, and to triage patients for adjuvant therapy appropriately.
- Strong desire for fertility-sparing
- The patient understands and accepts the fact that data on outcomes (pregnancy-related and cancer-related) are limited
- Well-differentiated endometrioid endometrial carcinoma, grade 1
- No extrauterine involvement
- No myometrial invasion
- No contraindications to medical management

**Urethral Caruncle**

May initially be treated with topical estrogen, though removal may sometimes be indicated.

**Hematuria**

Acute cystitis may be treated with antibiotics. The appropriate specialist should manage concerns for bleeding from renal etiologies or bladder masses/malignancy.

**Gastrointestinal Bleeding**

Bleeding hemorrhoids may be managed with topical treatments or with removal. Constipation can be treated with hydration, stool softeners, etc. Bleeding from more proximal in the gastrointestinal tract may necessitate specialist referral for additional evaluation.

**Medications**

If phytoestrogens are suspected of causing stimulation of the endometrial lining, they can be stopped, and further endometrial evaluation may be performed as above. In patients taking postmenopausal hormone replacement, the regimen may be adjusted. Postmenopausal hormone therapy may also lead to uterine abnormalities as above, and if so, they should be treated as indicated. If anticoagulants are leading to vaginal bleeding, medical management with progestins may control bleeding until the anticoagulant course is complete. Longer-term solutions may need to be discussed in patients on lifelong anticoagulation.