**Infiltration Anesthesia**

**Buccal Infiltration**

The needle is inserted 2 or 3 mm into the buccal sulcus adjacent to the tooth to be treated. The solution diffuses across the periosteum and alveolar bone to anesthetize the nerves supplying sensation to the tooth, periodontium, and buccal gingiva.

Infiltration anesthesia is commonly reserved for the maxilla because the maxilla’s porous structure allows the anesthetic solution to easily penetrate the bone.

In addition, studies have suggested that palatal anesthesia can be achieved following a maxillary buccal infiltration with articaine, negating the need for a separate palatal infiltration.

**Palatal Infiltration**

A palatal infiltration can be administered to anesthetize the nasopalatine or greater palatine nerve endings, thus providing anesthesia to the palatal gingiva. This injection is often described as painful due to the separation of the tightly-bound mucoperiosteum from the underlying hard palate bone. Methods to reduce discomfort may include topical anesthesia, cooling, applying pressure with a mirror handle, or slightly retracting the needle before injection.

**Intrapapillary Infiltration**

Intrapapillary (also known as transpapillary) infiltration can sometimes be used to avoid the need for a palatal infiltration. Following a buccal infiltration, the needle is inserted across the buccal interdental papilla and advanced above the alveolar bone to reach the palatal papilla. This technique anesthetizes the palatal interdental papilla and palatal free gingiva. Intrapapillary infiltration is commonly used for primary teeth.

**Maxillary Blocks**

The posterior superior alveolar block is used to anesthetize the maxillary molars, excluding the mesiobuccal root of the first molar. It also anesthetizes their periodontium and the adjacent buccal soft tissues. The needle is inserted 15 mm into the buccal vestibule distal to the malar at 45 degrees to the occlusal plane, and 1 ml of anesthetic solution is injected.

The middle superior alveolar block anesthetizes the maxillary premolars, the mesiobuccal root of the first molar, their periodontium, and adjacent buccal soft tissues. The needle is inserted 5 mm into the buccal vestibule adjacent to the maxillary second premolar, and 1 ml of anesthetic solution is given.

The anterior superior alveolar block anesthetizes the maxillary incisor and canine teeth, periodontium, and buccal soft tissues. The needle is inserted 5 mm into the buccal vestibule of the maxillary canine, and 1 ml of anesthetic solution is given.

The infraorbital block serves to anesthetize the ipsilateral maxillary teeth, periodontium, buccal soft tissues, maxillary tuberosity, and the skin of the lower eyelid, nose, cheek, and upper lip.

The greater palatine block anesthetizes the ipsilateral hard palate posterior to the canine tooth. The needle is inserted at the entrance of the greater palatine foramen to a depth of less than 5 mm until the bone is contacted and 0.5 ml of anesthetic solution is injected. The greater palatine foramen is a palpable depression or soft area on the hard palate, usually at the third maxillary molar level or 5 mm anterior to the hard and soft palate junction and halfway between the gingiva and palate midline.

The nasopalatine block anesthetizes the palatal premaxilla bilaterally. In some patients, it further provides some anesthesia to the maxillary incisors. Following buccal and intrapapillary infiltrations, the needle is inserted into the blanched incisive papilla to a depth of less than 5 mm until the bone is contacted and the tip contacts the lateral soft tissue of the incisive papilla. 0.25 ml of anesthetic solution is usually sufficient.

**Mandibular Blocks**

**Inferior Alveolar Nerve Block (IANB)**

The IANB anesthetizes the ipsilateral mandibular teeth, periosteum, lower lip, chin, and the buccal soft tissues from the premolars to the midline.

The dental syringe is positioned above the contralateral premolars. A long needle is inserted 1 to 1.5 cm superior to the mandibular occlusal plane into the pterygotemporal depression to reach the pterygomandibular space.

The pterygotemporal depression is located between the pterygomandibular raphe and the coronoid notch of the mandibular ramus. The coronoid notch is the most concave point on the anterior ramus, and it can be palpated with the non-dominant hand before the injection. The needle is inserted 20 to 25 mm until the bone of the crista endocoronoidea is contacted.

The needle is then withdrawn 1 to 2 mm, aspiration is performed to prevent intravascular injection, and 1.5 ml of anesthetic solution is delivered. The needle is then withdrawn halfway, and the remaining solution is given to anesthetize the lingual nerve. Nonetheless, an IANB usually anesthetizes the lingual nerve even if this last step is omitted.

**Gow-Gates Technique**

The Gow-Gates technique blocks the mandibular nerve adjacent to its division into auriculotemporal, inferior alveolar, mylohyoid, lingual, and buccal nerves

The patient should open their mouth fully to allow the condyle to rotate and translate forwards. The operator palpates the condyle and retracts the cheek with their non-dominant hand. The syringe is placed at the level of the contralateral mandibular canine, and a long needle is inserted at the level of the upper second molar and just below the lateral pterygoid muscle insertion.

The needle is then withdrawn 1 mm and the solution injected following aspiration.

For experienced clinicians, the Gow-Gates approach is associated with a higher success rate and a lower risk of positive aspiration than the conventional IANB.

**Vazirani-Akinosi Technique**

The Vazirani-Akinosi technique, also known as the closed-mouth block, is helpful for patients with trismus or when the landmarks used for a conventional IANB are not clearly defined. This technique anesthetizes the inferior alveolar, mylohyoid, lingual, and buccal nerves in 5 to 7 minutes.

The patient’s mouth remains closed with the muscles of mastication relaxed, and the operator palpates the coronoid process before the injection. A long needle parallel to the maxillary occlusal plane is inserted between the coronoid process and the maxillary tuberosity at the level of the maxillary posterior teeth mucogingival junction.

The bevel of the needle should point away from the ramus to ensure deflection occurs towards the ramus. The needle is advanced to a depth of half the anteroposterior width of the ramus. For most adults, this depth is 25 mm from the maxillary tuberosity, and the hub of the needle sits above the mesial aspect of the upper second molar.

**Mental and Incisive Blocks**

Although the mental and incisive nerves are anesthetized by an IANB, mental and incisive blocks are useful when bilateral anesthesia is desired on or anterior to the mandibular premolars.

A short needle is inserted in the buccal sulcus next to the mental foramen, usually located between the premolar apices. The needle is inserted 5 to 6 mm with the bevel facing the bone, and the anesthetic solution is administered following aspiration. Gentle pressure and massaging at the injection site for two minutes allow the anesthetic solution to enter the mental foramen to anesthetize the incisive nerve. The mental and incisive blocks provide anesthesia to the premolar, canine, incisor teeth and their periodontium, buccal soft tissues, the lower lip, and the chin. However, anesthesia of the lingual tissues is not provided.

**Buccal Nerve Block**

The buccal nerve block is administered when anesthesia of the buccal mucosa or the buccal gingiva of the mandibular molars is required. The needle is advanced 1 to 3 mm into the buccal vestibule distal to the second or third molar until the bone is contacted. The point of insertion is medial to the coronoid notch. A small amount of anesthetic solution, usually 0.25 ml, tends to suffice.

**Modified IANB Techniques**

Table 1 outlines examples of modified IANB techniques described in the literature

The syringe is placed at the contralateral canine or premolar teeth and inserted 6 to 8 mm superior to the halfway point between the upper and lower occlusal planes and 8 to 10 mm posterior to the anterior aspect of the ramus. The needle is advanced 21 to 24 mm, with continuous bone contact. Anesthetic solution is delivered following aspiration. This technique has shown a high success rate of 95% and a lower risk of complications such as positive aspiration, hematoma, nerve damage, trismus, and needle breakage. However, it traumatizes the periosteum of the medial ramus.

The needle is bent and inserted at an angle of almost 90 degrees to the ramus. The rationale for this technique is that it helps overcome the risk of inserting the needle too posteriorly, which can lead to complications, including transient facial paralysis and failure of anesthesia.

Modified IANB by Palti et al

Two wires are used to estimate the location of the mandibular foramen. The first wire approaches from the contralateral first permanent molar or second primary molar, along their mesiobuccal groove and distolingual cusp. The second wire is parallel to the ipsilateral occlusal plane. The wires intersect at the mandibular foramen, and this is the point where the anesthetic is injected. A higher success rate has been reported in children than adults, but further evidence is required.

Mandibular foramen anterior technique by Takusugi et al

The needle is inserted anterior to the mandibular foramen to reduce the risk of vascular and nerve injury. The syringe barrel is positioned above the contralateral first molar, and the needle is inserted 1 cm superior to the occlusal plane and at a depth of 1 cm. A success rate of 75% has been suggested for this technique.

Modified IANB by Boonsiriseth et al

The syringe is placed parallel to the ipsilateral mandibular occlusal plane. A long needle with a rubber stop at 20 mm is inserted in the pterygotemporal depression to a depth of 20 mm as measured by the rubber stop. The bone is not contacted, and there is a lower risk of pain, positive aspiration, nerve injury, and vascular injury.

**Supplemental Anesthesia Techniques**

Supplemental techniques can be useful when conventional block and infiltration methods have failed to provide adequate anesthesia.

**Intraligamentary Anesthesia**

A conventional dental syringe with a short needle or a specialized intraligamental syringe can be used.

The anesthetic solution diffuses from the PDL to the adjacent cancellous bone under the high pressure of the injection. Anesthesia onset is rapid, usually within 30 seconds. However, the duration of anesthesia is short, generally lasting 10 to 45 minutes.

Reported complications for intraligamentary injections include cartridge fracture due to high pressure; damage to unerupted teeth; damage to the PDL; tooth extrusion; discomfort; and bacteriemia with a potential risk of endocarditis for high-risk patients. The risks of cartridge fracture and discomfort can be mitigated by injecting slowly.

The intraligamentary technique is commonly utilized following a failed IANB and appears to be more successful for exodontia than endodontic treatment.

**Intraosseous Anesthesia**

Specialized intraosseous injection devices are used to drill a small hole through the cortical plate to reach the cancellous bone, and the anesthetic solution is injected slowly through this hole.

The perforation is made through the attached gingiva at a point 2 mm apical to the junction of two imaginary lines. These lines run horizontally across the buccal gingival margins and vertically to bisect the interdental papilla distal to the tooth to be anesthetized.

Anesthesia onset is rapid, often immediate, and anesthesia usually lasts 15 to 60 minutes, depending on the use of a vasoconstrictor.

**Intrapulpal Anesthesia**

A short needle is inserted into the pulp chamber or root canal to a point where there is a tight fit, and 0.2 to 0.3 ml of anesthetic solution is delivered under pressure.

Injecting all canals in multirooted teeth has been recommended. In addition, an alternative technique described is allowing the pulp chamber to bathe in the anesthetic solution for 30 seconds.

**Intraseptal Anesthesia**

A short needle is inserted at 90 degrees into the interdental papilla, 2 mm apical to the gingival margin. A small amount of anesthetic solution is administered when the needle enters the gingiva. The needle is then advanced until the bone is contacted and pushed a further 1 to 2 mm into the interdental septum by applying gentle pressure. Then, 0.2 to 0.4 ml of anesthetic solution is injected over at least 20 seconds. Intraseptal injection should be avoided at sites of infection.