Candida species are found in the oral cavity of immunocompetent individuals as a commensal population, and a shift to pathological activity is triggered by a decrease in the host's immunity, e.g., extremes of age, immunocompromising diseases, long-term steroids, and antibiotic treatment.

Each type of oral candidiasis has a different clinical presentation, so the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team are beneficial in such cases. Patients may be asymptomatic and unaware of the infection or report oral burning, discomfort, and changes in taste. The diagnosis of oral candidiasis is based on history taking, assessment of risk factors, and clinical examination, and further evaluation is usually indicated for refractory cases. General practitioners and dentists are usually the ones who diagnose and treat cases of oral candidiasis. Pediatricians also play a crucial role in managing cases in neonates and infants, who commonly develop oral thrush.

Depending on the underlying immunosuppressing condition, oncologists and infectious disease specialists may provide consultations. As oral candidiasis is often the first sign of a systemic immunocompromising condition, referring patients with suspected or diagnosed underlying conditions to the appropriate specialist is crucial. The pharmacist should educate the patient on the importance of medication compliance, verify medication dosing, check for drug-drug interactions, and report any concerns to the healthcare team. Patients with diabetes mellitus should be urged to monitor their blood sugar levels. Also, the patient should receive instructions to quit smoking. Patients who take inhaled steroids should be asked to perform water gargles after each use and follow up with the clinician. Nurses administer medications for inpatients and provide significant counseling to reinforce the points above. Only with an interprofessional collaborative team approach with open communication between team members can oral candidiasis treatment achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]