# Introduction

The glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide, formerly known as gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP) was first isolated in 1973 from porcine small intestine based on its ability to inhibit gastric hydrochloric acid secretion. Soon after, in 1980, it was found that GIP is a weak inhibitor of acid secretion and potent stimulator of insulin post meals.

# Issues of Concern

Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus have a high burden of renal failure and cardiovascular diseases. They often require a personalized approach based on their genetic predisposition and clinical presentation for glucose control. Further, patients are becoming increasingly resistant to monotherapy with metformin and sulfonylureas. Incretin based therapy can be administered as an alternative and/or combination therapy to standard guidelines.

# Cellular Level

GIP is secreted by the enteroendocrine K-cells that are present in high density in the duodenum and upper jejunum but are present throughout the small intestine.

# Development

The gene sequence of GIP is well conserved across species.

# Organ Systems Involved

The action of GIP is primarily on the endocrine pancreas to potentiate glucose-dependent insulin secretion. Secondly, GIP acts to decrease gastrin and gastrin dependent acid secretion from the parietal cells of the stomach.

# Function

The name given the augmentation of insulin secretion by the action of gastrointestinal hormones is the entero-insular axis.

# Mechanism

GIP acts on class-II G-protein coupled receptors.

# Related Testing

GIP is measured in the plasma using commercially available sandwich ELISA kits. The ELISA test is specific for GIP, and it does not cross-react with GLP-1 and GLP-2. GIP-(1-42), which is the biologically active form of GIP, is metabolized by DPP-4 to form GIP-(3-42). GIP-(3-42) is biologically inactive and is found to have a weak antagonizing effect on GIP receptors in rat models.

# Pathophysiology

Although hyper- or hyposecretion of GIP is not causally related to the pathogenesis of diseases, the secretion of GIP is altered in the following disease states:

- Type 2 Diabetes Mellites

An abnormal incretin effect occurs in pathological glucose intolerance.

- Obesity

GIP plays a vital role in lipid metabolism and the development of obesity. Hyperplasia of K-cells and increased GIP levels are observed in obesity as fat is a potent stimulus of GIP secretion. As mentioned above, GIP is an anabolic hormone that inhibits lipolysis and stimulates lipogenesis.

- Food-Induced Cushing Syndrome

GIP, like ACTH, can cause hypersecretion of cortisol after mixed meals leading to food-induced Cushing syndrome or ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH).

# Clinical Significance

DPP-4 inhibitors (linagliptin, saxagliptin, and sitagliptin) are oral hypoglycemic agents. Inhibition of DPP-4 results in increased plasma concentration of incretins and glucose-dependent insulin release. Therefore, they are beneficial in the treatment of diabetes. Studies have shown DPP-4 inhibitors are well tolerated, weight neutral, and do not cause hypoglycemia due to their glucose-dependent action.