The ictal-interictal continuum comprises an umbrella for various rhythmic and periodic electroencephalographic patterns that occur in the setting of global or focal cerebral dysfunction. Patterns may arise from acute, life-threatening processes or chronic illness. Of equal importance, they may portend further neurologic decompensation by demonstrating characteristics concerning for ongoing nonconvulsive seizures or give rise to unequivocal electrographic or electroclinical seizures.

Because these patterns often arise in critically ill patients with a complicated clinical course, immediate and well-coordinated interdisciplinary and interprofessional care is essential to ensure that patients with these patterns receive appropriate interventions when clinically indicated and supportive care while diagnostic clarity is pursued. Management decisions, frequently directed by the intensivist or hospitalist, should be followed with guidance from the interpreting epileptologist or clinical neurophysiologist in the context of the patient's history and exam.

EEG technologists play an essential role, both by the timely connection of the EEG and ensuring a high-quality recording is available for interpretation and by documenting clinical responses to stimulation on the EEG record, which may help further inform clinical decision-making.

Selection of appropriate first- and second-line medications for treating these patterns may require guidance from the pharmacist for dosing considerations in the setting of medical comorbidities. In contrast, medication delivery relies on expert execution from nursing, coordinating activities with the prescribing/ordering clinician and the pharmacist as needed. While outcomes generally reflect the underlying etiology of the cerebral insult, timely intervention can reduce the risk of medical complications and prolonged hospitalization.

Proposed treatment algorithms reflect expert opinion as controlled studies exploring clinical outcomes pertaining to specific interventions for managing patterns on the IIC have not been performed.