During the third week of gestation, the formation of the nervous system begins with the development of the neural plate from a thickening of the ectoderm. The formation of two neural folds gives rise to a longitudinal neural groove along the midline of the neural plate. Subsequent midline fusion of the neural folds converts the grooved neural plate into the neural tube having two openings, anterior and posterior neuropores. This process is called neurulation that proceeds in both directions, cranial and caudal.

Neurulation occurs simultaneously with the dissociation of the neuroectoderm from the overlying surface ectoderm, a process termed as disjunction. Anterior and posterior neuropores close between gestational days 23 to 25 and 25 to 27, respectively. The brain and spinal cord are derived from the wall of the neural tube, whereas the lumen forms the ventricular system and central canal.

During the fourth week, three primary brain vesicles form in the rostral neural tube named, the forebrain vesicle or prosencephalon, the midbrain vesicle or mesencephalon, and the hindbrain vesicle or rhombencephalon. During the fifth week, the forebrain splits into the telencephalon and diencephalon, the hindbrain into the metencephalon and the myelencephalon, and the midbrain becomes the mesencephalon. Thus, five secondary brain vesicles form. As the three primary vesicles develop, the brain bends forward to form the cephalic and the cervical flexure in the midbrain region and at the hindbrain spinal cord junction, respectively.

Later, a compensatory pontine flexure forms between the cervical and cephalic flexure. The pontine flexure divides the hindbrain into the metencephalon (future pons and cerebellum) and the myelencephalon (future medulla). The dorsal portion of the metencephalon gives rise to the cerebellum, whereas the ventral part becomes the pons. The pontine nuclei, those project axons to the contralateral cerebellar cortex, lie in the ventral pons, whereas the cranial nerve nuclei are located in the dorsal pons. Motor nuclei of cranial nerves derive from the basal plate, and sensory nuclei are from the alar plate.

The central hindbrain cavity becomes the fourth ventricle. Consequently, the fourth ventricle expands and spreads its lateral walls like the pages of a book. As a result, the dorsal wall or roof plate of the fourth ventricle, covered by pia mater, is stretched and thinned. The roof plate with its vascular pia mater forms the tela choroidea that invaginates into the fourth ventricular cavity to form choroid plexus. Another result of the spreading of lateral walls of the fourth ventricle is the alar plates granted the lateral position in relation to basal plates.