Since bile acid sequestrants are not absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, they have limited systemic side effects. Some of the most common adverse effects are gastrointestinal, including constipation, stomach pain, bloating, vomiting, heartburn, loss of appetite, indigestion, and upset stomach. Constipation is experienced by 10% of patients taking colestipol and 28% in those taking cholestyramine. These side effects occur more commonly with larger doses and older patients (older than 65 years). They can exacerbate peptic ulcer disease and hemorrhoids. Using it chronically correlates with bleeding problems in high doses, which is preventable using oral vitamin K therapy.

**Cholestyramine:**Its use requires caution in renally impaired patients as it can cause hyperchloremia acidosis, especially at higher doses. Asthma-like symptoms were not observed with colestipol but can occur with cholestyramine. Constipation associated with the use of cholestyramine can aggravate hemorrhoids. Resin therapy has reportedly produced transient and modest increases in serum transaminases and alkaline phosphatase.

**Colestipol:**Wide array of adverse effects, including edema, syncope, dizziness, drowsiness, headaches, neuralgia, paresthesia, skin rashes, irritation, weight gain or loss, abdominal pain, biliary colic, constipation, dental discoloration, diarrhea, steatorrhea, abnormal hepatic function test, anemia, adenopathy, dyspnea, or wheezing are reported in patients using colestipol. Less than 1 in 1000 patients on colestipol have hypersensitivity, including urticaria or dermatitis.

Other non-gastrointestinal adverse reactions reported at equal frequency in patients receiving colestipol or placebo were chest pain, tachycardia, angina, musculoskeletal pain, joint pains, aches or pains in the extremities, arthritis, and backache. Anorexia, weakness, fatigue, and swelling of the hands or feet have been infrequently reported.

**Colesevelam:**It can increase triglyceride levels which can cause acute pancreatitis. In clinical trials, gastrointestinal obstruction and vitamin K or fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies are reported with colesevelam use. The use of colesevelam hydrochloride might decrease the efficacy of oral contraceptives, which contain ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone. Therefore, patients are advised to take oral contraceptives at least 4 hours before administering colesevelam.

**Drug Interactions**

- It can also induce malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins, and therefore patients with fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies should avoid bile acid sequestrants use. If using bile acid sequestrants with fat-soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E, and K ) and folic acid, the patient should take the vitamins over 4 hours before.

- Bile acid sequestrants may also decrease the absorption of many drugs by binding and excretion in the feces when taken concomitantly. Therefore, to avoid interference with the other drugs, especially narrow therapeutic index drugs, commonly thyroxine, digoxin, warfarin, hydrochlorothiazide, etc., should be taken 1 hour before or 4 hours after the bile acid sequestrants.