Triacylglycerol Synthesis

TAGs, which provide the body with a significant source of energy, are obtained from the diet or are synthesized endogenously, mainly in the liver. They are transported in the blood as lipoproteins and are stored in adipose tissue. The major classes of blood lipoproteins involved include high-density lipoprotein (HDL),  intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), and chylomicrons. Chylomicrons undergo synthesis in the small intestine and transport dietary TAGs from the small intestine to tissues such as muscle and adipose. The liver synthesizes VLDLs in the liver and transport TAGs from the liver to tissues in the same way. HDLs have multiple functions relative to lipid metabolism, including serving an integral role in the conversions of VLDL to LDL. HDL also serves as a reservoir for essential apoproteins such as Apo C-II. Apo C-II activates lipoprotein lipase, the enzyme responsible for digestion and breakdown of TAGs. Synthesis of TAGs stores in adipose tissue occurs in the fed state after a meal.

Triacylglycerol Hydrolysis

During times of energy deprivation, WAT is stimulated via homeostatic control to shift toward higher net rates of lipolysis. This change in nutritional state elucidates this compensatory process and is regulated through hormonal and biochemical signals. Lipolysis proceeds in an orderly and controlled manner, with different enzymes acting at each step. Catecholamines are the primary activators of lipolysis, while other hormones and dietary compounds also affect it. Each of these substances binds and work on their respective membrane-bound receptors to elicit a signaling cascade with the sole purpose of activating HSL. ATGL performs the first step of TAG hydrolysis (thus, it is rate-limiting), generating diacylglycerols and FFAs. HSL performs the second step and hydrolyzes DAGs, generating monoacylglycerols and FFAs. MGL is selective for MGs and produces glycerol and the third FFA.