PVB is applied in managing certain traumatic arterial injuries, or aneurysms, and most commonly for peripheral arterial disease (PAD). PAD results from atherosclerotic plaque causing stenosis of the arteries supplying the lower extremities. Symptoms of PAD range from asymptomatic to demand ischemia or claudication to Critical Limb Ischemia (CLI), characterized by severe disability and tissue loss. For these patients, PVB is considered if they have a severe disease burden that is not amenable to endovascular therapy or if they have failed therapy previously. Lesions that are not responsive include severe stenosis and hostile vascular anatomy, which would make endovascular treatment technically challenging.

In PAD patients with claudication, revascularization is indicated only for those patients who will derive a functional benefit. For instance, an increase in walking distance is predicted. However, revascularization for disabling claudication is limited to those patients with the more proximal disease, specifically when the iliofemoral or femoropopliteal territory is involved. Accordingly, claudication is not usually considered a robust indication to perform a distal (e.g., femorotibial) bypass. Moreover, distal bypass to a tibial artery for the treatment of claudication is not usually indicated. Assigning the infrapopliteal vessels for the outflow of the bypass should be limited to the patients with CLTI in whom either the femoropopliteal bypass is not feasible or with the absence of direct flow into patent runoff vessels.

It should be noted that in the patients with CLTI signs and symptoms, including rest pain and tissue loss, revascularization is strongly indicated otherwise, as progression to amputation is likely in such cases. Therefore, a form of intervention, either endovascular revascularization or surgical bypass, might be selected. Notwithstanding, CLTI is a considerable indication for intervention; in some patients with less significant stages of the wound, ischemia, and foot Infection stages, supportive management without revascularization is indicated. Interestingly, as the patients with CLTI are commonly affected with a multilevel arterial occlusive disease involving not only the femoropopliteal but also tibioperoneal segments, lower extremity surgical revascularization bypass addresses both by a common femoral artery to the tibial arteries bypass, however, in patients with diabetes with diffuse and significant below-the-knee disease, a shorter bypass from the superficial femoral artery or popliteal artery is indicated.