The etiology of priapism can broadly be categorized as low flow (ischemic) and high flow (non-ischemic). The flow refers to arterial flow. The causes of ischemic priapism are numerous and include various hemoglobinopathies, such as sickle cell disease and thalassemia, and any hypercoagulable state. Vasoactive medications, including erectile dysfunction medications (phosphodiesterase type five inhibitors and intracavernous injections), have been blamed for an increased incidence of this disorder and are thought to cause at least 25% of all cases.

Surprisingly, priapism following the use of phosphodiesterase (PDE) type 5 inhibitors (sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, etc.) is relatively rare. Antipsychotics and trazodone are more than twice as likely to cause priapism as PDE type 5 inhibitors.

Malignancies of the male pelvis can cause priapism due to either direct tumor infiltration or blockage of venous outflow. This can be identified with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The reported incidence of such "malignant priapism" is as high as 3.5% of patients presenting with priapism.

Rare medication-related causes of priapism include hydroxyzine, drotaverine (a papaverine analog), low molecular weight heparin, and coagulopathy generally associated with coronavirus.

Non-ischemic priapism is less common and usually results from direct trauma or injury. Priapism can also result from iatrogenic injury during surgical interventions, congenital arterial malformations, or cancer. In some, no underlying cause or explanation can be found for the disorder.