Initially, early in the pandemic, the understanding of COVID-19 and its therapeutic management was limited, creating an urgency to mitigate this new viral illness with experimental therapies and drug repurposing. Since then, due to the intense efforts of clinical researchers globally, significant progress has been made, which has led to a better understanding of not only COVID-19 and its management but also has resulted in the development of novel therapeutics and vaccine development at an unprecedented speed.

**Pharmacologic Therapies In The Management Of Adults With COVID-19**

Currently, a variety of therapeutic options are available that include antiviral drugs (e.g., molnupiravir, paxlovid, remdesivir), anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies (e.g., bamlanivimab/etesevimab, casirivimab/imdevimab,sotrovimab,bebtelovimab), anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., dexamethasone), immunomodulators agents (e.g., baricitinib, tocilizumab) are available under FDA issued Emergency Use Authorization( EUA) or being evaluated in the management of COVID-19.

The clinical utility of these treatments is specific and is based on the severity of illness or certain risk factors. The clinical course of the COVID-19 illness occurs in 2 phases, an early phase when SARS-CoV-2 replication is greatest before or soon after the onset of symptoms. Antiviral medications and antibody-based treatments are likely to be more effective during this stage of viral replication. The later phase of the illness is driven by a hyperinflammatory state induced by the release of cytokines and the coagulation system's activation that causes a prothrombotic state. Anti-inflammatory drugs such as corticosteroids, immunomodulating therapies, or a combination of these therapies may help combat this hyperinflammatory state more than antiviral therapies.

**Antiviral Therapies**

- **Molnupiravir**(named after the Norse god Thor's hammer Mjölnir) is a directly acting broad-spectrum oral antiviral agent acting on the RdRp enzyme was initially developed as a possible antiviral treatment for influenza, alphaviruses including Eastern, Western, and Venezuelan equine encephalitic viruses. Based on a meta-analysis of available phase 1-3 studies, molnupiravir was noted to demonstrate a significant reduction in hospitalization and death in mild COVID-19 disease

- **Paxlovid**(ritonavir in combination with nirmatrelvir )****is an oral combination pill of two antiviral agents which on an interim analysis of phase 2-3 data (reported via press release) which included 1219 patients, found that the risk of COVID-19 related hospital admission or all-cause mortality was 89% lower in the paxlovid group when compared to placebo when started within three days of symptom onset.

- **Remdesivir**is a broad-spectrum antiviral agent that previously demonstrated antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2in vitro.

- **Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine**were proposed as antiviral treatments for COVID-19 initially during the pandemic. However, data from randomized control trials evaluating the use of hydroxychloroquine with or without azithromycin in hospitalized patients did not improve the clinical status or overall mortality compared to placebo.

- **Lopinavir/ritonavir**is an FDA-approved combo therapy for the treatment of HIV and was proposed as antiviral therapy against COVID-19 during the early onset of the pandemic. Data from a randomized control trial that reported no benefit was observed with lopinavir-ritonavir treatment compared to standard of care in patients hospitalized with severe COVID-19.****Lopinavir/Ritonavir is currently not indicated for the treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized and nonhospitalized patients.

- **Ivermectin**is****an FDA-approved anti-parasitic drug used worldwide in the treatment of COVID-19 based on anin vitro study that showed inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 replication.

A recent study evaluating the effect of remdesivir, nirmatrelvir and molnupiravir reported that  these three antiviral drugs may have therapeutic value against the Omicron subvariants BA.2.12.1, BA.4, and BA.5.

**Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Neutralizing Antibody Products**

Individuals recovering from COVID-19 develop neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, and the duration of how long this immunity lasts is unclear. Nevertheless, their role as therapeutic agents in the management of COVID-19 is extensively being pursued in ongoing clinical trials.

- **Convalescent Plasma**therapy was evaluated during the SARS, MERS, and Ebola epidemics; however, it lacked randomized control trials to back its actual efficacy. The FDA approved convalescent plasma therapy under a EUA for patients with severe life-threatening COVID-19.****Although it appeared promising, data from multiple studies evaluating the use of convalescent plasma in life-threatening COVID-19 has generated mixed results. One retrospective study based on a U.S. national registry reported that among patients hospitalized with COVID-19, not on mechanical ventilation, there was a lower risk of death in patients who received a transfusion of convalescent plasma with higher anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody than patients who received a transfusion of convalescent plasma with low antibody levels. Data from three small randomized control trials showed no significant differences in clinical improvement or overall mortality in patients treated with convalescent plasma versus standard therapy.

- **REGN-COV2 (Casirivimab and Imdevimab):**REGN-COV2 is an antibody cocktail containing two noncompeting IgG1 antibodies (casirivimab and imdevimab) that target the RBD on the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that has been shown to decrease the viral load in vivo, preventing virus-induced pathological sequelae when administered prophylactically or therapeutically in non-human primates. et al. reported that the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant was resistant to casirivimab and imdevimab in their in-vitro study.

- **Bamlanivimab and Etesevimab (LY-CoV555 or LY3819253 and LY-CoV016 or LY3832479)**are potent anti-spike neutralizing monoclonal antibodies. Bamlanivimab is a neutralizing monoclonal antibody derived from convalescent plasma obtained from a patient with COVID-19. Like REGN-COV2, it also targets the RBD of the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 and has been shown to neutralize SARS-CoV-2 and reduce viral replication in non-human primates.In vitro experiments revealed that etesevimab binds to a different epitope than bamlanivimab and neutralizes resistant variants with mutations in the epitope bound by bamlanivimab. In Phase 2 of the BLAZE-1 trial, bamlanivimab/etesevimab was associated with a significant reduction in SARS-CoV-2 viral load compared to placebo.In vitro data is available regarding the effect of bamlanivimab/etesevimab on the new SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (B.1.1.7; B.1.351) reveals retained activity.

- **Sotrovimab (VIR-7831)**is a potent anti-spike neutralizing monoclonal antibody that demonstratedin vitro activity against all the four VOCs Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), Gamma(P1), and Delta (B.1.617.2). Results from a preplanned interim analysis(not yet peer-reviewed) of the multicenter, double-blind placebo-controlled Phase 3, COMET-ICE trial by Gupta et al. that evaluated the clinical efficacy and safety of sotrovimab demonstrated that one dose of sotrovimab (500 mg) reduced the risk of hospitalization or death by 85% in high-risk non hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 compared with placebo.

- **Bebtelovimab (LY-CoV1404, 1404)**is a neutralizing monoclonal antibody that targets the RBD of the spike(S) protein of SARS-CoV-2 virus. Bebtelovimab has shown to demonstrate broad neutralizing activity to all SARS-CoV-2 VOCs, including Omicron VOC and its sub variants in vitro.et.al available as a preprint(MedRxiv 2022). Based on results demonstrating its broad  neutralizing activity against all SARS-CoV-2 VOCs including the Omicron VOC, the US FDA issued an EUA authorizing the use of bebtelovimab  for the treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19  in ambulatory patients (aged ≥12 years and weighing ≥40 kg) with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection and mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at high risk for progressing to severe disease and/or hospitalization or death.

- REGN-COV2 (casirivimab and imdevimab) and sotrovimab were approved for clinical use by the FDA under two separate EUAs issued in November 2020 and May 2021, respectively, that allowed the use of these drugs only in nonhospitalized patients (aged ≥12 years and weighing ≥40 kg) with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection and mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at high risk for progressing to severe disease and/or hospitalization. On March 25, the U.S. government stopped the recent treatment study distribution of bamlanivimab alone, citing that the increasing emergence of coronavirus variants makes the treatment ineffective. Ongoing local vigilance regarding the prevalence of emerging variants will be necessary to determine which antibody treatments retain efficacy.

- **Tixagevimab and Cilgavimab(AZD7442)**are potent anti-spike neutralizing monoclonal antibodies obtained from antibodies isolated from B cells of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 that have demonstrated neutralizing activity against SARS-CoV-2 virus by binding to nonoverlapping epitopes of the viral spike-protein RBD.**preexposure prophylaxis of COVID-19 in adults and pediatric population**(12 years of age and older being at least 40 kg in weight) with no current evidence of SARS-CoV-2  infection and no recent exposure to SARS-CoV-2 positive individuals**AND**who have moderate or severe immunocompromised due to several types of conditions and treatments**OR**are on immunosuppressive medications and may not mount an adequate immune response to COVID-19 vaccination**OR**in individuals in whom COVID-19 vaccination is contraindicated due to history of severe adverse reaction to the vaccine the vaccine components.

**Immunomodulatory Agents**

- **Corticosteroids:**Severe COVID-19 is associated with inflammation-related lung injury driven by the release of cytokines characterized by an elevation in inflammatory markers. During the pandemic's early course, glucocorticoids' efficacy in patients with COVID-19 was not well described. The Randomized Evaluation of Covid-19 Therapy (RECOVERY) trial, which included hospitalized patients with clinically suspected or laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 who were randomly assigned to received dexamethasone (n=2104) or usual care (n=4321), showed that the use of dexamethasone resulted in lower 28-day mortality in patients who were on invasive mechanical ventilation or oxygen support but not in patients who were not receiving any respiratory support.

- **Interferon-β-1a (IFN-****β-1a):**Interferons are cytokines that are essential in mounting an immune response to a viral infection, and SARS-CoV-2 suppresses its releasein vitro.

- **Interleukin (IL)-1 Antagonists:**Anakinra is an interleukin-1 receptor antagonist that is FDA approved to treat rheumatoid arthritis. Its off-label use in severe COVID-19 was assessed in a small case-control study trial based on the rationale that the severe COVID-19 is driven by cytokine production, including interleukin (I.L.)-1β. This trial revealed that of the 52 patients who received anakinra and 44 patients who received standard of care, anakinra reduced the need for invasive mechanical ventilation and mortality in patients with severe COVID-19.****There is no data available regarding the efficacy of interleukin-1 receptor antagonists on the three new SARS-CoV-2 variants (B.1.1.7; B.1.351, and P.1). Given the insufficient data regarding this treatment based on case series only, this is not currently recommended to treat COVID-19 infection.

- **Anti-IL-6 receptor Monoclonal Antibodies:**Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a proinflammatory cytokine that is considered the key driver of the hyperinflammatory state associated with COVID-19. Targeting this cytokine with an IL-6 receptor inhibitor could slow down the process of inflammation based on case reports that showed favorable outcomes in patients with severe COVID-19.****The FDA****approved three different types of IL-6 receptor inhibitors for various rheumatological conditions (Tocilizumab, Sarilumab) and a rare disorder called Castleman's syndrome (Siltuximab).

- **Tocilizumab**is an anti-interleukin-6 receptor alpha receptor monoclonal antibody that has been indicated for various rheumatological diseases. The data regarding the use of this agent is mixed. A randomized control trial involving 438 hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19 pneumonia, among which 294 were randomized to receive tocilizumab and 144 to placebo, showed that tocilizumab did not translate into a significant improvement in clinical status or lower the 28-day mortality compared to placebo.

- **Sarilumab and Siltuximab**are IL-6 receptor antagonists that may potentially have a similar effect on the hyperinflammatory state associated with COVID-19 as tocilizumab. Currently, there are no known published clinical trials supporting the use of siltuximab in severe COVID-19. Conversely, a 60-day randomized, double-blind placebo control multinational phase 3 trial that evaluated the clinical efficacy, mortality, and safety of sarilumab in 431 patients did not show any significant improvement in clinical status or mortality rate.**(NCT04315298**).

- **Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors**

- **Baricitinib**is an oral selective inhibitor of Janus kinase (JAK) 1 and JAK 2 currently indicated for moderate to severely active rheumatoid arthritis(R.A.) patients. Baricitinib was considered a potential treatment for COVID-19 based on its inhibitory effect on SARS-CoV-2 endocytosisin vitro and on the intracellular signaling pathway of cytokines that cause the late-onset hyperinflammatory state that results in severe illness.

- **Ruxolitinib**is another oral selective inhibitor of JAK 1 and 2 that is indicated for myeloproliferative disorders, polycythemia vera, and steroid-resistant GVHD. Similar to baricitinib, it has been hypothesized to have an inhibitory effect on cytokines' intracellular signaling pathway, making it a potential treatment against COVID-19. Results from a small prospective multicenter randomized controlled phase 2 trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of ruxolitinib reported no statistical difference than the standard of care. However, most of the patients demonstrated significant chest C.T. improvement and faster recovery from lymphopenia.**(NCT04362137)**is ongoing to assess ruxolitinib's efficacy and safety in patients with severe COVID-19.

- **Tofacitinib**is another oral selective inhibitor of JAK 1 and JAK3 that is indicated for moderate to severe R.A., psoriatic arthritis, and moderate to severe ulcerative colitis. Given its inhibitory effect on the inflammatory cascade, it was hypothesized that its use could ameliorate the viral inflammation-mediated lung injury in patients with severe COVID-19. Results from a small randomized controlled trial that evaluated the efficacy involving 289 patients who were randomized to receive tofacitinib or placebo showed that tofacitinib led to a lower risk of respiratory failure or death(PMID:34133856).

- **Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitors**such as**acalabrutinib, ibrutinib, rilzabrutinib**are tyrosine kinase inhibitors that regulate macrophage signaling and activation currently FDA approved for some hematologic malignancies. It is proposed that macrophage activation occurs during the hyperinflammatory immune response seen in severe COVID-19. Results from a small off-label study of 19 hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19 who received acalabrutinib highlighted the potential clinical benefit of BTK inhibition.****Clinical trials are in progress to validate the actual efficacy of these drugs in severe COVID-19 illness.

**Oxygenation And Ventilation Management In COVID-19**

**Conventional Oxygen Therapy**

COVID-19 patients with associated respiratory insufficiency should be monitored closely with continuous pulse oximetry. Supplemental oxygen supplementation via nasal cannula or Venturi mask must be administered to maintain oxygen saturation (SpO2) between 92 to 96% (< 88-90% if COPD). If there is improvement in clinical and oxygen saturation, supplemental oxygen should be continued with periodic reassessment. If there is no clinical improvement or worsening of symptoms and/or oxygen saturation, noninvasive treatments such as High-Flow Nasal Cannula (HFNC) or Noninvasive Positive Pressure Ventilation(NIPPV) are recommended**.**

**Management of Acute Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure in COVID-19**

Acute hypoxemic respiratory failure is the most common complication in adult patients with COVID-19, and conventional oxygen therapy is not helpful to address the oxygen demand in these patients. These patients should be managed with enhanced respiratory support modalities such as high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC), noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV), endotracheal intubation, and invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO**)**

**High-Flow Nasal Cannula (HFNC) and Noninvasive Positive Pressure Ventilation (NIPPV)**

HFNC and NIPPV are noninvasive enhanced respiratory support modalities available in managing COVID-19-associated acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and are instrumental in avoiding invasive mechanical ventilation in carefully selected patients. A meta-analysis study evaluating the effectiveness of HFNC compared to conventional oxygen therapy and NIPPV before mechanical ventilation reported that HFNC, when used before mechanical ventilation, could improve the prognosis of patients compared to conventional oxygen therapy and NIPPV.

**Noninvasive Positive-pressure Ventilation (NIPPV)**

- NIPPV (bilevel positive airway pressure [BiPAP]/continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP]) is instrumental in the management of COVID-19-associated acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and may help avoid invasive mechanical ventilation in carefully selected patients.

- NIPPV should be restricted to hospitalized patients with COVID-19 who develop respiratory insufficiency due to COPD, cardiogenic pulmonary edema, or have underlying obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) rather than ARDS.

- A helmet is preferred for minimizing the risk of aerosolization. In NIPPV with face masks (full-face or oronasal), the use of masks integrated with an expiratory valve fitted with an antimicrobial filter is recommended.

- Results from the HENIVOT trial, an Italian open-label multicenter randomized clinical trial, reported that there was no significant difference in the number of days free of respiratory support with the utilization of helmet noninvasive ventilation treatment compared to high flow nasal oxygen in COVID-19 patients hospitalized with moderate to severe degree of hypoxemia.

**Endotracheal Intubation and Lung Protective Invasive Mechanical Ventilation**

- Impending respiratory failure should be recognized as early as possible, and a skilled operator must promptly perform endotracheal intubation to maximize first-pass success.

- Clinicians and other healthcare staff must wear appropriate PPE that includes gowns, gloves, N95 masks, and eye protection when performing endotracheal intubation and manual ventilation before intubation, physical proning of the patient, or providing critical patient care such as upper airway suctioning, disconnecting the patient from the ventilator.

- Preoxygenation (100% O2 for 5 minutes) should be performed via HFNC.

- Invasive mechanical ventilation in COVID-19 associated acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and ARDS should be with lower tidal volumes (V.T.) (4 to 8 ml/kg predicted body weight, PBW) and lower inspiratory pressures reaching a plateau pressure (Pplat) < 30 cm of H2O.

- Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) must be as high as possible to maintain the driving pressure (Pplat-PEEP) as low as possible (< 14 cmH2O).

- Use of neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA) should be used as needed to facilitate lung-protective ventilation.

- In patients with refractory hypoxemia (PaO2:FiO2 of <150 mm Hg), prone ventilation for > 12 to 16 hours per day and the use of a conservative fluid management strategy for ARDS patients without tissue hypoperfusion are strongly emphasized.

- The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Covid-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel recommends against inhaled pulmonary vasodilators such as nitric oxide.

- Lung-protective ventilation can also reduce the risk of new or worsening AKI by preventing ventilator-induced hemodynamic effects.

- ECMO should be considered in carefully selected patients with refractory hypoxemia despite lung-protective ventilation and patients who fail to respond to prone position ventilation.

**Management Of COVID-19 Based On The Severity of Illness**

- 
**Asymptomatic or Presymptomatic Infection**

- 
              
- Individuals with a positive SARS-CoV-2 test without any clinical symptoms consistent with COVID-19 should be advised to isolate themselves and monitor clinical symptoms.

- 
**Mild Illness**

- 
              
- Based on the NIH guidelines, individuals with mild illness is manageable in the ambulatory setting with supportive care and isolation. 
              
              
- Laboratory and radiographic evaluations are routinely not indicated.
              
              
- Elderly patients and those with pre-existing conditions should be monitored closely until clinical recovery is achieved.  
              
              
- The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Covid-19 treatment guidelines panel recommends the use of**Paxlovid or Remdesivir**in order of preference****as preffered therapies for outpatients who are at high risk of disease progression with a low threshold to consider hospitalization for closer monitoring.The panel recommends clinical use of alternative therapies such as**Bebtelovimab or Molnupiravir**ONLY if  there is non availbility of preferred therapies, or not feasible to use, or clinically inappropriate.
              
              
- The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Covid-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel recommends against dexamethasone in mild illness.

- 
**Moderate Illness**

- 
              
- Patients with moderate COVID-19 illness should be hospitalized for close monitoring.
              
              
- Clinicians and healthcare staff should don appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) while interacting or taking care of the patient. 
              
              
- All hospitalized patients should receive supportive care with isotonic fluid resuscitation if volume-depleted, and supplemental oxygen therapy must be initiated if SpO2 and be maintained no higher than 96%.
              
              
- Empirical antibacterial therapy should be started only if there is a suspicion of bacterial infection and should be discontinued as early as possible if not indicated.
              
              
- Patients with COVID-19 are at risk of developing venous and thromboembolic events and should be maintained on thromboembolic prophylaxis with appropriate anticoagulation.
              
              
- **Remdesivir**and**dexamethasone**can be considered for patients who are hospitalized and require supplemental oxygen.
              
              
- The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Covid-19 treatment guidelines panel recommends the use of either **remdesivir alone**or**dexamethasone plus remdesivir**or**dexamethasone alone**if combination therapy (remdesivir and dexamethasone) is not available in hospitalized patients who require supplemental oxygen but are not receiving HFNC or NIPPV or IMV or ECMO.

- **Severe/Critical Illness**

- 
              
- Patients with severe/critical COVID-19 illness require hospitalization.
              
              
- Considering that patients with severe COVID-19 are at increased risk of prolonged critical illness and death, discussions regarding care goals, reviewing advanced directives, and identifying surrogate medical decision-makers must be made.
              
              
- All patients should be maintained on prophylactic anticoagulation, considering COVID-19 is associated with a prothrombotic state.
              
              
- Clinicians and other healthcare staff must wear appropriate PPE that include gowns, gloves, N95 masks, and eye protection when performing aerosol-generating procedures on patients with COVID-19 in the ICU, such as endotracheal intubation, bronchoscopy, tracheostomy, manual ventilation before intubation, physical proning of the patient or providing critical patient care such as nebulization, upper airway suctioning, disconnecting the patient from the ventilator, and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation that may potentially lead to the aerosol generation.
              
              
- Renal replacement therapy should be considered in renal failure when indicated.
              
              
- HFNC or NIPPV can be considered in patients who do not require intubation.
              
              
- Having awake patients self-prone while receiving HFNC can improve oxygenation if endotracheal intubation is not indicated. However, the efficacy of performing this maneuver on awake patients is not clear and more data from clinical trials is needed.
              
              
- The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Covid-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel strongly recommends using **dexamethasone**in hospitalized patients who require oxygen via noninvasive or invasive ventilation. Combination therapy with**dexamethasone plus  baricitinib or tocilizumab in combination with dexamethasone alone**is recommended in hospitalized patients on HFNC or NIPPV with evidence of disease progression.
              
              
- Impending respiratory failure should be recognized as early as possible, and endotracheal intubation with IMV must be initiated as described earlier.
              
              
- Vasopressors should be started to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) between 60 mmHg and 65 mmHg. Norepinephrine is the preferred initial vasopressor. 
              
              
- Empiric antibacterial therapy should be considered if there is a concern for a secondary bacterial infection. Antibiotic use must be reassessed daily for de-escalation, and the duration of the treatment requires evaluation for appropriateness based on the diagnosis.
              
              
- Management of COVID-19 patients with ARDS should be similar to classical ARDS management from other causes, including prone positioning as per The Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines for managing COVID-19.
              
              
- ECMO should be considered in patients with refractory respiratory failure as previously described

**Prevention of COVID-19**

- 
**Vaccination to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection**

Besides the importance of imposing public health and infection control measures to prevent or decrease the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the most crucial step to contain this global pandemic is by vaccination to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection in communities across the world. Extraordinary efforts by clinical researchers worldwide during this pandemic have resulted in the development of novel vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 at an unprecedented speed to contain this viral illness that has devastated communities worldwide. Vaccination triggers the immune system leading to the production of neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. As per the WHO Coronavirus (COVID-19) Dashboard, more than 12 billion doses of vaccine doses have been administered so far.

**BNT162b2 vaccine:**Results of an ongoing multinational, placebo-controlled, observer-blinded, pivotal efficacy trial reported that individuals 16 years of age or older receiving two-dose regimen the trial vaccine BNT162b2 (mRNA-based, BioNTech/Pfizer) when given 21 days apart conferred 95% protection against COVID-19 with a safety profile similar to other viral vaccines.

**mRNA-1273 vaccine**: Results from another multicenter, Phase 3, randomized, observer-blinded, placebo-controlled trial demonstrated that individuals who were randomized to receive two doses of mRNA-1273****(mRNA based, Moderna) vaccine given 28 days apart showed 94.1% efficacy at preventing COVID-19 illness and no safety concerns were noted besides transient local and systemic reactions.

**Ad26.COV2.S vaccine**: A third vaccine Ad26.COV2.S vaccine for the prevention of COVID-19 received EUA by the FDA on February 27, 2021, based on the results of an international multicenter, randomized,placebo-controlled multicenter, phase 3 trial showed that a single dose of Ad26.COV2.S vaccine conferred 73.1% efficacy in preventing COVID-19 in adult participants who were randomized to receive the vaccine.

**ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine:**Interim analysis of an ongoing multicenter randomized control trial demonstrated an acceptable safety profile and clinical efficacy of 70.4% against symptomatic COVID-19 after two doses and 64 % protection against COVID-19 after at least one standard dose.

**NVX-CoV2373 vaccine:**Preliminary results from a randomized, observer-blinded, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial in South Africa evaluating the efficacy and safety of NVX-CoV2373(Novavax), a recombinant SARS-CoV-2 nanoparticle genetically engineered vaccine, reported that NVX-CoV2373 vaccine was efficacious in preventing COVID-19.

In addition to the vaccines mentioned above, as many as seven other vaccines, including protein-based and inactivated vaccines, have been developed indigenously in India(**Covaxin**), Russia(**Sputnik V**), and China(**CoronaVac**) and have been approved or granted emergency use authorization to prevent COVID-19 in many countries around the world.

In early 2021, a new clinical syndrome characterized by thrombosis at atypical sites (cerebral venous sinus thrombosis/splanchnic venous thrombosis) combined with thrombocytopenia was observed in multiple patients days after vaccination with the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine and Ad26.COV2. S vaccine. This novel clinical syndrome demonstrated striking similarities to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia(HIT); however, in the absence of prior heparin exposure was named vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT). Conversely, the management of VITT is similar to HIT

A third dose (booster dose) has been included in the vaccination schedule of various nations, with studies showing some amount of waning of immunity after 2 doses and a third dose offering higher protection levels.

- 
**Preexposure Prophylaxis(PrEP) to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection**

Although,vaccination is considered  the most effective and crucial step to prevent this viral infection, some individuals may not develop an adequate immune response to COVID-19 vaccination OR in individuals in whom COVID-19 vaccination is contraindicated due to history of severe adverse reaction to the vaccine the vaccine component. In such individuals,the US Food and drug administration showed an EUA for the emergency use of this **Tixagevimab**and in combination with**Cilgavimab**for use in preexposure prophylaxis of COVID-19 in adults and pediatric population (12 years of age and older being at least 40 kg in weight) with no current evidence of SARS-CoV-2  infection and no recent exposure to SARS-CoV-2 positive individuals**AND**who have moderate or severe immunocompromised due to several types of conditions and treatments**OR**are on immunosuppressive medications and may not mount an adequate immune response to COVID-19 vaccination**OR**in individuals in whom COVID-19 vaccination is contraindicated due to history of severe adverse reaction to the vaccine the vaccine components.