Milk-alkali syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion, and all other conditions causing hypercalcemia need to be excluded. Careful history-taking and a detailed physical examination are vital. Currently, it is essential to gain information regarding drug intake, as various over-the-counter preparations contain calcium.

Historically, three progressive phases of the syndrome were described when the syndrome developed after the acute or prolonged use of the antacid regimen. Patients presented in the acute, subacute, and chronic stages depending on the duration and time since the exposure.

**Acute Toxemic Phase**

Patients presented within a month of treatment with the antacid regimen. Symptoms of acute hypercalcemia, including headache, vertigo, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia, were reported.

**Subacute Phase (Cope syndrome)**

Patients presented with features of acute and chronic hypercalcemia.

**Chronic Phase (Brunett syndrome)**

Patients treated with the milk and alkali regimen for years generally presented with this syndrome with features of chronic hypercalcemia. Symptoms included polyuria, polydipsia, pruritis, tremors, and psychosis. Abnormal calcium deposition in the tissues and organs was typically observed in the chronic phase. Band keratopathy and nephrocalcinosis were commonly present. Metastatic calcification in other areas, including the liver, central nervous system, periarticular tissue, subcutaneous tissue, adrenals, bones, and lungs, was also frequently noted.