For RTKs to initiate a downstream signaling cascade and cellular response, three distinct processes must occur. These are ligand-induced dimerization, activation of the cytoplasmic kinase domains, and linking of the activated RTK to cell signaling.

**Ligand-Induced Dimerization**

Early studies of RTKs espoused that receptors existed on the cell surface as monomers and that bivalent ligand interactions crosslinked two monomers into an active dimer. Subsequent studies have revealed that ligand-induced activation is more varied and complex. Prior to ligand binding, some RTKs exist on the cell surface as dimers (e.g., Ins) or oligomers (e.g., EGFR). Ligand binding in these cases induces structural changes in the receptor, which stimulate tyrosine kinase activity. Additionally, some RTKs may require oligomers rather than dimers for activation (e.g., Tie2, Eph).

The extent to which the ligand makes up the interface between the two TRK dimers varies depending on the receptor as well. The dimerization of many RTKs, including TrkA, Tie2, and FLT1, follow the traditional format of being “ligand-mediated.” The extracellular regions of the two RTK monomers do not contact one another; the ligand forms the entire dimer interface. Conversely, receptors in the EGFR family are said to be “receptor-mediated.” The ligand constitutes no part of the dimer interface; instead, ligand binding to each receptor monomer induces conformational changes in the receptor extracellular region, exposing sites for dimerization. Between these two extremes are cases in which the dimer interface forms by both the ligand and extracellular receptor domains (e.g., c-KIT) and cases where the dimer interface forms by various interactions between the involved ligand, receptors, and an accessory molecule. An example of the latter is the FGFR family, which requires heparin to form the dimer interface.

**Activation of Cytoplasmic Kinase Domains**

TKDs of RTKs are comprised of a C-lobe, N-lobe, and “activation loop.” For a TKD to become functional, both the “activation loop” and N-lobe alpha-C helix must adopt a specific, “active” configuration. In the majority of cases, the release of cis-autoinhibition is required for this to occur. Cis-autoinhibition occurs in several ways. In Ins receptors, a tyrosine on the activation loop occupies the kinase active site, forming a stable configuration that blocks ATP and protein substrate entry.

Similarly, in Tie2 RTKs, tyrosines on the C-terminal tail occupy the active site. In several RTKs, (c-KIT, FLT3, and MuSK), tyrosines in the juxtamembrane region interact with the TKD and its activation loop, stabilizing it in an inactive conformation. In all cases, ligand dimerization permits the partner TKD to trans-phosphorylate these tyrosines, releasing the cis-autoinhibition and allowing the RTK to assume the active state.

The EGFR and RET RTKs are unique in that TKD activation do not require trans-phosphorylation. In the case of EGFR, allosteric interactions in the “receiver” N-lobe of the TKD of one RTK monomer maintain it in an inactive conformation. Upon dimerization, these interactions are disrupted by the “activator” C-lobe of the TKD of the other RTK monomer, allowing the receiver TKD to become active. The mechanism of TKD activation in RET RTKs is not as well elucidated. The unphosphorylated and phosphorylated TKDs both exist in an active configuration and have a similarly low level of enzymatic activity. Speculations are that RET may exist as a trans-inhibited dimer and that the inhibitory interactions are relieved by ligand binding.

**Linking of Activated RTK to Cell Signaling**

Except for EGFR and RET, trans-autophosphorylation provides the means by which RTKs link to cell signaling pathways. Autophosphorylation occurs in two phases. The first phase has been described previously; trans-autophosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues relieves cis-autoinhibition, allowing the TKD to adopt the active configuration and optimizing enzyme kinetics. In second phase autophosphorylation, additional tyrosines in the juxtamembrane region, C-terminal tail, and TKD are phosphorylated, creating phosphotyrosine-binding sites that can be bound by kinases and adaptor proteins possessing SH2 or PTB domains. The TKD can also phosphorylate tyrosines on associated docking proteins, which have no enzymatic activity themselves but provide more potential binding sites. Examples of docking proteins include FRS2, IRS1, and Gab-1. The cell signaling pathways triggered by these interactions are discussed in the “Cellular” section.