Treatment and management may vary depending on the grade/form of decompression sickness and the treating facility or organization.

Oxygen will wash inert gas from the lungs. A gradient is formed from tissues to lungs, allowing for the removal of the inert gas by both perfusion and diffusion.

The United States Air Force has published information on using ground-level 100% oxygen therapy for 2 hours following type-1 decompression sickness that occurs at altitude if it resolves upon descent. In more severe cases, hyperbaric recompression is accomplished in hyperbaric chambers. The recompression while breathing 100% oxygen will increase the tissue to lung gradient previously mentioned and decrease the bubble volume (Boyle’s Law), leading to the resolution of inert gas tissue bubbles. Standard recompression protocols are modeled after the United States Navy tables.

Decompression sickness in aviation most commonly is seen following flights in non-pressurized aircraft, in flights with cabin pressure fluctuations, or in individuals who fly after diving. Cases also have been reported after the use of altitude chambers. The manifestations are treated as SCUBA diving decompression sickness is treated, primarily with ground level or hyperbaric oxygen. These are relatively rare clinical events, and the clinician must consider this diagnosis in the proper historical setting. Practitioners should know where local hyperbaric chambers are located as well as have the ability to consult with a physician experienced with hyperbaric medicine. The Divers' Alert Network (DAN) is an excellent source of information.