Computed tomography (CT) is the backbone of pancreatic imaging.  Intravenous contrast is nearly always indicated, with multi-phase enhanced imaging being optimal for identifying and characterizing pancreatic masses or complications from pancreatitis.  Multi-phase pancreas protocols will usually include an unenhanced sequence, a ‘pancreas phase’ or late-arterial phase, as well as portal venous phase sequences.

In acute pancreatitis, intravenous contrast-enhanced CT will show focal or diffuse enlargement of the pancreatic parenchyma due to interstitial edema, with heterogeneous enhancement.

Regarding chronic pancreatitis, findings may include a dilated main pancreatic duct, atrophy of the pancreatic parenchyma, and pancreatic calcifications. While pancreatic atrophy occurs in approximately 54% of patients with chronic pancreatitis, this is not a specific finding and can also occur with normal aging.

Nearly nine out of ten cystic fibrosis patients experience pancreatic exocrine gland insufficiency due to ductal obstruction and subsequent fibrosis and fatty replacement. This blockage can cause acute pancreatitis when there is still residual pancreatic exocrine function. CT imaging can reveal fatty replacement of the pancreas, which appears as areas of fat (low) attenuation. Eventually, the continuing fatty replacement can lead to complete pancreatic lipomatosis, typically before the patient reaches 20 years of age.

When evaluating pancreatic exocrine tumors, the ‘pancreas phase’ sequence best accentuates the attenuation difference between the malignancy and the healthy pancreatic tissue due to the tumor’s hypovascularity.

Multiphase, contrast-enhanced CT is also the ideal imaging technique for evaluating pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. NETs are highly vascular tumors that will enhance during the arterial or pancreatic phase. Washout should be noted during the portal venous phase sequencing.