**Study 1**is ‘Single Bolus Dose of Ketodex Versus Ketofol For Prevention Of Emergence Agitation In Adults Undergoing Nasal Surgeries.’ It is an interventional double-blinded randomized clinical trial in early Phase 1, started in July 2019 to be completed by October 2019, conducted at the Faculty of Medicine Zagazig, Elsharkia, Egypt. In this study, patients aged 21 to 60 years old, belonging to all sexes, with BMI (25 to 35 kg/m2), ASA I / II, scheduled for elective nasal surgery, were selected. Exclusion criteria included patients with difficult airway (Mallapati III, IV), altered mental status (psychiatric and anxiety disorder), posttraumatic stress disorders, history of allergy to study drugs, on sedative or hypnotic medication, with chronic pain or on a painkiller, severe hepatic or kidney impairment, having a history of thyrotoxicosis, hypertension, cardiac, chest or neurologic disease, receiving B agonist, pregnant or breastfeeding females. The study divided patients into two active groups. One group of patients received a single IV bolus of a combination of ketamine and dexmedetomidine. The second group of patients received a single IV bolus of a combination of ketamine and propofol. The third group of patients received an IV bolus of saline to act as a placebo group. Researchers compared these three groups for the emergence of agitation. This study is the first one on the development of agitation in adults, with primary outcome measures being:

- The incidence of emergence agitation which is measured 24 hours postoperative

- Emergence time, which is the time from discontinuation of isoflurane to first response to verbal command

- Extubation time which is the time from discontinuation of isoflurane to extubation, both measured up to 60 minutes postoperative

- Change in the level of emergence agitation, assessed by Richmond Agitation-Sedation scale (RASS)

- Postoperative pain is evaluated using the numerical rating scale (NRS).

The secondary outcome measures were:

- The time of discharge: up to 120 minutes postoperative

- Mean arterial pressure: on admission to PACU, and at 10 minutes in the first 30 minutes, then every 15 minutes up to 120 minutes and at 4 hours, 6 hours, 12hours, 24 hours

- Side effects: up to 24 hours of postoperative nausea/vomiting

- Heart rate: on admission to PACU, and at 10 minutes in the first 30 minutes, then every 15 minutes up to 120 minutes, and at 4 hours, 6 hours, 12hours, 24 hours

- Oxygen saturation: on admission to PACU, and at 10 minutes in the first 30 minutes, then every 15 minutes up to 120 minutes, and at 4 hours, 6 hours, 12 hours, 24 hours.

**Study 2**is ‘Haloperidol and Lorazepam for Delirium in Patients With Advanced Cancer.’ This study is a double-blinded, randomized controlled trial in phase 2, which started in Jan 2014 conducted at the University of Texas, Anderson cancer center Houston, Texas, USA; the estimated completion date is Jan 2021. The goal of the study is to determine if giving lorazepam in combination with haloperidol can assist in controlling the symptoms of delirium in advanced cancer patients. The safety profile of this drug combination will also be studied. Patients selected had a diagnosis of advanced cancer (defined as a locally advanced, metastatic, recurrent, or incurable disease), admitted to acute palliative care unit (APCU), with delirium as per the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR) criteria, hyperactive/mixed delirium with RASS greater than or equal to 2 in the last 24 hours. The patient selection criteria included:

- On scheduled haloperidol dosing less than or equal to 8 mg in the previous 24 hours

- Age 18 or older

- Legally authorized representative consent

- Family members who are patient's spouse, adult child, sibling, parent, another relative, or significant other (defined by the patient as a partner) of age 18 or older, are at the patient's bedside at least 4 hours each day during patient delirium episode

- Able to communicate in English or Spanish

Exclusion criteria included patients with a history of myasthenia gravis or acute narrow-angle glaucoma, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, Parkinson disease or dementia, uncontrolled seizure disorder, with history of hypersensitivity to haloperidol or benzodiazepine, who are on regular doses of benzodiazepine or chlorpromazine within the past 48 hours, had previously documented and persistent QTc prolongation (greater than 500 ms), or with heart failure exacerbation at the time of enrollment. The study divided patients into two groups. The first group receives a single dose of lorazepam in addition to a standardized dose of haloperidol. The second group, which will act as a comparison group, will be given normal saline in addition to a standardized dose of haloperidol. The primary outcome measure is the control of delirium symptoms for 8 hours. Delirium symptom rating will be by the intensity of agitation scores (Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale - RASS) over 8 hours.

**Study 3**is ‘Dexmedetomidine and IV Acetaminophen for the Prevention of Postoperative Delirium Following Cardiac Surgery (DEXACET).’ It is a randomized triple blinded clinical trial in phase 4, started in Oct 2015 and estimated completion was April 2019, conducted at US Massachusetts Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Patients 60 years and above, belonging to both sexes and undergoing CABG with or without valve procedure requiring bypass, were selected for the study. Exclusion criteria were patients with preoperative left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) below 30%, emergent or urgent procedures, aortic surgery, pre-existing cognitive impairment (defined based on a short screening assessment), Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, recent seizures (less than 3 months), who are on prophylactic medications for cognitive decline, have serum creatinine over 2 mg/dl, liver dysfunction (liver enzymes over four times the baseline, since patients will have a baseline liver function tests), history and exam suggestive of jaundice, with a known history of alcohol or drug abuse (over 10 drinks per week), hypersensitivity to any of the study drug and percutaneous procedures and are non-English speaking. To one group of patients, IV acetaminophen and IV propofol are given 4 to 6 hours before the patients awaken in the ICU during the first two days postoperative and IV acetaminophen, and the second group receives IV dexmedetomidine every 6 hours during the first two days postoperative to the other group. IV propofol and placebo, IV dexmedetomidine, and placebo are given for 4 to 6 hours before awakening the patients in the ICU for comparison. The primary outcome measure is the incidence of delirium. The study followed the patients for the duration of the hospital stay, which was an average of 5 days. Incidence of delirium will be analyzed between patients treated with and without IV acetaminophen, measured from 24 hours post-operation and daily until discharge. Secondary outcome measures are:

- Duration of delirium: Participants will be followed for the duration of the hospital stay, an average of 6 days, and at 1 month and 1 year following the date of surgery. Delirium will be defined using the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM).

- The severity of delirium: Participants will be followed for the duration of the hospital stay, an average of 6 days, assessed by using Confusion Assessment Method Severity Score (CAM-S).

- Postoperative opioid consumption: The study will follow participants for the first 48 hours postoperatively.

- Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA): Given on the day of discharge, an average of 6 days

- Hospital length of stay: Measured in days admitted in the hospital, an average of 6 days

- ICU Length of stay: Measured in days admitted in the ICU, an average of 2 days

- Follow-up incidence of delirium: Patients will be assessed for delirium at 1 month and 1 year following the date of surgery.