Clinicians may be presented with a patient who has (1) new-onset spasticity as an initial symptom of an underlying neurological illness or (2) as existing spasticity that has worsened as a result of the progression of the known chronic neurologic condition or an aggravating factor. When evaluating a patient with new spasticity, the clinician must obtain a history and progression of the symptoms, including any motor weakness, altered sensation, pain, bladder and/or bowel dysfunction, and sexual dysfunction. Additionally, a complete history should include family history, travel history, diet, and any compromised immunity. The physical exam should include a neurological evaluation of muscle tone, motor power, reflexes, and sensation.

For a patient with worsening of chronic spasticity, which is often a more common reason for consultation than new onset spasticity, a clinician must evaluate for any triggers, disease progression, and the possibility of a new disease. Triggers may include skin, visceral, drug-related, or device-related issues. Skin issues may present as ulcers, ingrown toenails, boils, and infections. Visceral issues include constipation, urinary tract infections, or calculi. Rapid withdrawal of antispasmodic agents can lead to worsening spasticity. Lastly, poor seating, an ill-fitting orthotic, or failure of an intrathecal baclofen pump can all be device-related triggers. Spasticity also can be worsened by other noxious stimuli such as infections, injuries, deep vein thromboses (DVT), or stress.