**Pharmacological Management**

Although there is no cure, over the past two decades, there have been remarkable improvements in treatment and management strategies for rheumatoid arthritis, especially with the advent of the biological disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs). American College of Rheumatology recommends a treat-to-target strategy, with the goal to achieve and maintain complete remission. Prevention of radiographic progression and joint deformities and prevention and early management of the extra-articular disease are important goals as well.

There are several medications available for the management of RA; however, to date, there is no clinical, laboratory, or radiographic parameter that can predict a favorable response to any particular therapy. Decision making shall consider RA disease activity, patient comorbidities, and patient preference. Several treatment strategies including sequential monotherapy, step-up therapy, and step-down therapy have been evaluated. While step-up therapy is the most commonly used, recent studies favor the use of aggressive therapy early in the disease with step down once remission is achieved.

With the recent advancements in the available treatment options with the introduction of highly specific and effective biological DMARDs, the use of older therapeutic agents such as gold, penicillamine, minocycline, doxycycline is no longer encouraged. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) can provide short term symptom relief but are not associated with the prevention of disease progression, and their adverse effect profile with long term use prohibits their use as long-term management options for RA.

ACR recommends using corticosteroids only during the early management phase and in the lowest possible dose for the shortest possible duration. Other immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine and cyclosporine are no longer the treatments of choice for RA given the availability of more effective and safer alternatives, although these may be used in special circumstances (such as azathioprine in interstitial lung disease).

Available DMARDs can be classified into conventional synthetic DMARDs (cs-DMARDs) and biologic DMARDs (b-DMARDs).

The cs-DMARDs include Methotrexate (MTX), Leflunomide (LFN), Sulfasalazine (SSZ), and Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ). Methotrexate is the preferred c-DMARD given the significant data on its efficacy. These cs-DMARDs can take weeks to months to show clinical efficacy.

The b-DMARDs are highly specific genetically engineered drugs that target specific pathways of the immune system. B-DMARDs can be used as first-line therapy or after the failure of cs-DMARDs therapy in case of ongoing disease activity with evidence of clinical or radiographic disease progression. B-DMARDs can be used as monotherapy or in combination with other cs- DMARDs for better control of disease activity but cannot be used in combination with other b-DMARDs due to lack of additional efficacy and more adverse effects. Targeted synthetic DMARDs are non biological small molecules that have been developed to address cytokine functions at the transcrptional level via inhibition of the Janus Kinases therby interrupting intracellular cytokine signalling pathways.

B-DMARDs include:

- Tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha) inhibitors
- Infliximab
- Etanercept
- Adalimumab
- Certolizumab
- Golimumab

- Interleukin-6 inhibitors

- Tocilizumab
- Sarilumab

- B-cell depleting therapies

- Rituximab

- T-cell co-stimulation inhibition

- Abatacept

- Interleukin-1 inhibitors

- Anakinra

Targeted Synthetic DMARDs- Janus Kinase inhibitors include:

- Tofacitinib

- Upadacitinib

- Baricitinib

TNF-α inhibitors are among the first prescribed b-DMARDs.

A summary of the keypoints provided by the updated American College of Rheumatology 2021 therapeutic recommendtaions for the management of Rheumatoid arthritis:

- Target is remission.

- Attaining at least low disease activity can be conditionally recommended over remission.

- The addition /switching to DMARDs is conditionally recommended over continuation of oral  and/or intraarticular  glucocorticoids in RA patients who require glucocorticoids to remain at target.

- Methotrexate is strongly recommended as a monotherapy over other conventional DMARDs and leflunomide monotherapy for DMARDs-naive RA patients with moderate- to- high disease activity.

- Methotrexate is strongly recommended as a monotherapy over biologic DMARDs (bDMARDs) or targeted synthetic DMARDs (tsDMARDs) monotherapy for DMARDs- naive RA patients with moderate- to- high disease activity.

- Methotrexate as a monotherapy is conditionally recommended over dual or triple conventional synthetic DMARDs in DMARDs- naive RA patients with moderate- to- high disease activity.

- Methotrexate as a monotherapy is conditionally recommended over the use of methotrexate with a tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor in DMARDs- naive RA patients with moderate- to- high disease activity.

- Methotrexate as a monotherapy is strongly recommended over methotrexate with a non– TNF inhibitor biologic DMARD or targeted synthetic DMARD for DMARDs- naive RA patients with moderate- to- high disease activity.

- The initiation of a csDMARD without the addition of short- term (<3 months) glucocorticoids is conditionally recommended over the addition of a short- term glucocorticoids for DMARD- naive RA patients with moderate- to- high disease activity.

- The initiation of a csDMARD without the additional use of longer-term (≥3 months) glucocorticoids is strongly recommended over the additional use of longer- term glucocorticoids for DMARD- naive RA patients with moderate- to- high disease activity.

- In DMARD-naive RA patients with low disease activity, methotrexate is conditionally recommended over leflunomide, sulfasalazine is conditionally recommended over methotrexate and hydroxychloroquine (antimalarial csDMARDs) is conditionally recommended over other conventional synthetic DMARDs.

- In RA patients moderate- to- high disease activity previously treated with csDMARDs, excluding methotrexate, Methotrexate monotherapy is conditionally recommended over the combination of methotrexate with a biologic or targeted synthetic DMARD.

- The use of oral methotrexate is conditionally recommended over the subcutaneous route for patients initiating methotrexate.

- Initiation/titration of methotrexate to at least 15 mg as a weekly dose within 4 to 6 weeks is conditionally recommended over initiation/titration to <15 mg weekly dose.

- For patients not tolerating oral weekly methotrexate a split oral dose of over 24 hours or weekly subcutaneous dose, and/or increasing the dose of  folic/folinic acid, is conditionally recommended over switching other DMARDs.

- The treat-to-target approach is strongly recommended over traditional therapies in RA patients naieve to bDMARDs or tsDMARDs.

- In patients taking a maximum tolerated dose of methotrexate and didn't acheive target, adding on bDMARD or tsDMARD is conditionally recommended over the use of triple therapy approach (i.e., the addition of sulfasalazine and hydroxychloroquine).

- - In RA patients taking a bDMARD or tsDMARD without reaching goal of remission or low disease activity shifting to a bDMARD or tsDMARD of another different class is conditionally recommended over switching to the same class.

- The recommendations have also addressed the treatment modifications in the presence of specific situations or comorbidities.

**Non-pharmacological Management**

A structured exercise program comprises an integral part of disease management protocols in RA. Patient education and support programs, physical therapy (thermo-therapy either heat or cold), transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), and rest during flare must be implemented and explained in RA. Physical exercises reduce fatigue scores and improve cardiovascular performance in stable RA patients. They exert a positive impact on cognition in RA patients. A structured exercise program should be an integral part of chronic disease management protocols for patients with RA. Occupational therapy can help to improve performance and maximize the quality of life including training of motor function, instructions for joint protection, the usage of assistive devices such as therapy gloves, splints, hand or wrists orthoses, electric jar, and can openers.

Occupational therapy to improve performance and maximize the quality of life including training of motor function, instructions for joint protection, the usage of assistive devices such as therapy gloves, splints, hand or wrists orthoses, electric jar, and can openers.

**Surgical Interventions**

With the recent advancements in the therapeutics, surgical intervention is rarely needed.

- For refractory cases, surgical interventions such as synovectomy, tenosynovectomy, tendon realignment, tendon transfer, joint replacement (arthroplasty), and joint fusion (arthrodesis) can be considered.

- Vaughan-Jackson deformity is considered a surgical emergency, with timely surgical intervention resulting in better outcomes and prevention of long-term disability.

- Removal of subcutaneous nodules is not routinely recommended due to increased risk of recurrence of nodules, and surgical complications such as infections and poor healing. However, nodules interfering with lifestyle such as on dominant hand interfering with fine motor function can be considered for removal.

- Carpal tunnel syndrome in RA, especially early in the disease course, usually responds to treatment of RA and resolution of wrist synovitis with rare cases needing surgical intervention.