There is no definitive laboratory test to diagnose a tarantula envenomation or exposure to their urticating hairs. Like other arachnid exposures and envenomations, most of the evaluation is performed with a thorough history and physical exam. The international standard for making a definitive diagnosis of a spider bite includes all three of the following:

- An observation by the patient of the spider inflicting a bite.

- The spider was caught and sent for identification by a qualified expert.

- Symptoms associated with the bite, such as pain or discomfort.

As tarantulas are such large, conspicuous spiders, it is often unnecessary to make the definitive diagnosis of a tarantula bite to make the presumed diagnosis. Often a reliable reported history of exposure should suffice.

It is important to thoroughly examine the wound or affected area. Often, a patient may suspect an arachnid envenomation but without a clear history of exposure. In these cases, an infection should be considered, especially if there are local signs such as fluctuance or purulent exudates at the wound site.

If the patient reports eye symptoms, such as pain or vision changes, or if the history provided is consistent with ocular involvement from urticating hairs, a slit-lamp exam should be performed to look for hairs embedded in the cornea or conjunctiva.

If the history is not entirely clear, it would be reasonable to perform basic laboratory bloodwork to help in diagnosing common mimics of tarantula exposures. This would include:

- Complete blood count

- Metabolic panel

- Wound culture (if applicable)