Botulinum neurotoxin is a 150kDa protein that comprises a 100kDa heavy chain and 50kDa light chain linked by a single disulfide bridge. There are eight distinct serotypes of BoNT, A (BoNT/A) through H (BoNT/H), based on recognition by polyclonal serum. Toxin subtypes A, B, E, and rarely F, G, and H cause human disease. The vast majority of cases reported in the US are caused by BoNT/A and BoNT/B. While most strains of C. botulinum produce only one toxin serotype, dual toxin-producing strains have been identified. Toxin type A is the most potent, followed by BoNT/B.

The mode of entry of the toxin into the bloodstream depends on the type of exposure. In infant botulism, the lack of a robust immune system allows the proliferation of toxin-elaborating C. botulinum colonies in the digestive tract or bronchioles following ingestion or inhalation of spores. Once released, BoNT migrates via transcytosis across the mucosal barrier (either intestinal or pulmonary epithelium) into the circulation. The ingestion of preformed toxin in improperly stored food results in food-borne botulism, which is then absorbed in the intestinal tract similarly to infant botulism. Wound botulism is the result of C. botulinum spore germination in devitalized tissue, most commonly as a result of subcutaneous injection of spore-contaminated illicit drugs, with the release of BoNT into the local circulation.

Once in the bloodstream, BoNT travels to and binds presynaptic nerve terminals of the voluntary motor and autonomic NMJs. The heavy chain moiety of the toxin promotes endocytosis, after which the light chain is cleaved and released into the cytosol. The light chain targets and cleaves serotype-specific targets of the SNARE (SNAP-25, VAMP, or syntaxin) polypeptide complex, proteins required for fusion of ACh-containing vesicles with the presynaptic membrane. Fusion allows exocytosis of ACh into the NMJ and depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane. By cleaving these fusion complexes, BoNT blocks presynaptic ACh release and inhibits muscle contraction, causing flaccid paralysis. Despite serotype-specific differences in target sites, all BoNT serotypes share the downstream syndrome of flaccid paralysis secondary to failure of ACh release at the NMJ.