In the past, the illness was considered benign and typically would remit after a few months.  More recent studies have found that up to half of patients have chorea lasting up to 2 years. Recurrences of movement disorders occur in up to 50% of patients regardless of prophylaxis.  Many of these recurrences have not been associated with Streptococcus infection or anti-basal ganglia antibodies. A significant concern for patients with the illness is the development of valvular heart disease as a component of RF. There is a very strong correlation between SD and the development of carditis and valvular heart disease.

Prevention of the SD by aggressively treating Group A B-hemolytic streptococcal pharyngeal infection and reducing the likelihood of rheumatic heart disease is effective. Once SD is diagnosed, secondary antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated to decrease the risk of neurologic and cardiac problems with future streptococcal infections. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends secondary prophylaxis up to the age of 21 years.

Symptomatic treatment of the illness has not been well-studied.  Typically valproic acid has been used in escalating doses, first starting at 250 mg per day and rapidly increasing up to 1500 mg per day or until symptoms abate.  Valproic acid does have a slow onset of action thus at least 2 weeks should be allowed before abandoning as ineffective.  The second-line treatment if valproic acid fails is neuroleptics.  Risperidone 1 mg to 2 mg per day has been found effective in controlling the chorea.