The major branches of the SMA are the inferior pancreaticoduodenal, right colic, middle colic and ileocolic. Additionally, multiple branches supplying the jejunum and ileum arise from the left aspect of the SMA. The middle colic artery is the first of the colic branches of the superior mesenteric artery providing blood supply to the proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon. The right colic artery is the second branch supplying the right colon, primarily the ascending colon. The ileocolic artery is the most inferior branch (often referred to as the terminal branch) of the superior mesenteric artery. The ileocolic artery courses inferiorly and retroperitoneally after arising from the superior mesenteric artery, traversing towards the right iliac fossa. At this location, the ileocolic artery divides into the inferior and superior branches. The superior branch of the ileocolic artery anastomoses with the right colic artery. It supplies the terminal ileum, cecum, and appendix. The inferior branch gives rise to the anterior and posterior cecal arteries, the ileal branch of the ileocolic artery, and the appendicular artery. The anterior and posterior cecal arteries are found anterior and posterior to the terminal ileum, respectively. The ileal branch of the ileocolic artery forms an anastomosis with the last intestinal (ileal) artery. Additionally, the ileocolic artery anastomoses with the right colic artery superiorly. Finally, the appendicular artery is suspended in the mesoappendix and can be found posterior to the terminal ileum.

It should be noted that there are normal anatomic variations of the right colonic vasculature and branches of the superior mesenteric artery; the most common being separate origins of the right, middle, and ileocolic arteries as described above. The other two most common variations include a common origin of the middle and right colic arteries with separate origin of the ileocolic and common origin of the right colic and ileocolic arteries with separate origin of the middle colic. Additionally, it is important to note that the arteries of the mid and hindgut form an anastomosis, the marginal artery of Drummond. The artery of Drummond is an anastomosis between the terminal branches of the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries running along the inner margin of the colon within the mesentery and gives off small branches to the colon called vasa recta.

The ileocolic artery and its branches supply blood to the distal ileum, ileocecal valve, cecum, vermiform appendix, and the proximal ascending colon.

**Key Relations**

- The ileocolic artery is found anterior to the right gonadal vessels and ureter.

- The posterior cecal artery is found posterior to the terminal ileum/cecum.

- The anterior cecal artery is found anterior to the terminal ileum/cecum.

- The appendicular artery is found posterior to the terminal ileum.

- The ileocolic artery forms an anastomosis with the right colic artery.

- Terminal branches of both the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries form and anastomosis via the marginal artery of Drummond.