**Causes of Pain**

Most patients who suffer from chronic pain complain of more than one type of pain.

There are multiple categories and etiologies of types of pain, which include neuropathic, nociceptive, musculoskeletal, inflammatory, psychogenic, and mechanical.

**Neuropathic Pain**

- Peripheral neuropathic pain, as in the case of post-herpetic neuralgia or diabetic neuropathy

- Central neuropathic pain - cerebral vascular accident sequella

**Nociceptive Pain**

- Pain due to actual tissue injuries such as burns, bruises, sprains, or fractures.

**Musculoskeletal Pain**

- Back pain

- Myofascial pain

**Inflammatory Pain**

- Autoimmune disorders (rheumatoid arthritis)

- Infection

**Psychogenic Pain**

- Pain caused by psychological factors such as headaches or abdominal pain caused by emotional, psychological, or behavioral factors

**Mechanical Pain**

- Expanding malignancy

**Causes of Opioid Abuse and Associated Morbidity and Mortality**

Unfortunately, the cure for pain is associated with morbidity, mortality, and abuse of opioid therapy, often used to alleviate the pain. Causes of opioid abuse include medical, social, and economic problems.

**Medical and Social**

Twenty years ago, a national shift occurred where clinicians were encouraged to treat pain more aggressively. Pain was considered the fifth vital sign, and clinicians who undertreated noncancer pain potentially incurred liability, patient complaints, and licensing board complaints. At the same time, oxycodone was introduced and touted to have low addiction potential. Further, patients and clinicians concluded that it was better and safer to take prescription opioids rather than street drugs. The end result was more than a decade of growth of prescription opioid use.

**Economic**

Opioid use has increased as a result of direct marketing to consumers, promotion to physicians and pharmacists from sales forces, and illicit production and distribution of opioids. Due to the opportunity for enormous profits, "pill mills" developed where unscrupulous providers provided prescriptions for opioids that required little or no documentation. As these sources have gradually diminished, heroin use has made a resurgence.

**Opioid Manufacturer Role**

Individuals and governments, including federal, state, and local municipalities, have successfully sued opioid manufacturers for their role in promoting the use of opioids. Purdue Pharma specifically has been found liable for the promotion of its sustained-release form of oxycodone.

**Prescribers**

Prescribers who prescribe for chronic noncancer pain, exceeding practice guidelines, higher than normal doses, long-acting formulations, large volume prescriptions with limited follow-up, and using methadone for pain relief have increased opioid abuse and associated morbidity and mortality.

**Dispensers**

Unfortunately, some prescribers challenge pharmacists who question prescriptions that seem unreasonable. Pharmacists can use noninvasive means such as checking state opioid use databases and then contact prescribers with patients that are concerning. Interprofessional collaboration, often mandated by states, encourages optional and safe patient care.