Frey syndrome, also known as Baillarger’s syndrome, auriculotemporal syndrome, Dupuy syndrome, or gustatory hyperhidrosis, represents aberrant reinnervation following injury to the auriculotemporal nerve. The auriculotemporal nerve, a branch of the trigeminal nerve, consists of parasympathetic fibers that signal the parotid gland to produce saliva and sympathetic fibers that innervate the sweat glands of the face and scalp. When an insult to the parasympathetic and sympathetic nerve fibers of the auriculotemporal nerve in the parotid region occurs, the resulting aberrant regeneration of post-ganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers (responsible for salivary secretion) along the pre-existing sympathetic pathways to the vessels and sweat glands of the skin leads to the development of Frey syndrome.

Patients with Frey syndrome often present with facial warmth, flushing, and sweating in the territory of the auriculotemporal nerve overlying the parotid gland, which may include the preauricular skin, the temporal skin, the scalp, and the temporomandibular joint region.

Dr. Jules Baillarger first reported the phenomenon in 1853, describing two patients that underwent incision and drainage for parotid abscesses. The patients later developed facial sweating during meals. At that time, he misinterpreted the facial fluid as saliva overflowing through the skin due to a blocked Stenson’s duct.

It was not until 1923 that the first accurate description of this phenomenon was provided by Dr. Lucja Frey, a Polish physician and one of the first female academic neurologists in Europe. She described a 25-year-old female who sustained a gunshot wound to the parotid region and subsequently developed facial flushing and sweating five months afterward. She accurately identified the autonomic innervation of the parotid gland and the auriculotemporal nerve as the link between gustatory stimulation and facial sweat production.