Low back pain is one of the most common musculoskeletal complaints encountered in clinical practice. It is the leading cause of disability in the developed world and accounts for billions of dollars in healthcare costs annually. Lumbosacral facet syndrome refers to a clinical condition consisting of various patient-reported symptoms, including mechanical back pain, radicular symptoms, and neurogenic claudication, secondary to either acute or subacute trauma or secondary to the degenerative cascade affecting the posterior spinal elements. The facet joint degenerates secondary to repetitive overuse and everyday activities, eventually leading to microinstability and synovial facet cysts that generate and compress the surrounding nerve roots. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of lumbosacral facet syndrome and the interprofessional team's role in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the specific pathophysiology of lumbosacral facet syndrome.
- Summarize the evaluation of low back pain, including examination and imaging that would lead to a diagnosis of lumbosacral facet syndrome in cases where that is the source of pain.
- Outline the various treatment options available to manage lumbosacral facet syndrome.
- Explain the importance of interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to aid in prompt diagnosis of lumbosacral facet syndrome and improving outcomes in patients diagnosed with the condition.