Diagnostic testing for protein S deficiency is performed using functional assays, including clotting assays and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), to determine levels of protein S activity.

**Protein S Antigen**

Protein S antigen can be detected as total antigen or free protein S antigen. The free form of protein S is functionally active. Both free and total protein S can be measured by ELISA.

**Functional Protein S**

Functional protein S assays are indirect and based on the prolongation of blood clotting by forming activated protein C (APC) and its function in the assay.

Many conditions reduce the blood levels of protein S on both antigenic and functional assays. These include:

- Vitamin K deficiency

- Liver disease

- Antagonism with warfarin reduces protein S levels

- Acute thrombosis

- Pregnancy

Plasma protein S levels fluctuate with age, gender, and genetic or acquired influences such as hormonal status or lipid metabolism.

Protein S deficiency is classified into three phenotypes based on free and total protein S antigen and functional protein S activity by the International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis (ISTH), as discussed in the etiology section.

Type 2 deficiency is rare. The most common are types 1 and 3.

Total protein S tests have excellent performance but cannot detect type 2 and 3 protein S deficiency. Free protein S assays may be a useful alternative, although they lack reproducibility. Measurement of APC cofactor activity could be used as a proxy indicator of protein S deficiency, although these assays have a high false-positive rate.

Mutational analysis of the PROS1 gene can be important in diagnosing protein S deficiency, and ISTH maintains a registry of documented mutations.

Hemostasis analysis (per ISTH): Diagnosis of PROS1 mutations is performed using DNA sequencing or amplification and analysis by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by gel electrophoresis.