Early vaginal cancers are generally treated with surgery or radiation therapy. Advanced cancers are treated with radiation therapy and the simultaneous administration of combined chemotherapy; surgery has a limited role due to the proximity of the bladder, urethra, and rectum.

Local excision may be possible for small (<2 cm) lesions confined to the mucosa. For upper vaginal disease, radical hysterectomy (if the uterus is present) plus radical vaginectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy is an option. For lower vaginal disease, radical excision with groin node dissection is a treatment option. The goal for lower and upper disease is 1 cm disease-free margins.

A study from the National Cancer Database showed the use of combined chemoradiation therapy (CCRT) for patients with vaginal cancer has increased and is associated with a significant improvement. CCRT should be incorporated into treatment guidelines for vaginal cancer.

Vaginal melanoma is rare, and there is no standard treatment. Surgery for excision, including exenterative surgery, has been reported, and there is limited evidence to support adjuvant therapy. The use of targeted therapy such as PD-L1 blockade has increased and improved prognosis in cutaneous melanoma; however, vaginal melanoma has a different genetic profile with fewer BRAF mutations and more c-KIT mutations.

Individualized treatment of high-grade VAIN can prevent malignant conversion. Reported treatment modalities include laser ablation, surgical excision, and topical treatments such as imiquimod and topical chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil.