As a clinician, the ability to recognize high-risk patients presenting with classical symptoms of SON in addition to well-defined associated risk factors is essential. Obtaining urgent bilateral anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral radiographs, with further investigation using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), is essential to make a timely diagnosis. This will ultimately lead to optimal clinical outcomes for patients.

Traditionally, radionucleotide scanning had been the recommended modality of imaging to investigate and stage ON. However, a report by Mont et al. highlighted that MRI is the gold standard of imaging for the investigation of ON.

To date, there are no high powered studies that report pathognomonic changes on MRI indicative of early stages of SON. However, the distribution pattern of the bone marrow edema on MRI can be suggestive of SON. This is because the epiphysis, metaphysis, and diaphysis can be involved, which is in contrast to SPONK, where the MRI changes are only seen in the subchondral area of the affected femoral condyle.

In addition, there is often a rim or double halo sign, adjacent to the proximal boundary of the osteonecrotic bone displayed on MRI images in SON. Narvaex et al. showed that this finding was present in 70% of his cases with SON but importantly in none of the patient MRI images with SPONK.

Secondary osteonecrosis of the knee can be staged to indicate the severity and thus guide management options. Two classification systems can be used: the Koshino staging system, which was developed for SPONK, and the modified Ficat and Arlet staging system, which has been adapted for the knee after originally being developed for osteonecrosis of the femoral head.

The latter system is in more routine use, and a summary of its classification follows:

- Stage I - Normal radiological appearance.

- Stage II – Cystic or osteosclerotic lesions present, but the absence of subchondral fracture or flattening of the articular surface.

- Stage III – Crescent sign or evidence of subchondral collapse present.

- Stage IV – Narrowing of the joint space with the presence of cysts and osteophytes.