Long-term complications related to menopause are associated with decreased estrogen.

**Cardiovascular Disease**

During menopause, the decline in estrogen not only causes vasoconstriction but also changes in a woman’s lipid profile. As a result, women who have gone through menopause are at a greater risk of cardiovascular disease (i.e., coronary artery disease and stroke). In fact, coronary heart disease rates are 2 to 3 times higher in those that have reached menopause than those of the same age who have not. Cardiovascular risk factors can optimize by starting hormone therapy within 10 years of the final menstrual period, younger patients less than 60 years old, nonsmokers, and better lipid panel LDL less than 130. For this reason, menopausal and postmenopausal women are encouraged to maintain a healthy diet and exercise to mitigate some of the risk factors.

**Osteoporosis**

More than 250,000 menopausal and postmenopausal women are affected by osteoporosis. The characteristic bone loss or decreased bone density in osteoporosis is due to estrogen deficiency in these women. At the age of 40, women begin to lose bone at a rate of 0.3% to 0.5% per year. During menopause, women experience an increased rate of bone loss of 3% to 5% per year for 5 to 7 years.  In the Women’s Health Institute trial, hormone replacement was chosen to decrease osteoporotic fractures. This and various other studies have shown that hormone therapy is protective against bone loss. However, there are risks associated with the long-term use of hormone therapy, such as endometrial and breast cancer and deep vein thrombosis/pulmonary embolism. For this reason, several other approaches to decreasing the risk of osteoporosis and related injuries are encouraged. Among these approaches are smoking cessation, physical activity, calcium supplementation, and non-hormonal treatments such as bisphosphonates and denosumab.