As previously stated, hypophosphatemia's most common causes are inadequate phosphate intake, increased phosphate excretion, and shift from extracellular phosphate into the intracellular space.

Hypophosphatemia secondary to inadequate intake of phosphate occurs in the setting of prolonged poor dietary sources of phosphate, intestinal malabsorption, and intestinal binding by exogenous agents.  As stated above, almost all diet types contain a surplus of phosphate sufficient to maintain needs. Additionally, renal adaptations typically can compensate for the short-term deficiency. Intestinal malabsorption may be due to a variety of causes. Notably, chronic diarrhea has been shown to increase phosphate losses through the intestines. Certain medications are known to bind with phosphate, decreasing the available free ion to be absorbed via the small intestines into circulation. Aluminum and magnesium antacids are notoriously associated with a net loss of phosphate from the body by binding to both ingested and excreted phosphate. This chemical reaction creates aluminum- or magnesium-bound phosphate salts that are non-absorbable by the body.

Increased excretion of phosphate occurs primarily in the renal system. The proximal renal tubule reabsorbs up to 70% of filtered phosphate normally, and the distal tubule reabsorbs up to 15% of filtered phosphate. Resorption is regulated by serum phosphate concentration with mild phosphate depletion, which directly triggers increased phosphate reabsorption via the sodium-phosphate cotransporters of the proximal tubule and increases expression and formation for new sodium-phosphate cotransporters. Conversely, parathyroid hormone functions to increase phosphate excretion by inhibiting the activity of sodium-phosphate cotransporters. Additionally, fibroblast growth factor 23, fibroblast growth factor 7, extracellular matrix phosphoglycoprotein, and secreted frizzled-related protein-4 decrease phosphate reabsorption by sodium-phosphate cotransporters. Therefore, any increase in parathyroid hormone has the potential for inducing hypophosphatemia.

Primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism are the most likely causes where primary hyperparathyroidism is due to hypercalcemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism is induced by any of the causes that lead to vitamin D deficiency. Primary renal phosphate-wasting syndromes also exist where there is a direct failure of the renal system without coexisting systemic failure. These include a wide variety of genetic malformations, leading to faulty sodium-phosphate cotransporters. One of the larger examples of this includes X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, where a mutation in the PHEX gene leads to increased levels of fibroblast growth factor 23 and directly decreases resorption of phosphate in the proximal renal-collecting tubules. Mutations in the sodium-phosphate cotransporter gene SLC34A3 causes type 2c sodium-phosphate cotransporter failure. The SLC34A1 gene is responsible for encoding the type 2a sodium-phosphate cotransporter and has been associated with mutations. The sodium-hydrogen exchanger regulatory factor 1 is responsible for creating the sodium gradient, which powers most ion reabsorption. Mutations here lead to pan-ionic losses. Fanconi syndrome is another classic cause of renal loss. It is a generalized impairment in proximal tubular function leading to urinary wasting most often due to illnesses such as multiple myeloma where immunoglobulin light chains induce renal tubular damage and Wilson disease with copper accumulation in children. Anything that increases urine production also will lead to increased phosphate loss, including glucosuria, alcohol, lithium, and diuretics such as acetazolamide and thiazides, rapid fluid volume expansion from oral or intravenous fluids. In patients with renal failure, hypophosphatemia can be seen as a result of dialysis therapy removing phosphate in bulk.

Intracellular shifting of phosphate stores may occur in a variety of clinical scenarios. Refeeding syndrome occurs when a patient who has been starved of nutrition suddenly is replenished with carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids. Insulin and glucose assist in driving phosphate intracellularly. The net body stores of phosphate necessary to perform basic metabolism, such as glycolysis, are depleted. The body begins to process the newfound foods to produce ATP for energy. Cells uptake all available free phosphate, leading to profound hypophosphatemia. The hungry bone syndrome occurs after the correction of hyperparathyroidism, where osteopenic bones begin to reabsorb and store phosphate and calcium. This leads to increased bone demand for these ions and hypophosphatemia. Acute respiratory alkalosis induces hypophosphatemia via changes in cellular pH. Increased pH stimulates phosphofructokinase, thus stimulating glycolysis to produce ATP, thus consuming phosphate from the cellular space. Serum phosphate is shifted intracellularly to meet this demand. While typically mild, extreme hyperventilation with subsequent PCO2 changes to less than 20 mmHg can lower phosphate concentrations to below 0.32 mmol/L. This is thought to be the most common cause of marked hypophosphatemia in hospitalized patients.