Imperative to follow treatment algorithms to ensure adequate diagnosis and treatment.

- If hydrocephalus absent:

- 
              
- Tumor markers obtained (serum and CSF).
              
              
- 
                  
- If positive, treatment based on most likely pathology (See figure) 
                  
                  
- If negative tissue diagnosis is necessary:
                  
                  
- 
                      
- Biopsy (stereotactic, endoscopic, open).
                      
                      
- Resection (based on preliminary radiographic findings or pathology findings)
                      
                    

                  
                  
- Final management is based on pathology.

- If hydrocephalus present:

- 
              
- CSF fluid diversion; best option is an endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV)
              
              
- 
                  
- Always attempt endoscopic biopsy during ETV
                  
                  
- Final management is based on pathology

Endoscopic third ventriculostomy:

- It is performed by fenestration of the floor of the third ventricle, thus forming a passage between the third ventricle and prepontine cisterns.

- In most cases, a right frontal burr hole (just anterior to Kocher’s point) is performed, and the neuro endoscope is advanced until the ipsilateral lateral ventricle is reached. Through the ipsilateral foramen of Monro, the floor of the third ventricle (tuber cinereum) is fenestrated and expanded to permit adequate CSF flow.

- A biopsy is obtained from the posterior aspect of the third ventricle.

- If endoscopic third ventriculostomy fails, the definitive treatment is a ventricular shunt placement.

- ETV success score:

- 
              
- ETV success score uses three variables for its calculation; age, cause of hydrocephalus, and previous ventricular shunt placement. To calculate the success score, one must add up the percentage of success for each variable. The lowest score is 0% and the highest at 90%.
              
              
- Age: 
              
              
- 
                  
- <1 month = 0%
                  
                  
- 1 to 6 months = 10%
                  
                  
- 6 months to 1 year = 30%
                  
                  
- 1 to 10 years = 40%
                  
                  
- >10 years = 50%
                  
                

              
              
- Cause of hydrocephalus:
              
              
- 
                  
- Post-infectious = 0%
                  
                  
- Myelomeningocele, intraventricular hemorrhage, and non-tectal tumor = 20%
                  
                  
- Tectal tumor, aqueductal stenosis, or other = 30%
                  
                

              
              
- Previous ventricular shunt placement:
              
              
- 
                  
- Yes = 0%
                  
                  
- No = 10%

Definite treatment is based on the pathology:

- Surgical resection:

- 
              
- All pineal parenchymal tumors
              
              
- Mature teratoma
              
              
- Residual tumor after chemotherapy + radiotherapy (so-called “second-look surgery”)

- Radiotherapy (reserved for patients > 3 years old):

- 
              
- Germinoma

- Chemotherapy plus radiotherapy (chemotherapy alone if <3 years old):

- 
              
- Adjuvant chemotherapy plus radiotherapy are given to all tumors except pineocytoma and mature teratoma if complete resection is achieved.
              
              
- All non-germinomatous germ cell tumors
              
              
- Germinomatous germ cell tumors if <3 years old.

Surgical approach to the pineal region is chosen based on the specific location of pathology and surgeon preference:

- Paramedian infratentorial supracerebellar resection:

- 
              
- Useful for all pineal region tumors except for large tumors that extend laterally and inferiorly.
              
              
- Left-sided suboccipital craniotomy is performed to protect the torcula and the often more dominant right-sided veins and dural sinuses, including the transverse sinus.
              
              
- Most flexible approach for resection of most pineal region tumors.

- Midline infratentorial supracerebellar resection:

- 
              
- They are traditionally used for exposing pineal region tumors.
              
              
- Performed via a bilateral midline suboccipital craniotomy.
              
              
- Limitations of this approach include limited lateral or inferior visualization caused by the angle of the tentorium and the obstructive apex of the culmen, respectively. 
              
              
- Almost all midline bridging vermian veins are invariably sacrificed.

- Occipital transtentorial resection:

- 
              
- Particularly useful for large pineal region tumors that extend laterally and inferiorly.
              
              
- Performed through a unilateral occipital craniotomy.
              
              
- Limitations of this approach include difficulty with anatomic orientation, the need to divide the tentorium, and the possibility of a homonymous hemianopia from occipital lobe retraction.

It is crucial to screen the full neuroaxis with all pineal region tumors. Prognosis and treatment dramatically vary depending on the CSF spread of the tumor. Distant CSF seeding (except for germinoma), and drop metastasis have a poor prognosis. MRIs of the brain, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine with and without contrast is required for adequate screening of the neuraxis. Spinal radiotherapy as a prophylactic treatment is controversial.