By far, the most common indication for parotidectomy is the removal of a neoplasm. In 75% to 80% of cases, these neoplasms are benign and of primary parotid origin. Pleomorphic adenoma and Warthin tumors represent the majority of tumors, with pleomorphic adenoma representing the most common benign parotid tumor. Of malignant tumors, mucoepidermoid and adenoid cystic carcinoma are the two most common primary parotid tumors, in that order. Metastasis from a cutaneous primary represents the most common parotid malignancy in some series, notably in Australia

Every patient should be evaluated properly before surgery. History and physical exam are essential for optimal decision-making. Most patients are asymptomatic and present with an enlarging mass that was incidentally noted. Pain, if present, is not predictive of malignant histology.

The TNM staging system is frequently used for major salivary gland tumors. Aro, et al., analyzed the data of 4,520 patients from the United States National Cancer Database in an attempt the create an adapted lymph node staging system for salivary gland tumors. Mortality increased rapidly for every LN below 4 and at a slower pattern above 4. The staging system can also be criticized for encompassing all types of salivary gland tumors, while obviously, each histologic subtype behaves differently. The standard of care staging system remains the AJCC 8th edition, as of the date of this article.

Types of parotid surgery include

Extracapsular dissection: the facial nerve is not identified; the tumor is resected with the help of a facial nerve monitor (discussion beyond the scope of this chapter), used for benign lesions that are **not**pleomorphic adenoma.

Partial/superficial parotidectomy: the tumor is resected with a cuff of parotid tissue while identifying and preserving the facial nerve; used for benign lesions and lymph node metastasis into the superficial lobe.

Total parotidectomy: the entire gland is removed with identification and preservation of the facial nerve. Used for aggressive malignant tumors, deep lobe tumors, sentinel lymph node excision when located in the deep lobe, vascular malformations, or in large tumors where the distinction between superficial and deep lobes is unclear.

Radical parotidectomy: the entire gland, including the facial nerve, is removed, mostly used when preoperative facial paralysis is well established, or circumferential involvement of the nerve by malignant tumor is encountered. Simultaneous nerve grafting or other facial reanimation procedures can be employed in this situation.

The patient needs to be counseled before surgery about the risk of temporary or permanent facial paralysis, the need for a suction drain, compressive dressing, and the possibility of an aesthetic contour deformity at the site of surgery.