The two sensory circumventricular organs (CVO), SFO, and OVLT are in direct contact with the systemic circulation; this is because, unlike other neural parenchymal structures, these organs lack a normal blood-brain barrier.

- When the serum osmolality increases above the threshold limit, the TRPV1 and the TRPV4 receptors in the central and peripheral osmoreceptors respectively are stimulated, either by dehydration or by negative suction pressure.

- The variation in blood volume either stimulates the sympathetic nervous system or the release of renin from the kidney. As a result, the angiotensin II levels increase in blood. This angiotensin II activates the AT1R receptor in the SFO and OVLT, thereby regulating AVP release, thirst, and sodium intake.

Arginine vasopressin

Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is synthesized in the magnocellular cell bodies of the paraventricular nuclei and the supraoptic nuclei of the posterior hypothalamus. It then travels to the posterior pituitary along the supraoptic hypophyseal tract.

Thirst

When the SFO and OVLT neurons sense an increase in the serum osmolality above the permissible levels, they relay this signal to the insula and cingulate cortices via the paraventricular and mediodorsal thalamic nuclei. The cortex perceives these stimuli as thirst, a primal, and homeostatic inner feeling essential for survival - this further invokes emotional and behavioral responses to attain satiation or the need to quench thirst. As a result, the individual is conscious of the demand for water. Upon drinking, this emotion is satisfied by the effect of water on the tongue and the buccal mucosa, as well as the cognitive perception of fluid intake. The peripheral osmoreceptors via TRPV4 channels are also known to play a role in quenching thirst.