These are commonly performed procedures, and it is essential to understand and recognize that different fracture types and patient groups are better suited to the specific type of fixation/arthroplasty. There are some areas of debate on the finer points of the surgery, and these will be briefly considered.

**Bipolar versus Unipolar Hemiarthroplasty**

There is debate over the use of bipolar or unipolar implants. In bipolar implants, the femoral head is surrounded by a polyethylene liner within an acetabular shell within which it can move. Although a more expensive implant, studies suggest it confers benefits of reduced pain, less acetabular wear, and lower dislocation rates. It is also easier to convert to a total hip replacement should that be indicated in the future. Unipolar implants are simpler and less expensive. There is some evidence to suggest that over time the bipolar implant also loses movement at the inner bearing and eventually resembles a unipolar implant.

**Cemented versus Uncemented Hemiarthroplasty**

Cemented implants give better functional and mobility-related outcomes. It also confers greater stability but does carry an increased risk of a fat embolism which can cause hypoxemia. Despite this, research suggests that cemented stems carry a higher overall survival rate. The cement acts as a grout, creating an interface to distribute the load between the smooth surface of the femoral stem and the irregularities of the bone surface.

Uncemented implants carry a higher risk of periprosthetic fracture post and intra-operatively.

**SHS Lag Screw Positioning**

Tip apex distance is the sum of the distance from the tip of the screw to the apex of the femoral head on the AP and lateral views. Baumgaertner et al.