# Introduction

The semilunar sensory ganglion (also known as the trigeminal ganglion or Gasserian ganglion) is a thin, crescent-shaped structure situated in Meckel’s cave within the middle cranial fossa.

The ganglion contains the cell bodies of the sensory roots of the three major divisions of the trigeminal nerve (CN V); the ophthalmic nerve (V1 sensory), maxillary nerve (V2 sensory), and mandibular nerve (V3 motor and sensory). Trigeminal neuralgia, when refractory to medical treatment, can be effectively treated by percutaneous interventions at the semilunar ganglion by accessing the foramen ovale through the oral cavity and ablating the ganglion by radiofrequency, balloon compression, or chemical means.

# Structure and Function

The semilunar ganglion is a crescent-shaped structure located at the anterior, inferior, and lateral borders of Meckel’s cave, a dural recess formed between the dura propria and periosteal dura of the middle cranial fossa.

The convex border of the semilunar ganglion is located at the antero-infero-lateral walls of Meckel’s cave, while the concave border, which is also known as the sinus ganglion, is located postero-supero-medially in the direction of the trigeminal cistern and the ostium of Meckel’s cave. A layer of dura propria and arachnoid surrounds the semilunar ganglion. The posteromedial portion of the semilunar ganglion is situated in the trigeminal cistern while the anteroinferior portion is located outside of the trigeminal cistern as it adheres closely to the dura of the Meckel’s cavity medially, and the dura of the temporal fossa laterally.

The semilunar ganglion segregates into three divisions: the ophthalmic (V1), which is the dorsal division, maxillary (V2), which is the intermediate portion, and the mandibular (V3), which is the ventral division. The ophthalmic portion exits the semilunar ganglion and enters the orbit via the superior orbital fissure. It separates into the supraorbital, supratrochlear, and nasociliary nerves that provide innervation to the nose and forehead. The maxillary portion leaves the middle cranial fossa by passing through the foramen rotundum before branching multiple times to provide innervation via the infraorbital, palatine, zygomatic, and superior alveolar nerves.

The cellular composition of the semilunar ganglion is between 20,000 to 35,000 pseudo-unipolar neurons, with non-neuronal cells, such as glia and fibroblasts, outnumbering them by approximately 100 times.

The semilunar ganglion is essential for releasing many neuropeptides and signaling molecules. As a potent vasodilator, calcitonin gene-related peptide is the most prevalent among these neuropeptides and plays a vital role in the pathophysiology of cluster and migraine headaches.

# Embryology

The semilunar ganglion contains neurons that arise from two trigeminal placodes and the neural crest. In the chick, they are known as the ophthalmic and maxillomandibular trigeminal placodes, whereas in the Xenopus frog, they are known as the profundal and trigeminal placodes. In the chick, the ophthalmic placode has a small area of ectodermal thickenings divided across a broad area rostral to rhombomere one and gives rise to postmitotic neurons.

The first condensation of the semilunar ganglion forms by neural crest cells. In the chick, the ophthalmic placode can express Pax3 (also known as the paired domain transcription factor gene), Fgfr4, (also known as the fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 gene), and Neurogenin2 (also known as the proneural transcription factor gene) while the maxillomandibular trigeminal placode expresses Ngn1 (also known as the proneural transcription factor gene). Neurogenesis in the ophthalmic placode starts in the ten-somite stage with the expression of Ngn2. Researchers also found that even though the degree of separation between the ophthalmic and maxillomandibular trigeminal placodes augments with time, a definitive border between them does not exist even at the 16-somite level. Moreover, some cells along the border between the two placodes express Pax3 and Ngn1, which suggests these cells respond to ophthalmic and maxillomandibular placode-inducing signals.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Blood supply to the semilunar ganglion comes from the middle meningeal artery, accessory middle meningeal artery, the inferolateral trunk of the internal carotid artery, and the tentorial branch of the superior cerebellar artery. The trigeminal nerve root acquires vascular supply from the superolateral pontine artery, anterior inferior cerebellar artery, inferolateral or posterolateral pontine arteries, superior cerebellar artery, basilar artery, and trigeminocerebellar artery. The motor root and the ophthalmic portion of the sensory root usually receive blood supply from the superolateral pontine artery while the maxillary portion receives blood supply from the superolateral and inferolateral pontine arteries and the mandibular portion of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. Most of the blood supply to the semilunar ganglion is supplied by the middle meningeal artery and inferolateral trunk of the internal carotid artery.

As discussed previously, the superior petrosal sinus lies in close proximity to Meckel's cave and provides venous drainage of the cavernous sinus. It passes posterolaterally from this point to drain into the junction of the sigmoid and transverse sinuses.

# Muscles

Only the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve has a motor component. The mandibular branch provides motor innervation to the facial muscles involved in mastication, including the master, temporalis muscle, and lateral and medial pterygoids.

# Physiologic Variants

Reports indicate that the size of the semilunar ganglion varies from 14 to 22 mm in length and 4 to 5 mm in thickness. However, after taking into account the concave structure of the semilunar ganglion, the semilunar ganglion is 1.5 to 2 mm in thickness.

# Surgical Considerations

Targeting the semilunar ganglion in Meckel’s cave by utilizing anatomic landmarks or image-guided by fluoroscopy or computed tomography may be effective for patients with refractory facial pain due to trigeminal neuralgia, certain headaches, conditions such as recalcitrant herpes zoster ophthalmicus and postherpetic neuralgia. This option is generally considered when medical management with maximal oral analgesia (typically carbamazepine) has been trialed and not provided adequate pain relief. The procedure may also be an option in cases where neurosurgical management is not practical.

The procedure was first described by Belber et al. in 1987

Once access is gained, either balloon compression, glycerol infiltration, or radiofrequency thermocoagulation of the semilunar ganglion can be performed to provide a therapeutic effect.

# Clinical Significance

As stated previously, the semilunar ganglion plays a critical role in expressing various neuropeptides and signaling molecules that are important in gene expression, modulation of sensory information, and peripheral and central sensitization.

The semilunar ganglion is also known to become latently infected with the herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1).

The semilunar ganglion is also known to incur damage in patients with the trigeminal trophic syndrome (TTS).