When diagnosed early, classic PKU can be treated by life-long dietary therapy focused on maintaining low Phe levels and adequate Tyr intake.  These dietary interventions are generally effective at preventing the most severe cognitive impairment due to high Phe levels. Nevertheless, dietary therapy for PKU has been associated with deficiencies in selenium, copper, magnesium, and zinc.

The management of PKU is complex and dietary non-adherence often increases in adolescence and early adulthood, particularly due to social issues. Besides a low Phe diet, promising drugs are being developed for PKU. Oral sapropterin dihydrochloride (KUVAN), a synthetic form of BH4, could help lower Phe levels in some PKU patients. It is not yet possible to predict which PKU patients are BH4 responders, but a 30-day trial can be undertaken to make this determination. Encouragingly, sapropterin dihydrochloride treatment improves brain function in some PKU patients.

Enzyme replacement therapy for PKU has not been possible since PAH is unstable. The FDA has recently approved an enzyme substitution therapy for PKU. In this approach, a “substitution” enzyme is delivered to the PKU patient that can lower Phe levels. This substitution enzyme is a PEGylated phenylalanine ammonia lyase (called pegvaliase) that degrades Phe. Pegvaliase is approved only for adult patients having uncontrolled phenylalanine levels. It is not yet clear if pegvaliase will permit a less strict dietary regimen or be of long-range benefit in preventing or reversing cognitive impairment.

Women of childbearing age with PKU should receive counseling concerning the benefits of strict dietary therapy both before and during pregnancy. Elevated maternal Phe levels during pregnancy may cause fetal brain damage and congenital heart disease.

Treatment of IEMs has traditionally relied on treating the nutritional and/or metabolic environment, for example, replacement enzyme therapy, rather than the genetic disorder itself. Rapid advances in gene therapy and its safety may one day be possible.