To enhance healthcare team outcomes, measures should aim to provide the safest yet most effective intervention for the patient. Different improvement strategies aiming to improve patient care and healthcare team outcomes can be implemented and divided into preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative.

Preoperative measures start in the emergency department once the patient arrives or in the outpatient clinic. An interprofessional approach to patient care after successful communication between the neurosurgeon, emergency department physician, internal medicine physician, or cardiologist improves outcomes.

Intraoperatively, effective communication between the team members in the operating room is always needed. This communication will ensure the correct patient is operated, on and the correct procedure is performed on the right side, minimizing potential errors or mistakes. Patient safety should be the top priority at all times. All personnel needs to know the procedure to be performed and how it is performed. For intraoperative neuromonitoring, technicians become part of the essential team that will provide the best care for the patient. Experienced neurosurgeons provide the patient with the best result and outcomes for those complicated and rare cases. Neuroanesthesiologists are very important during the wake-up process to avoid coughing or agitation to prevent bleeding into the surgical area.

During the postoperative period, once the patient wakes up from anesthesia, nursing personnel from the recovery room and intensive care unit communicate to transfer and receive the patient. Pharmacists will also become an integral part of the team needed for the essential care of the patient by providing treatment recommendations and modifications.