Awareness of excited delirium syndrome as well as its management is essential for all members of the inter-professional team. It is crucial for law enforcement officers to be aware of this condition and to be able to recognize both the condition and its potentially fatal nature. EMS personnel not only need to identify, diagnose, and initially manage these patients, but also need to develop effective measures for personal protection.

Apart from medication management, the patient's environment plays a vital role as these patients should be kept in a quiet setting. Familiar objects can be brought from home and placed in the hospital room. The room should have adequate sunlight. Family and friends are encouraged to talk, orient, and reassure patients frequently.  Nurses should educate the family about the disorder limit traffic to the room and pay close attention to the vital and neuro signs. Nurses will also have the most contact with the patient and can monitor status, look for adverse effects of drugs, and engage the patient as needed. All nursing findings should be charted and communicated to the physicians over the case. The pharmacist should ensure the discontinuation of any drug with adverse CNS effects, in addition to performing full medication reconciliation, and reporting their findings to the managing physician.

All members of the care team in the emergency department and inpatient teams, including nurses, technicians, and physicians, need to learn how to safely and effectively recognize and treat patients with excited delirium. The entire interprofessional team should develop the care plan and the patient's course closely monitored by the nurses with frequent reporting to the team — the earlier the treatment, the better the outcomes. A collaborative team approach is necessary for optimal success. [Level 5] However, because many of these patients have other co-morbidity, the eventual outcome is guarded.