As on Earth, diet and exercise are key to health maintenance and wellness in the aerospace environment; although, the size and weight restrictions as well as limitations posed by a microgravity environment present significant challenges to overcome.

The numerous stressors in space are all exacerbated by mission length. An exploration mission to Mars is expected to take on the order of 2.5 years. Extreme isolation and austere surroundings would be intensified by processed, pre-packaged food and a monotonous menu. The preservation process, removing water and reducing temperature/time restrictions results in food that is blander to the palate and eye. It also concentrates, among other things, salt, so the food consumed by space crews is at risk of being less healthy than a diet of fresh produce which, at present, is ideal though not feasible.

The logistics of carrying and preserving every meal to meet the needs of an entire crew (four to six or more) for the length of a deep space mission, and allowing for any unforeseen problems, is daunting. Using shuttle weight restrictions for food of 3.8 pounds (1.7 kg) per crew member per day, allowing for six astronauts and 2.5 years, means the rocket taking explorers to Mars would have to allow for an additional 20,805 lbs at takeoff! Pre-positioning meals at Lagrange points as well as on the planet surface is a consideration; however, time and radiation may degrade food quality and nutrients. Of significance, loss or destruction of the pre-positioned supplies would be catastrophic.

Rather than aggravate the psychologic impact of an expected Spartan existence, mealtime should be embraced as an opportunity for providing nutrition while simultaneously promoting an environment of rest, diversion, rejuvenation, comradery, and social interaction.

Greenhouse analogs are being developed to provide fresh vegetables for astronaut consumption, the Veggie system on the United States side and the Lada system on the Russian side of the ISS. In addition to nutrition and atmospheric recycling, the benefits of gardening in space fulfill other important human needs such as the positive psychological impact of augmenting an otherwise austere, sterile environment as well as the positive emotional impact of caring for and cohabitating with living organisms. Moreover, artificially creating agricultural seasons of planting, growth, and harvest would also be an effective method to mark the passage of time on deep space missions.

Bioregenerative food production systems, therefore, will have a significant positive effect on long-duration, exploration missions.

A significant effect of microgravity is the consequential fluid shift which results in nasal congestion adversely affecting taste. As a result, the visual component of eating is of increased importance and space travelers will have a greater appreciation for piquant foods in their diet.

While diet and exercise are the cornerstones of health maintenance and wellness in the hostile environment of aerospace, an important consideration is the deleterious effects of radiation. Once leaving the protective atmosphere and magnetosphere of Earth, astronauts are subjected to solar and cosmic radiation, so engineering controls to provide shielding are paramount. Solar radiation includes ultraviolet rays, x-rays, protons, and electrons. Cosmic radiation emanates from every direction in deep space and consists of high-energy protons and atomic nuclei which are far more energetic, and therefore more damaging than solar radiation. Because of current concerns of lifetime radiation exposure and resulting cancer, astronauts selected for a long duration, deep space mission will likely be older.

Finally, engineering controls are vital to protecting food from the adverse effects of radiation so that when consumed after long storage, whether onboard ship or pre-placed, nutrient content will be maintained and quality will be preserved.