Secukinumab comes formulated as lyophilized powder of 150 mg in a vial, prefilled syringe, or a sensory-ready pen that requires storage at a cool temperature (2 to 8 degrees C).

Before administration, the pen or prefilled syringe must be kept aside for 20 to 30 mins until it reaches room temperature. Next, product reconstitution is performed with 10 ml sterile distilled water, followed by gentle stirring to dissolve the powder, and kept aside for 10 mins. Finally, the solution must be inspected to be free of residual particles or discoloration, and administration must follow promptly.

A specialist physician should administer secukinumab while performing routine disease monitoring. It is given subcutaneously at sites such as the upper arm, thigh, and abdomen while avoiding sites of previous injection or tender, bruised, inflamed, indurated, or lesional skin.

The drug's pharmacokinetic profile is such that it will attain peak concentrations after 5-6 days and a two-fold increase achieved after monthly dosing that becomes stable after 20 weeks. The average bioavailability is 73%, while the distribution is primarily peripheral, thereby increasing its specificity. The half-life is 27 days, with its elimination being dose and time-dependent.

**Adult Dosing**

- Plaque psoriasis: 300 mg subcutaneous injection at 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks is given, followed by 300 mg SC injection every four weeks.

- Psoriatic arthritis: Two regimens may be followed, with or without the loading dose. With loading dose, 150 mg is given subcutaneously at weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4: followed by a dose every four weeks. Without loading dose, 150 mg via subcutaneous route at intervals of 4 weeks. In case of suboptimal response, clinicians can consider a dosage of 300 mg every four weeks.

- Ankylosing spondylitis: Two regimens may be followed, with and without a loading dose. With loading dose, 150 mg is given subcutaneously at weeks 0,1,2,3, and 4: followed by a dose every four weeks. Without loading dose, 150 mg via subcutaneous route at intervals of 4 weeks. In case of no response, up-dosing to 300 mg is an option.

- Non-Radiographic Axial Spondyloarthritis: Administer secukinumab with or without a loading dosage by subcutaneous injection. A Loading dose regimen is 150 mg at weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 and every four weeks after that. Without loading dose, 150 mg via subcutaneous route at intervals of 4 weeks.

- Enthesitis-Related Arthritis: The dose of secukinumab is based on body weight. Secukinumab is administered by subcutaneous injection at weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4, followed by a dose every four weeks. For patients weighing ≥ 15 kg and < 50 kg, the suggested dose is 75 mg. For patients weighing ≥ 50 kg, the suggested dose is 150 mg.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**According to product labeling, no clinical trial of the effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of secukinumab has been conducted.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**According to product labeling, no clinical trial of the effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of secukinumab has been conducted.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**According to product labeling, limited human data on secukinumab use in pregnant women is inadequate to inform a drug-associated risk of adverse developmental outcomes. However, preclinical embryo-fetal development studies observed no adverse outcomes after subcutaneous secukinumab administration during organ development at 30 times MRHD(maximum recommended human dose). In addition, another study found no potential safety signals regarding spontaneous abortions or congenital malformations. However, the limitations of this research were a large amount of missing outcome data and the relatively short exposure to secukinumab.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**There is a lack of information concerning the clinical use of secukinumab during breastfeeding. As secukinumab has a high molecular weight and is a big protein molecule, the concentration in maternal milk is likely to be very low. Secukinumab is also probably partially destroyed in the infant's gastrointestinal tract. However, significant research is still needed. Hence, clinicians should be cautious while prescribing secukinumab during breastfeeding.