Salmeterol comes in a variety of dosing forms and strengths. The most common form is a fixed-dose combination containing both fluticasone propionate and salmeterol. As salmeterol monotherapy is contraindicated in the treatment of asthma, clinicians often use fixed-dose combinations to ensure adherence to both drugs.

Salmeterol is currently available as an oral inhalation powder and an oral inhalation aerosol. Inhalation powder is available in 3 doses of fluticasone (100 mcg, 250 mcg, 500 mcg) and a fixed dose (50 mcg) of salmeterol. An aerosol metered-dose inhaler (MDI) is also available in 3 doses of fluticasone (45 mcg, 115 mcg, 230 mcg) and a fixed-dose (21 mcg) of salmeterol. A hydrofluoralkane propellant delivers the metered-dose inhaler. In an active-controlled, 12-week trial, improvements in morning peak expiratory flow (PEF) observed with 500/50 mcg formulation was similar to improvements seen with the 230/21 formulation. Though the mechanism of delivery and dose vary, research showed efficacy to be similar across treatments.

For the treatment of asthma in patients aged 12 years and older, one inhalation of fluticasone/salmeterol 100/50, 250/50, 500/50 mcg inhalation powder is taken twice daily.

For the treatment of asthma in children between the ages of 4 and 11, the standard recommendation is one inhalation of fluticasone/ salmeterol 100/50 mcg twice daily.

For maintenance treatment of bronchospasm associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the recommendation is one inhalation 250/50 mcg twice daily, approximately 12 hours apart.

For the prevention of exercise-induced bronchospasm (EIB), single-agent administration of salmeterol inhalation powder may be clinically indicated in patients without persistent asthma. In these cases, one inhalation of 50 mcg, taken 20 to 30 minutes before exercise, has been shown to protect against EIB. Generally, the desired bronchodilation effects last 9 hours in adults and 12 hours in patients 4 to 11 years old. In patients with persistent asthma, monotherapy is contraindicated.