Causes of elevated unconjugated bilirubin are vast. The most common cause is physiologic jaundice. Physiologic jaundice presents around day 2 or 3 with serum bilirubin of less than 12 mg/dL, mainly unconjugated. It commonly disappears by the end of the first week and happens in 60% of term and 80% of preterm infants because of limited ability to conjugate bilirubin.

Jaundice in the first 24 hours after birth is not physiologic jaundice and needs further evaluation. Early-onset breastfeeding jaundice is the most common cause of pathologic unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Breastfeeding can potentiate physiologic jaundice in the first week of life because of caloric deprivation, leading to an increase in enterohepatic circulation and thus a decrease in bilirubin reabsorption via the gut. Successful breastfeeding every 2 to 3 hours while monitoring stool and urine output to determine if the infant is feeding adequately significantly decreases the risk of hyperbilirubinemia.

Breast milk jaundice occurs after the first week of life and is secondary to breast milk’s ability to inhibit 2,3 UDP glucuronyltransferase, the enzyme responsible for conjugating bilirubin.

Genetic causes of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia include Gilbert syndrome, which presents with jaundice later in life following mild illnesses, fasting, or physical stress. Gilbert syndrome is due to a UDP glucuronosyltransferase defect. Crigler-Najjar is due to an absence or decrease in UDP glucuronosyltransferase.

Other causes due to an increase in bilirubin production, similar to Rh/ABO incompatibility, include enzyme defects (glucose-6-phosphate deficiency and pyruvate kinase deficiency), structural defects (spherocytosis and elliptocytosis), birth trauma (cephalohematoma and excessive bruising), and polycythemia.

The work-up for indirect hyperbilirubinemia includes CBC, reticulocyte count, blood smear, serum haptoglobin, direct and indirect Coombs test, hemoglobin electrophoresis, red cell enzyme assay, and spherocytosis test.