The management of pneumonia requires an interprofessional team. The reason is that most patients are managed as outpatients, but if not properly treated, the morbidity and mortality are high.

Besides administering antibiotics, these patients often require chest physical therapy, a dietary consult, physical therapy to help regain muscle mass, and a dental consult. The key is to educate the patient on the discontinuation of smoking and abstaining from alcohol.

Patients need to be referred to a dietitian to ensure that they are eating healthy.

Further, the clinicians should encourage patients to get appropriate influenza and pneumococcal vaccines. The pharmacist should teach about antibiotic compliance and ensure that the patient is prescribed the right antibiotics aimed at the target organism. An infectious disease specialty-trained pharmacist is particularly helpful in assisting the team with difficult antibiotic treatment choices. Nursing can counsel on the appropriate dosing and administration of medications and answer patient questions, as well as charting treatment progress and reporting any issues to the clinician managing the case.

Finally, it is important to educate the patient to follow up with clinicians if they want a complete resolution of the infectious process.

**Outcomes**

In healthy people, the outcome after bacterial pneumonia is excellent. However, in people with advanced age, lung disease, immunosuppression, infection with aggressive gram-negative organisms (Klebsiella), and other comorbidities, the outcomes are usually poor. When pneumonia is left untreated, it carries mortality in excess of 25%. Pneumonia can also lead to extensive lung damage and leads to residual impairment in lung function. Other reported complications of pneumonia that occur in 1 to 5% of patients include lung abscess, empyema, and bronchiectasis.