**HPV VACCINATION**

There are three HPV vaccines available. These are

1. Quadrivalent against HPV types 6,11,16 and 18

2. 9-Valent against 6,11,16,18,31,33,45,52 and 58

3. Bivalent against 16 and 18

HPV vaccination is recommended in both males and females. As men cannot develop cervical cancer, but the HPV vaccine may prevent or reduce the risk of genital diseases such as genital warts, penile cancer, anal cancer, and the spread of HPV to sexual partners. It is not recommended in pregnant patients due to inadequate evidence of safety. These vaccines provide excellent seroconversion rates (93 to 100 % in females and 99-100 % in males). Higher antibody titers are obtained for younger individuals. Mild injection site reactions can be expected. It is not effective in clearing out HPV infections, warts, or intraepithelial neoplasia that is already present.

ACIP (Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices) Vaccination Recommendation For HPV

The 9-valent vaccine is the recommended one. For individuals less than15 years of age, two doses are recommended that should be six months apart. For more than 15 years and immunocompromised, three doses are recommended at 0, 1, or 2 and six months. The optimal time to administer the HPV vaccine is before sexual debut. The recommended age of HPV vaccination is from 11 to 12 years of age. For 13-26 years, catch-up vaccination is recommended if HPV vaccination not previously received or completed. For older adults, catch-up vaccination is usually not recommended. For more than 26 years, the decision to vaccinate is an individual one. But it can be considered in 27-45 year individuals if there is a high-risk. Most insurance providers do no cover HPV immunization in more than 26 years old.

Various trials have been performed to demonstrate the effect of HPV vaccination in patients treated with excision for CIN 2+. Meta-analysis and systematic review of these studies have shown a decreased recurrence of any grade CIN in vaccinated patients who were CIN 2+ treated than those who were unvaccinated ( 6 versus 10 percent)

**Treatment Options For CIN 2,3**

- Local ablative therapy: Cryosurgery, fulguration/electrocoagulation, laser ablation.

- Excision of abnormal tissue (diagnostic/therapeutic): Cold knife conization, laser conization, LLETZ (large loop excision of the transformational zone), Loop electrosurgical excision procedure.

- Surgery: Hysterectomy, hysterectomy with removal of vaginal cuff if CIN extends to the vaginal wall.

**Treatment Of Invasive Cervical Cancer**

**Early-Stage Cervical Cancer**: This includes FIGO ( international federation of gynecology and obstetrics) stages IA1, IA2, IB1, and IB2. The preferred management options are as follows:

- 1A1 With No Intermediate Or High-Risk Features: Cone biopsy or extra-fascial hysterectomy

- 1A2-1B2: Modified radical hysterectomy with or without adjuvant therapy. Alternatives to modified radical hysterectomy include fertility-sparing surgery (conization, simple trachelectomy, or radical trachelectomy) in women who are in the reproductive age group. For those who cannot undergo surgery (co-morbidities or poor functional status), the preferred option is primary radiotherapy (RT) with or without chemotherapy.

Now those who undergo modified radical hysterectomy, adjuvant treatment if following risk factors are present:

For those having intermediate-risk factors (i.e., tumor size more than4cm; lymphovascular space invasion or deep cervical stromal invasion, RT is recommended.

For those with high-risk factors (pathologically positive lymph nodes, parametrial invasion, positive surgical margins), chemoradiation is recommended.

**Locally-Advanced Cervical Cancer:**This includes FIGO stage IB3, stage II, stage III, stage IVA. There is an initial pretreatment evaluation required before the recommended chemoradiation (weekly cisplatin- (40 mg/m^2) with RT) for locally advanced cancer for the following purposes:

- Lymph node assessment by PET/CT scan to determine nodal metastases and accordingly design radiation fields.

- If the PET/CT scan reveals positive para-aortic nodal involvement, confirmation of nodal metastases is done by CT-guided biopsy, or an F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake, or a lymphadenectomy.

- Non-contrast CT/MRI in case of elevated creatinine/renal insufficiency to determine the cause of urinary tract obstruction (obstruction due to tumor or due to intrinsic renal disease). Hydronephrosis or kidney dysfunction is diagnostic of stage III, before chemoradiation treatment, treatment of urinary obstruction known to improve progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS).

For women undergoing chemoradiation, treatment must be completed in eight weeks. Radiotherapy is delivered via External beam Radiotherapy (EBRT). Cervical brachytherapy can also be considered to maximize local control.

**Recurrent/ Metastatic Cervical Cancer:**About 15 to 61 % of women treated for early-stage cervical cancer develop distant metastases and multiple recurrences. For any suspected case of metastases/recurrence, a PET scan/CT scan is done to identify the metastases. It can be a locoregional recurrence (disease isolated to the pelvis) or disease involving other organs outside of the pelvis. A vaginal recurrence, if suspected, then the suspected area is biopsied to prove the recurrent disease. The treatment options include hysterectomy or pelvic exenteration for those previously treated with radiotherapy. RT will be preferred in those who are non-surgical candidates provided they haven't already received RT. If the patient is a non-surgical candidate and has previously received RT, chemotherapy is the preferred option.

- Local Recurrence: Surgical resection will be carried out in the appropriate surgical candidates. RT plus chemotherapy is an acceptable alternative for non-surgical candidates, provided they have not received any radiotherapy previously.

- For disease limited to the nodes (para-aortic/supraclavicular lymph nodes): The options are systemic chemotherapy or RT with/without chemotherapy. The choice depends on patient preference and institutional practice.

- Isolated metastatic disease (e.g., involving the lung, liver): Surgical resection is preferred through which sustained clinical remission is possible to achieve.

- For patients who have recurrent cervical cancer along with metastases and are not surgical candidates, first-line therapy is chemotherapy plus bevacizumab. The preferred chemotherapy is a platinum-based regimen (cisplatin plus paclitaxel, carboplatin plus paclitaxel is an acceptable alternative for those with kidney disease or previous treatment with cisplatin). For those who are not candidates for combination therapy or those in whom first-line treatment fails, treatment with a single chemotherapeutic agent is recommended.