# Continuing Education Activity

Pentosan polysulfate (PPS) is a commonly used medication to treat interstitial cystitis, also known as bladder pain syndrome. In 2018 it was first associated with a progressive retinal pigmentary maculopathy, a finding which was later corroborated by several other large studies. PPS maculopathy (PPSM) can cause severe visual impairment by decreasing visual acuity and causing nyctalopia. PPSM is generally not reversible and can be progressive even once discontinued. This activity reviews the evaluation and etiology of PPSM and highlights techniques to help diagnose the condition earlier with specific imaging modalities.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pattern of imaging findings consistent with pentosan polysulfate maculopathy.
- Identify the currently accepted guidelines for screening patients taking pentosan polysulfate.
- Explain the pathophysiology of pentosan polysulfate maculopathy.
- Review the available treatments for pentosan polysulfate maculopathy.

# Introduction

Pentosan polysulfate (PPS) is a semisynthetic pentasaccharide heparinoid with anticoagulant properties and was initially used in the 1950s as a thrombolytic due to the ability of the molecule to bind the glycocalyx of circulating red blood cells.

Interstitial cystitis is characterized by bladder pain (suprapubic, pelvic, urethral, vaginal, or perineal) caused by filling and relieved by emptying with petechial bladder mucosal hemorrhages on endoscopy and decreased bladder compliance on urodynamics.

Twenty-two years after its approval as a second-line agent for interstitial cystitis, a six-patient case series described a progressive maculopathy associated with long-term use of the drug, an association that researchers have demonstrated and characterized multiple times.

# Etiology

Studies agree that the duration of PPS use, which correlates strongly with cumulative exposure to PPS, might be the most important risk factor for developing PPSM.

As alluded to previously, these studies include patients from when they are diagnosed as having PPSM, not when they become symptomatic, so the onset of the disease is likely earlier.

The daily dose and dose per unit of body weight are also not infrequently discussed as potential enablers of toxicity. Regarding the former, in one study, a higher mean daily dose was found among affected patients (445 g vs. 302 g).

# Epidemiology

Patients with PPSM are predominantly white (93%), female (90%) adults (mean age 62.2 +/- 13.2 years).

Notwithstanding these limitations, the prevalence of PPSM among those who have used PPS ranges between 0.7% to 2.4% and 3.4% in large-scale retrospective studies from insurance claims databases, however, these studies likely underestimate the true prevalence because patients would have to have been diagnosed with another retinal disease, and length of follow-up in the databases limits the ability to find an association between PPS and a retinal disorder.

Among larger prospective screening studies on known PPS users, the prevalence is estimated between 16.5% to 23.1%, although these may overestimate the true prevalence because of selection bias.

# Pathophysiology

PPS has been proposed to cause this characteristic maculopathy by direct toxicity to the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) or choroid, although other mechanisms have been proposed. The former is thought to be due to PPS interfering with the interaction of the retina's extracellular matrix (ECM) or its regulators, notably fibroblast growth factor (FGF). The second is postulated to be due to changes in the choroidal vasculature, specifically the choriocapillaris. These findings are perhaps best supported by imaging which consistently finds a primary abnormality in these layers, as well as the finding of progression despite drug cessation.

The ECM in the retina includes a specific area, the interphotoreceptor matrix (IPM), which, especially via its large glycosylated proteins, including chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, SPACR, and SPACRCAN, is responsible for intracellular communication, the delivery of signaling molecules, nutrients and metabolism, maintenance of retina adhesion, photoreceptor alignment, and the transport regulation of oxygen.

PPS has been shown to interact with cartilage proteoglycans in experimental animal models of arthritis to the extent that it was approved as a disease-modifying antirheumatic agent for veterinarians.

One additional component of the ECM and IPM is the FGFs which bind to heparin and heparan sulfate.

When FGF signaling is inhibited in transgenic zebrafish, there is a significant thickening of the RPE layer as the cells grow to contact the outer segments of the photoreceptors.

The differences between FGFR inhibition via chemotherapeutic targeting and the effects of PPS include that the SRF from the former starts an average of 21 days after starting the medication, the SRF will often resolve without discontinuation of the medicine, and there were no changes (in one case report) to choroidal vasculature.

More recent research using optical coherence tomography–angiography (OCT-A) to characterize choroidal vasculature in PPS-exposed patients who have no other findings of PPSM has shown increased vascular flow deficits within the choriocapillaris and decreased choroidal stroma in the deeper Haller and Sattler layers, leading to an increased choroidal vascular index (CVI = choroidal luminal area / luminal + stromal area). As the authors point out, this could be due to the choriocapillaris being a secondary target of PPSM or a secondary effect of the disrupted RPE.

The fact that these flow voids are detectable in patients without other stigmata of the disease lends credence to the choriocapillaris being a primary site of injury, as ischemic changes would only be expected to progress. Further, the evidence that visual acuity is spared despite these changes in the choriocapillaris flow may support this argument as well.

Other proposals for the pathogenesis of PPSM include mitochondrial dysfunction (based on phenotypic similarity) and that there may be an undefined common cause of interstitial cystitis, making the maculopathy unrelated to PPS exposure.

In sum, the ECM of the RPE and the choroidal vasculature contain numerous constituents that either have been shown to be affected by PPS or have theoretical interactions based on the structure of PPS. Therefore, the pathogenesis of PPSM is likely located in this area.

# History and Physical

Patients with PPSM will report a history of chronic use of PPS, which they may have already discontinued. If they are unable to report the use of the medication, they may also report having used a drug to help with bladder pain.

Although patients can be asymptomatic, they may also present with any of the following symptoms in order of decreasing frequency: decreased visual acuity, nyctalopia, metamorphopsia, paracentral scotoma, and delayed dark adaptation.

Regarding visual acuity, the decrease experienced by patients is typically mild, with many studies reporting an average of 20/25 unless the patchy areas of the atrophic retina coalesce into the central fovea.

Delayed dark adaptation was also studied objectively, and although many patients were found to have an increased rod intercept time, the wide variability of the results caused the test to have a low sensitivity for detecting PPSM.

Patients are not affected by decreased contrast sensitivity until late in the disease state.

# Evaluation

Anterior segment examination is predominantly within normal limits for patients of this age.

The pattern is most striking on autofluorescence, which shows a typically well-circumscribed area of small densely-packed hyper and hypoautofluorescent spots.

On OCT, the co-localized yellowish pigment on fundus examination and the hyperautofluorescent lesions correspond to nodular RPE abnormalities and excrescences, which cast a shadow onto the underlying choroid (thereby differentiating them from drusen).

Near Infrared Reflectance (NIR), which is co-acquired with OCT, is often highly effective in showing the characteristic lesions in mild forms of the disease, including when FAF findings are inconclusive.

On OCT-A, PPSM additionally has many characteristic findings which may hint at the ultimate pathophysiology of the disease. PPSM is associated with abnormal foveal avascular zone (FAZ) configurations and decreased choriocapillaris perfusion in patients with later stages of the disease. These areas of decreased perfusion were shown to have a flow void average of 54%, compared to 14% in non-PPSM patients, and they correspond to areas of outer retinal atrophy.

A separate analysis of the stroma on OCT-A found a decreased stromal choroidal area with a preserved stromal luminal area, yielding an increased choroidal vascularity index. These changes on OCT-A may be utilized to detect patients with forme fruste PPSM, as increased flow voids were found in 15 patients with greater than 1000 g of PPS exposure who had no other findings on retinal imaging.

When tested on electroretinography (ERG), patients can have nonspecific responses ranging from normal to mild attenuation of amplitude in code and rod responses with variable delay in response.

Multiple studies have included genetic testing for patients with PPSM to rule out other maculopathies. While none have found clear associations, some wonder if there may be a genetic predisposition to having a more severe phenotype.RP1 gene who presented with geographic atrophy and count fingers vision.

Based on these results, Barnes and colleagues proposed six diagnostic criteria:

- Macular hyperpigmented spots with yellow-orange deposits and patchy RPE atrophy on fundus photography.

- Densely packed clusters of hyperautofluorescent and hypoautofluorescent areas within the posterior pole on FAF.

- Focal thickening of the RPE with hyper-reflectance on NIR.

- The peripapillary hypoautofluorescent halo.

- Maximum size of the hyperautofluorescent spots of two venule widths.

- Absence of typical drusen.

Further, based on their work, Wang and colleagues proposed the following guidelines for defining disease severity:

- Mild: Speckled pattern on FAF without well-demarcated atrophic lesions on FAF and no evidence of complete RPE and outer retinal atrophy.

- Moderate: The lesions are well-demarcated, nummular, and co-localized with RPE and outer retinal atrophy, but there is no central foveal involvement.

- Severe: Well-demarcated lesions with associated hypoautofluorescent atrophy with RPE and outer retinal atrophy, which involves the central fovea.

Hanif and colleagues proposed a similar classification of severity:

- Disease within the vascular arcades and without areas of atrophy.

- Disease extending to the vascular arcades but not more than two-disc diameters beyond or the presence of non-central atrophy.

- Disease which extends more than two-disc diameters beyond the temporal arcades or the presents of central foveal atrophy.

Of these, the former group found a correlation between disease severity and cumulative dosage; however, the sample size was too small to make any conclusion.

# Treatment / Management

There is no known treatment for PPSM; therefore, primary prevention is imperative with medication avoidance or using the lowest effective dose if necessary. The sight-threatening sequelae of PPSM can be treated with common medications already used to address those conditions. For example, patients with cystoid macular edema have been successfully treated with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and anti-VEGF drugs, and patients with choroidal neovascular membranes have been treated with intravitreal anti-VEGF medications.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of PPSM, and the primary methods of differentiating it from these conditions, are listed below:

**Age-Related Macular Degeneration**

PPSM and AMD are both characterized by patients with similar demographics and pigmentary macular changes, which can progress to geographic atrophy. The two entities can be differentiated via multi-modal imaging and identification of the typical pattern of PPSM.

Specifically, hyperpigmented macular spots with yellow-orange deposits, which are at the level of the RPE and not below, along with dense packing of hyper-and hypo-autofluorescent spots on FAF, especially with a peripapillary autofluorescent halo, best describe PPSM. On the other hand, AMD can be identified by drusen, which is below the RPE. In one study comparing these diagnoses, no macular drusen were found in eyes that were diagnosed with PPSM, whereas RPE pigmentary clumps were more frequently found in AMD eyes of patients with prior PPS exposure.

**Pattern Dystrophy**

When differentiating PPSM from other pattern dystrophies, the same framework from above is used; however, special attention is paid to three features in patients with borderline imaging.

Inquiring about the family history or performing genetic testing can be useful in cases that are not elucidated by these three findings.

**Mitochondrial Dystrophy**

Additionally, there is a phenotypic overlap between PPSM and mitochondrial retinopathies, including reticulated-appearing fundus, peripapillary atrophy, and nyctalopia. One difference that may be seen between these diseases is that PPSM does not necessarily spare the fovea early in the disease, whereas mitochondrial illnesses will. Further, mitochondrial illnesses will often have systemic manifestations which are not seen in PPSM, such as muscle weakness (e.g., cardiomyopathy).

# Prognosis

PPSM is a progressive maculopathy that leads to areas of RPE atrophy which can decrease visual acuity, causing legal blindness, in addition to other visually debilitating symptoms such as nyctalopia, metamorphopsia, a paracentral scotoma, and delayed dark adaptation.

# Complications

In addition to decreased visual acuity from RPE atrophy, the sight-threatening sequelae of PPSM include CME, subfoveal vitelliform deposits, and macular neovascular membranes.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

In addition to educating urologists and urogynecologists on this condition, various proposals for screening guidelines for PPSM have been proposed, and all generally agree on baseline testing at the initiation of the drug, annual testing thereafter, and collaborative decision-making about drug discontinuation when patients have a cumulative dose of greater than 1500 g. At each screening appointment with the ophthalmologist, various imaging modalities should be used, including NIR, FAF, and OCT-A, if possible.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While no large-scale interventional studies to discontinue PPS have been conducted, experts agree that communication between urologists, urogynecologists, and ophthalmologists should be codified to screen PPS patients continuously.