When evaluating a skin lesion on the eyelid, the following questions are important to ask the patient:

- How long has the lesion been present?

- Have you noticed the lesion changing color, size or shape?

- Does the lesion cause pain or irritation?

- Has the lesion bled or drained any fluid or purulent material?

- Do you have any other similar skin lesions on other parts of your body?

- Have you had a similar lesion in the past on the eyelid?

- Do you have a history of skin cancer?

- When patients present with eyelid papillomas, they typically have been present for months to years. These lesions do not grow rapidly, and patients do not notice them changing in character over time. Occasionally the patient can feel the papilloma from the weight of the eyelid, or the lesion can get mildly inflamed, but chronic or severe inflammation of the lesion is uncharacteristic of a papilloma. Papillomas do not bleed or drain purulent material unless the lesion was picked at by the patient and it subsequently became infected. A history of skin cancer in a patient should prompt the clinician to monitor for suspicious characteristics of the lesion more closely.

When performing the physical exam, it is important to perform the following evaluations:

- Examine the surrounding skin for additional skin lesions.

- Feel facial/neck lymph nodes to assess for lymphadenopathy.

- Using the slit lamp, examine lesion for the destruction of nearby tissues (skin ulceration, destruction of Meibomian glands, or eyelash loss (madarosis). Note any telangiectasia of the lesion, whitening of nearby eyelashes (poliosis), destruction of Meibomian glands. Evert eyelids to look for disruption of palpebral conjunctiva.

Physical exam finding for papillomas will vary slightly depending on the type.

**Squamous papilloma:**This is a soft, flesh-colored lesion that is generally smooth, round and/or pedunculated.

**Seborrheic keratosis:**Classically has a “stuck on” appearance and can have varying degrees of pigmentation. Lesions tend to vary from a pink or flesh color to dark brown. These lesions are well circumscribed and are usually slightly elevated.

**Pseudoepitheliomatous Hyperplasia**

These lesions are often reactive processes in response to trauma, wound, burn, pharmaceutical agents, etc. that can appear similar to basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma. These lesions are usually elevated on the skin with an irregular surface and occasionally ulceration or crusting.

**Inverted Follicular Keratosis**

This is normally a solitary lesion affecting the eyelid margin. It may or may not be pigmented and has been described as either nodular or papillary in appearance.

**Verruca vulgaris:**Flesh-colored skin growth. The superior portion of the lesion can have very tiny, fingerlike projections that are sometimes visible without magnification.