Genetic abnormalities, EBV infection, and tumor microenvironment have been shown to play significant roles in the molecular pathogenesis of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

**1. Genetic Abnormalities**

**JAK/STAT Pathway**

The Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway is important for hematopoiesis and immune development. In extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, STAT3 of the JAK/STAT cascade is the most frequently mutated genes followed by TP53, JAK3, JAK1, and SOCS1.****STAT3 mutations promote STAT3 phosphorylation and transcriptional activity of STAT3 in the absence of cytokines. By binding to the programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) gene promoter, activated STAT3 then upregulates the expression of PD-L1. Increased PD-L1 interacts with the programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), an inhibitory co-receptor on T-cells, and suppresses T-cell activation and receptor signaling.

**Epigenetic Dysregulation**

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone methyltransferase and a catalytic component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) molecule.

EZH2 is aberrantly overexpressed in extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, which is mediated by MYC-induced repression of regulatory microRNAs.

Besides, phosphorylation by JAK3 promotes EZH2 as a transcriptional activator.

**PD-L1 Genetic Abnormalities**

Structural variations and focal copy number alterations affecting PD-L1 are associated with an overexpression of PD-L1 in extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

**Hereditary Susceptibility**

A genome-wide association study found out that a single-nucleotide polymorphism located in HLA-DPB1, namely rs9277378, was associated with a 2.3 times higher risk of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma compared to baseline, rendering its hereditary susceptible to the disease.

**Other Gene Mutations**

Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is associated with the deletion in the chromosome 6q21-25, and mutations in the cell surface receptor FAS (Apo-1/CD95), p53, K-ras, and c-kit.

**2. EBV Infection**

EBV infection is believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma though its actual mechanism is still undetermined. It is known to integrate its genomic fragment into different repeat families of the human genome, such as SINE, LINE, and satellite.

By expressing EBV nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1), latent membrane protein (LMP) 1, LMP2A, and LMP2B (latency phase II), EBV modulates cell signaling, and forms barriers to apoptotic signals to escape from T-cell-mediated immune response.

**3. Tumor Microenvironment**

Chemokines play a crucial role in the proliferation of tumor cells with the recruitment of inflammatory cells.