It is available as an intravenous solution of 1 mg/mL, 4 mg/250 mL in dextrose 5%, and 8 mg/250 mL in dextrose 5%. Because of its relatively short half-life of 2.5 minutes, the administration of norepinephrine is typically by continuous infusion. The FDA recommends diluting the concentrated norepinephrine in dextrose-containing solutions before infusion, protecting against potential oxidation and subsequent loss of drug potency. The FDA explicitly recommends against using saline as the sole diluent.

It is highly recommended to infuse norepinephrine through large-bore peripheral intravenous catheters or central venous catheters. Ideally, the peripheral infusion should be in the upper extremity, preferably through an antecubital vein, as this provides the least risk of ischemia secondary to extravasation. If possible, lower extremity veins should be avoided as occlusive vascular diseases are more likely to occur in the lower extremities. Extravasation into local tissue can cause significant ischemia and subsequent necrosis. Should extravasation be suspected, the infusion should stop immediately. An attempt should be made to remove (drawback) any of the injected medication. If continuing the infusion is necessary, it should be restarted at a different site, ideally in a different extremity. The local area should then be infiltrated with phentolamine.

It is worth noting that hypotension secondary to hypovolemia should have treatment with fluid resuscitation as a priority. Using vasopressors such as norepinephrine in a patient who has not had appropriate resuscitation may worsen ischemia and an overall decline in clinical status.

**Use In Specific Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**There are no dose modifications provided in the manufacturer's labeling for patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**: There are no dosage modifications provided per the manufacturer's labeling for patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**A literature review, including a few case reports and small trials involving norepinephrine in pregnant women, has not identified an increased risk of miscarriage or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. In addition, delaying treatment in pregnant women with hypotension associated with septic shock may increase the risk of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. Therefore, clinicians should not withhold life-saving treatment for the pregnant woman due to potential risks regarding the consequences of norepinephrine on the fetus.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Norepinephrine inhibits the synthesis of beta-casein via stimulation of adrenergic beta-2 receptors. Animal data indicate that norepinephrine can decrease serum prolactin, reduce milk production, and inhibit the release of oxytocin, which inhibits milk ejection. Because of its poor oral bioavailability and short half-life, any norepinephrine in milk is unlikely to affect the infant. High intravenous doses of norepinephrine might reduce milk production and decrease the concentration of beta-casein in milk.