Patients with a WPW pattern who have never developed an arrhythmia will be asymptomatic, and therefore, their history and physical exam will be mostly unremarkable. Prior ECG may have diagnosed the pattern, and the patient may be aware of their condition, but some accessory pathway conduction is transient or concealed, which may lead to prior normal or intermittently normal ECGs. Patients with WPW pattern may have a family history of WPW pattern or syndrome.

Patients with WPW pattern who develop a tachyarrhythmia will often experience symptoms associated with the arrhythmia including palpitations, chest pain, dyspnea, dizziness, lightheadedness, presyncope, syncope, collapse, and/or sudden death. The history will be notable for these symptoms, which may be episodic and resolved, or ongoing at presentation if the arrhythmia persists. Physical exam should be focused on the patient's cardiovascular, pulmonary perfusion status, and neurological exam and may be completely normal if the arrhythmia has resolved. A persisting arrhythmia will usually be symptomatic, and vitals signs will be notable for tachycardia. Blood pressure may range from normal or elevated to hypotension depending on the severity of the tachyarrhythmia, comorbidities, and the patient's ability to compensate for the arrhythmia. Respiratory rate will vary based on the patient's level of distress and the ability to maintain perfusing blood pressure. The physical exam will again vary depending on the severity of the arrhythmia. The cardiac exam will demonstrate a regular or irregular tachycardia. The remainder of the physical exam may be normal or show signs of discomfort, distress, hypoperfusion, cardiogenic shock, and unresponsiveness depending on the severity of the arrhythmia.