The management of upper extremity DVT is by an interprofessional team that includes a radiologist, oncologist, nephrologist, hematologist, an internist and a vascular surgeon. The treatment of upper extremity DVTs depends on the clinical presentation. The majority of patients present with limb swelling in the setting of central venous catheterization. The American College of Chest Physicians recommends that the clinician first determine the necessity of the line. If it is required (e.g., total peripheral nutrition), it should remain in place, and the patient should be started on anticoagulation therapy. If the line is not needed, it should be removed but only after completion of 3 to 5 days of anticoagulation therapy. In the hospital, patients can be bridged to warfarin with unfractionated heparin; clinicians would do well to consult the pharmacist for proper bridging and continued anticoagulation. Patients should continue on warfarin for 3 to 6 months after diagnosis, with vigilant monitoring by the nurse and clinician.

In the case of PSS, the treatment course differs as it typically involves acute thrombosis. As such, patients develop significant pain and swelling requiring intravenous catheter-directed thrombolysis. This often resolves pain and swelling but does not treat the underlying etiology. Patients with PSS will, therefore, require urgent surgical intervention for first rib removal. This provides additional space in the thoracic outlet to prevent future compression of the neurovascular bundle.  Post-thrombotic phlebitis is known to occur in some patients and they may need to wear compression garments and/or undertake physical therapy. Here again, nursing staff can help the clinician with monitoring and serve as a bridge between therapists and the clinician.