Cancers can be diagnosed and staged by nuclear medicine scans. Cancer cells uptake more glucose than normal cells. Thus, when fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose is given to a patient, it will accumulate in cancer cells. The limitations of this include organs that have lower metabolic activities, such as the prostate and liver. This has led to the creation of the radiotracers carbon-11 methyl-methionine, fluorine-18-fluoro-l-phenylalanine, and fluorine-18-fluoro-L-thymidine, which detect DNA synthesis and metabolism of amino acids. These can help detect cancers that are not as well detected by fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose, such as cancers in the brain.

Nuclear medicine can also be used to detect inflammation and infection. The radiotracers indium-111 and technetium-99m are tagged onto a patient’s white blood cells. The mixture of tagged white blood cells is injected back into the patient, and these white blood cells travel to areas of inflammation and infection. A scintillation camera is used to detect which areas the white blood cells travel to, indicating infection. Other ways to detect infection include using nanomaterials that target monocytes and macrophages. The phagocytic properties of these cells allow them to uptake the nanoparticles. Increased activity is shown in areas where there is increased uptake of the nanoparticles.

Decreased glucose uptake in certain parts of brain tissue is seen in neurodegenerative disorders. Scanning the brain after injection of fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose allows one to see the glucose metabolism of the brain. In healthy individuals, the entire cerebral cortex will show glucose metabolism. Patients with Alzheimer’s disease will show decreased glucose metabolism in certain parts of the brain.

Radiotracers can diagnose perfusion deficits. A patient’s red blood cells are tagged with radiotracers and injected back into the bloodstream. Detecting where the blood cells go and their pattern of movement can diagnose coronary artery disease. This is not limited to the heart. Other organs such as the kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs can all have their perfusion assessed via nuclear medicine.

Nuclear medicine shows promise with the diagnosis of coronary atherosclerosis. A few studies have shown that fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose has increased uptake in areas of atherosclerotic lesions such as in the carotid arteries.

Gastrointestinal functionality can be assessed by nuclear medicine. Radiotracers are mixed into liquid egg whites and cooked to an omelet consistency. This is eaten by the patient, and the movement of the food is captured by a gamma camera.

Other diagnoses can be made about endocrine functionality, such as assessing thyroid functionality. A radioactive iodine uptake test using I-123 or I-131 is given to the patient, and the thyroid function is assessed to give the patient a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism.