As one of the many long bones within the appendicular skeleton, the humerus develops via endochondral ossification.**,**a relatively tiny cartilage model is laid down by mesenchymal cells that form cartilage secreting chondrocytes. Second, in the center of the cartilage template (ossification center), there is chondrocyte hypertrophy and secretion factors such as alkaline phosphatase to promote calcification of that cartilage. This action forms a blockade of nutrients and causes chondrocyte death. However, before dying, these cells also secrete vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to support angiogenesis towards the interior of this calcifying cartilage. Meanwhile, under the influence of Indian hedgehog homolog (IHH) protein, cells outside in the perichondrium differentiate into osteoblasts and form a layer of bone surrounding the center of cartilage known as the bony collar.****

As time progresses, a central area of dead chondrocytes develops, with little pieces of calcified cartilage left behind, a shell of bone around the center, and the vascular supply going around the interior. Vascular supply brings into the interior mesenchymal cells that differentiate into more osteoblasts and monocytes that form osteoclasts. In the center of the initial cartilage template, bone is resorbed on the inside and deposited on the outside, creating the growth in width of a hollow entity (forming a marrow). Simultaneously, the proximal and distal ends of the cartilage template have chondrocytes that continue to proliferate as secondary ossification centers. This activity allows cartilage growth at the end of the bones, providing vertically expansive capabilities. Ultimately, the areas where bone meets cartilage forms the epiphyseal plate (a linear zone of cartilage), where bone replaces cartilage continuously until bone growth completely fuses and stops around puberty. In the humerus specifically, there are eight ossification centers, at the head of the humerus, humeral shaft, greater and lesser tubercles, medial and lateral epicondyles, trochlea, and olecranon.

The ossification of the shaft occurs at eight weeks gestation, with the humeral head ossification occurring at birth/after birth. The greater tubercle's ossification takes place during the first year of life and the lesser tubercle ossification within the first six years of life.