The decision to choose conservative vs. surgical management depends on the duration and severity of symptoms, as well as the exact etiology determined to be the cause of the symptoms.  For example, high-performance athletes and professional baseball players can develop hook of hamate fractures that can occur from acute trauma or repetitive pathologic contact during the performance.  In this setting, the general consensus of hand surgeons is to perform an isolated hook of hamate incision, which has reliably demonstrated low/minimal rates of postoperative complications, return to play within 3 to 4 weeks, and high patient satisfaction scores.

**General Considerations**

Treatment of Guyon canal syndrome is similar to that of carpal tunnel syndrome. Its spectrum consists of conservative management and surgical decompression. Conservative management involves patient instructions and splinting. Instructions are centered around the avoidance of mechanical compression and repetitive stress at the Guyon canal. In the case of cyclists, the utilization of more ergonomically favored handlebar positions can be used. Repetitive or prolonged wrist extension should be minimized as this exerts compressive forces on the ulnar nerve in the hand.

Wrist splinting must keep the wrist in a neutral position but may allow fingers to move around freely. A splint is to be worn at least at night for a recommended duration of one to 12 weeks.

According to a European Handguide study published in British Medical Journal, an expert panel of medical professionals had reached a consensus of utilizing conservative management for symptoms that are mild to moderate in severity and with acute to subacute duration lasting up to three months. For moderate to severe symptoms lasting three months or longer surgical decompression was favored. Surgical treatment may also include post-surgical exercises especially in those with a reduced range of motion at the joint. Post-surgical splinting was not a necessity but can be used in those patients who have a habit of loading the wrist joint.

According to the same European Handguide study, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and corticosteroid injections are not beneficial for the treatment of Guyon canal syndrome.

Additional treatments that can be used include therapeutic ultrasound and nerve gliding exercises.

In the case of ulnar artery thrombosis or an aneurysm (hypothenar hammer syndrome), asymptomatic patients do not have to be treated surgically. However, when symptomatic, treatment will range from antiplatelet medication to surgical correction (e.g., bypass).