**History**

There may be a history of a fall on an outstretched arm, causing an extension-type fracture or a fall on a flexed elbow. Although rare, a non-accidental injury must be excluded, accounting for <0.5% of the fractures.

**Physical Examination**

The affected limb must be thoroughly assessed for the integrity of the soft tissue envelope and the distal neurovascular status. Any other injuries must also be carefully evaluated and documented.

The arm may be swollen, bruised, and deformed. Any bleeding around the elbow may point towards an open fracture and needs to be assessed. The typical deformity for an "off-ended" Gartland III injury is an S-shaped deformity. There may be a "pucker sign" in the antecubital fossa, indicating that the proximal fragment may have button-holed through the brachialis muscle indenting the deep dermis.

Careful assessment and documentation of the functions of the median, anterior interosseous, ulnar, and radial nerves are mandatory. Best practice includes documentation of the motor and sensory functions of each nerve. Neurovascular injuries have been reported to be as high as 49%. The vascular compromise has been reported in 10-20% of the displaced supracondylar humerus fractures. Similarly, traumatic neurapraxia has been documented in around 11% of fractures, with the anterior interosseous nerve most commonly involved in extension-type fractures and the ulnar nerve most frequently involved in flexion-type injuries.

Brachial artery injury can occur in up to 38% of displaced Gartland III fractures cases.

Similarly, adequate neurological evaluation is of paramount importance and should be repeated after every intervention. It is difficult to perform a thorough nerve examination in children; however, certain games like rock, paper, scissors, and ok can help in the motor assessment. The child is asked to make a fist (rock) that evaluates the median nerve, extend the fingers (paper) to assess the radial nerve, and abduct the fingers (scissors) that check the ulnar nerve motor function. Finally, asking them to make an ok sign evaluates the anterior interosseous nerve.