Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease is a rare cause of pulmonary arterial hypertension. The patients typically present with signs of right ventricular dysfunction such as worsening dyspnea on exertion, lower extremity edema, and ascites. The workup of these patients is the same as the workup of pulmonary hypertension itself. This includes echocardiography, chest X-ray, computed tomography of the chest, and right heart catheterization. Given the rare nature of this disease and the complexity of diagnosis and management, a multidisciplinary and interprofessional team approach is crucial.

For patients with family history, genetic tests may be necessary. The early recognition of this disease is ideal as these patients benefit from early referral for lung transplantation. This will require all members of the health care team to be aware of the disease process and its high rate of mortality.

Early referral to a lung transplant center will require the utilization of caseworkers and nurses to facilitate this process. Though most of the initial care will be provided by a pulmonologist, there will need to be involvement of multiple specialties, including cardiology, transplant pulmonology, and radiology. For patients in which medical therapy is attempted, it will require pharmacists' cooperation, guidance, and monitoring of medications prescribed, along with thorough medication reconciliation.

All interprofessional team members must maintain clear communication channels with all other team members and reach out when any change in patient status is noted, or any intervention may be necessary. Everyone on the management team is responsible for keeping meticulous records of all interactions and interventions so that everyone on the case can access the same accurate, up-to-date information. This interprofessional team approach will optimize patient outcomes for this rare condition. [Level 5]