There are several treatments of skin tags, and all require removal of the lesion. Today, the use of radiocautery in the office is the most commonly performed procedure. Other methods of removal include the following:

- Snip excision

- Cautery

- Cryosurgery

Smaller skin tags are also removed using the nanosecond Q-switched Nd: Yag or the CO2 laser. Some patients may require an injection/topical application of a local anesthetic to minimize the pain. After excising the skin tag, the tiny wound usually heals on its own.

In most cases, the treatment almost always consists of excision and removal using radio cautery, snip excision, or cryosurgery. However, most specialists prefer radio cautery due to its ease of use and precision.

**Risks associated with skin tag removal**

Skin tag removal is primarily a low-risk clinic procedure. However, the lesion often freely bleeds when removed, requiring pressure and monitoring during the procedure. On occasion, coagulation with silver nitrate or electrocautery is necessary.

In rare cases, the patient may experience heavy bleeding or the development of an aberrant infection after the surgery. The clinician can mitigate the risk for complications by taking a proper history of any prescription or over-the-counter medications the patient might be taking since some drugs, and herbal supplements can alter the bleeding and clotting times.

It is also crucial that the patient follows proper instructions on how to care for the area of skin tag removal; this will reduce the risk of infection after the procedure. The patient must never try to remove the skin tags at home. Without proper technique and a sterile environment, the risk for excessive bleeding and infection increases.