The diagnosis and management of patients with LBD is extremely difficult and requires an interprofessional team that includes the primary care provider, psychiatrist, neurologist, radiologist, behavior specialist, internist, and specialty trained nurses. Once the diagnosis is made, there is no effective treatment and the condition is progressive. All the available pharmacological agents are only used to treat behavioral symptoms. Home care nurses play a vital role in regularly assessing the patient and providing support services. The education of the caregiver is vital. The family needs to be aware of the behavior changes, hallucinations, and fluctuations in cognition. Caregivers have to monitor the patient closely as their level of function is minimal. Most are not able to perform daily living activities and are prone to falls and aspiration pneumonia. Finally, the pharmacist should educate caregivers that there is no medical therapy to reverse the cognitive changes and drugs that are used to manage behavior and motor deficits also have many adverse effects. Finally, a mental health nurse should follow these patients as depression is common. Close communication between members of the interprofessional team is vital to improve outcomes. [Level 5]

**Support and Therapies**

Patient and caregiver education regarding symptoms of a disease and their management is necessary. Understanding the disease helps the caregivers cope with everyday challenges. They require home modifications occasionally and individual patient needs should specifically guide them.

The outcomes for most patients is guarded and the quality of life is poor. Most patients eventually end up in a long term care facility, where optimal treatment for basic living activities is not always provided.