Phacoemulsification is a modern-day cataract surgery that employs ultrasound energy to emulsify the nucleus, vacuum to catch the nuclear material, and irrigation and aspiration for cortex and viscoelastic removal. A typical phaco machine consists of a handpiece, foot pedal, irrigation, and aspiration system. The working of the handpiece has been classically described as the jackhammer effect. The handpiece consists of piezoelectric crystals.

These crystals' two and fro motion produces the mechanical energy for emulsifying the nucleus. The stroke length of the handpiece depends on the power of the machine. The to and fro motion results in compression, producing gas bubbles that help disassemble the nucleus. This process is known as cavitation. The vibrations of the tip can be longitudinal or torsional, which aid in the mechanical disassembly of the nucleus.

The operator's command over the foot pedal is critical in determining a perfect visual outcome. All modern phaco machines have three positions in the foot pedal. Position 1 is for irrigation, 2 for irrigation and aspiration, and 3 for aspiration and ultrasound power. Power delivery can be fixed or variable. In fixed mode, the power delivery is fixed from 0 to 100%, while in variable mode, the depth of depression of the foot pedal determines the amount of energy delivered.

**Phaco Power Delivery**

The phaco energy delivery in the eye can have favorable and disastrous outcomes. Cavitation and chatter can result in damage. The heat generation during phaco power can result in thermal injury to the endothelium. Hence, it is imperative to use phaco power judiciously and safely. Intermittent phaco power delivery can be used instead of continuous mode to safeguard the endothelium. The size and angle of the tip can also be changed to improve cutting efficiency. Torsional and elliptical movement of phaco tip also helps in reducing energy generation.

**Phaco Tip**

Various tips are available with the bevel of 0, 15, 30, 45, and 60 degrees. A steeper bevel creates more holding force and higher cutting efficiency. The disadvantage is difficulty in achieving in a full vacuum. Phaco tip-end configuration can be bent, round, ellipsoid, or flared.

**Modes of Phaco Delivery**

**Pulse Modes**

In this mode number of pulses per second are delivered with the foot pedal in position 3. There is also an off period during which no phaco power is delivered. The power of each pulse rises as the foot pedal is depressed further down to position 3. In position 3, maximum phaco power is delivered with each pulse.

**Burst-mode**

Burst mode allows energy delivery of pre-set power (0-100%) separated by intervals of decreasing energy in position 3 of the foot pedal. When the foot pedal is fully depressed to position 3, the power is delivered in continuous mode rather than pulse mode. Burst mode helps in burring the tip in the lenticular matter and helps in chopping.

**Torsional Phacoemulsification**

In this, the piezoelectric crystals within the handpiece create oscillatory movements, which are increased by using a Kelman-type bent tip. The high side-to-side motion helps in greater cutting efficiency and aids in easy nuclear disassembly.

**Elliptical Phacoemulsification**

This uses combined transverse and longitudinal modes of phacoemulsification,  resulting in an elliptical cutting pattern, increasing nuclear disassembly