The current US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation for average-risk adults is that beginning at age 50 patients should initiate regular colon cancer screening. Methods include a fecal occult blood test, fecal immunochemical test, and direct visualization methods. Direct visualization through colonoscopy, biopsy, and histologic examination of colon lesions is necessary to examine and diagnose colorectal polyps and cancers.

Blood work may reveal low hemoglobin and mean cell volume indicating iron deficiency anemia. These patients will also have low serum iron and ferritin levels.

Only about 40% of patients with villous adenoma will have a positive fecal occult blood test. Of these, about 2-10% may harbor colon cancer.

Double-contrast barium enema has better sensitivity compared to single contrast barium study. But barium enema is not sensitive when the polyp is less than 6 mm in diameter. In addition, poor bowel preparation can result in false positives. The presence of diverticular disease can lead to false negatives.

CT colonography is a novel method to assess the bowel but it still requires proper bowel preparation. Again, it is not sensitive for polyps that are less than 6 mm in diameter.

Endoscopy is the most sensitive method to assess for the presence of polyps and also allows for therapeutic intervention. While colonoscopy is better than other methods for evaluating polyps, it is also very operator-dependent. Difficulties with colonoscopy include patient discomfort, and the risk of perforation especially when a polyp is excised. Sigmoidoscopy only allows visualization of the bowel to 60 cm and patients often do not require full bowel preparation.