**Initial Evaluation**

Initial laboratory evaluation for children and adults should include a complete blood count with differential, a reticulocyte count, peripheral blood smear, blood type, and direct antiglobulin test (DAT), and if suspecting an underlying immunodeficiency, immunoglobulin levels.

In ITP, the white blood count, hemoglobin concentration, red cell indices, and differential are usually normal, and the only abnormality seen is a platelet count of less than 100,000/microL.

If there are other findings seen on the peripheral smear, this may suggest another underlying cause of thrombocytopenia. For example, if WBC precursor cells (i.e., blasts) are seen on a peripheral smear, one must consider leukemia or lymphoma as the cause of thrombocytopenia.

If polychromasia, reticulocytes, or spherocytes are seen on peripheral smear, hemolytic anemia may cause thrombocytopenia, and if schistocytes are seen, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia may be the cause of the underlying thrombocytopenia. Therefore, blood type and direct antiglobulin test (DAT) are usually performed if the patient needs a blood transfusion, and DAT testing is generally negative.

**Further Evaluation**

For many adults and children, an initial bone marrow biopsy is no longer performed for a typical presentation of ITP. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are indicated if there are clinical, or laboratory signs suggesting malignancy or bone marrow failure (i.e., lymph node enlargement, splenomegaly, bone pain, fevers, unintentional weight loss, neutropenia, leukocytosis, atypical lymphocytes, or anemia) or the patient is unresponsive to treatment with glucocorticoids, IVIG, and/or anti-D immune globulin.

Prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) may be performed in individuals with moderate or severe thrombocytopenia, those with planned invasive procedures, and those with concerns of overt bleeding.

Based on history and gastrointestinal symptoms, patients suspected with Helicobacter pylori infection should be tested for H. pylori.

Patients requiring splenectomy to treat ITP (or any other surgery) may often be screened for hypo- or hyperthyroidism before the procedure due to the increased risk of perioperative complications.

Vitamin B12 and folate levels should be measured in patients with dietary practices associated with decreased intake of B12, those with neurologic or psychiatric changes, and those with hypersegmented neutrophils on a complete blood profile.

Antiplatelet antibody testing is not recommended as it does not correlate with clinical outcomes.