The placenta is a fetal organ made up of its parenchyma, chorion, amnion, and umbilical cord. The fetal structures form from the zygote and therefore separate the fetus from the endometrium. The fetal tissues form from the chorionic sac - which includes the amnion, chorion, yolk sac, and allantois. These tissues get delivered after birth. The maternal part comes from the endometrium and is called the decidua. There are three parts to the decidua - the decidua basalis (deep at the implantation site), the decidua capsularis (covers the implantation site), and the decidua parietalis (everything else).

After fertilization, the fertilized ovum evolves into a morula, which will develop into the embryo and fetal placenta. The inner cell mass develops into the embryoblast, and the outer cell mass is the trophoblast. The morula then takes in fluid and forms a blastocyst with the trophoblast surrounding the inner cell mass and fluid. The blastocyst implants into the uterus approximately six days after fertilization. The contact of the trophoblast with the endometrium causes the development of the syncytiotrophoblast, which secretes human chorionic gonadotrophic hormone (hCG) and the cytotrophoblast which secretes enzymes that break down the bond between endometrial cells so the syncytiotrophoblast can invade the endometrial wall. Both the cytotrophoblast and the syncytiotrophoblast are part of the chorion, which develops into the placenta along with the extraembryonic mesoderm.

The chorion forms the placenta and consists of the syncytiotrophoblast, cytotrophoblast, and extraembryonic mesoderm. The cytotrophoblast grows into the syncytiotrophoblast as finger-like projections, which are called the primary chorionic villi. The extraembryonic mesoderm splits into somatic and splanchnic mesoderm, and the somatic mesoderm grows into the primary villi creating the secondary villi. The mesenchyme gives rise to blood cells and vessels, which designates tertiary villi when formed. Capillary beds grow from the villi, which connect to the embryo heart. Maternal blood flowing through the embryonic capillaries provide oxygen and nutrients to the fetus. The villi continue to grow and branch into the villus chorion, which is the fetal placenta.

As development continues, cells from the cytotrophoblast continue to extend through the syncytiotrophoblast to eventually form a cytotrophoblastic shell. As progesterone increases, the decidua connective tissue develops into “decidua cells,” which help protect the uterus from an invasion of the syncytiotrophoblast. As the sac continues to grow, the decidua capsularis villi degenerate and eventually disappear as they fuse with the decidua parietalis.

The amniotic sac enlarges faster than the chorionic sac, which causes them eventually to come into contact and fuse into the amniochorionic membrane. The amniochorionic membrane then fuses to the decidua capsularis and, ultimately, the decidua parietalis for stability. The amniochorionic membrane ruptures during labor. The amniochorionic membrane with the fetal vessels makes up the chorionic plate. Parts of the decidua basalis grow into the chorionic plate dividing it into separated septa called cotyledons, in which each contains stem villi.

The fetomaternal junction provides stability for the chorion. The chorionic villi that attach to the decidua basalis are an anchor for the fetal chorionic sac to the endometrium. Endometrial vessels, called spiral arteries, make their way through openings in the cytotrophoblastic shell and reside inside the villi where they release maternal blood to bath the chorionic villi in each cotyledon; this allows for maternal blood to provide oxygen and nutrients to the fetus across the placental membrane. Endometrial veins then drain the blood. Although the fetal vessels are bathed in maternal blood, there is normally no mixing between maternal and fetal red blood cells.

The placental membrane is where the mother and fetus exchange gases, nutrients, etc. The membrane forms by the syncytiotrophoblast, cytotrophoblast, embryonic connective tissue (Wharton’s jelly), and the endothelium of fetal blood vessels.

The umbilical cord serves to attach the fetus to the placenta and consists of two umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein.