Following diagnosis, prompt surgical treatment of a ruptured aorta is critical to offer the patient a chance of survival. Repair can be done using either an open or endovascular technique. Open operative repair most commonly occurs through a left fourth intercostal space thoracotomy. After achieving sufficient exposure to the aorta, surgeons are then able to perform either a primary repair (rare) or resection and replacement of the damaged segment utilizing prosthetic graft. Despite technological advancements and surgical modifications, open repair continues to pose a significant surgical risk with high rates of morbidity and mortality.

The most notable progress in the management of aortic rupture has been the widespread adaptation of stent grafting. This method achieves aortic repair through the delivery and placement of endografts through the femoral arteries. These grafts cover the damaged portion of the aorta and prevent further blood loss. Endovascular treatment has become the preferred method for aortic repair based upon improved perioperative morbidity and mortality. Studies have shown a significant reduction in mortality for patients undergoing endovascular repair when compared to open surgery (7.2% versus 23.5%). Further studies have revealed significantly lower postoperative rates of spinal cord ischemia, paraplegia, stroke, and end-stage renal disease in those patients treated endovascularly.

Initial management in the perioperative period involves medical therapy. Therapy requires aggressive blood pressure control to reduce the risk of further transection progression. Intravenous beta blockers (labetalol or esmolol) are the mainstays of therapy during this time. It is necessary to reduce the heart rate to decrease the tension-time effect on the aortic wall. Vasodilators have also demonstrated effectiveness in decreasing shear forces on the aortic wall.