The human body can be divided into five main anatomical regions for MR imaging application:

- 
**Central nervous system imaging**

- 
**Musculoskeletal imaging**

- 
**Body imaging**

- 
**Cardiovascular imaging**

- 
**Breast imaging**

We will present different patient positioning with the above classification.

**Central Nervous System Imaging**

- Routine Brain:

- The patient should be centralized to the brain coil with the chin pointed upwards using landmarking, laser marker light, or touch sensors. For patient comfort and safety, the earplugs should be used for hearing protection, immobilization pads and straps should be placed around the head to reduce noise and motion, leg support pads should be placed, and the alarm bell must be tested and given to the patient. The patient's eyes must be closed while using laser marking.

- Orbit:

- If loop coils exist at the site setting (also called TMJ coils), they should be used as they have a shorter signal penetration length but significantly higher signal-to-noise- ratio (SNR). The loop coils shall be placed as close as possible to the orbit. If no loop coils available, the routine brain can be used.

- Neck and brachial Plexus

- With the patient in a supine position, the larynx should be centered to the coil center. After landmarking the center of the brain coil, the patient may be sent for the scan. To ensure patient safety, the measures used in the routine brain are also applicable.

- Nasopharynx and Maxillofacial:

- Using an eight-channel brain or neurovascular coil, the patient cheekbones must be in-line with the coil to ensure the best quality.

- Thoracic Spine Imaging

- The patient should lie in a supine position, and the center of the sternum must be aligned with the center of the spine coil.

- Lumbar spine imaging

- The patient should lie down in a supine position, and the spine coil must be centered on the table about 5 cm superior of the iliac bones must be aligned with the coil's center. The coil selection must be wisely selected depending on the region of interest to avoid peripheral signal artifact.

**Musculoskeletal Imaging**

- Temporomandibular Joint (TMJ)

- The TMJ coils have two pieces connected by a holder. With the patient in a supine position, the coil's loop must be placed at the TMJ and as close as possible to the patient face without causing discomfort. If no TMJ coils are available, routine brain coils can be used.

- Shoulder

- With the aid of straps, the shoulder coils are placed on the patient's shoulder. The patient must be in the supine position, and the arm must be parallel to the bed and in external rotation.

- Elbow

- With the patient in the supine position, the coil is wrapped around the elbow of interest. The arm must be parallel to the bed in external rotation.

- Wrist

- If the is a dedicated coil available, it should be placed straight with the patient's wrist on the coil's center and the patient in a supine position. If no dedicated coil is available, the superman position can be used in which is placed in the prone position, and the head is first. The arm then extended straight with the arm pointing down; however, this position is less comfortable to the patient.

- Hip imaging

- Cardiac coils can be used for hip imaging since they have a smaller size and smaller multiple coil elements and hence better signal than the multi-channel coil. The coil should be placed at the MR table center, aligned to the iliac crest to reduce the breathing artifact.

- Knee imaging

- The knee is usually imaged using dedicated coils. These transmit/receive coils that can transmit and receive RF pulse using the transmitter and receiver elements. The knee coil must be placed at the center of the MR table. The patient's knee is then inserted with a slight bend (about 15 degrees). The patella is aligned to the center of the coil.

- Ankle imaging

- Using the ankle coil, the patient's ankle is placed in the center. With the support pads' aid, the patient's foot can be kept immobilized and straight during the exam. The other (non-imaged) foot should be placed away from the coil to avoid wrapping or aliasing.

- Long bones (femur, Tibia)

- The long bones can be imaged bilaterally by using multi-channel coils. The bone's anatomy of interest must be placed in the center of the coil, including the entire region. E.g., for femoral imaging, the hip and knee must be included in the coil.

**Body Imaging**

- Thorax imaging

- The patient should be in a supine position. The arms must be raised above the head. The center of the coil should be aligned to the center of the breast mass for females and nipples in males. The inspiratory bellow must be placed on the level of the diaphragm.

- Liver imaging

- The coil must be placed straight to the center of the MR table. With the patient in the supine position, the coil must be placed while the arms are raised above the head. The center of the coil must be at the level of the xiphoid process.

- Pancreas

- The coil placement is the same as for liver imaging.

- Pelvis

- The coil must be placed squarely at the center of the MR table. The coils must be placed with the arms sideways above the coils' level with the patient in the supine position. The center of the coil must be about 10 cm below the iliac crest level.

**Cardiovascular Imaging**

- Cardiac MR imaging

- The coil must be placed squarely at the center of the MR table. The coil must be placed with the arms raised above the head with the patient in the supine position. The coil's alignment must be with the center of the breast mass for females and the nipple for males.

- Brain MR Angiography

- The patient positioning is identical to routine brain imaging.

- Pulmonary Angiography

- The coil must be placed straight to the center of the MR table. With the patient in the supine position, the coil must be placed while the arms are raised above the head. The center of the coil must be at the center of the sternum.

- Aorta Angiography

- The coil must be placed straight to the center of the MR table. With the patient in the supine position, the coil must be placed while the arms are raised above the head. The center of the coil must be at the center of the sternum or to the section of the aorta to be imaged.

- Renal MR Angiography

- The coil must be placed straight to the center of the MR table. With the patient in the supine position, the coil must be placed while the arms are raised above the head. The coil center must be aligned between the lower end of the sternum and the belly button.

**Breast Imaging**

The coil must be placed straight to the center of the MR table. The coil must be placed with the patient in the supine position while the arms are extended forward and folded comfortably. The center of the coil must be at the center of the breast mass for females and the nipples for males.