The use of medical marijuana can be traced back to over 5000 years ago. It was used by early Chinese physicians to treat pain associated with childbirth, rheumatic pain, malaria, and even constipation.

Over the course of many years, there have been countless studies addressing the effectiveness of medicinal cannabis in treating chronic pain. One particular study evaluated chronic pain patients' perspectives on medical marijuana. The study included 984 chronic pain patients, including those with neuropathic pain, back pain, arthritis, post-surgical pain, headaches, and abdominal pain. In this particular study, two-thirds of patients reported pain relief as the main benefit of marijuana use. Improved sleep was the second most commonly reported benefit. On the other hand, the primary negative theme amongst these patients was the cost associated with medicinal cannabis. The average cost was about two thousand dollars per year, depending on the formulation and preferred route of administration. Unlike other medications, medicinal cannabis is not covered by insurance companies leading to increased costs. Other negative themes associated with medicinal cannabis use amongst these patients were adverse effects of the medication and perceived bias against marijuana use.

In addition, another study showed a 64% reduction in opioid use amongst chronic pain patients who used medical marijuana.

A different study highlighted the effectiveness of medical marijuana in treating chronic non-cancer pain, neuropathic pain, medication-rebound headache, and allodynia. However, it did not appear to have the same effectiveness as non-opioid analgesics for the treatment of acute pain. Furthermore, in this particular study, medicinal cannabis was no more effective than a placebo for treating visceral pain and only provided minimal analgesic effect in cancer pain.

There have also been a few randomized controlled trials studying the dosing and administration of medicinal cannabis. In one specific study, experts across nine different countries developed three different treatment protocols for the dosing and administration of cannabis when treating patients with chronic pain. In the routine treatment protocol, it was agreed that a 5-milligram CBD-predominant strain of cannabis taken twice daily should be the initiating form of treatment due to its safety profile. If greater than or equal to 40 milligrams of CBD per day failed to provide adequate pain relief, a starting dose of 2.5 milligrams of THC was deemed appropriate.

As per the consensus, THC could be slowly titrated up to 2.5 milligrams every two to seven days until a maximum of 40 milligrams daily is reached. Expert consultation from a cannabinoid specialist or experienced medicinal cannabis clinical was recommended if the dosing as mentioned above failed to provide adequate pain relief. In the conservative treatment protocol, the initiating CBD dose was 5 milligrams once or twice daily up to a maximum of 40 milligrams daily, followed by an initiating dose of 1 milligram of THC if the maximum CBD-predominant dose provided inadequate pain control. The THC dose could then be titrated up by 1 milligram every seven days to reach a maximum dosage of 40 milligrams daily. Lastly, the rapid protocol involved a balanced CBD to THC type of cannabis. The initial starting dose was 2.5 to 5 milligrams of each cannabinoid once or twice daily. The dosage could be titrated up by 2.5 to 5 milligrams every two to three days once or twice daily until a maximum dosage of 40 milligrams of THC was reached.