# Continuing Education Activity

Psittacosis represents a zoonotic bacterial infectious disease caused by the obligate intracellular organism, Chlamydia psittaci. Psittacosis, which is also called parrot fever and ornithosis, is transmitted from contact with infected birds and causes a wide-ranging spectrum of disease and severity. Birds serve as the major epidemiological reservoir, and while birds from the order Psittaciformes (parakeets, parrots, lories, cockatoos, and budgerigars) and Galliformes (chickens, turkeys, pheasants) are commonly identified, this disease process can occur in any bird species. It has been documented in 467 different species from 30 different orders of birds. This activity reviews the pathophysiology and presentation of psittacosis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients affected by this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Review the epidemiology and pathophysiology of psittacosis.
- Describe the clinical presentation of patients affected with psittacosis.
- Summarize the available diagnostic options for patients affected with psittacosis.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by psittacosis.

# Introduction

Psittacosis represents a zoonotic bacterial infectious disease caused by the obligate intracellular organism, Chlamydia psittaci. Psittacosis, also called parrot fever and ornithosis, is transmitted from contact with infected birds and causes a wide-ranging spectrum of disease and severity. Birds serve as the major epidemiological reservoir.

While birds from the order Psittaciformes (parakeets, parrots, lories, cockatoos, and budgerigars) and Galliformes (chickens, turkeys, pheasants) are commonly identified, this disease process can occur in any bird species and has been documented in 467 different species from 30 different orders of birds.

# Etiology

C. psittaci is a gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacterium of both mammals and birds with multiple genotypes, which can be sequenced by genotype-specific real-time PCR for identification and epidemiological studies. Each genotype is associated with a specific animal host, and all can be transmitted to humans, causing psittacosis.

As stated above, contact with birds appears to be the primary risk factor for psittacosis in humans.

# Epidemiology

Psittacosis can affect any age group and gender, but incidence tends to peak in middle age, with an age range of 35 to 55.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States classifies psittacosis as a reportable condition in most states, with estimated confirmed cases numbering fewer than ten annually. This is likely due to underdiagnosis and underreporting. Individuals with exposure to pet shops, veterinary hospitals, bird exhibitions, and occupational exposure in the poultry industry are considered at the highest risk of contracting the disease.

Psittacosis has been reported throughout the world. In a meta-analysis review of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) worldwide, C. psittaci was reported to be the causative agent in 1.03% of the cases, with a range of 0 to 6.7%.C psittaci.

Improved diagnostic techniques and strategies will likely lead to an apparent increase in the incidence of psittacosis. A 2022 study from China, using combined molecular techniques to identify pathogens in severe community-acquired pneumonia cases, revealed that Chlamydia psittaci was the causative agent in 6.8% of the patients (15 out of 222).

# Pathophysiology

C. psittaci is a gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacterium with a developmental cycle that entails two forms. The organism consists of an extracellular infectious elementary body and a larger metabolically active intracellular reticulate body. After exposure to a host’s eukaryotic cell, the infectious, elementary body is endocytosed into the cell through interaction with the cell membrane receptor of the host cell, thereby evading the host immune system response. The endocytosed elementary body increases in size to form the metabolically active reticulate body.

These reticulate bodies can undergo binary fission utilizing ATP from the host cell to form new reticulate bodies. These inclusion reticulate bodies then restructure back into an intermediate state and finally into elementary bodies and are released by cell lysis as well as reverse endocytosis, which can leave the host cell intact, and is thought to allow a chronic and silent infection.

Although the exact pathophysiology has yet to be fully elucidated, recent studies using a bovine model show that upon inoculation of C. psittaci, there is an initial infection of the alveolar epithelial cells. C. psittaci.

# Histopathology

Microscopically, exudates form and consist of fibrin, neutrophils, and hemorrhage. The bacteria are visible with light microscopy as basophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies of 0.25 to 0.5 mm in diameter.

# History and Physical

Despite the strong link to bird exposure, it is not necessary for a diagnosis. This is especially true in areas with large numbers of wild birds. For example, there have been two outbreaks in Australia with towns surrounded by a large avian flora.

Symptom onset is typically abrupt, with a headache cited as the most prominent complaint, in addition to fever, myalgias, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and cough.

Psittacosis can affect multiple organ systems, and a multitude of manifestations have been reported in case reports of psittacosis.

- Central nervous system manifestations of meningoencephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, cranial nerve palsies, transverse myelitis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, and status epileptics

- Respiratory manifestations of pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, respiratory failure, and septic shock

- Cardiac manifestations are rare but can include myocarditis, pericarditis, culture-negative endocarditis, and aortitis

- Renal and gastrointestinal manifestations include acute interstitial nephritis, acute renal failure, glomerulonephritis, hepatitis, and pancreatitis

- Hematological manifestations include disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), splenomegaly, and hemophagocytic syndrome

- Rheumatological manifestations include reactive arthritis and polyarteritis

- There have also been cases of gestational psittacosis with poor fetal and maternal outcomes, as well as an association with ocular lymphoma

The physical exam will usually reveal rales or evidence of consolidation on pulmonary auscultation. Traditionally, pleural rubs and pleural effusions have been uncommon in psittacosis and, when present, warranted considering an alternate diagnosis.

# Evaluation

Psittacosis is noted for a normal white cell count with toxic granulation or a left shift on laboratory testing. Leukocytosis is uncommon but can be seen. Other markers of acute inflammation, such as the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), are often elevated.

Chest imaging is abnormal in the majority of the cases, most often revealing lobar infiltrates.

**Psittacosis Specific Testing**

Traditionally, serologic testing has been used to confirm suspected cases of psittacosis. Available serologic tests for psittacosis include complement fixation (CF) testing and micro-immunofluorescent (MIF) antibody testing with paired sera. MIF testing is more sensitive and specific for C. psittaci when compared to CF.

Monoclonal antibody techniques are being developed for diagnosing psittacosis, but studies demonstrating the sensitivity and specificity of these techniques are still lacking. DNA-based polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques have also been developed. They show promise as rapid diagnostic tools for diagnosing psittacosis but are not widely available. A 2016 study from the Netherlands that performed real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing in all patients hospitalized with CAP reported PCR testing to be highly reliable with a rapid turnaround time compared to traditional serologic testing.

An emerging diagnostic tool is metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS), which was shown to increase the rate of pathogen identification in severe community-acquired pneumonia cases from 40.8% (when using PCR) to 74.2% (when using mNGS).Legionella pneumophila, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae was noted. Blood and sputum cultures remained negative, but mNGS of blood and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid identified C. psittaci within 48 hours in all three patients. The subsequent history of pet parrots who had recently been sick was identified.

A 2022 study reported higher sensitivity of mNGS than PCR in blood for diagnosing psittacosis because mNGS can detect pathogens with an extremely low DNA load in the sample.

Culture is the most specific and accurate method to diagnose psittacosis; however, it should be noted that isolation of C. psittaci requires a biosafety level three facility due to the risk of transmission to laboratory personnel.

**Diagnostic Criteria for Psittacosis**

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has published guidelines for diagnosing psittacosis. In the appropriate clinical scenario, a diagnosis is made by meeting any one of the criteria listed below:

- Isolation of the causative organism from respiratory secretions

- A noted four-fold or greater increase in antibody titer between serum samples collected two weeks apart via the complement-fixation test (CFT) or micro-immunofluorescence (MIF)

- A single IgM antibody titer detected by MIF of 1:16 or higher

# Treatment / Management

Treatment for this bacterial infection is based on intracellular activity, pharmacokinetics, and evidence from clinical trials that recommend tetracycline antibiotics, particularly doxycycline, as the preferred treatment. Case studies have shown that with treatment, most infected individuals will have an improvement in fever and clinical symptoms within 48 hours.

In pregnancy and in patients where doxycycline is contraindicated, the infection is best treated with macrolide antibiotics, such as azithromycin (a 5-day course if clinical response is seen) and erythromycin for a 7-day course. Third-line antibiotics active against C. psittaci include fluoroquinolones, which are less effective than tetracyclines and macrolides.

Macrolides remain the agents of choice in children with mild to moderate infection. However, as has been proposed for the treatment of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, in cases where the benefit of treatment with doxycycline outweighs the potential risk, especially if the alternative therapy is found to be ineffective against psittacosis, a tetracycline, such asdoxycycline can be considered in pediatric patients.

The role of corticosteroids in severe psittacosis is unclear. A case report published in 2021 outlined a case of severe psittacosis, which progressed to organizing pneumonia after 11 days of symptoms and reported poor response to doxycycline. Failing appropriate antibiotic therapy, corticosteroids were eventually added, which resulted in improvement in clinical symptoms; however, the patient did not survive.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Mycoplasma pneumonia

- Legionella pneumonia

- Q fever (Coxiella burnetii)

- Tularemia (Francisella tularensis)

- Influenza

- Typhoid fever

- Brucellosis

- Bacterial pneumonia

- Fungal pneumonia

- Viral pneumonia (COVID-19, H1N1, etc.)

# Prognosis

The prognosis of psittacosis will depend on the patient’s clinical disease severity, comorbid conditions, as well as the time of treatment. Before antimicrobial agentswere available, approximately 15% to 20% of humans with Chlamydial respiratory infection died, but it is not clear how many of those were attributable to psittacosis.

Some cases, however, present with a fulminant disease, and an estimated mortality rate of 1% or less is reported in the modern era.

# Complications

Patients infected with psittacosis can present with many manifestations due to its hematogenous spread after initial inoculation. Please refer to the “History and Physical” section above for a thorough outline of different complications. In short, complications of infection with C. psittaci include acute respiratory distress syndrome, respiratory failure, as well as endocarditis, myocarditis, sepsis, DIC, meningoencephalitis, hepatitis, and pancreatitis; rarely, the patient may present with a fulminant disease course characterized by multi-organ failure.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Per the CDC, isolation precautions and contact prophylaxis are not indicated for psittacosis, as person-to-person transmission is exceedingly rare. However, most states classify psittacosis as a reportable condition in the United States. A timely diagnosis aims to control the spread of this disease.

Patients and the public, in general, should be educated on the purchase, handling, and cleaning of birds and birdcages to control the acquisition and spread of this disease. Psittacosis is quite common in birds, and human infection is likely much higher than currently suspected. Birds suspected as a source of infection should be referred to veterinarians and health department personnel as soon as possible. Proper care handling of pet birds and protocols to protect workers in the poultry industry can significantly decrease the morbidity associated with this disease.

In 2017, the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians compiled a compendium on measures to control C. psittaci infection with recommendations assigned a level of evidence using the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) framework.

- Persons at risk, as well as healthcare providers, be educated on the signs, symptoms, and appropriate workup of the disease. (Level B)

- Public education outlining proper bird handling, use of protective clothing, and use of a disposable particulate respirator when applicable should be provided. (Level B)

- A combined public health department and healthcare personnel coordinated effort should be undertaken to educate the public and the industry on maintaining accurate records of all bird-related transactions to help identify sources of infection. (Level B)

- Quarantine of exposed birds and isolation of ill birds with signs of psittacosis. (Level A)

- Use of appropriate disinfection measures on all exposed surfaces. (Level A)

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Psittacosis is caused by the bacterium C. psittaci and is a zoonotic infection mostly attributed to contact with birds.

- Diagnosis hinges on the clinician performing a thorough patient interview, asking about occupational history, hobbies, and travel history, as well as maintaining a high index of suspicion.

- Most infected individuals present with an influenza-like illness characterized by headaches, fevers, chills, myalgias, and a cough. A severe headache and gastrointestinal symptoms in the appropriate clinical setting warrant workup for psittacosis.

- Routine laboratory testing is largely non-specific but may reveal elevated liver function testing and elevated inflammatory markers.

- The chest X-ray is noted to be abnormal in most hospitalized psittacosis cases.

- Specific diagnostic testing is recommended when psittacosis is suspected. Preferably with molecular testing (PCR, mNGS) and/or serological testing.

- Newer diagnostic tools utilizing molecular techniques can help in the early detection of psittacosis and should be employed when available.

- Treatment with tetracyclines, such as doxycycline, is preferred.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Psittacosis is caused by inhalation of aerosolized C. psittaci from urine, feces, or other excretions from infected birds. It leads to CAP, which can be severe in some cases. Empiric treatment for CAP does not include first-line therapies for psittacosis, leading to poor outcomes in some cases. This highlights the need for increased vigilance by providers and other healthcare personnel operating as an interprofessional team in diagnosing psittacosis, especially in cases where empiric treatment for seemingly run-of-the-mill CAP is not effective. Occupational nurses and clinicians need to maintain a high degree of suspicion for psittacosis in persons who work in at-risk environments to help diagnose this condition early.

Clinical pharmacists can help recommend pharmacotherapy, especially in cases where first-line therapy may be contraindicated. A well-integrated interprofessional team of clinical providers can help bridge the gap between the perceived incidence of this disease and its true incidence. It can also help in the early diagnosis of psittacosis, greatly reducing the morbidity associated with this condition. [Level 5]