The first reports of West Nile virus were in Uganda in 1937. It resurfaced in 1999 when there were reports of seven deaths and 62 cases of encephalitis in New York; this was the first presentation of the virus in the western hemisphere. As of today, the West Nile virus is found in Africa, Europe, Asia, North America, Australia, and the Middle East.

The original outbreaks of the virus showed a typically self-limited and minor illness. In the mid-1990s West Nile virus became correlated with severe neurologic disease. Based on a comprehensive literature review in 2013, meningitis and encephalitis (neuroinvasive disease) were present in less than one percent of infected patients with a mortality of 10 percent. West Nile fever is present in 25% of those infected; the remaining 75% show few to no symptoms. This fact leads to the likely vast underreporting of West Nile virus infections. Outbreaks tend to be associated late summer and fall due to the mosquito vector’s life cycle and the amplification from the bird-mosquito-bird cycle. In warmer climates, cases can occur throughout the year.

In the US from 1999 to 2015, there have been almost 44000 confirmed and probable cases of West Nile virus with over 20000 cases of neuroinvasive disease. The number of neuroinvasive cases varies heavily year to year, ranging from 386 to 2946. Serologic surveys and blood donor screening data shows a rate of neuroinvasive disease of around 0.5% of infected patients and an infection rate of 10% in areas of outbreak. This data extrapolates to an estimated 3 to 5 million cases of infection.