The patient's position is made so that the surgeon can see directly down the ear canal from a sitting position, local injections can begin with a 27- or 30-gauge needle starting at the posterior canal wall or the 6-o’clock position. Slow injection of anesthetic should be maintained, especially if performing under local anesthesia, as the skin is tightly adherent to bone or cartilage. An injection that is performed too rapidly can cause ballooning of the canal skin resulting in a subcutaneous collection of fluid, which should be punctured with a needle tip. Minimal injection volumes should be maintained as the surgeon progresses circumferentially around the canal to preserve exposure in such tight spaces. It is important to note that the tissue one anticipates using for an oval window graft, be it vein, fascia, perichondrium, or fat, can be procured before or after the canal surgery has started. The graft needs to be prepared before the opening of the stapes footplate, limiting the exposure time of the vestibule.

With many sizes of specula available to the surgeon, the largest one that can be seated into the ear canal should be used. Depending on the surgeon’s preference, a fixed speculum holder may be used. The technique described here will assume the role of a one-handed surgeon, or lack of the fixed speculum holder, providing flexibility in viewing the canal and allowing an awake, locally anesthetized patient to move their head if so desired. Plain metal specula and instruments are preferred, as black materials detract much-needed light from the operative field.

Proper exposure is essential in maximizing the success in every operation, and this principle is equally important when working in the middle ear space. As with all procedures, the anticipation of surgical challenges should be considered, and as such, a sufficient tympanomeatal flap should be created. Using a sickle knife, an incision beginning 1 mm from the tympanic membrane is extended superolaterally from the posteroinferior annulus to a point well superior to the pars flaccida. Several sweeps with the sickle knife may be required to ensure the periosteum has been cut. The length of the flap should be about 5-7 mm and is then dissected gently until the fibrous annulus is seen inferiorly, and the notch of Rivinus is seen superiorly. The surgeon will know the incision was sufficient when sectioning of the mallear fold allows the complete reflection of the tympanic membrane.

When performing a stapedectomy for suspected otosclerosis or working in the middle ear space to improve any conductive hearing impairment, adequate exposure is ensured when the following landmarks are visible: the neck and handle of the malleus, anteriorly; the round window, inferiorly; the pyramidal process, posteriorly; and the horizontal portion of the facial nerve, superiorly. These landmarks are visualized after the successful removal of the bony scutum, which typically begins with curettage at the notch of Rivinus, proceeding inferiorly. Care must be taken to avoid chorda tympani nerve damage during this process.

After achieving good exposure, the ossicular chain must be palpated to determine the site of pathology. In the normal, non-diseased ear, palpation of the malleus will result in a round-window reflex, demonstrating an intact ossicular chain with the normal movement of fluid within the perilymph. In otosclerosis, however, this round-window reflex will be absent, as upon palpation of the malleus, the stapes is stuck and completely immobile. Once the degree and location of stapes fixation per the otosclerotic disease have been assessed, the incudostapedial joint is separated. The stapes footplate is then fenestrated, at its thinnest point, with a fine needle to decompress the vestibule and provide an area of instrumentation, should footplate floatation occur.

The next steps would be to section the stapedial tendon and fracture the stapes superstructure with the use of quick, downward pressure toward the promontory. A small, angled hook is then used to remove parts of the central footplate. How much footplate to be removed depends on how the bone fractures away, but typically amounts to approximately one-fourth of the footplates surface area. Careful use of the suction should be maintained so as not to inadvertently disturb perilymph fluid while suctioning blood around the oval window.

During footplate removal, any bone pieces or blood that enter into the vestibule are left alone. When measuring the appropriate length of the prosthesis to be used, the distance from the footplate to the top of the incus is often used. This often results in a prosthesis of about 4.5 mm, but the distance varies from 3.5 to 5.5 mm. Many types of prostheses may be used - categorized into buckets, wire loops, pistons, or even homemade.

When the right prosthesis is selected and sized, the graft is gently placed over the oval window and pressed into the created fenestra to help identify the location where the medial end of the prosthesis will be placed. Care is taken to ensure that whatever prosthesis the surgeon chooses, it is placed carefully. When comfortable, the ossicular chain must be palpated to ensure continuity of the chain/prosthesis union. Finally, the transposed tympanomeatal skin flap can be returned to its original position and packed with small cotton balls that have been impregnated with antibiotic ointment.