**Pain Assessment Tools**

Culturally sensitive pain assessment is essential to achieve proper pain control. The following are pain evaluation scales that can be used in culturally diverse populations.

**Faces Pain Scale**

Perhaps the simplest scale is composed of a series of faces that progress from a neutral facial expression indicating no pain to a grimacing expression suggesting severe pain. The patient selects the face that corresponds to their pain intensity. The scale works particularly well in children but may also be used in adults, particularly those with impaired cognition.

**Numeric Pain Rating Scale**

A vertical line with marks evenly spaced and numbered from zero to 10. The patient circles or verbalizes the number corresponding to their pain intensity. Health professionals need to ensure patients understand how to use the scale. Some patients that fail to understand the use of the scale may choose lucky or sacred numbers.

**Visual Analog Scale**

A 10-cm horizontal line with the worst possible pain on the right end and no pain at the left. The patient makes a line to indicate their pain level. The clinician measures from the left end to the patient's mark from 0 to 100 in millimeters to obtain a pain score. For this scale to be practical, the patient must have motor skills to utilize a marking pen. This system may not work well for patients with impaired cognition. Measuring the location of the marks may add a potential source of error in calculating the pain score. This scale may also be culturally inappropriate for Chinese and Japanese patients as they are used to reading vertically instead of horizontally.

**Pain Scale Interpretation**

Health professionals should incorporate cultural values when evaluating pain scores. A patient's facial expressions may show they are in severe pain, yet they may report a low pain score because it is part of their cultural belief that pain should be endured. Recognizing this may help them assess the need for additional pain medications.