Community resilience research has shown that all community members including individuals, businesses, private and non-profit agencies should participate in disaster preparedness. Community outreach and education are required to educate and engage the community in mitigating damage and recovering from disasters that will inevitably occur.

Recovery after a disaster is more challenging for children, the elderly, those with disabilities and complex mental and physical health needs. Nearly half of the US population is described as potentially vulnerable in the aftermath of a disaster.

During a disaster event, it is critical that an interprofessional approach to the health needs of the community be in place, where physicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and other qualified personnel (e.g., EMTs) work collaboratively in an "all hands on deck" fashion. This collaboration can help to bring bout the best resolution for both the community as a whole, as well as the individuals in the community with their particular requirements.

Local health departments have an opportunity for improvement as well. After the hurricane Harvey recovery, local health departments in the impacted area were asked about their response to the needs of citizens in their area. There was wide variability amongst health departments engagement with the local population. There was poor communication between health departments and other health sectors. Opportunity to increase resources, technical help and communication between health sectors were identified as ways to improve response and improve community resilience.

Hospitals, too, as large healthcare providers and community members are obligated to prepare for disaster response and increasingly have developed plans to most effectively address the needs of a potentially large influx of patients during a disaster response.  Community Health Care coalitions have been proposed to join local healthcare stakeholders in knowledge and resource-sharing in the event of a community disaster.