Before initiating the therapy, baseline disease severity should be assessed. Disease severity is determined by assessing functional impairment based on exercise capacity and hemodynamic derangement.

The goal of the management of pulmonary hypertension is primary therapy to treat the underlying cause of pulmonary hypertension. Following primary therapy, the disease severity is reassessed.

Patients with WHO Functional Class II, III and, IV with persistent pulmonary hypertension despite primary therapy require advanced therapy which targets pulmonary hypertension itself and not the underlying cause). Advanced therapy is used in most Group 1 PAH cases and some patients with group 3, 4, and 5 on a case-by-case basis. However, it is almost never used for Group 2 patients.

Advanced therapy includes prostacyclin agonists, endothelin receptor antagonists, NO-cGMP enhancers, and rarely, calcium channel blockers.

A combination or alternate therapy is used in patients with refractory PAH.

Group 1 PH: None of the primary therapies have been proven to be successful for most types. Often, advanced therapy is required.

Group 2 PH: Medications or valve repair to optimize left heart function in these patients. In patients with volume overload, diuretics can be considered. Thiazides followed by loop diuretics can be used. However, over diuresis should be avoided. Sodium restriction can be helpful.

Heart failure should be managed according to ejection fraction. Beta-blockers, nitrates, and digoxin should be avoided in a preserved ejection fraction, until very necessary. Treatment of coexisting conditions (hypertension, valvular heart disease, ischemic heart disease, diabetes, thyroid disease) and lifestyle modification. Remote monitoring strategies such as weight and symptoms can help reduce hospitalizations in heart failure patients with reduced or preserved ejection fraction.

Group 3 PH: Supplemental oxygen to correct hypoxemia and management of the underlying cause of hypoxemia.

Group 4 PH: The most effective step in effectively reducing the resistance of pulmonary vessels secondary to chronic thrombo-emboli is pulmonary thromboendarterectomy. Small vessel disease is a contraindication as the reduction in the pulmonary vascular resistance post-thromboendarterectomy is not as expected. Pulmonary artery steal syndrome and, reperfusion pulmonary edema are the common negative sequelae. After initial improvement post-thromboendarterectomy, late adverse events such as residual pulmonary hypertension and recurrent pulmonary hypertension can take place.

If the disease is inoperable and thrombectomy cannot be performed, Balloon pulmonary-artery angioplasty is an alternative.

If the thromboembolism is surgically inaccessible or there is recurrent or persistent pulmonary hypertension post-thromboendarterectomy, advanced medical therapy can be considered. Advanced medical therapy includes anticoagulants and pulmonary vasodilators. However, there is no approved medical therapy.

Heart-lung transplantation can be considered and is the final treatment for those patients who fail to respond to the above measures.