**Testicular Dysfunction in Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)**

Low libido, potency, and testicular size are all signs of testicular dysfunction. In end-stage renal disease, all these signs can present. Testosterone concentration in the plasma and how quickly testosterone production takes place are usually low in patients with chronic kidney disease. Spermatogenesis has been noted to be either lowered or completely absent as well. After renal transplantation, the changes noted above can be reversed and return to normal. Studies have shown that this testicular dysfunction and altered testosterone concentration results from higher levels of LH in the plasma and lower amounts of secretory LH pulses seen in men with end-stage renal disease when compared to healthy subjects or men who underwent a successful renal transplant. This fact is significant because the pulsatile secretion of LH is necessary for gonadotropin receptors of the testes to function properly. Furthermore, sustained high levels of LH in the blood and testes can cause a loss of gonadotropin receptors in the testes

**Infertility and Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART)**

Infertility is defined clinically as the inability to become clinically pregnant after at least 12 months of unprotected sexual intercourse. It can be caused by female factors, male factors, or both. In women, it can be the result of ovulatory issues (i.e., anovulation), obstructions of the fallopian tubes, and endometriosis. To become pregnant, many women undergo assisted reproductive technologies (ART), like intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization

Proper development of a follicle and ovulation involves the combined effects of FSH and LH and their activities in the body. This interplay between FSH and LH has also been shown to be important in ART. It has been found that low LH levels in the body can result in poor outcomes in ART. Thus, patients who have low endogenous LH, such as with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, can have an increase in efficacy of ART with exogenous LH treatment

Although there are demonstrable benefits of LH supplementation during ART, research also shows that levels of LH can have unfavorable effects on ART

**Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism in Males**

Hypogonadism is impaired testicular function; this can occur due to a problem with the testes (primary/hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) or due to a problem with the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (secondary/hypogonadotropic hypogonadism). Men with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism have low levels of androgens in the plasma as well as a lack or delay of sexual maturity, which can cause symptoms such as a lack of libido, depression, increase in adipose tissue, and diminished erectile function

Patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism usually have an issue with GnRH signaling, which then causes a decrease in FSH and LH secretion. This decrease in FSH and LH contributes to both decreased androgen levels as well as reduced spermatogenesis. Studies have shown that giving these patients pulsatile GnRH or LH (or hCG) and FSH can help increase spermatogenesis and thus increase the sperm concentration in the ejaculate. Even then, most couples will need ART to achieve pregnancy