**Harvesting the graft material from the Donor site [Figure 2]**

- **Donor Site**- As with other conventional skin grafting methods, the usual donor sites are the lateral/anterolateral part of the thighs, buttocks, and outer aspect of the arms. However, since the Jodhpur technique depends on the successful procurement of a good cellular pool of keratinocytes-melanocytes, any site with apparently healthy skin may be used. In fact, in the Jodhpur technique, a previous surgically repigmented site may also be used as a donor area.

- **Modification of the donor site for JODHPUR TECHNIQUE**- A new modification of the donor site selection in the Jodhpur Technique for vitiligo is to take the perilesional skin of the lesion, or even a previous surgically-repigmented site**[Figure 2A]**. Advantages of the former approach being: (1) reduced morbidity of patients undergoing surgery as single site is being traumatized; and (2) graft material would be rich in melanocytes and keratinocytes of the same topographical region, whichmay hypothetically be more physiologically matched to the pigment deficient lesion and provide better color match and overall cosmetic acceptance.

- **Local Anesthesia**- After taking all aseptic precautions, the donor area is also anesthetized by infiltrating it with 2% lignocaine (plain, without adrenaline). Adrenaline is avoided for the same reason, as explained for the recipient site preparation.

- **Dermabrasion**- Similar to the procedure followed at the recipient site, the anesthetized donor area is dermabraded using either Manekshaw's manual dermabraders, or preferably a motorized dermabrader with diamond fraise until reaching the end-point, which is uniform pin-point bleeding. The modification in the Jodhpur technique is that a thick layer of an antibiotic ointment, preferably a 2% mupirocin ointment, gets smeared over the donor area before dermabrasion**[Figures 2B-2D]**. This ointment serves to entrap the epidermal cells that would separate doing dermabrasion. Upon reaching the end-point, a thick paste is obtained consisting of epidermal cells, both keratinocytes, and melanocytes, few dermal fibroblasts, free melanin, etc. entrapped in the ointment**[Figure 2E]**. This cellular graft in the form of this paste is collected with a spatula**[Figure 2F]**and is ready to be overlayed on the already prepared recipient site.

**Placing the graft over the Recipient site [Figure 3]**

- The donor graft mucilage/paste is transferred to a slide and mixed with saline to form a homogenous paste **[Figures 3A-3B].**

- This homogenized paste then gets overlayed over the prepared recipient site taking care that a thin layer is applied using the spatula **[Figure 3C].**

- This grafted recipient area is covered with wet/ dry collagen dressing, followed by dressing with antibiotic ointment soaked gauge **[Figure 3D].**

- The third layer consists of a cotton pad which requires secure anchoring with a bandage.

**Post-procedure Instructions**

- The dressing should be allowed to remain for at least seven days, with avoidance of wetting. However, readers must note that **the expected transfer of the cells from the donor paste harvested during Jodhpur Technique onto the recipient site finishes within 48-72 hours of firm anchoring of the donor material over the recipient site**. However, it is preferable to keep the dressing in place for seven days to ensure maximum probability of cellular transfer.

- A short course of oral antibiotics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDS]

- Review for follow-up on the seventh day or earlier if any issue arises.

**Post-procedure Follow-up**

- The dressing gets opened on the seventh day, and the recipient area checked for any infection, which is very rare.

- The area is then left open, although a small dressing may be done in extremities, to prevent traumatic insult to the healing area

- In cases of vitiligo, phototherapy with nb-UVB or PUVASol is started around the 14th day onwards and continued till the maximum repigmentation is achieved (usually 4 to 6 weeks with 2 to 3 sessions/week)

**The expected time-period for the outcome**

- Vitiligo - Pigmentation usually begins at 8 to 12 weeks, and complete and uniform pigmentation is generally attainable in 16 to 20 weeks.

- CNHU - Although the experience of the Jodhpur technique for this indication is lesser, in our experience, around 5 to 6 weeks after a single session of Jodhpur technique induces over 95% healing of the ulcer.