# Continuing Education Activity

Onychoscopy is performed for close evaluation of the nail unit to aid in the diagnosis, which is limited to gross examination. Contact and non-contact dermoscopy of the nail are two ways to identify features of nail disease. At different depths, these methods can identify characteristic features to diagnose local and systemic diseases. In turn, onychoscopy can aid in diagnosing systemic diseases that are challenging to diagnose. It can also aid in decision-making for local diseases that may require further intervention. The diagnostic procedure can also assist in finding ideal locations for biopsies to optimize the diagnostic yield of a biopsy. This activity reviews the evaluation of the nail unit with onychoscopy and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and treating patients who undergo onychoscopy.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the diagnostic findings of nail psoriasis.
- Review the causes and management of longitudinal melanonychia.
- Identify the key features of onychopapilloma.
- Explain the onychoscopic findings in connective tissue disease, such as dermatomyositis.

# Introduction

Many dermatological conditions are associated with or present with nail abnormalities. Clinical examination of the nails may be insufficient to provide a straightforward diagnosis, often requiring additional evaluation for a precise diagnosis. Although biopsy-based histopathological evaluation remains the gold standard for a myriad of cutaneous diagnoses, biopsies of the nail unit can be challenging for providers and uncomfortable for patients. Dermoscopy of the nails (i.e., onychoscopy) as routine evaluation has aided the diagnosis of many lesions and limited the need for further procedural intervention.

Onychoscopy can be used to evaluate the nail matrix and nail bed, structures customarily obscured by the nail plate. The initial use of onychoscopy was often for evaluating nail pigmented lesions (i.e., melanonychia), yet the scope has expanded to include nonpigmented lesions and tumors.

Onychoscopy can be performed as non-polarized dermoscopy, polarized non-contact (dry) dermoscopy, or polarized contact (wet) dermoscopy.

# Anatomy and Physiology

**Gross Anatomy of the Nail Unit**

The nail unit of a human digit includes the nail plate (surface and free edge), nail bed, nail matrix (proximal and distal/germinal), proximal nail fold, lateral nail folds, the cuticle (i.e., distal crease of eponychium), the paronychium, and the hyponychium.

The nail matrix has a proximal and a distal (also called keratogenous or germinal) component. The distal portion often has a visible part called the lunula—a pale white, crescent-shaped portion most apparent on the thumb with relatively less exposure in other digits. The whitish hue of the lunula is created by the light reflected off the nuclei in the keratogenous zone. The proximal portion of the nail matrix composes most of the nail plate overall, specifically the superficial/dorsal portion of the nail plate, while the distal portion contributes to the ventral nail plate.

The nail bed extends from the distal margin of the lunula to the hyponychium, a space between the distal ridge and the nail plate. The nail bed matrix is located under the keratogenous zone of the nail plate matrix, obstructed from view by the lunula, and produces the nail bed epidermis. The onychodermal band is the name given to the distal margin of the nail bed, where a brown transverse band is present, which varies in color based on ethnicity.

**Vascular Supply of the Nail Unit**

The arterial supply of the fingers and toes is broadly similar. In the upper extremity, the radial and ulnar arteries supply deep and superficial palmar arcades that act as large anastomoses.

The venous drainage of the fingers is through deep and superficial systems, with the former corresponding to the arterial supply. The nail fold capillary network is like the normal cutaneous plexus, though the capillary loops are more horizontal and visible throughout their length.

Glomus bodies are thermoregulatory plexuses of cavernous blood vessels and smooth muscle cells. They are constituted by an arteriovenous anastomosis that includes the afferent artery and the Sucquet-Hoyer canal, surrounded by epithelioid cells, smooth muscle cells, nervous supply, and an efferent vein, which connect outside the glomus capsule. The nail bed is richly supplied with glomus bodies, where they are presumed to function in thermoregulation.

**Nerve Supply of the Nail Unit**

The periungual soft tissues are innervated by the dorsal branches of paired digital nerves, with the palmar and plantar surfaces supplied by corresponding palmar and plantar nerve branches.

**Histology of the Nail Unit**

The nail plate is characterized by a modified stratum corneum.

The nail bed epithelium is composed of a monocellular basal layer and a spinous layer. Scant melanocytes with a basal distribution may be present.

The hyponychium refers to the epidermis underlying the free margin of the nail. Histologically, the hyponychium shows thick epithelium, including the stratum granulosum and basal melanocytes. The isthmus is the transitional zone between the distal nail bed and the hyponychium. It is characterized by longitudinal ridges (similar to the nail bed), discontinuous and thin granular layer, a thin compartment of pale corneocytes, and transitional keratin expression.

**Dermoscopic Correlation with Anatomy, Physiology & Histology of the Nail Unit**

At lower magnification, the nail folds appear pale pink with a smooth surface, and the cuticle is a transparent, transverse band that seals the nail plate to the proximal nail fold. At higher magnification, there are hairpin-shaped capillary vessels parallel to the skin surface. Nailfold capillaries are best visualized with the aid of polarized video-dermatoscopes on the fourth or fifth digits (as these have the thinnest nail folds).

The nail plate appears pale pink with a smooth, shiny surface, though some longitudinal striations are normal in elderly individuals.

The hyponychium is best visualized using tangential dermoscopy, in which the dermatoscope is fixed at an angular slant.

# Indications

Onychoscopy is indicated for the clinical diagnosis of all nail unit pathologies and other systemic diseases that have nail involvement.

# Contraindications

Onychoscopy is safe for use in all individuals. Special care and attention should be paid to situations where they are fragile or damaged nails or in the transfer of infections, such as COVID-19, during the examination.

# Equipment

A dermatoscope is required for onychoscopy. For certain types of onychoscopy, alcohol wipes and a contact medium (such as ultrasound gel) may be required.

# Personnel

Any trained healthcare provider may use a dermatoscope for onychoscopy, but these may be used in certain specialties of medicine, such as dermatology, rheumatology, infectious diseases, and primary care specialties.

# Preparation

Both non-polarized and polarized light dermatoscopes have been used in onychoscopy. To reduce or prevent surface reflectance, one must overcome the difference in the refractive indices of air and stratum corneum.

# Technique or Treatment

First, the nail should be cleansed by having the patient wash their hands if there is visible debris on the hands and nails. Additional cleansing with alcohol (or acetone, in some cases, as in nail polish) may be required to ensure the appropriate ability to examine the nails.

Dermoscopy with nonpolarized light ensures better visualization of surface irregularities, such as pits and ridges, whereas polarized light blunts surface irregularities and enables visualization of deeper structures, such as nail bed details. For better visualization of the nail apparatus, an interface or immersion medium is recommended, usually with ultrasound gel. Transillumination can be used to evaluate the extent of a nail tumor, such as a glomus tumor.

# Complications

There are minimal complications with onychoscopy, though care is necessary to prevent cross-contamination of the glass covering between patients to prevent infection. This is easily achieved by using alcohol to wipe the lens or using disposable lens coverings.

# Clinical Significance

Evaluation of the nail with onychoscopy should be performed for disorders of pigmentation, infection, inflammatory diseases, connective tissue diseases, tumors, and trauma, as detailed below:

**Pigmentation**

The archetypal lesion of pigmentation is longitudinal melanonychia, where pigmentation is usually located in the nail plate longitudinally, though it can be transverse. Melanonychia is first evaluated by establishing if the pigment is melanotic or non-melanotic (e.g., blood). Next, if melanotic, it must be determined if the etiology is matrical melanocytic activation or proliferation; if determined to be due to proliferation, it must be established as either benign or malignant.

Melanocytic activation is common in darker skin types and various conditions, such as lichen planus, drug-related (e.g., antimalarials), postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, traumatic melanonychia, or as part of a benign pigmentary lesion (e.g., lentigo).

Malignant melanocytic proliferation (e.g., nail matrix melanoma) often demonstrates a brown or black band that may show irregularities in color, parallelism, spacing, and thickness; melanoma may also present as diffuse darkness with barely visible lines, and variability in hues may point out the possibility of melanoma.

Non-melanotic pigmentation is usually due to subungual hematoma or infection. Subungual hematoma has reddish-purple to black lesions with well-circumscribed reddish dots or streaks at the distal edge in the acute phase and splinter hemorrhages with a linear pattern in the chronic phase.

Leukonychia must be classified as true, apparent, or pseudo-leukonychia. In true leukonychia, altered keratinization of the distal nail matrix produces white pigmentation in the nail plate, whereas the discoloration originates in the nail bed in apparent leukonychia and has an external origin in pseudo-leukonychia. True leukonychia from repetitive trauma often presents with transverse or punctate white marks that move distally as the nail.

A white discoloration of the lunula is typical of proximal subungual onychomycosis.

**Infections**

Onychoscopy plays an important role in diagnosing onychomycosis; after all, onychoscopic-guided sampling can help provide the best yield for microbiologic evaluation.

Onycholysis is often seen in onychomycosis as a jagged nail plate edge with intermittent spikes, but onycholysis can have other causes, such as nail psoriasis and trauma.

Although often presenting as a white-yellow streak, onychomycosis can present as longitudinal or transverse melanonychia, where fungal colonies clump into pigmented granules in the bands.

Subungual hyperkeratosis is also seen in onychomycosis,****corresponding to the indented and crumbled areas.

**Inflammatory Diseases**

Onychoscopy has markedly improved the visualization of minute features in nail psoriasis.

Onycholysis has a distinct erythematous or bright yellow-orange border at the proximal end of the onycholytic band, which is relatively straight. In psoriasis, pitting of the nails and splinter hemorrhages have been observed as the most common feature, followed by onycholysis.

Onychoscopic examination of the proximal nail fold shows reduced mean capillary and capillary architecture alterations in the form of coiled capillaries and dropouts. On onychoscopic examination of the hyponychium, irregularly distributed, elongated, tortuous, and dilated capillaries, similar to those seen in psoriasis of the skin, are observed. The capillary density correlates with the severity of disease and treatment response directly. In some cases, the capillaries, which appear as red dots, can be visible on the proximal nail fold.

Rheumatoid arthritis has been observed to have tortuous capillaries with dilated loops and a normal number of capillaries and without hemorrhagic spots, though one study does report findings of angiogenesis being common.

**Connective Tissue Diseases**

Connective tissue diseases benefit from onychoscopy in the evaluation of nail fold capillaries. Capillaroscopy may also serve as a valuable tool in systemic diseases for predicting the development of visceral complications and digital ulceration.

In systemic sclerosis, the nail fold capillary destruction occurs secondary to vasculopathy and microangiopathy.

In systemic lupus erythematosus, prominent subpapillary plexus with tortuous capillaries is seen.

In dermatomyositis, nail fold capillaries are grossly enlarged with tortuous, dilated capillary loops and multiple hemorrhagic spots; prognostically, this finding correlates with myalgias and arthralgias.

**Tumors**

Onychopapilloma is a benign neoplasm of the distal matrix/proximal nail bed. Onychoscopy shows a band of longitudinal erythronychia from the lunula to the distal margin, often associated with splinter hemorrhages.

A glomus tumor is a benign vascular hamartoma of the glomus body arising from the thermoregulatory smooth muscle cells.

Onychomatricoma is a rare matrix tumor that is usually benign and presents with a classical tetrad of ungual hyperkeratosis, splinter hemorrhages, xanthonychia, and overcurvature of the nail plate, both transversely and longitudinally; on dermoscopy it often has parallel lateral edges, nail pitting, thickening of the free edge, dark dots, splinter hemorrhages, and longitudinal parallel white lines.

Pyogenic granuloma, on onychoscopy, shows a vascular pattern with reddish discoloration and regular vessels (which appear as dots at low magnification and lines at higher magnification) with a milky red veil.

**Trauma**

Nail tic disorders, such as onychotillomania, show characteristic features like the absence of the nail plate with multiple obliquely oriented nail bed hemorrhages, gray pigmentation of the nail bed, and the presence of wavy lines—uneven longitudinal pigmented lines in different planes due to uneven or absent nail plate growth after recurring trauma.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Onychoscopy provides good detail but should be used in conjunction with other clinicopathologic information. Some challenges to its use have included: equipment cost, training, and lack of information. The International Dermoscopy Society and the Council for Nail Disorders, among other organizations, have committed to disseminating information on nail disease and evaluation. More information can be found on their respective websites for further training and information.

Diagnoses achieved through onychoscopic examination may require interprofessional action from other health care team members, including other specialists, nurses, and pharmacists, depending on the problem revealed and the treatment needed.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

This procedure should be used in all conditions involving the nail unit or suspected of having that involvement. Information from this procedure should be integrated with interprofessional team members in the clinical setting, pathology, and related procedural team members (e.g., Mohs micrographic surgeon).

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

No monitoring is necessary during or after an onychoscopy. However, all team members play a role in ensuring hygienic practices, so appropriate nail cleansing, particularly after using an interface media, should be performed by having the patient wash their hands or use alcohol or other antimicrobial wipes.