**Posterior Segment Lesions**

The posterior segment plays a critical role in successful management. Posterior-segment lesions can be classified as central or peripheral retinal lesions. The basic goal of identifying lesions is to prevent sudden loss of vision following retinal detachment. A high refractive error and longer axial length are the most vital risk factors for posterior-segment lesions. The retina of patients with myopia stretches posteriorly due to an increase in the axial length, eventually causing peripheral retinal degeneration and thinning. However, certain conditions should be observed and treated to prevent retinal detachment.

Tears and holes in the peripheral retina are critical components of the clinical workup of patients with myopia and should be observed periodically. A horseshoe tear and percolated holes should be barraged using retinal lasers to prevent future mishaps. Atrophic holes can be periodically observed during the development of subclinical retinal detachment. Lattice and pigmentary degeneration are commonly observed in patients with myopia. These lesions do not require treatment in the presence of super-filled holes or tears.

The central retina is critical for visual acuity in patients. Anatomical and functional abnormalities are observed in patients with pathological myopia. Posterior staphyloma, choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM), and foveal retinoschisis are the three critical lesions observed in patients with myopia >10 D. Staphyloma can be observed in the macula or peripapillary region. Posterior extension of the sclera prevents macular support, leading to stretch maculopathy, which may require scleral reinforcement. CNVMs should be observed, and any form of progression may require anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy.

A macular hole is a rare complication following a history of trivial trauma or traction of the posterior hyaloid over the macula.

Other lesions, such as a dome-shaped macula, breaks in Bruce’s membrane (lacquer cracks), tessellations, and peripapillary atrophy, are observed and do not require aggressive management.

**Amblyopia**

Amblyopia is critical for the appropriate treatment of myopia. Patients with anisometropia are more likely to have amblyopia in eyes with a high refractive error, termed anisometropic amblyopia. Ametropic amblyopia is a condition in which patients’ vision does not improve to 6/6 or 20/20, even after best visual acuity correction.