The adverse effects of fresh frozen plasma administration are similar to those that pertain to whole blood and all blood components. They can be categorized into non-immunologic complications, immediate immunologic complications, and delayed immunologic complications. The acellularity of fresh frozen plasma spares certain disease transmission and blood immunogenicity: CMV and graft-versus-host disease cannot be transmitted by fresh frozen plasma as there are no viable leukocytes. Non-immunologic complications include the transmission of infectious agents, transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO), and metabolic complications like citrate toxicity. Infectious agents that are transmittable via fresh frozen plasma include HIV and hepatitis B and C. Screening and pathogen inactivation has reduced transmission rates of HIV to 1 in 7.8 million, hepatitis B virus to 1 in 153,000, and hepatitis C virus to 1 in 2.3 million.

TACO results from cardiogenic pulmonary edema and can occur after transfusion of excessive volumes or volumes at excessive rates. Immediate immunologic complications include hemolytic transfusion reaction, febrile non-hemolytic reaction, allergic reactions, anaphylactoid/anaphylactic reactions, and transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI). Hemolytic transfusion reaction occurs from anti-A and anti-B antibodies due to the failure of ABO matching. TRALI is the most common cause of transfusion-related death. TRALI is the acute onset of hypoxemia and non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema in the absence of other causes of acute lung injury or circulatory overload. TRALI occurs secondary to stimuli in blood components (white blood cell antibodies from donors and/or pro-inflammatory molecules that have accumulated in stored blood components) that trigger an inflammatory response resulting in injury to the alveolar-capillary membrane causing permeability pulmonary edema. Delayed immunologic complications include alloimmunization to plasma proteins.