One useful framework is the SMART goals to create specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and timely learning objectives. Development of assessments, learning activities, performance metrics, and learning outcomes may be guided by modification of SMART goals as the model does not fully apply to these elements. Setting learner expectations is key for both behavioral and cognitive outcomes. Alignment of assessments, which are ideally developed after learning objectives and before learning activities, supports congruency among these three instructional design elements. Formative assessment is embedded in the repeated practice with coaching/instruction and immediate feedback to the learner, preferably verbal in real-time.

Learner motivation is an essential requirement for a well-designed, effective DP. Self-efficacy models list internal and external drivers, but of course, teachers can most readily affect learner motivation via external means. Summative assessments are rated highest, with explicitly established relevance as second (i.e., future summative assessment, required professional activity/skill, a prerequisite to other required skills). Applied skills, that is, skills which the learners anticipate to be valuable or necessary for clinical performance and patient care, rank higher than prerequisite skills. Level of importance may be influenced by teacher/coach selection with respect to their area of expertise (medical specialty/discipline), degree of expertise (years in practice), and near-peer level relationships as having a greater influence on learners than distant, often senior-level faculty. Also, some attention is necessary to delineate the skill hierarchy or degree of relevance; engaging learners in a discussion of their perception may inform the teacher as to the individual student zone of proximal development.