The diagnosis of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia is usually challenging due to the lack of specific morphologic, immunophenotypic, or chromosomal changes. This lack makes the differentiation of this disease entity from other small B cell lymphomas based on exclusion. Symptoms can be classified into two categories: neoplasmic organ involvement and IgM paraprotein-related symptoms. Patients may present with B-related symptoms such as fever, night sweats, weight loss. Because of the frequent involvement of bone marrow, most lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma patients present with weakness and/or fatigue related to anemia. Some patients may present with the involvement of spleen, liver, and other extranodal sites, including skin, stomach, and bowel. As a rule, the diagnosis of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma should be considered in elderly individuals with unexplained weakness, bleeding, neurological deficits, neuropathies, and visual difficulties

The 2017 World Health Organization classification of tumors of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues have established four diagnostic criteria for Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, including

- Presence of IgM monoclonal gammopathy

- Infiltration of bone marrow by small lymphocytes showing plasmacytoid or plasma cell differentiation

- Bone marrow infiltration showing an intertrabecular pattern

- Immunophenotype supportive of Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia that including surface IgM+, CD19+, CD20+, CD22+, CD25+, CD27+, FMC7+, CD5 variable, CD10-, CD23-, CD103-, and CD108-

Most Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia patients have monoclonal IgM. A minority can have both IgM and IgG. Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia patients can present with hyperviscosity symptoms (30%), autoimmune hemolysis (20%), coagulopathy, and/or diarrhea. Symptoms related to hyperviscosity include visual impairment, neurologic symptoms (neuropathy), bleeding, new-onset headaches, blurred vision, and cryoglobulinemia leading to Raynaud phenomena and cold urticaria. The neuropathy is sensory and affects more the feet than hands in a bilaterally symmetric pattern. The autoimmune hemolysis is due to cold agglutinins (IgM antibodies that bind at less than 37 C)