The initial interview with the avoidant patient will prove a challenge for the clinician. These patients are often reticent and laconic. Their constant fear of the potential embarrassment of 'saying something stupid' will disrupt the interview process. The interviewer must use tact to create a therapeutic alliance in which the patient feels confident enough to be forthcoming.

The categorical identification of AVPD in DSM-V implements the following diagnostic criteria:

Feelings of inadequacy, a pervasive pattern of social inhibition, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation are present in a variety of contexts, beginning by early adulthood as indicated by 4 (or more) of the following:

- Avoidance of activities related to an occupation that involve significant interpersonal contact due to fears of such issues as disapproval, criticism, or rejection.

- Do not want to get involved with people unless they are sure of being liked.

- Displays restraint within intimate relationships because of the fear of being ridiculed or shamed.

- Is preoccupied with being rejected or criticized in normal social situations.

- Shows inhibition in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of inadequacy.

- Views self as socially inept, personally unappealing, and inferior to other people.

- Is unusually reluctant to take personal risks or engage in new activities because they may prove embarrassing.

The alternative dimensional model of AVPD identifies the internalization of distress, high levels of negative affectivity, behavioral inhibition and avoidance, and low levels of extraversion as salient diagnostic features.