Clonazepam is a highly potent long-acting benzodiazepine. Clonazepam exerts pharmacological effects by acting as a positive allosteric modulator of GABA-A receptors. The GABA-A receptor is a ligand-gated chloride ion selective channel whose endogenous ligand is GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid). Benzodiazepines facilitate GABA-A action by increasing the frequency of chloride channel opening resulting in hyperpolarization of the neurons and reduced firing, thus producing calming effects on the brain by decreasing the excitability of neurons. In the absence of GABA, benzodiazepines have no effects on GABA-A receptor function.

GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in abundance in the cortex and limbic system. There are three GABA receptors; A, B, and C. However, BZDs act only on GABA-A receptors. Each receptor complex has 2 GABA-binding sites and 1 BZD-binding site and is comprised of five subunits: two alpha, two beta, and one gamma. BZDs do not bind to the same receptor site on the receptor complex as the endogenous ligand GABA but bind to distinct BZD-binding sites situated at the interface between the alpha and gamma subunits. The binding results in a conformational change in the GABA-A receptor's chloride channel that results in the hyperpolarization of the cell and accounts for GABA's inhibitory effect throughout the central nervous system.

GABA receptors are also classified into various BZD receptors based on the isoforms of the alpha subunit. The benzodiazepine type-1 receptors (BZ1), which contain alpha-1 subunits, are abundant in the cortex, thalamus, and cerebellum and are responsible for their anticonvulsant and sedative effects. Whereas benzodiazepine type-2 receptors containing alpha-2 subunits, mostly concentrated in the limbic system, motor neurons, and dorsal horn of the spinal cord, mediate the anxiolytic effects of BZDs.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Absorption: Clonazepam has rapid absorption after oral administration. The maximum plasma concentration is reached within one to four hours after oral administration.

- Distribution: Clonazepam is approximately 85% bound to plasma proteins. Clonazepam has lower lipid solubility and is less likely to cause anterograde amnesia than other high-potency benzodiazepines.

- Metabolism: Clonazepam is extensively metabolized by the liver's cytochrome P-450, particularly by CYP3A, in a dose-dependent manner.

- Excretion: The elimination half-life of clonazepam is around 30 to 40 hours. Clonazepam's major metabolite, 7-amino-clonazepam, is excreted mainly in the urine.