Carpal tunnel syndrome results from increased carpal tunnel pressure and subsequent compression of the median nerve. The most common causes of carpal tunnel syndrome include genetic predisposition, history of repetitive wrist movements such as typing, or machine work as well as obesity, autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, and pregnancy.

The majority of CTS cases are idiopathic. Secondary CTS causes are divided into abnormalities of the container or content. Dynamic CTS can occur with manual work.

**Secondary Carpal Tunnel Syndrome**

- **Abnormalities of the Container -**Any condition that modifies the walls of the carpal tunnel may cause compression of the median nerve
- Dislocation or subluxation of the carpus
- Fractures or skewed consolidation of the distal radius
- Wrist arthrosis, inflammatory arthritis, infectious arthritis
- Acromegaly

- **Abnormalities of Content**
- Tenosynovial hypertrophy
- Inflammatory rheumatism, and infection
- Diabetes mellitus (abnormality of collagen turnover), primary or secondary amyloidosis (chronic hemodialysis with deposition of beta-2-microglobulin), and go
- Abnormalities of fluid distribution: pregnancy, hypothyroidism, and chronic kidney failure (arteriovenous fistula)
- Arterial hypertrophy of the median nerve
- Intratunnel tumor: lipoma, synovial cyst, synovial sarcoma, or neural tumor (schwannoma, neurofibroma, or lipofibroma)
- Hematoma due to hemophilia, anticoagulant accident or trauma
- Obesity

- **Dynamic Carpal Tunnel Syndrome -**The pressure inside the carpal tunnel increases during the wrist's repetitive extension and flexion movements. This particular movement can be seen in occupational pathological conditions.

- **Exposure to Vibration -**Exposure to vibration causes ultrastructural consequences that comprise microcirculatory compression problems and intraneural edema following an injury of the myelin and axons.