Hexokinases catalyze the most essential and initial step of the cellular metabolism of glucose. These enzymes have a high affinity for glucose and convert it to glucose-6-phosphate, creating a downhill gradient that results in increased facilitated diffusion of glucose through facilitative glucose transporters (GLUT1-13).

Positron emission tomography (PET), when used with radiolabeled drugs like [F18]FDG, can detect the rate of glucose consumption in the tissues using radioactive emission. The emission source in FDG is fluorine-18 which has a half-life of about 110 minutes. When it decays, the nucleus of the 18F emits a positron, which collides with an electron within the tissue. Positron and electron collisions result in annihilation leading to the conversion of the mass to energy in the form of two photons (E=mc^2). The scintillation crystals in the PET cameras absorb energy from the photons and emit light into electrical signals.

**Neoplastic Disease**: Metabolic changes in the neoplastic cells generally occur before the tumor size increases, making FDG/PET an important diagnostic and treatment response monitoring tool in oncology.

Cancer cells require a high level of NADPH to produce phospholipids, triglycerides, cholesterol esters, and acylated proteins for rapid cell division. The increased demand for NADPH requires the activation of aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect). Aerobic glycolysis is the process of producing lactate in the presence of oxygen and functioning mitochondria. This process is enhanced by increased activity of glucose transporters, increased expression of hexokinases, and decreased expression of glucose-6-phosphatase.

**Epilepsy**: The brain uses glucose as the primary source of energy. Changes in glucose utilization from the normal metabolic pattern can help diagnose specific pathologic states. FDG can help identify the seizure foci. The seizure foci are hypermetabolic during the ictal state and hypometabolic during the interictal stage. In addition to localizing the seizure foci, FDG-PET can also provide information about the functional status of the rest of the brain.

**Alzheimer's Disease**: FDG-PET can distinguish Alzheimer's Disease from frontotemporal dementia and help discriminate from non-neurodegenerative conditions like depression in patients with atypical presentations. Patients with Alzheimer's Disease have reduced glucose metabolism in the brain's temporoparietal region. Drugs for Alzheimer's disease are most efficacious early in the disease course. There is cortical atrophy during the late stage, and drugs are not as effective due to structural alteration. Therefore, detecting early metabolic changes with FDG-PET may be crucial when creating a treatment plan.

**Myocardial Viability**: Free fatty acids are the primary energy source for healthy myocardium. However, ischemic myocardium tissue shifts its metabolism from fatty acids to anaerobic glucose metabolism. FDG-PET is used in nuclear medicine to identify hibernating myocardium in patients with left ventricular dysfunction and coronary artery disease planning to undergo coronary revascularization. Its use is based on the principle that the reversible injured myocytes can use glucose, but irreversibly injured myocytes cannot. When FDG accumulates in the areas with reduced perfusion, it indicates that systolic function in that area is reversible if blood flow is restored. This pattern is quantified as a perfusion-metabolism mismatch because of reduced blood flow and high glucose metabolism. Conversely, the areas with irreversible loss of systolic function or scarred areas have matched patterns, meaning there is a reduced accumulation of FDG and reduced perfusion in that area. This pattern is associated with a low likelihood of functional recovery after revascularization. Partially reduced myocardial perfusion with FDG uptake is a non-transmural match pattern. It represents a non-transmural scar that is not likely to recover unless it is associated with stress-induced reversibility. However, the decision for revascularization should not be based on FDG-PET alone because the reversibility of systolic function depends on successful coronary revascularization.

**Atherosclerosis**: Atherosclerotic vessels uptake FDG. It is quite noticeable within the intima of large vessels like the aorta and other major arteries. Increased metabolic activity by the macrophages in the atherosclerotic plaque is responsible for FDG uptake. Smooth muscles in the walls of arteries also uptake FDG and are visualized with PET.

**Infectious and Inflammatory Processes**: FDG accumulates in inflammatory cells because of their high rates of glycolysis. FDG-PET is used to detect the sites of infection and inflammation, particularly orthopedic infections related to osteomyelitis and implanted prostheses. For complicated and challenging clinical cases, FDG-PET is the study of choice. FDG-PET is also helpful in detecting other inflammatory processes like sarcoidosis, vasculitis, rheumatologic diseases, and regional ileitis.

**Pharmacokinetics:**According to the manufacturer's labeling, FDG is rapidly distributed to all organs after intravenous administration. FDG is transported into cells and phosphorylated to 18F-FDG-6- phosphate at a rate proportional to the rate of glucose metabolism within that tissue. FDG is cleared from most tissues within 24 hours. However, clearance of FDG from the cardiac tissue may require more than 96 hours. FDG, which is not metabolized in any tissue, is predominantly eliminated unchanged in the urine.