Andexanet alfa acts as a decoy and sequesters rivaroxaban or apixaban, inhibiting them from binding to natural factor Xa. The increase in available factor Xa reduces anticoagulant action, which can be measured by anti-factor Xa activity, thrombin generation, or unbound factor Xa inhibitor plasma concentration from baseline. In clinical trials, the median decline in anti-factor Xa activity for apixaban or rivaroxaban was 88% or higher. The binding of andexanet alfa to factor Xa inhibitors is dose-dependent. There is a rapid decrease in anti-factor Xa activity after giving the bolus. This decrease in anti-factor Xa activity remains throughout the infusion. At the initiation of the infusion, anti-factor Xa activity increases and peaks 4 hours later. After the peak, anti-factor Xa activity decreases at a rate similar to that of the clearance of factor Xa inhibitors. In ANNEXA-A, andexanet alfa restored thrombin generation in 100% healthy volunteers who were on apixaban therapy. Thrombin generation returns in 96% of healthy volunteers on rivaroxaban therapy who received andexanet alfa in ANNEXA-R.

Andexanet alfa also binds tissue factor inhibitor pathway (TPFI), a peptide that inhibits factor Xa. Binding TPFI reduces its activity, thus increasing the formation of thrombin. Tissue factor pathway inhibition remains sustained for at least 22 hours after andexanet alfa therapy.

The volume of distribution is almost equivalent to blood volume at 5 liters, clearance is about 4.3 liters per hour, and the half-life is 5 to 7 hours.