Ketamine hydrochloride is a nonbarbiturate dissociative anesthetic. It is a cyclohexanone derivative that is rapidly acting and produces profound anesthesia and analgesia. Its chemical name is ±)-2-(o-chlorophenyl)-2-(methylamino) cyclohexanone hydrochloride; its structural formula is CHClNO. Ketamine is a noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and glutamate receptor antagonist. It blocks HCN1 receptors. The unique dissociative action and partial agonism on opiate mu-receptors permit the performance of painful procedures in a consistent state of sedation and patient comfort.

Ketamine's effects in chronic pain, and as an antidepressant, far outlast the actual drug levels and are probably mediated by a secondary increase in structural synaptic connectivity that is mediated by a neuronal response to the ketamine-induced hyper-glutamatergic state." (Sleigh 2014).

The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor has a significant role in the etiology of depression. Ketamine, through its NMDA antagonistic action, works rapidly in controlling symptoms of depression and acute suicidal ideation. Ketamine may increase glutamate levels and lead to synaptogenesis and elevated levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).

Ketamine may interact with the sigma receptors. It tends to work by decreasing central sensitization, wind-up phenomenon (development of ongoing, worsening, or chronic pain), and pain memory. Cholinergic, aminergic, and opioid systems appear to play both a positive and negative modulatory role in both sedation and analgesia. Ketamine reverses tolerance to opioids. It is metabolized via the hepatic system by way of N-dealkylation, hydroxylation, conjugation, and dehydration. The half-life of ketamine is approximately 45 minutes.

Ketamine generally maintains normal pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes and, therefore, permits spontaneous respiration. It slightly enhances or maintains normal skeletal muscle tone and is associated with cardiovascular and respiratory stimulation. These characteristics make it particularly useful in the emergency department setting for short-term procedures, especially as is often the case when a patient has not been "prepped" for an emergency procedure. Since there is no guarantee of maintenance of the pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes, there can be no assumption that they will "protect" the airway. Additionally, there may be transient minimal respiratory depression if the medication is administered too rapidly or in too high a dose. Therefore, the physician must be ready to perform emergency intubation.