Once the history and physical exam confirm suspicion for femoroacetabular impingement or any hip pathology for that matter, radiographic evaluation of the hip with X-rays is the initial step. At a minimum, X-rays should include a standing anterior-posterior (AP) pelvis, AP hip, and lateral of the hip. These views allow the physician to assess the pelvis and proximal femur anatomy. Standing films help determine the position of the hip at a functional load-bearing position, which also helps detect arthritis of the hip or hip dysplasia. Cam and pincer lesions are identifiable on these X-ray views. The lateral center edge angle (LCEA) is also measured to assess for hip dysplasia. The lateral center edge angle is formed by a vertical line from the center of the femoral head and a line to the lateral edge of the acetabulum. An angle less than 25 degrees is indicative of hip dysplasia or lack of lateral femoral head coverage by the acetabulum. This condition is critical to identify since hip dysplasia can also manifest with intraarticular hip pain. Pincer deformity will present as an excess bony growth along the edge of the acetabulum, and a cam deformity will demonstrate as an excess bony growth along the femoral head-neck junction laterally or loss of sphericity of the head. Retroversion of the acetabulum can also be a cause for anterior impingement as this manifests with an overhanging acetabular rim and a crossover sign on the AP pelvis.

Other views commonly obtained to assess femoroacetabular impingement include the false profile and the Dunn views of the hip. To obtain a false profile view, the patient standing at an angle of 65 degrees from the cassette as the X-ray beam is directed towards the affected hip. This view can help assess the amount of anterior acetabular coverage of the hip by measuring the anterior center edge angle (ACEA); this is measured by an angle formed by a vertical line from the center of the femoral head and line from the center of the femoral head to the anterior acetabular rim. An angle of less than 25 degrees is indicative of poor anterior coverage consistent with hip dysplasia. Pincer deformity will demonstrate an increased angle (greater than 40 degrees) because of over coverage, coxa profunda, or protrusio acetabuli. The Dunn view is a lateral view of the affected hip which can be obtained at a 45-degree angle to the hip. This view best assesses the cam deformity along the anterolateral aspect of the femoral head-neck junction. The alpha angle measurement determines the extent of the cam lesion and is measured by a line in the center of the neck axis to the center of the femoral head, and another line from the center of the femoral head to the point of the anterior femoral head where normal sphericity is lost. Abnormal alpha angle measurements are over 50 degrees and indicate a cam deformity.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with or without intra-articular contrast injection, is also utilized to assess FAI. This imaging modality can provide valuable information about potential labral or cartilage injury from impingement. It also offers 3D imaging of bony morphology and the presence of impingement cysts in the femoral neck. Other possible sources of hip pain can be identified such as avascular necrosis, stress fractures, greater trochanteric bursitis, abductor tendonitis, and iliopsoas tendinitis.