Niacin is necessary for adequate cellular metabolism and function as a vital component in coenzyme 1 (the oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NAD]) and coenzyme 2 (the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate [NADP]), which either accept or donate hydrogen ions in essential oxidation-reduction reactions. They are important coenzymes for glycolysis, pyruvate metabolism, protein, amino acid metabolism, pentose biosynthesis, glycerol metabolism, synthesis of high energy phosphate bonds, and fatty acid metabolism.

As cellular functions in many organs and tissues are affected by the deficiency of niacin, the clinical expression of pellagra is diverse. Niacin underdosing in vulnerable population groups may result in pellagra, which is characterized by 4 Ds in clinical manifestations, diarrhea, dermatitis, dementia, and death. The diagnosis of dermatitis is challenging in the absence of skin lesions and is more straightforward if characteristic skin lesions are present. Dermatitis begins as erythema, resembles sunburn in the initial stages, but tanning occurs more slowly than typically seen in sunburn. The lesion is a bilaterally symmetrical eruption located at sites of sunlight exposure.

Cutaneous patches on the neck are known as Casal necklace. It extends as a broad collar around the cervical dermatomes C3 and C4 in the neck. Gastrointestinal disturbances include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, epigastric discomfort, poor appetite, abdominal pain, and increased salivation. Neurologic manifestation presents as nonspecific symptoms like confusion, hallucinations, irritability, psychomotor unrest, ataxia, and depression. As the disease advances, patients become confused, disoriented, delirious, comatose, and stuporous, and finally die.

Mechanism of action of niacin in dyslipidemia includes inhibition of lipolysis within adipose tissue, reduction in liver triacylglycerol formation, increase in lipoprotein lipase activity, inhibition of synthesis of apo B-100 and hepatic very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), impaired cholesterol biosynthesis, and lowering of the fractional catabolic rate of HDL-Apo A-1. Apo A-1, an activator of lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), has a significant role in reverse cholesterol transport.