There is no specific laboratory test for cholesterol embolization syndrome. However, as mentioned above, a basic lab workup with CBC with cell count differential, complete metabolic panel (CMP), and UA can help. The retinal exam should be done in case the presentation of amaurosis fugax or sudden blindness to look for "Hollenhorst plaques." The only way to confirm the diagnosis of CES is the biopsy of various organs such as skin, skeletal muscles, gut mucosa, bone marrow, or kidneys.

Depending on which organ is affected by cholesterol embolization, the evaluation and management of CES can be different. For instance, if stroke-like symptoms are seen in a patient, then CT scan of brain and MRI of the brain without contrast as well as MRA of the head and neck, are indicated. For acute limb ischemia, a CT angiogram should be considered based on the urgency of the presentation. If bowel ischemia is suspected, then the laboratory workup should include serum lactate and white blood cell count. In addition, high-resolution CT angiography should be considered to evaluate for bowel ischemia. In the case of suspected renal emboli, UA with proteinuria, eosinophiluria, or elevated LDH on the bloodwork should be seen. The renal US or high-resolution CT angiography should be done to diagnose renal emboli. Sometimes if the source is suspected to be valvular, then transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) is performed.

The diagnosis can also be made clinically when fulminant CES occurs within days after the endovascular procedure, usually accompanied by blue toes or livedo reticularis.