Injury to the MPFL occurs most frequently during lateral patellar dislocation. After an initial dislocation, conservative treatment with physical therapy and short-term immobilization is often recommended. About 35 to 50% of those patients will suffer from another dislocation. A patient with multiple dislocations is considered to have patellar instability and may be treated surgically.

Evidence has shown that surgery is preferred in the acute setting, with the presence of a patellar or femoral-based avulsion.

If surgery is pursued, the MPFL will typically be reconstructed from the patient's own tissue or a cadaveric donor. Biomechanical studies have failed to show the superiority of autograft versus allograft, and surgeons thus are increasingly favoring cadaveric tissue.

The surgeon will harvest a graft of this tissue, restructure it to the appropriate dimensions, and then implant it into the patient. This is typically performed as a combination of using both arthroscopic and open surgical techniques. Patients can be discharged on the same day of surgery with a knee brace for short-term immobilization of the joint. Athletes can typically return to sport four to seven months after reconstruction. MPFL reconstructions are often successful with good outcomes, and redislocations are rare. Although redislocations are rare, other postoperative complications such as apprehension and subluxation have been reported.

Lastly, it is important to consider surrounding anatomy and other possible injuries following dislocations as concurrent injuries may substantially contribute to knee instability. In these cases, multiple procedures may be necessary to restore joint stability rather than MPFL repair alone. The quadriceps-angle (Q-angle), which is the angle between the quadriceps load vector and the patellar tendon load vector, has been implicated in patellar mal-tracking. A Q-angle of 20 degrees or larger tends to track the patella laterally, causing pain and putting the patient at an increased risk of dislocation. Patients with a large Q-angle may be candidates for surgical procedures such as an osteotomy of the tibial tubercle or distal femur to correct patellar mal-tracking.