Dysfunction of the lingual complex could be the source of dural pain. We know that tooth pulp inflammation causes a secondary symptom picture of pain in the tongue, through a retrograde behavior of the electrical and biological information from the gums, towards structures that innervate the lingual complex. From the electrophysiological and mechano-metabolic point of view, we cannot always predict where the symptom appears, precisely because of the networks of bodily innervations that communicate with each other. If the tongue has mechanical problems following a cervical trauma (whiplash), a situation could arise where the trigeminal system that innervates the lingual complex sends information in antidromic modalities to the Gasser ganglion. The latter contains neural cells and macrophages, and lymphocytes (and glial cells), which are responsible for making the trigeminal network more receptive to mechano-metabolic information, triggering trigeminal pain. At the dural level of the tentorium cerebelli, we can find mechanical receptors near the arterial routes. When these receptor areas are activated, they cause vasodilation and trigeminal pain. The tongue can be responsible for dural trigeminal pain, sending non-physiological information to the trigeminal ganglion in the Meckel's cavity, which will stimulate non-physiological behaviors in the dural area, with the final result of local dural pain or in other locations of the skull. (for example, to the eye for the important connection with the nervus tentorii).

The manual treatment of the 5 diaphragms has several objectives, including improving the circulation of body fluids. The meningeal system encloses the venous vessels and the glymphatic system, which is drained, in particular, via the cribriform plate, to pass to the oral mucosa, tongue, and cervical tract, up to the thoracic outlet. Cranial dural tissue can change its tension state. This means that the passage in the fluids will be altered for different reasons. To give an example, a mechanical tension deriving from the suboccipital muscles can vary the tension of the tentorium and create an inflammatory environment where the arterial passages contribute to the extent of the inflammatory response as they alter their tone. We know that lighter fluids such as lymph and interstitial fluids are displaced, in particular, by the heartbeat, which is reflected in arterial vascular tone. A tensional alteration of the tentorium and arterial vessels can slow down the glymphatic flow and adversely affect immunoregulation. In the animal model, lymphatic vessels are found near the cranial nerves, including the branches that involve the functioning of the tongue. We can strongly assume that a non-physiological mechanical tension and an altered metabolic environment can produce inflammation and/or infections of the lingual complex, both due to altered nervous conductivity and the transport of biological substances to the tongue, as the literature suggests. Evaluating and treating the tentorium, in this case, to solve or help a lingual problem, has a clinical logic.

Paresthesia in the fifth finger due to non-physiological pressure on the ulnar nerve could result from abnormal tension in the diaphragm muscle. Palpation could bring the osteopath's attention to the respiratory diaphragm, despite the suspected cause linked to the thoracic outlet syndrome. For an antidromic effect, the phrenic nerve (right or left) can carry inflammatory substances synthesized by contractile fibers or connective tissue in retrograde mode to the medulla, involving the motor neurons of the subclavian nerve. This last nerve is able to create non-physiological muscle tension in the subclavian muscle (hypertonus) and maintain the first rib in inspiratory attitude, which will compress the ulnar nerve resulting in a neuropathic picture. As demonstrated in the literature, a diaphragmatic herniation problem could be responsible for pain in the shoulder joint (involving the axillary nerve). In chronic pathologies, where the diaphragm muscle is involved, it is possible to find thoracic outlet syndromes, even if the nature of this combination is not always determined or illustrated by the authors. Myocardial infarction can alter the genetic transcription of some diaphragm proteins (such as in aging), inducing dysfunction in the breath, even sub-clinical. This can again lead to inflammatory substances being produced by the diaphragm and negatively affecting the function of the brachial nerves via transport by the phrenic nerve. If the diaphragm is in the inspiratory position, the phrenic nerve can undergo chronic non-physiological traction. As happens in traction neuropathies, the nerve tissue will produce biological substances that can reach the brachial medullary nerves.

In some patients, the vagus nerve has a close relationship with the omohyoid muscle (infrahyoid muscle) and medial to the jugular vein; in some patients, this muscle may involve both clavicles or the mastoid process. The omohyoid muscle may be positioned above the superior transverse scapular ligament or laterally, under which the suprascapular nerve (C5-C6) passes. The omohyoid muscle is activated by the movements of the tongue and probably plays a proprioceptive role in the movements of the scapula. The suprascapular nerve and the phrenic nerve, as demonstrated with dye injection, are closely related. If the tongue's position tends to remain towards the hard palate, the omohyoid muscle will be more activated from an electromyographic point of view; this situation can alter the mechanical environment of the passage of the suprascapular nerve and negatively affect the phrenic nerve. Furthermore, the innervation of the omohyoid muscle (C1-C3) could alter the environment of neurological information that reaches the suboccipital muscles; the vagus nerve itself could undergo abnormal tension from the sub-hyoid musculature. Therefore, we could have a disturbance in a localized area (thoracic outlet) that spreads to other diaphragms. An altered scapular position, in the case of a hyperkyphotic attitude, could cause the same problems.

Hypertonicity of the muscles that make up the pelvic floor could be a source of pain in this anatomical area, particularly during movements of the pelvis, during inhalation, or physical efforts (lifting or sneezing). The chronicity of the pain or the consequent (visceral) disorder could negatively alter the excursion of the diaphragm muscle, which could reduce its functional capacity during inhalation and create conditions that lead to chronic lower back pain. The osteopath must be aware of the anatomy of the 5 diaphragms and never dwell only on the symptom. In this example, the diaphragm should not be treated in the first instance but, rather, focus attention on the pelvic floor muscles.

Previous cardiac surgery in median sternotomy can have iatrogenic repercussions on the phrenic nerve, such as a permanent partial injury. Or, if the lesion is complete and extensive, the patient may undergo another diaphragm plication to try to restore some of the main respiratory muscle function. One of the symptoms after cardiovascular surgery and in the presence of partial or total plegia of the phrenic nerve, particularly on the left and more rarely on the right, is an alteration of the movement of the ipsilateral shoulder (thoracic outlet). The main motivations concern an antidromic behavior of the nerve, which carries multiple biochemicals towards the medulla and involves the brachial plexus (axillary nerve). Furthermore, if the myofascial continuum undergoes a functional discontinuity due to a weaker anatomical area (hemidiaphragm), there will be an alteration in the distribution of mechanical tensions and, as in this specific case, the shoulder will undergo an alteration of its range of motion. The concept that must emerge from this clinical situation is that in the presence of a permanent phrenic lesion or the case of plication of the diaphragm, the osteopath can bring great relief to the patient without completely resolving the situation, as it is present. Structural damage (plegia and/or diaphragmatic scar). It is not a defeat, but it is a moment of maximum adaptability for the clinician, recognizing their limits and increasing the patient's maximum adaptability.