Infectious endometritis results from the proximal translocation of normal bacterial flora from the cervix and vagina into the uterine cavity. It may also be due to bacteria exogenous to the genital tract.

**Postpartum Endometritis**

During pregnancy, the thick mucus plug (along with other host factors) protects the uterine cavity from infection, and PID/endometritis is uncommon. As the cervix dilates and the fetal membranes rupture, the opportunity for bacterial colonization of the uterine cavity increases. This risk is increased further with instrumentation and insertion of foreign bodies into the uterine cavity. Bacteria is also more likely to colonize uterine tissue that has been devitalized, bleeding, or is otherwise damaged (such as during a cesarean delivery).

Risk factors for postpartum endometritis include:

- Cesarean delivery (most important risk factor)

- Infections/bacterial colonization present during labor and delivery, including intrapartum intraamniotic infection (also known as chorioamnionitis), bacterial vaginosis, Group B streptococcus (GBS), and STIs

- Prolonged rupture of membranes and/or prolonged labor

- Insertion of foreign bodies into the uterus, including multiple cervical examinations, invasive maternal/fetal monitoring devices, and manual extraction of the placenta

- Operative vaginal delivery

- Maternal factors: HIV infection, diabetes mellitus, and obesity

Postpartum endometritis infections are usually polymicrobial, involving both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Some of the most common species identified include:

- Gram-positive cocci: Groups A and B Streptococci, Staphylococcus, Enterococcus

- Gram-negative bacilli:  Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Proteus

- Anaerobic organisms: Bacteroides, Peptostreptococcus, Peptococcus, Prevotella, and Clostridium

- Others: Mycoplasma, Chlamydia

Chlamydia is an uncommon cause of postpartum endometritis, though it is often associated with late-onset presentations. Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Clostridium sordellii, or Clostridium perfringens are associated with increased morbidity and mortality.

**Acute and Chronic Endometritis Unassociated With Pregnancy**

Endometritis not associated with pregnancy is also due to altered endometrial microbiota.

In acute endometritis/PID, >85% of infections are caused by STIs (primarily Chlamydia trachomatis and to a slightly lesser extent Neisseria gonorrhoeae), and/or BV-causing organisms, such as Gardnerella vaginalis. Mycoplasma genitalium, Streptococcus and Staphylococcus species, Haemophilus influenzae, Escherichia coli and anaerobes.

Chronic endometritis is also thought to be a polymicrobial infection. Causative organisms include Streptococcus, Enterococcus, E. coli, Klebsiella, Staphylococcus, Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, Gardnerella, Pseudomonas, and yeasts (including Candida and Saccharomyces). Chlamydia and Neisseria infections are uncommon causes of chronic endometritis.