# Continuing Education Activity

Rapid eye movement behavior disorder (RBD) is parasomnia strongly linked to neurodegenerative diseases, and it can also be very disturbing and lead to injury requiring medical attention. This activity describes the evaluation and management of RBD and highlights the role of the healthcare team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of rapid eye movement behavior disorder.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of rapid eye movement behavior disorder.
- Review the treatment and management options available for rapid eye movement behavior disorder.
- Describe the importance of interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance management of rapid eye movement behavior disorder and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Rapid eye movement behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia involving dream enactment behavior associated with loss of atonia during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. These symptoms may bring serious harm to the individual themselves and their sleeping partners. RBD has been associated with antidepressant use as well as narcolepsy. The strongest correlation exists between RBD and comorbid neurodegenerative alpha-synucleinopathies (i.e., Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and multiple system atrophy). Symptoms of RBD may precede neurodegenerative disorders by decades; therefore, a careful history is significant in assessing these patients.

# Etiology

Predisposing factors that increase RBD diathesis include elderly age, male sex, narcolepsy, antidepressant use, and neurological disorders. RBD can be divided into three categories:

- Idiopathic RBD

- Drug-induced RBD

- Secondary RBD due to medical condition

Idiopathic RBD is most suggestive in neurodegenerative synucleinopathies, including dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease, olivopontocerebellar degeneration, multiple-system atrophy, and Shy-Drager syndrome.

Drug-induced RBD is common in individuals who are taking antidepressants. The most likely antidepressants that will incite an RBD episode are serotonin reuptake inhibitors (fluoxetine), tricyclic antidepressants (mirtazapine, protriptyline, amitriptyline, nortriptyline, desipramine, imipramine), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (phenelzine and selegiline).

RBD with concomitant narcolepsy may be considered a distinct phenotype of RBD. It is characterized by less violent or complex behavior during REM sleep, earlier age of onset, equal sex distribution, and hypocretin (orexin) deficiency (a lab diagnosis specific for narcolepsy type 1).

# Epidemiology

Studies on RBD, although limited in quantity, suggest a prevalence of 0.5% in the general population.

There is a strong link between RBD and psychiatric disorders. RBD is found to be 5-fold and 10-fold more likely to develop in patients receiving antidepressants and patients with psychiatric disorders, respectively.

# Pathophysiology

A prime feature of rapid eye movement behavior disorder is the intermittent loss of atonia during REM sleep, which leads to dreaming-related motor behaviors. Muscle atonia during normal REM sleep is controlled within the pontine tegmentum and medial medulla. Excitatory glutamatergic neurons within the dorsal pre-coeruleus nucleus activate the spinal cord inhibitory interneurons, thereby initiating REM sleep atonia. Animal models and diagnostic imaging of case reports suggesting interruption or disinhibition of these brainstem areas is the pathophysiology of RBD.

The neurodegenerative alpha-synucleinopathies consist of glial cytoplasmic inclusions aggregates of insoluble alpha-synuclein protein.

RBD has also been described as associated with Wilson disease

The pathogenesis of RBD is distinct in cases of narcolepsy as it is linked to orexin deficiency. In contrast to idiopathic RBD, in cases of RBD-narcolepsy combination, alpha-synuclein biomarkers are usually not detected.

# History and Physical

Rapid eye movement behavior disorder exhibits abnormal behaviors during REM sleep that may disrupt sleep and injury. Dream-enactment is the most distinct abnormal behavior associated with RBD characterized by purposeful movements during REM sleep with or without vocalization linked to a dream. These sleep-related movements could be violent and lead to self-injuries or injuries to the bed partner. These complex behavior could result in walking out of bed or falling. Symptoms are usually associated with enacting undesirable or violent dreams where the patient is attacked, chased, or compromised. The patient often wakes up abruptly with prompt alertness and can recount the dream coherently. More than half of the patients are usually aware of their dream-enactment behaviors.

Acute forms of RBD can be exhibited with intense REM sleep rebound due to withdrawal effects from REM suppressing drugs. These include alcohol, sedative-hypnotic medications, drug intoxication, or antidepressants.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of rapid eye movement behavior disorder comprises two features: loss of normal atonia during REM sleep and dream enactment behavior. The suspicion of RBD is usually due to presentation consistent with dream enactment behavior. The diagnosis requires however confirmation with in-lab polysomnography (PSG) with video recording.

The presence of isolated RSWA is considered an incidental finding in normal individuals, especially in patients receiving antidepressant therapy (SSRI)

The scoring of ESWA requires at least 1 of the following features developed by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM):

– Sustained muscle activity in the chin EMG during the REM sleep stage.

– Excessive transient muscle activity in the chin or limb EMG during REM sleep.

The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3 ed., states that diagnostic criteria for RBD must include the following:

- Repeated episodes of sleep-related behaviors such as vocalization and/or complex motor behaviors.

- Documenting behaviors by polysomnography during REM sleep or based on clinical history.

- Recordings of polysomnography that demonstrate REM sleep without atonia via submental or limb leads

- Behaviors are not better explained by another sleep disorder, mental disorder, medication, substance use, or epilepsy.

Validated questionnaires have been established to screen patients for RBD. Two single-question questionnaires have been established; the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire and the RBD1Q. The Mayo sleep question was tested in the general population and queried the bed partners (sensitivity 98% and specificity 74%); it asks “Have you ever seen the patient appear to ‘act out his or her dreams’ (punched or flailed arms in the air, shouted, or screamed) while sleeping?”

# Treatment / Management

The primary treatment goal of rapid eye movement behavior disorder is to reduce the risk of injury to the patient and bed partners. The change in routine sleep habits may prove challenging for the patient and their bed partners. Their risk for injury, however, needs to be emphasized. Patients and sleeping partners should be educated on the following:

- Mitigating fall risk by lowering the bed closer to the floor

- Safe-guarding any firearms, knives, and other weapons

- Cushioning or padding the floor or sharp furniture surfaces.

- Placing patients in restraining clothes or sleeping bags

- Separating the sleeping partner from the patient to reduce the risk of injury

The preferred pharmacological treatment of RBD is melatonin. Melatonin is an endogenous hormone secreted from the pineal gland associated with circadian rhythm, and its secretion is influenced by light exposure. Although the mechanism of action is unclear, 3 to 12 mg of melatonin at bedtime is recommended and appears effective in reducing RBD symptoms.

Clonazepam is an effective treatment for RBD and has been considered for a long time as first-line pharmacological therapy.

Other second-line therapies

Other non-pharmacologic treatments under investigation include Plasma exchange

Treating comorbid obstructive sleep apnea with continuous positive airway pressure may decrease the frequency and severity of RBD symptoms. Medication reconciliation is necessary to identify medications prone to inducing loss of REM atonia. Management should be discussed with ordering providers and the patient that may require discontinuation, reduction of dose, or earlier medication intake.

# Differential Diagnosis

Many conditions may mimic the presentation of rapid eye movement behavior disorder symptoms.

- Substance use and/or withdrawal

- Benign childhood epilepsy

- Complex partial seizures

- Confusional arousals

- Delirium

- Epilepsia partialis continua

- Epileptic encephalopathy

- Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy

- Malingering

- Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)

- Parasomnia overlap syndrome

- Periodic limb movement disorder

- Posttraumatic stress disorder

- Psychogenic nonepileptic seizure

- Sleep terror

- Sleepwalking

- Trauma-associated sleep disorder

Non-REM sleep parasomnias are common and could mimic RBD, including confusional arousals, sleepwalking, and sleep terrors. These disorders typically occur during childhood in the first half of the night during non-REM sleep without dream recall. However, these clinical findings may be observed concomitantly with objective results of REM without atonia and have been characterized as parasomnia overlap syndrome. In contrast to RBD, sleep terrors occur predominantly in children and present with sudden screening during sleep that can last for several minutes. Sleep talking can be confused with RBD. However, the tone of voice mimics usual conversation and occurs during NREM and REM sleep. Nightmares are vivid dreams that do not have a motor activity. Other associated parasomnias may include sleep-related eating disorders, sexsomnia, or rhythmic movement disorder.

Trauma-associated sleep disorder has recently been characterized as a novel parasomnia. The patient demographics tend to be younger males with traumatic experiences as the temporal onset of disturbing nocturnal behaviors and nightmares. They may or may not have posttraumatic disorders. Objective findings include REM without atonia. Disruptive nocturnal behaviors captured in the lab are rare.

It is important to differentiate RBD behaviors from nocturnal seizures, including juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, grand mal seizure, benign rolandic, Landau-Kleffner syndrome, and sleep-related hyper motor epilepsy (formerly known as nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy). Patients with epilepsy may exhibit prodromal symptoms such as mood changes and auras, such as irregular blinking or bladder/bowel control loss. Another differentiating behavior between RBD and seizures is the presentation of postictal states that may appear as confusion, headaches, nausea, temporary neurological deficits, sensory deficits, and/or suppressed alertness following the seizure.

# Prognosis

The clinical progression of RBD is dependent on the etiology. Idiopathic RBD and RBD associated with neurodegenerative diseases are often slowly progressive. At the same time, medication-induced RBD may occur acutely and improve upon discontinuing the medication. In RBD related to neurodegenerative disorders, the prognosis is dependent on the underlying condition. Amongst those with the confirmed diagnosis of neurodegenerative condition due to an underlying synucleinopathy, it is estimated that the correlation with RBD is significantly high: 30 to 50% of Parkinson disease, 75% of Lewy-body dementia, and 70% to 90% of multiple system atrophy.

Once RBD has been confirmed, discussing the associated neurodegenerative risks is appropriate if individual patient circumstances are considered, and patients are closely monitored for neurodegenerative disorder findings. In these patients, early introduction for neuroprotective therapies

# Complications

The primary complications concerning RBD are the risk of injury and the potential prodromal symptoms linking neurodegenerative alpha-synucleinopathies. The injuries sustained during an event may require immediate medical attention and/or involve sleeping partners causing legal implications. Management for RBD primarily involves injury risk mitigation through behavioral changes and/or pharmacologically. Early diagnosis and management of RBD provide a therapeutic window to treat the potential underlying neurodegenerative disorder.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with rapid eye movement behavior disorder and their sleeping partners are prone to injuries during their sleep that can result in serious harm. The sleeping partner could target a violent dream enactment behavior leading to the patient being arrested on charges of domestic assault. Therapeutic management should include injury risk mitigation discussions with the patient and their sleeping partner.

It is ethically important to disclose potential risks for the development of neurodegenerative disease to patients diagnosed with RBD. An open discussion with family members offers an opportunity for improved understanding and avoiding misinformation about the disease process. It is recommended to counsel patients that Parkinson disease and other neurodegenerative disorders can be treatable. The prompt diagnosis of RBD may provide an early therapeutic window for neuroprotective therapies. The International Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder Study Group is conducting ongoing collaborative studies for symptomatic and neuroprotective treatment.

# Pearls and Other Issues

After ten years from diagnosis, there is a high risk with rapid eye movement behavior disorder for developing alpha-synucleinopathy pathology.

There are currently no guidelines on counseling and management regarding potential phenoconversion of RBD to alpha-synucleinopathy. The approach may include a discussion with the patient to understand this risk. The patient should be recommended to seek consultation from their primary care provider, sleep specialist, and/or neurologist if associated symptoms manifest, such as memory issues, constipation, gait abnormalities, orthostatic hypotension, or neurological deficits.

Prodromal alpha-synucleinopathy is possible in younger patients less than 50 years old, but nondegenerative disorders should be considered, including autoimmunity, narcolepsy, and REM-suppressing medication use.

There is a lack of controlled, randomized, double-blind studies for RBD treatment. However, injury prevention is critical in the management of RBD. Clonazepam is highly effective in treating RBD to reduce injury risks.

Low risk for adverse reaction favors melatonin over clonazepam as initial pharmacological therapy for RBD.

Other etiology may resemble RBD symptoms and behaviors, necessitating evaluation with a formal PSG to rule out malingering, psychogenic movement disorder, NREM parasomnias, sleep-related epilepsy syndrome, and obstructive sleep apnea. As physicians may be called upon for legal proceedings, this becomes more paramount when an illegal act is presented to occur during sleep.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The evaluation and management of newly diagnosed rapid eye movement behavior disorder require a multi-disciplinary effort involving a sleep specialist, neurologist, and primary care provider to maximize these patients’ wellbeing. Injury prevention is paramount and may require both pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions. The looming prognosis of a neurodegenerative disorder in association with RBD will likely provoke anxiety and mood disruption and will require management on its own. Including family members is also a key element of support for these patients.

Unfortunately, there are no established means of predicting the development of neurodegenerative disease nor effective management to slow down the disease process. This makes the discussion with patients on the prognostic timeline and the decision of optimal treatment management truly difficult. Close follow-ups and multi-disciplinary communication are critical.

Future research is needed to identify potential biomarkers and neuroprotective strategies to prevent further neurodegeneration in high-risk individuals.