Patients presenting with a testicular mass or groin pain should be carefully evaluated. The younger age group is extremely susceptible to testicular cancer, and young men have obvious fertility concerns regarding therapy. A detailed history should be obtained, with information regarding undescended testis, previous testicular torsion, injury to the groin, the growth rate of the present lesion, and the presence of any associated symptoms. A history of surgery for undescended testis is also relevant since the testis that has been brought down into the scrotum still has a 10 fold higher risk for malignant change in comparison to the normal testis. Patients can be asymptomatic or complain of painless swelling of the testicle. In other cases, patients can present with painful testicular swelling, usually due to intratumoral hemorrhage and hematoma or testicular torsion.

A careful physical examination should be coupled with ultrasound examination and appropriate serologic studies. Bilateral tumors are uncommon; nevertheless, there should always be a comparison with the contralateral testis. An empty hemiscrotum with absent scrotal rugae would point towards undescended testis, and an associated groin swelling might indicate a malignant change in the undescended testis. Another caveat is that a fast-growing testicular cancer may feel soft due to secondary hydrocele. Still, on careful palpation, the solid mass can often be felt through the surrounding fluid. In later stages of progression, the growth incorporates the testis, and the cord structures are thickened. However, the scrotal skin is not involved until very late in the disease course. Enlarged para-aortic nodes may be palpable in a thin subject in the epigastric region. In advanced cases, the left supraclavicular lymph nodes may also be palpably enlarged (Virchow's node).