Multiple modalities have been used to diagnose this condition. A CT scan with intravenous contrast is the preferred primary investigation that can be done quickly, available in most centers, and is non-invasive. Very often, the contrast study of the esophagus will demonstrate a smooth filling defect in the lumen in the esophagus. The typical CT finding is a thickened esophageal wall with luminal compression or, in large hematomas, the obliteration of the lumen. A CT scan shows an intra-esophageal mass or filling defect, which may sometimes resemble a double barrel or dual lumen. A contrast-enhanced CT will also delineate the anatomical relationship between the esophagus, aorta, and mediastinal structures. Administration of oral contrast and imaging should be performed in instances where the transmural perforation is suspected. Extravasation of oral contrast extraluminally is diagnostic and can demonstrate the location of the rent in the mucosa.

Other investigative modalities such as endoscopic ultrasound and MRI are found to be useful in diagnosing intramural hematoma of the esophagus. Endoscopy should be postponed until the integrity of the esophageal wall had been established. If needed, an endoscopy can be performed with care after confirming the integrity of the esophageal wall. An endoscopy will reveal a bluish swelling with or without a mucosal tear.  Endoscopic ultrasound is superior to plain endoscopy in that it can demonstrate submucosal lesions as well as can evaluate adjacent structures. MRI can show a mass of intermediate density on T1- and T2-weighted images and can distinguish IHE from other mediastinal pathologies as well as displaying soft tissue planes around the aorta. EKG, chest x-ray, and cardiac markers are useful to exclude other cardiopulmonary diseases. The presence of pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, or pleural effusion should raise the strong suspicion of a transmural injury to the esophagus along with the intramural hematoma. A proposed grading of the severity of the luminal involvement by the hematoma is stage 1 when there is an isolated hematoma, stage II hematoma surrounded by tissue edema, stage III when there is compression of the esophageal lumen, and stage VI when there is an obliteration of the esophageal lumen by the hematoma.