Conditions such as lactose malabsorption and intolerance could fall prey to an insouciant approach due to its virtual impossibility of fatal outcomes. However, food intolerance has serious implications for the patient’s quality of life and, depending on the etiology, for the patient’s medical status. As health care providers, tremendous emphasis should be placed on the quality of life and not underestimate the negative impact on a patient when there lacks an immediate threat to our patient’s medical status. Furthermore, food intolerance is important because it can easily cause IBS and other functional GI disorders. Additionally, investigating food intolerances and malabsorption syndromes can improve cost-effectiveness through interventions as conservative as dietary therapy. In more intricate and complicated cases such as ultrashort bowel syndrome in infancy, caregivers endure multiple sleep interruptions at night due to pump alarms, perform toileting, administer stoma/gastrostomy bag care, and provide enteral tube feeding throughout the day, enhancing healthcare team outcomes becomes more readily apparent to any observer. Therefore, exemplary evaluation and management of malabsorption syndromes, like any medical condition, can reduce the burden of even caregivers, a critical component involved in patient outcomes.

Generally speaking, enhancing interprofessional health care team outcomes depends heavily on a loop that begins and ends with the patient. This approach means that the patient is part of the team, and management starts with enough patient involvement to present for a medical visit. Followed by the physician, nurse, or physician assistant’s appropriate clinical knowledge and skills. The history and physical then guide appropriate evaluation. At any time during patient management, the patient’s every point of contact plays a role in the patient’s outcome. The individuals include but are not limited to specialists (e,g. consults, referrals, radiologists, surgeons, therapists), lab technicians, phlebotomists, medical assistants, and patient transport services. The key is appreciating the impact team dynamics can have on patient outcomes, no matter how brief. Compassion remains necessary for a positive, motivating, productive relationship when interacting with the patient, especially when the realities of patient obstacles arise, such as those with transportation, insight, mental or physical capacity, symptom burden, psychological state, treatment adherence, or financial/economic status.

Patient encounters should include setting realistic goals, discussing realistic treatment options, and shared-decision making. Nursing staff should inquire at each visit regarding the progression of patient symptoms, compliance with management plans, and solicit questions from the patient. These behaviors with the maintenance of professional conduct increase the likelihood that the patient remains engaged in their health status, reflected in patient proactiveness, follow up, adherence to the treatment plan when home, and staying informed. Pharmacists can perform medication reconciliation and ensure that drugs are not a source of the patient's symptoms or condition. Nutritionists and dieticians are also necessary to ensure proper nutrient intake and help the clinician rule out dietary causes or exacerbations. When these take place to the best of the patient’s ability, the interprofessional team maximizes a patient’s outcome. [Level 5]