- CLL is an indolent malignancy characterized by increased production of mature but dysfunctional B lymphocytes. The primary disease sites include peripheral blood, spleen, lymph node, and bone marrow. Signs and symptoms are absent in many patients, but when present, include B symptoms (fevers, night sweats, unintentional weight loss), fatigue, early satiety, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy. CLL can be diagnosed by peripheral blood smear and confirmed by flow cytometry and immunophenotyping of peripheral blood. Treatment, including chemotherapy/immunotherapy, is generally not curative and is given only in symptomatic patients. Asymptomatic patients are generally observed. Current first-line treatment for CLL now includes BTK and BCL-2 inhibitors. Chemoimmunotherapy decreases symptoms and prolongs survival in symptomatic patients.

- About 2 to 10% of CLL patients undergo Richter's transformation, where CLL evolved into an aggressive lymphoma, most commonly diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, which presents with fever, rapid enlargement of previously stable nodal disease, and severely rising LDH levels.  CLL can also transform into high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma by involving into B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia.

- It is important to differentiate CLL from other causes of lymphocytosis, including other B-cell disorders, which can present similarly, such as infectious causes of lymphocytosis. Certain infections can present with lymphocytoses such as pertussis and infectious mononucleosis. However, unlike CLL, it is transient and is not monoclonal.

- Monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL): is defined as an absolute lymphocyte count of less than 5000/mcL with evidence of clonality on flow cytometry. CLL is a monoclonal expansion of B cells preceded by an oligoclonal expansion of B cells termed monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis. It is said to have a genetic basis, and certain genetic polymorphisms are known to predispose individuals to develop CLL. Patients with MBL are asymptomatic, present with no constitutional symptoms, no anemia, no thrombocytopenia, no organomegaly, and lymph nodes are less than 1.5 cm in size.  Patients with MBL are managed by observation.

- Other B cell disorders: Mantle cell lymphoma, splenic marginal zone lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, hairy cell leukemia. Even though these disorders can mimic CLL clinically, a careful look at the immunophenotypic markers, morphology, or specific genetic abnormalities such as translocation t(14;18) for follicular lymphoma can lead to the diagnosis.