The management of patients with VHL is optimally performed by an interprofessional healthcare team. This team involves clinicians (including NPs and PAs), specialists, and oncology-specialty nurses and pharmacists, all collaborating and communicating to drive the best possible patient outcomes. [Level 5]

These patients need lifelong monitoring. Family members need surveillance and screening, which can help minimize complications, including neurological deficits, hearing and vision loss, and renal impairment. For individuals with known VHL syndrome, a known VHL genetic mutation, or first-degree relatives of VHL patients, annual evaluation starting at age one for vision and hearing problems, neurological symptoms, and blood pressure monitoring is recommended. An MRI of the brain and entire spine is recommended every 2 years starting at age 16 to screen for CNS lesions. An abdominal ultrasound or MRI is recommended for visceral lesions starting at age 16 every 1 to 2 years. Annual blood or urinary fractionated metanephrines are used to screen for pheochromocytomas starting at age 5. For endolymphatic sac tumors, an MRI is recommended in symptomatic patients. An audiology evaluation every 2 to 3 years starting at age five can help detect early hearing deficits.

Genetic counseling and testing should be offered to individuals at risk to confirm the diagnosis and prevent screening tests in individuals without the pathogenic variant. The prognosis for most patients with VHL is guarded, and the quality of life for these patients is not good.