The first step in evaluation is the determination of Rh blood type in every pregnant female, according to the recommendations of the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).

If a woman is Rh-positive, there is no need for further testing. If a woman is Rh-negative, the second step is the determination of anti-D antibody presence in the maternal serum initially by a qualitative rosette test and later on by a quantitative Kleihauer-Betke test. This is a confirmatory test to quantify antibody titers, especially in large hemorrhage (>30ml blood) recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). A Coomb's test is used for confirmation if antibody titers are positive. Antibody titers level should be less than 1:16, a level greater than this requires further serial amniocentesis started as early as 16-20 weeks to determine fetal Rh status.

Fetal surveillance depends on the Rh positivity of the fetus. It is usually done by serial pelvic ultrasounds, umbilical artery doppler, and middle cerebral artery (MCA) dopplers to monitor fetal growth if an Rh-negative mother is carrying an Rh-positive fetus. MCA doppler is primarily used to screen anemia in Rh-positive fetuses. It is usually performed every 1-2 weeks beginning at 24 weeks gestation with the use of peak systolic velocity (PSV) as the main parameter as it increases in anemic fetuses.

Negative antibody testing further requires paternal Rh testing. If the father is Rh-negative, then no more testing is required. On the contrary, if the father is heterozygous Rh-positive, there is a 50% chance for the fetus to be Rh-negative or positive. So in such cases or where paternal Rh grouping is not possible, fetal Rh genotyping is required either by non-invasive methods or by invasive techniques. Non-invasive fetal RHD genotyping is done in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy by taking a maternal blood sample, and this procedure is found to be 97% accurate with specificity and sensitivity 93% and 100% respectively in determining Rh status.

If a woman presents in the emergency department for delivery without any prior prenatal investigations, then blood samples are taken from the umbilical cord of the infant for blood grouping and Rh typing, hematocrit, hemoglobin level measurement, and serum bilirubin analysis. Direct Coombs test is also performed to confirm the diagnosis of antibody-induced hemolytic anemia, which is more commonly due to Rh-incompatibility than ABO incompatibility. Increased bilirubin, low hematocrit, and high reticulocyte count may indicate the need for early exchange transfusion.

Imaging studies include pelvic ultrasound mainly which can show signs of fetal ascites, soft-tissue edema, scalp edema, pleural and pericardial effusion, cardiomegaly, and hepatomegaly with portal hypertension in the case of a severely affected fetus.