The patient’s age, time of presentation, severity of symptoms, and stability of the lesion will dictate treatment. Several systems to classify the lesions have been developed, with the important feature being the degree of overlying cartilage involvement and mobility of the lesion fragment. In stable lesions, conservative management is preferred with immobilization and protected weight-bearing for a length of time, depending on which joint is affected. Patients with stable lesions that fail conservative treatment may be treated with drilling techniques (retroarticular or transarticular drilling). These procedures have shown healing rates and symptom improvement ranging from 92% to 100%, with transarticular drilling having slightly higher success rates. When lesions are unstable or displaced, surgical intervention is necessary, typically performed arthroscopically. The knee is the location most often requiring surgery, with 58% of procedures for OCD lesions being performed on the knee. Various modalities and techniques exist, such as fixation, debridement, microfracture, and cartilage grafting/transplantation. In situ fixation of lesions can be performed using various types of metallic screws, bioabsorbable implants, or osteochondral plugs. Metallic fixation screws, when OCD lesion size permits their use, show high successful healing rates of 84% to 100%. The disadvantage of metallic screws is the need for a second procedure 6 to 12 weeks after initial fixation to remove the screw. Bioabsorbable implants do not require a second procedure for removal and show successful healing rates around 90%; however, these implants show higher rates of complications. Osteochondral autograft or allograft plugs can also be used, with clinical outcomes of “good to excellent” in 72% of patients receiving allograft plugs. The overall goal of surgery is the promotion of cartilage reformation and/or repair of the articular surface to prevent early-onset osteoarthritis.