**How to Apply the AGS Beers Criteria®?**

The AGS Beers Criteria® evaluates five aspects of PIM: drugs to avoid, drugs to use with caution, drug interactions, medications to avoid in particular situations, and dosage according to kidney function. These aspects should be considered when prescribing single or multiple drug regimens in older adults.

There are seven key points to apply the AGS Beers Criteria® with real-world judgment, entitled "Using Wisely," which include utilizing the criteria as guidelines for a patient-centered approach.

**Key principles to guide optimal use of the American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria®**

1. Medications in the 2019 AGS Beers Criteria® are potentially inappropriate, not definitely inappropriate.

2. Read the rationale and recommendations statements for each criterion. The caveats and guidance listed there are important.

3. Understand why medications are included in the AGS Beers Criteria®, and adjust your approach to those medications accordingly.

4. Optimal application of the AGS Beers Criteria® involves identifying potentially inappropriate medications and, where appropriate, offering safer nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic therapies.

5. The AGS Beers Criteria® should be a starting point for a comprehensive process of identifying and improving medication appropriateness and safety.

6. Access to medications included in the AGS Beers Criteria® should not be excessively restricted by prior authorization and/or health plan coverage policies.

7. The AGS Beers Criteria® are not equally applicable to all countries.

Adapted with permission from Steinman MA, Fick DM. Using Wisely: A reminder on how to properly use the American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria®.

**Aspects to Evaluate in a Medical Visit**

The assessment and evaluation of patients in an integral, multi-dimensional fashion is necessary to avoid adverse drug events. Optimal medication prescription is paramount when treating older adults. Many protocols, such as the Assess, Review, Minimize, Optimize, Reassess (ARMOR) and the Prescribing Optimization Method (POM), attempt to standardize and guide these processes. However, these have not been validated.

A stepwise approach to treatment implementation is recommended. There are several key points to evaluate when encountering these situations to avoid inappropriate prescriptions.

- First, is there a clear indication for administering the medication?

- Do the benefits of the drug outweigh the potential harms?

- Do any of the medicines present significant interactions?

- Is the indicated duration of treatment appropriate?

- Are there any duplicated drugs?

- Is there a need for renal-adjusted dosage?

- Is there a non-pharmacological alternative to avoid PIM?

- What is the patient's functional status?

- What are the patient's preferences?

- Is the patient adherent to their treatment?

These questions are helpful when assessing PIM and implementing prescription management programs. The patient must be involved in decision-making.

Some helpful strategies to prevent adverse events include monitoring drug efficacy, assessing drug-drug interactions, avoiding overprescription, and periodically monitoring a patient's pharmacological treatment.

Other essential aspects of assessing are reviewing adherence and dosage formulations. For example, certain patients might chew, spit or combine their medication with food, affecting effectiveness. Moreover, patients with swallowing difficulties might find it challenging to take their medications, and alternatives should be offered. Often, herbal treatments and over-the-counter medications are forgotten and might contribute to unexpected events.

**Medication Reconciliation**

Medication reconciliation is another technique for evaluating polypharmacy and appropriate prescriptions without sacrificing time. It entails asking the patients to bring a list of all their medications or to bring the actual bottles (also known as the brown bag assessment) to a consultation. This practice is often very revealing and results in discovering potential risks for medication errors, including duplicate bottles of the same medication at different dosages, discovering medications prescribed by other providers, and medications the patient forgot to mention as they may use them intermittently. The American Geriatrics Society recommends only prescribing new drugs after reviewing all of a patient's medications.

**Deprescribing**

Deprescribing is a necessary intervention that reduces harm and prevents adverse drug events; it is defined as reducing or discontinuing a medication. Treatment efficiency and minimal effective dosage are the goals of deprescribing.

This process should be implemented whenever necessary, considering the evidence, patient preferences, and potential risks and benefits. Deprescribing should be seen as therapeutic, not as a harmful intervention. Interprofessional communication is essential to promote patient and provider confidence and achieve treatment goals.

Some useful tools for safely deprescribing are the Choosing Wisely Initiative and the Canadian Deprescribing Network. Both aim to optimize treatments and reduce PIM use.

Deprescribing should be systematically implemented, reducing patient hesitancy and improving acceptance.