A study done in 2005, reflecting on the 2001 National Household Survey of Drug Abuse, found that out of 55561 subjects, 33576 reported alcohol use within the past year. Ultimately the study found a slightly higher prevalence of abuse-to-dependence in males to females with (2.1 to 1) and (1.6 to 1), respectively

Designer drugs are illicitly produced drugs that are chemical analogs to preexisting psychoactive or analgesic molecules. These drugs can be more potent than known controlled or uncontrolled substances. There is a growing international concern that designer drugs are manufactured and distributed to circumvent drug laws and evade interdiction.

Abuse of prescription medicines involves central nervous depressants (benzodiazepines, non-benzodiazepines, and barbiturates), prescription opioids (hydrocodone, oxycodone, fentanyl, and codeine), and prescription stimulants (dextroamphetamine, dextroamphetamine/amphetamine combination product, and methylphenidate). Deaths from prescription opioid overdose were five times higher in 2016 than in 1999. In 2012, the National Center for Health Statistics reported that pain relievers (opioids) were involved in more "drug poisoning deaths" than heroin and cocaine, for example.

Around 9.7% of students in grades 7 to 12 reported using dextromethorphan recreationally in 2013, compared with 6.9% in 2011 based on the Ontario Student Drug Use and Health Survey. Most of the calls to poison control were related to dextromethorphan-related, and these calls involved adolescent males.

Extracts of many leaves were found to possess a powerfully addictive substance, and among them are extracted from a tree of the Mitragyna speciosa (kratom). Kratom is the subject of attention worldwide. Many reported exposure calls to poison centers related to kratom use, by year, increased from 2010 to 2015. Kratom (M. speciosa) misuse, among multiple compounds of the leaf, appears to be increasing in the Western world at an alarming rate with reported deaths.