The oral cavity is a unique structure in that it forms from both ectodermal and endodermal structures.

The tongue's embryological component derives from several different pharyngeal arches, each contributing towards the development of a different region of the tongue. In the fifth week of development, swellings, known as "lingual swellings," develop on the right and left sides of the first pharyngeal arch. These grow and develop to become the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The groove which marks the area of fusion between the two lingual swellings is known as the median sulcus. The posterior one-third of the tongue forms by the copula, a swelling that forms from the second pharyngeal arch, the second and third pharyngeal arches, and a small portion of the fourth pharyngeal arch. The boundary between the anterior and posterior portions of the tongue is a V-shaped groove known as the terminal sulcus.

The palate consists of primary and secondary embryological origins and forms between the sixth and twelfth week. The primary palate arises from the embryonic frontonasal prominences and contains the philtrum, upper incisors region, and anterior upper jaw. The secondary palate forms from the paired maxillary prominences fusion and contains the rest of the hard and soft palate. These palatal outgrowths then expand vertically to become palatal shelves. These shelves elevate horizontally above the dorsum of the tongue and fuse with the primary palate and nasal septum to form the intact roof of the oral cavity.

The upper lip form during early embryogenesis from the maxillary, lateral nasal, and medial nasal facial prominences. These facial prominences develop from anteriorly migrating neural crest cells in combination with mesoderm and the head ectoderm. They then undergo growth and expansion, eventually leading to their fusion and the formation of facial structures.