The goal of therapy for chronic CHF is to improve symptom management and quality of life, decrease hospitalizations, and decrease overall mortality associated with this disease. The goal of pharmacologic therapy is to give all indicated agents rather than single agents because the aggregate effect of these therapies is better than monotherapy from any of the agents.

The primary combination therapy for HFrEF includes diuretics, a renin-angiotensin system inhibitor (such as an angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB)), and a beta-blocker. The combination of hydralazine and nitrate is an alternative to an angiotensin system blocker for primary therapy if ACE inhibitor, ARNI, and ARB therapies are contraindicated. The nitrate and hydralazine combination is also indicated to reduce mortality and morbidity in African American patients with symptomatic HFrEF, currently receiving optimal medical therapy.

Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists such as spironolactone or eplerenone are indicated in patients with NYHA functional class II to IV and an LVEF of less than or equal to 35%. They are also indicated in patients with symptomatic HF after a myocardial infarction (MI) and an LVEF of less than 40%. However, in patients with recent MI and a low EF without symptoms of HF, these medications did not show any benefit.

Ivabradine selectively inhibits the funny current (I-f) in the sinoatrial node. According to the AHA/ACC, ivabradine is indicated in patients with persistently symptomatic HF and an EF of less than or equal to 35% in sinus rhythm. The resting heart rate should be greater than 70 beats/min despite goal-directed beta-blocker therapy.

Vericiguat is an agent that stimulates the intracellular receptor for endogenous NO, which is a potent vasodilator. It was recently approved by the FDA in 2021 to reduce the risk of mortality and HF hospitalizations in adults admitted with HF exacerbation who have chronic symptomatic HF and an EF of less than 45%.

Digoxin may be considered in symptomatic patients in sinus rhythm despite adequate goal-directed therapy to reduce the all-cause rate of hospitalizations, but its role is limited.

An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) is indicated for primary prevention of sudden cardiac death in patients with HF who have an LVEF of less than or equal to 35% and an NYHA functional class of II to III while on goal-directed medical therapy. It is also indicated if a patient has NYHA functional class II and an EF of less than or equal to 30% on adequate medical therapy.

Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) with biventricular pacing is indicated in patients with HFrEF and an NYHA functional class of II to IV with an LVEF less than or equal to 35% and QRS duration of greater than 150 ms.

In patients with refractory HF, despite optimized pharmacologic therapy, intravenous vasodilator therapy and intravenous inotropes have been considered in the past. However, according to the AHA/ACC 2013 and 2017 guidelines, this should be restricted to palliative symptom relief in patients with end-stage disease who cannot get relief with standard medical therapy.

In patients with HFpEF, none of the current therapies have a definitive improvement in mortality or hospitalization. However, medical management with the above therapies is indicated.

Patients with progressive HF or those with acute, severe refractory HF may be considered for heart transplantation.

It is also important to address potential triggers for HF exacerbation once the diagnosis of HF is made. Drugs that should be avoided in patients with HF include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), calcium channel blockers (CCBs) except vasoselective CCBs, and most antiarrhythmic drugs (except those in class III).