Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are derived from select B-lymphocytes from convalescent plasmas of recovered patients.

Monoclonal antibodies against COVID-19 disrupt host cell entry by binding the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (AE2) receptor binding domain (RBD) of the virus. SARS-CoV-2 engages the host cell ACE2 receptor via the spike (S) glycoprotein to cause infection. This makes spike S glycoprotein on the coronavirus surface a common target for antiviral therapy, most notable of which are monoclonal antibodies.

According to one study, single-cell sorting identified 4277 SARS-CoV-2 spike protein-specific memory B cells from just 14 COVID-19 survivors.

Consequently, many different monoclonal antibodies (mAb) were developed and granted emergency use authorizations for the treatment of acute COVID-19 illness in patients with mild to moderate disease who were at high risk for progression to severe disease. Clinical data revealed that the use of mAbs in these patients reduced viral load and improved symptoms.

Like other RNA viruses, there is a high potential for mutation, and several variants of SARS-CoV-2 have been identified. Thus far, several variants of concern have been identified, such as the alpha variant (B1.1.7 lineage, United Kingdon (UK) origin), beta variant (B.1351 lineage, South African origin), gamma variant (P.1/B.1.1.28.1 lineage, Brazilian origin), and delta variant (B1.617.2 lineage, Indian origin).

On November 26, 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) identified the Omicron variant (B.1.1.529) as a variant of concern (VOC). This variant carries a high number of mutations, especially in the main antigenic target of mAbs.