Disease-modifying therapies are the mainstay of treatment of relapsing-remitting MS. Glatiramer acetate, dimethyl fumarate, fingolimod, interferon-beta preparations, natalizumab, and mitoxantrone are some of the primary disease-modifying therapies available. Early treatment should commence upon establishing a diagnosis of MS. Short term goal includes a reduction in MRI lesion activity. Long term goals include prevention of secondary progressive MS. The primary issues after initiating therapy include patient compliance and monitoring for drug toxicity.

- Glatiramer acetate is a mixture of synthetic polypeptides, possibly functioning as a ligand for the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Binding limits activation and induces regulatory cells. Possible neuroprotective and repair mechanisms are also possibilities.

- Interferon-beta preparations have various mechanisms of possible action. Interferon-beta modulates T, and B-cell function possibly alters cytokine expression, plays a role in blood-brain barrier recovery, and potentially decreases matrix metalloproteinase expression. Administration is either subcutaneous or intramuscular, depending on the preparation. Side effects include flu-like symptoms and possible brief worsening of the patient's existing neurologic symptoms.

- Natalizumab is an intravenously administered humanized monoclonal antibody that blocks leukocyte adhesion with vascular endothelial cells. This drug inhibits leukocyte migration into the central nervous system. Natalizumab is usually well tolerated. Mild headaches and flushing often occur during intravenous administration.

- Mitoxantrone is an intravenously administered chemotherapeutic agent that interferes with DNA repair and RNA synthesis. A possible effect on cellular and humoral immunity may represent the mechanism of therapy for MS.

- Fingolimod is an orally administered drug with immunomodulatory effects, possibly relating to inhibition of T cell migration. Possible side effects include lymphopenia, bradycardia, and hepatotoxicity.

Patients with secondary progressive MS, progressive-relapsing MS, and primary progressive MS appear to represent primarily neurodegenerative processes. Disease-modifying therapies are, therefore, less effective, and treatment with these therapies has ranged from possible benefit to little effect on disease progression. Young patients with a short duration of progression seem to derive the most benefit.

The following principles highlight the treatment of acute relapses:

- Treatment of a possible underlying process which could have triggered a relapse (such as an infection or metabolic derangement)

- Symptomatic treatment based on specific neurologic symptoms

- A short course of corticosteroids to assist in recovery

- Rehabilitation with involvement of physical and occupational therapy