Cilia are tiny hair-like projections lining the airway to protect the lungs from toxins. They are also covered by a thin layer of mucus to help move the trapped particles towards expulsion via the cough reflex. Cilia are located in the upper airways whereas alveolar macrophages are in the lower airways, taking care of particles that are smaller in size that may have been missed by the cilia and/or mucus. Alveolar macrophages are white blood cells that ingest and digest smaller particles, less than 2 micrometers. When a large number of particles enter the lung, more alveolar macrophages can be recruited, including neutrophils if a bacterial infection were the concern.

On a smaller scale, the integrated stress response (ISR) becomes activated by one or more of these toxic triggers and thereby kicks off one of four stress-sensing kinases: heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI), protein kinase R (PKR), PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), and general control nonderepressible 2 (GCN2). A toxic insult activates each kinase: iron deficiency and oxidative stress activate HRI, dsDNA in viruses and bacteria activates PKR, hypoxia and misfolded proteins activate PERK, and amino acid starvation and UV light activate GCN2.

These stress-sensing kinases furthermore phosphorylate eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF2a) and reduce global protein synthesis as a protective mechanism. It wards off stressing the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) from an overproduction of proteins, it reduces the consumption of iron and amino acids in times of starvation of these proteins, and it blocks viral or bacterial replication by hindering protein synthesis.

The eIF2a also promotes the translation of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), which thereby has several functions. Activation of ATF4 allows for cellular adaptation to stress via increased production of transporters, such as for amino acids to overcome nutrient limitations. ATF4 also induces CCAT enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), a transcription factor that aids the eIF2a phosphatase, GADD34 (growth arrest and DNA-damage 34), allowing for the synthesis of various proteins. This protein synthesis can further induce damage to the ERs in the lungs if the insult continues chronically by overpopulating the ERs. CHOP also induces ER oxidase 1a to promote oxidative protein folding, the production of ROS species, as well as IL-8 induction, a proinflammatory gene all leading to chronic lung damage.