Typically, early-stage breast cancer (stage I and II) is treated with breast conservation therapy (BCT). Surgery includes lumpectomy and axillary staging with sentinel lymph node biopsy for invasive breast cancer. Axillary staging is not needed for ductal carcinoma in situ.  Contraindications to breast conservation therapy are multicentric disease, high tumor to breast ratio, diffuse microcalcifications, persistent positive margins despite re-excisions, previous breast radiation therapy, scleroderma, and pregnancy. In these cases, mastectomy is recommended.

Treatment for ductal carcinoma in situ (Stage 0) is individualized based on clinical and pathological features and patient preference. Typically, patients with ductal carcinoma in situ are treated with lumpectomy. Radiation therapy is recommended to reduce the risk of local breast recurrence. In some patients with a low-risk profile, radiation therapy can be omitted. Increasingly, Oncotype DX ductal carcinoma in situ score is utilized in the decision-making process for ductal carcinoma in situ to assess risk for recurrence and help guide treatment. In patients with invasive tumors, chemotherapy is recommended if there is a high risk of recurrence especially in the setting of a large tumor, node positive, triple-negative (ER, PR, HER2- negative), or HER2 positive disease.

Oncotype DX also plays a role in determining the need for chemotherapy in hormone positive, HER2-negative, node-negative breast tumors. Chemotherapy has traditionally been given in the adjuvant setting. Increasingly, neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been used in cases to allow tumor shrinkage in hopes of preserving the breast and in triple negative or HER2 positive breast tumors. Neoadjuvant therapy is now considered standard of care in high-risk populations such as young patients and those with more advanced or aggressive disease. Radiation therapy is recommended in the post-lumpectomy setting to reduce the risk of local recurrence.

Whole breast radiotherapy targets the entire breast tissue. Conventional dose of 45 Gy to 50 Gy is delivered to the whole breast, followed by a boost to the lumpectomy bed for an additional 10 Gy to 16 Gy.  Conventional fractionation typically given over 6 weeks. Depending on the risk of recurrence, radiation therapy is also delivered to regional nodes to 45 GY to 50 Gy.  Nodal irradiation includes the supraclavicular, axillary, and internal mammary regions if clinically indicated. Hypofractionation is considered for low-risk node-negative patients who are 50 years or older, not getting chemotherapy, and have a separation of 25 cm or less.

Recommended hypofractionation schedule is 42.56 Gy in 16 fractions plus lumpectomy bed boost (approximately 2 weeks less than conventional fractionation). Partial breast irradiation targets the lumpectomy bed only and is considered in low-risk patients who are 50 years or older with unicentric/unifocal tumors 3 cm or less, negative margins, and negative nodes. Partial breast irradiation is delivered in 10 fractions, twice daily, over 1 week.  Adjuvant therapy also includes endocrine therapy in patients with hormone-positive tumors.