Surgical wounds will heal through primary intention in the presence of well-approximated tissues and the absence of infection. This occurs over three overlapping phases: hemostasis/inflammation, proliferation, and maturation. Disruption of this process through infection, hypoxia, or dehiscence will lead to secondary wound healing. This occurs through the formation of granulation tissue (consisting of fibroblasts, new blood vessels, and type III collagen) with overlying epithelialization and extensive remodeling. Decelerated angiogenesis and epithelialization make this a slower mode of healing and more likely to result in chronic wounds or infection without good wound care.

The exact pathophysiology of seroma formation is not yet fully understood. Current hypotheses from different studies indicate a likely multifactorial origin of this fluid collection. Surgical procedures with extensive soft tissue dissection are more likely to transect blood and lymphatic vessels and lead to a transudative fluid collection. Cases that have undergone significant resection of tissue result in a large potential dead space, making it more difficult for flaps to adhere and creating shearing forces between tissue surfaces. This is thought to contribute to an inflammatory process with exudative fluid from tissues adding to seroma formation.

Multiple studies have analyzed fluid aspirated from seromas to investigate its chemical and cellular components, with conflicting findings suggestive of both a lymph-like fluid and fluid similar to inflammatory exudate.

Chronic, unsuccessfully treated seromas may rarely lead to pseudocyst formation, lined by a dense capsule consisting of fibrous tissue and hyaline degenerated collagen. The incidence and pathophysiology of this encapsulated seroma remain poorly understood, with current evidence limited to case reports.