In 2016, the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) updated their 2009 guidelines and recommended routine screening for depression in all adolescents aged 12 to 18 years in primary care settings (Grade B evidence).

There are multiple assessment tools for depression and suicide in children. They range from interviews, parent reporting, and child self-reporting. The tools vary in terms of their format, the number of items, self vs. parent report, the duration for completion, recommended age, availability (free or paid). The screening tests are available in many languages. The medical professional will have to ensure that the particular test is the best for the community/patient being tested. Screening for depression in childhood can be done in multiple settings- school, primary care clinic, emergency department, hospital. There are multiple methods used to screen for suicidality in children. Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression scale (CES-D), Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI), Clinical Interview Schedule (CIS) are some of the screening tests for childhood depression. Of these, PHQ-9 and BDI are more commonly used tests and have the highest sensitivity (up to 90%) and specificity (up to 94%).

PHQ-9 was first developed for adults. Patient Health Questionnaire for Adolescents (PHQ-9A) is a brief nine-question questionnaire tool that has been modified for adolescents. It asks the teen about lack of pleasure, feelings of hopelessness, sleep problems, lack of energy, problems with eating, feelings of guilt, lack of concentration, movement or speech problems, and suicidal thoughts. It scores the severity of each symptom based on the frequency of occurrence. PHQ-9A score can range from 0-27. The diagnosis of depression requires a score of at least 5. The symptoms should be present for at least two weeks and occur frequently ("more than half the days").

While screening for depression, one should be aware of other conditions like adjustment disorder, grief reaction, bipolar disorder. In depression, the mood is always negative. Whereas in grief reaction, sadness is intermixed with positive memories of the deceased. In depression, the individual has feelings of worthlessness. In contrast, self-esteem is preserved in a grief reaction. Adjustment disorder usually resolves after 6 months after a stressor. Bipolar disorder is diagnosed when there is at least one episode of mania.

Each of the nine questions in the screening tool is scored based on the frequency of occurrence. A score of 1 or 2 or 3 is given to each of the symptoms if they occur "several days" or "more than half of the days" or "nearly every day." PHQ-9A score can range from 0-27.  In the PHQ 9A, a total score of 0-4 implies no or minimal depression, and a score of 5 to 9 implies mild depression. Scores of 10-14 and 15-19 denote moderate depression and moderately severe depression, respectively. A score of 20-27 denotes severe depression.

BDI is a 21 questionnaire self-report tool that can be used for the diagnosis of depression. It asks about feelings of sadness, hopelessness, failure, lack of satisfaction, guilt, self-hate, punishment, self-blame, cry, suicidal thoughts, irritation, lack of interest in people, tiredness, decisions, work and sleep problems, physical appearance, appetite, weight loss, and sex. Score can range from 0-63. Scores up to 10 are normal. 11-16 is considered mild mood disturbance. Higher scores signify different levels of depression (borderline, moderate, severe, extreme).

Similar to depression, there are several tools that screen specifically for suicide in children. These include Ask Suicide Screening (ASQ), Risk of Suicide Questionnaire (RSQ), Moods and Feelings Questionnaire for Suicidal Ideation (MFQ-SI), Treatment-Emergent Activation, and Suicidal Assessment Profile, Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS).

Of these, ASQ is more commonly used. It is a brief self-report four questionnaire. It has been validated in emergency departments with a reported sensitivity of 96.5% and specificity of 87.6%. It asks the child if they wish they were dead. The tool asks if they have thoughts of killing and if they ever tried killing themselves. It asks if they feel that they or their family will be better off if they were dead. A positive screen requires a STAT full mental health and safety evaluation. The patient cannot leave until fully evaluated. Potentially dangerous items that can be used for self-harm should be removed. A safety plan should be created with the patient and the family to manage suicidal thoughts. Parents and caretakers should be involved where appropriate. Engaging the support system for the suicidal patient is an important intervention. Better the support system, the better is the outcome.

Healthcare providers should screen for substance abuse in children diagnosed with depression and mood disorders. Pediatricians should routinely screen for peripartum depression.