Adverse effects of thiazide diuretics stem from the ionic imbalance caused due to the initial Na loss in the DCT.

- **Hypokalemia.**Most widely recognized, the first adverse effect of thiazide diuretics is hypokalemia. As discussed above, hypokalemia is a sequela of the aldosterone-mediated actions of the Na/K pump in the CT. Hypokalemia can be life-threatening and requires monitored during the first 2-3 weeks of HCTZ therapy.

- **Hyponatremia.**The MOA of thiazide diuretics is to decrease sodium reabsorption and therefore decreased fluid reabsorption; this directly causes decreased levels of circulating sodium. If hyponatremia were to occur, it would happen during the first 2 to 3 weeks of therapy; after this time, the patient is in a new steady state in which further sodium and water losses do not occur.

- **Metabolic alkalosis.**Patients on thiazide diuretics may experience a hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis due to the increase in aldosterone-mediated K and H ions excretion in the intercalated cells of the CT.

- **Hypercalcemia.**By increasing calcium reabsorption from the luminal membrane into the interstitium in exchange for sodium, thiazides reduce urine calcium levels and increase blood calcium. However, if indicated, this effect of thiazide diuretics makes thiazides useful for nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis treatment. Decreased urinary calcium decreases stone development in the kidney, and increased blood calcium is beneficial for patients with osteoporosis and promotes bone health.

- **Hyperglycemia**. Thiazide diuretics cause hypokalemia; at the level of the pancreatic B cells, this hypokalemia causes hyperpolarization of the B cell and decreases insulin secretion. Decreased K in the interstitium keeps the K channels open for an extended time, which causes the hyperpolarization of the cell. This hyperpolarization does not allow the voltage-gated calcium channels to open. When intracellular calcium does not increase through calcium influx via the voltage-gated calcium channels, exocytosis of insulin granules does not occur in the pancreatic B cells.

- **Hyperuricemia**. Thiazide diuretics cause hyperuricemia and increase the risk of developing gout. Thiazides directly increase urate reabsorption in the proximal tubule by using the OAT 1 anion exchanger on the basolateral membrane and the OAT 4 urate anion exchanger on the luminal membrane. At the OAT 1 exchanger, thiazides enter the proximal convoluted tubule, in replacement of urate, for an anion, increasing urate in the interstitium. The OAT 4 exchanger exchanges thiazides for urate in the lumen, causing increased urate in the proximal convoluted tubule that then crosses the basolateral membrane and therefore increases urate in the interstitium.

- **Hyperlipidemia**. The mechanism of hyperlipidemia with thiazide treatment is unclear. However, it appears to be an acute response to high-dose thiazide treatment.

- **Sulfonamide allergy**. Thiazide diuretics are sulfa-containing drugs. Patients with sulfa allergies taking thiazides may experience headaches, rash, hives, swelling of the mouth and lips, wheezing or trouble breathing, asthma attack, and anaphylaxis.

Adverse effects of taking these medications also include a possible increased risk of developing acute pancreatitis. T hypothesized that thiazides have a toxic effect on the pancreas and cause increased pancreatic secretions and pancreatic ischemia. If the clinician observes symptoms of acute pancreatitis, the patient must immediately stop the use of the thiazide diuretic, and they should not be re-prescribed this medication.