**Pharmacodynamic Concepts**

A few key concepts and terms are used in the description of pharmacodynamics to describe the extent and duration of a drug's action.

- **Emax**is the maximal effect of a drug on a parameter being measured. For example, this could be a measure of platelet inhibition as anex-vivo test or the maximum lowering of blood pressure.

- **EC50**is the concentration of the drug at a steady state that produces half of the maximum effect

- **Hill coefficient**is the slope of the relationship between drug concentration and drug effect. Hill coefficient values above 2 indicate a steep relationship (i.e., small changes in concentration produce significant changes in effect), and hill coefficient values above 3 indicate an almost instantaneous "all or none" effect.

**General Mechanisms of Drug Actions**

Drugs produce their effects by interacting with biological targets, but the time course of the pharmacodynamic effect is dependent on the mechanism and biochemical pathway of the target. Effects can be classified as direct or indirect and immediate or delayed. Direct effects are usually the result of drugs interacting with a receptor or enzyme that is central to the pathway of the effect. Beta-blockers inhibit receptors that directly modulate cAMP levels in smooth muscle cells in the vasculature. Indirect effects are the result of drugs interacting with receptors and proteins of other biologic structures that are significantly upstream from the end biochemical process that produces the drug effect. Corticosteroids bind to nuclear transcription factors in the cell cytosol, which translocate to the nucleus and inhibit transcription of DNA to mRNA encoding for several inflammatory proteins.

Immediate effects are usually secondary to direct drug effects. Neuromuscular blocking agents such as succinylcholine, which consists of two acetylcholine (ACh) molecules linked end to end by their acetyl groups, interact with the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) on skeletal muscle cells and leave the channel in an open state, resulting in membrane depolarization and generation of an action potential, muscle contraction and then paralysis within 60 seconds after administration.

**Dosing Principles-Based Upon Pharmacodynamics**

Pharmacodynamics emphasizes dose-receptor relationships; these are the interactions between the drug's concentration and its effect.

In this equation, L represents the ligand, i.e., drug concentration, R denotes receptor concentrations, and LR is the ligand-receptor complex concentrations.

Other pharmacodynamic concepts include:

Kd: The pharmacologic response depends on the drug binding to its target as well as the concentration of the drug at the receptor site. Kd measures how tightly a drug binds to its receptor. Kd is defined as the ratio of rate constants for association (kon) and dissociation (koff) of the drug to and from the receptors. At equilibrium, the rate of receptor-drug complex formation is equal to the rate of dissociation into its components receptor + drug. The measurement of the reaction rate constants can be used to define an equilibrium or affinity constant (1/Kd). The smaller the Kd value, the greater the affinity of the antibody for its target. For example, albuterol has a Kd of 100 nanomolar (nM) for the beta-2 receptor.

Receptor Occupancy: From the law of mass action, the more receptors that are occupied by the drug, the greater the pharmacodynamic response, but all receptors do not need to be occupied in order to get a maximal response. This principle is the concept of spare receptors and commonly includes muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, steroid receptors, and catecholamine receptors. Maximal effects are obtained by less than maximal receptor occupancy by signal amplification.

Receptor Up- and Downregulation: Chronic exposure of a receptor to an antagonist typically leads to upregulation, or an increased number of receptors, while chronic exposure of a receptor to an agonist causes downregulation or a decreased number of receptors.

Effect compartment and indirect pharmacodynamics: A delay between the appearance of the drug in the plasma and its intended effect may be due to multiple factors, including transfer into the tissue or cell compartment in the body or a requirement for the inhibition or stimulation of a signal to be cascaded through intracellular pathways. These effects can be described by either using an effect compartment or using indirect pharmacodynamic response models, which describe the effect of the drug through indirect mechanisms such as inhibition or stimulation of the production or elimination of endogenous cellular components that control the effect pathway.