**Celiac Artery Compression Syndrome**

It is also commonly known as celiac axis syndrome, median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS), Marable syndrome, and Dunbar syndrome. This syndrome characteristically presents as angina localized to the upper abdomen due to the compression of the celiac artery by diaphragmatic crura.

The median arcuate ligament is a fibrous arch that connects the right and left diaphragmatic crura around the aorta, at the base of the diaphragm. If this ligament is low lying due to its highly variable locations, it can compress or distort the celiac trunk in a downward angle resulting in an unpleasant or excruciating epigastric pain. The pain is often relieved when in the standing position and becomes exacerbated when in the supine position. This syndrome commonly presents in the 20 to the 40-year-old patient population. In specific individuals, this may also result in mesenteric ischemia. The most common complaint alongside epigastric pain is postprandial pain, which results in weight loss.

Computed tomography (CT) angiography would reveal focal stenosis with a characteristic hook-shaped appearance due to the distorted shape of the celiac trunk on its superior surface. Since the celiac trunk can have a similar appearance upon expiration in a healthy patient, it is important to make the diagnosis of celiac artery compression syndrome by correlating the imaging findings with patient history.

Treatment of this syndrome via laparoscopic surgical decompression by dividing the median arcuate ligament and is usually reserved for symptomatic patients.

**Celiac Aneurysm**

Although rarely found in clinical cases, celiac artery aneurysm can occur as a form of splanchnic artery aneurysm. A celiac aneurysm is typically asymptomatic until it ruptures. Since the rupture of the celiac trunk aneurysm carries high morbidity and mortality rates, early recognition of this vascular anomaly becomes crucial. It is often found incidentally on diagnostic imaging studies such as arteriography or post rupture in autopsies.

**Celiac Trunk Dissection**

Most commonly, the cause of a celiac trunk dissection is iatrogenic. However, often comorbidities such as atherosclerosis, hypertension, pre-existing vascular diseases such as fibromuscular dysplasia, and even pregnancy can be predisposing factors to arterial dissection. Alternative factors can also include trauma due to a sudden increase in intra-abdominal pressure, or they can be mechanical. Celiac trunk dissections are frequently asymptomatic but may present with abdominal pain if there is the involvement of bowel ischemia secondary to rupture of other abdominal arteries such as splenic, renal, or superior mesenteric arteries.

The optimal means of diagnosing celiac trunk dissection is CT with contrast or CT angiography. However, other imaging studies, such as magnetic resonance (MR) angiography or sonography, can also be considered. On diagnostic imaging, the most common finding for the dissection is an intimal flap and/or a presence of mural thrombus in the lumen of the celiac trunk.

Surgery is usually needed to manage celiac trunk dissection to prevent further acute complications such as rupture, intestinal ischemia, or chronic complications such as arterial stenosis. However, if the clinician diagnoses the dissection as limited, the aim shifts toward preventing thromboembolic events. In such cases, treatment is conservative with the use of anticoagulation and anti-hypertensives to control the blood pressure. An additional option can also include evaluating the collateral supply and managing the endovascular itself.

**Peptic Ulcer Disease**

Gastric or duodenal ulcers are painful sores that occur mainly as a result of Helicobacter pylori infection, long-term non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use, or tobacco smoking. Patients will report epigastric abdominal pain and early satiety. With gastric ulcers, the pain usually increases after meals, while the pain usually decreases after meals with duodenal ulcers. Gastric ulcers most commonly occur on the lesser curvature of the stomach, which is supplied by the right and left gastric arteries. Duodenal ulcers most commonly occur on the posterior wall of the duodenum, an area supplied by the gastroduodenal artery. The gold standard for testing is Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Management typically includes H2-receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs).