The hepatitis C RNA virus enters the hepatocyte via endocytosis mediated by at least four co-receptor molecules. Following internalization in the cytoplasm, its positive-stranded RNA is uncoated and translated into ten mature peptides. These are then cleaved by both host proteases and virally encoded proteases known as NS3-4a serine proteases. These mature peptides then go on to reside on the endoplasmic reticulum, forming a replication complex that contains an important enzyme, the NS5B RNA dependent RNA polymerase. This enzyme catalyzes the positive RNA strand into its negative-strand intermediate, which in turn serves as the template for new positive-strand synthesis. These are then packaged with core and envelop glycoprotein into mature virions, which then exit the cell via exocytosis. HCV cannot integrate into the host's genome.

Over the years, many genotypes of HCV have been identified. The dominant genotype globally is genotype 1, which is also associated with more severe liver disease and a much greater risk of developing liver cancer. In the US, genotype 1 accounts for about 60% of cases of HCV. Genotypes 2a, 3b, and 2c account for about 10% of cases in the USA and are most responsive to antiviral medications.

The virus is detectable in plasma within days of exposure, often 1 to 4 weeks. Viremia peaks in the first 8 to 12 weeks of infection and then plateaus or drops to undetectable levels (viral clearance); in the majority, 50% to 85%, it persists. Persistent infection appears to be due to weak CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses, which fail to control viral replication. When a chronic infection is established, HCV does not appear to be cytopathic; it is the local inflammatory response that triggers fibrogenesis. Multiple external factors, including alcohol consumption, HIV/HBV coinfections, Genotype 3 infection, insulin resistance, obesity, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, have links with accelerated fibrosis progression and cirrhosis. The severity of liver fibrosis tightly correlates with the increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma via facilitating genetic aberrations and promoting neoplastic clones.