In typical postoperative endophthalmitis, poor visual acuity, corneal edema, hypopyon, vitreous inflammation, and poor fundus visualization are the most common clinical signs.

Reduced vision and worsening pain - In Endophthalmitis Vitrectomy Study (EVS) study, reduction in vision and pain accounted for 94% and 74% of all symptoms while in the ESCRS study, it accounted for 92.9% and 79% of all symptoms.**25%**of cases. The other common presenting features are swollen eyelid, redness of the eye, circumcorneal congestion, photophobia, ocular discharge, fibrinous membranes in the anterior chamber, iris synechiae formation, loss of fundal red reflex, and floaters. Bleb-related endophthalmitis initially presents as bacterial conjunctivitis with signs and symptoms such as conjunctival hyperemia and discharge, yellowish colored filtering bleb, and variable anterior chamber inflammatory reaction, which later progresses to involve the posterior chamber as well. Certain signs, if seen such as corneal ring abscess, are highly suggestive of Bacillus, while gas bubbles in the anterior chamber, amaurosis, or green-brown hypopyon indicate Clostridium.

In chronic endophthalmitis, patients present with low-grade anterior chamber inflammation and vitritis. Visual acuity can remain preserved until late in the presentation. Organisms such as Propionibacterium tend to get localized within the capsular bag and present as posterior capsular plaque.

In patients with endogenous endophthalmitis, the presentation can be bilateral with systemic morbidities like sepsis, nausea, vomiting, and fever. Endogenous bacterial endophthalmitis presents with pain, blurred vision, and redness with a variable degree of both anterior chamber and vitreous involvement. A subretinal abscess may be noted.

Endophthalmitis after infectious keratitis presents with hypopyon and severe visual loss, sometimes with an inaccurate projection of rays. Ultrasound evaluation of the posterior segment can help to detect vitreous involvement in the form of echoes in the vitreous and confirm the diagnosis.

Progression of the disease may lead to panophthalmitis, corneal infiltration and perforation, and phthisis bulbi.

Due to severe damage to ocular structures, the workup of endophthalmitis is done on an emergency basis.

**History**

- **Inciting event**– surgery/trauma/contiguous spread (keratitis)/endogenous endophthalmitis/other procedure

- **Onset**– fulminant/acute/chronic: Most cases of fulminant endophthalmitis are caused by highly virulent organisms such asPseudomonas aeruginosa / Bacillus species (see figure on the classification of endophthalmitis)

- **The rapidity of progression**– Rapid or gradual: Bacterial endophthalmitis progresses faster than fungal endophthalmitis.

- **Systemic illness**– history of intravenous infusion, prolonged hospitalization, diabetes, renal or liver problems: Helps to localize any source of endogenous endophthalmitis, calibrating drug dosage.

**Ophthalmic Assessment**

**Clinical**

1. **Visual acuity**including projection of rays- When visual acuity is less than counting fingers, EVS standards help in the maintenance of uniform records. After occluding the better eye, with light directed from behind the patient:

Hand movements are tested at a distance of 60 cm

Perception of light is tested at a distance of 90 cm with the bright light of indirect ophthalmoscope

At least four out of five responses should be correct for reading to be considered.

2. **Examination of the ocular adnexa**- especially to look for severe blepharitis, meibomitis, stye, chronic dacryocystitis, and other sources of infection3.**Ocular movements**- Reduced or absent ocular movements in a case of endophthalmitis with proptosis and pain, clinically point to the diagnosis of panophthalmitis4.**Anterior segment examination**[close focus at the sites of entry – SICS(small incision cataract surgery) tunnel/ Corneal entry wound / Bleb/ perforating trauma] look for corneal clarity; corneal infiltrate, Posterior capsular plaque, vitreous in the wound, open wound, unsutured wound, hypopyon, fibrin, posterior synechia5.**Intraocular pressure**6.**Fundus examination**(dilated) if media permits to look for any specific pattern as well as mimics such as dropped lens matter/ intraocular foreign body (IOFB)

Grading of vitreous haze (EVS standard) [clinical examination with an indirect ophthalmoscope]

- **Grade 1:**More than 20/40 (6/12) view of the retina

- **Grade 2:**Second order retinal vessels are visible

- **Grade 3:**Some vessels visible but not the second-order vessels

- **Grade 4:**No retinal vessels are visible, only red reflex present

- **Grade 5:**No red reflex is seen