**Osteosarcoma**

The true etiology of osteosarcoma is unknown. Most research analyses the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma of the long bones rather than being specific to the jaws. The relevance of this distinction is the variation in characteristics and clinical behavior between the two. Osteosarcoma of the jaw has a later onset, is more commonly low-grade, has a reduced risk of metastasis, and better overall prognosis.

Tumor suppressor genes p53 and RB1 mutations are thought to be involved in tumor initiation.

**Fibrous Dysplasia**

Fibrous dysplasia is caused by a genetic mutation in GNAS 1, leading to defective bone maturation during embryogenesis. This mutation occurs at different points in embryogenesis for each individual, altering the population size of daughter cells carrying the mutation. This accounts for the heterogeneity seen and is a form of somatic mosaicism. It is felt that earlier mutations lead to conditions like McCune-Albright syndrome and later monostotic fibrous dysplasia.

**Central Giant Cell Granuloma**

It was once thought that central giant cell granuloma represented a local reparative response to traumatic or inflammatory intramedullary hemorrhage.

**Osteoma**

The cause of osteoma is unknown. Multiple theories exist, defining them as either development abnormalities, neoplastic events, or a reactionary response. Most cited within the literature is that of a reaction to trauma or infection, with subsequent subperiosteal edema, bleeding and muscle traction thought to trigger uninhibited bone growth. Evidence to support abnormal muscle traction is their development in proximity to the muscular attachment on the lower border of the mandible.

**Osteochondroma**

There are many theories as to the development of osteochondromas. Some believe they occur due to epiphyseal cartilage herniation. Alternatively, due to their common formation at the insertion of the lateral pterygoid, some suggest that periosteal stress triggers the cartilaginous potential of accumulated embryonic cells in the region of tendon insertion.

**Osteoblastoma**

With the large degree of debate on the categorization and natural history of osteoblastoma, it is not surprising that etiology is poorly understood. Some have stated that trauma and abnormal local response to injury are involved, but little is truly understood.