In fetal circulation, the right side of the heart has higher pressures than the left side of the heart. This pressure difference allows the shunts to remain open. In postnatal circulation, when the baby takes its first breath, pulmonary resistance decreases, and blood flow through the placenta ceases. Blood commences flowing through the lungs, and the pressure on the left side becomes higher than on the right. As a result, the shunts mentioned above close.

Congenital heart defects arise when shunts fail to close after birth. Abnormalities in the anatomy of the heart can also alter the proper flow of blood. These defects can be cyanotic or acyanotic. Cyanotic heart defects are typically from right-to-left shunts in blood after birth. The baby can appear blue at birth, with deoxygenated blood bypassing the lungs and entering the systemic circulation. Examples of cyanotic heart defects are tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), transposition of the great arteries (TGA), persistent truncus arteriosus, tricuspid atresia, and total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR). Acyanotic heart defects are typically left-to-right shunts in blood after birth. Because the left side contains oxygenated blood, no deoxygenated blood enters the systemic circulation. Instead, some oxygenated blood goes to the right side of the heart and travels through the lungs again. As a result, the baby does not initially appear blue at birth. Examples of acyanotic heart defects are atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect (VSD), patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), and patent foramen ovale (PFO).

However, the shunt can reverse later in life if the left-to-right shunt goes uncorrected. With the left-to-right shunt, there can be a severe overload of the right heart due to increased blood flow, causing an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance, which causes pulmonary hypertension. Eventually, the right ventricle hypertrophies, and the pressure on the right side of the heart becomes more significant than on the left side. As a result, the shunt reverses and becomes right-to-left. Deoxygenated blood starts entering systemic circulation, and the baby can present with cyanosis. This switching of flow from left-to-right to right-to-left is known as Eisenmenger syndrome.

Developing endocardial cushions is essential in understanding why certain cardiac defects develop. The endocardial cushions contribute to the emergence of the atrial and ventricular septa, the mitral and tricuspid valves, the conotruncal septum, and the atrioventricular septa. When there is an endocardial cushion defect, it can cause cardiac malformations like ASD and VSD. These defects are also common in patients with trisomy 21 and fetal alcohol syndrome. ASDs arise when there is a hole in the atrial septum after birth. An ASD leads to communication between the right and left atria. The primum type of ASD is due to inadequate development of endocardial cushions and is seen less often than the secundum type. VSD arises when there is a hole in the ventricular septum after birth. A VSD leads to communication between the right and left ventricles.

Conotruncal septal defects are accountable for persistent truncus arteriosus, TGA, and TOF. In persistent truncus arteriosus, a single arterial trunk originates from both the right and left ventricles. It is not able to divide into the aorta and pulmonary artery distally. Because of a failure of neural crest cell migration, the conotruncal ridges are not able to form, resulting in this defect, which results in the deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle mixing with the oxygenated blood from the left ventricle, causing cyanosis. In TGA, the aorta and pulmonary artery switch locations. The aorta, in this case, originates from the right ventricle, and the pulmonary artery arises from the left ventricle. As a result, two independent blood circuits do not mix due to the conotruncal septum failing to spiral during development. Deoxygenated blood returns to the right side of the heart, travels through the aorta, and goes out to the body.

On the other hand, oxygenated blood returns to the left side of the heart from the lungs and then travels through the pulmonary artery to go back to the lungs. A shunt is needed for survival in this case due to the lack of oxygenated blood being delivered to the body. In TOF, there is an anterior displacement of the conotruncal septum. It is characterized by pulmonary stenosis, a VSD, an overriding aorta, and hypertrophy of the right ventricle. The pulmonary stenosis forces the deoxygenated blood to travel through the VSD from the right side to the left side, leading to right ventricular hypertrophy. Because of the deoxygenated blood crossing over into systemic circulation, the baby presents with early cyanosis.

Vascular malformations may also result in congenital defects. Coarctation of the aorta develops when there is constriction of the aortic arch distal to where the subclavian artery branches off. Pre-ductal indicates that the constriction is before the ductus arteriosus, and post-ductal indicates that the constriction is after the ductus arteriosus. In pre-ductal coarctation of the aorta, deoxygenated blood travels from the right atrium to the right ventricle and then through the pulmonary artery. Because a PDA is present, the deoxygenated blood crosses over to the aorta after the point of constriction. In post-ductal coarctation of the aorta, deoxygenated blood travels from the right atrium to the right ventricle and then through the pulmonary artery. Because there is no PDA present, the deoxygenated blood does not cross over to the left side.