# Continuing Education Activity

Tropicamide is a safe drug for pupillary dilation before a comprehensive eye exam or ocular procedure. Pupillary dilation is also necessary for specific intraocular procedures such as cataract surgery to reduce intraoperative complications and for better exposure to the cataract during surgery. Pupillary dilation is also essential for retinal surgery and investigations of the posterior segment. The use of mydriatic agents such as tropicamide has, therefore, become ubiquitous in optical settings. This activity will review drug indications, mechanisms of action, side effects, and how an interprofessional approach can improve patient management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the indications for tropicamide
- Summarize the mechanism through which tropicamide acts in each indication 
- Review the adverse effects of tropicamide, including at-risk patients for which prescribers require extra caution.
- Explain some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance tropicamide where it is indicated and improve patient outcomes.

# Indications

**FDA Approved Indications**

- Intended for diagnostic purposes: to achieve mydriasis

The preferred practice pattern of the American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends periodic dilated eye exams in different age groups.

Achieving a clinically effective pupil diameter of 6 mm is essential for viewing structures in the posterior segment. The most common indication for a comprehensive exam with pupillary dilation is screening for diabetic retinopathy. The nondilated exam gives the correct classification for the presence or stage of diabetic retinopathy in only  50% of cases.

The lower concentration of 0.5% produced less ocular discomfort with the same efficacy in dilating the pupil as the 1% solution in a study on 30 adolescents (aged 12 to 18 years) with type 1 diabetes.

- Intended for diagnostic purposes: cycloplegia

Eyecare specialists are interested in accommodation paralysis, also known as cycloplegia, when determining a patient's refractive error. Cycloplegic agents inactivate the ciliary muscle, so the patient cannot influence the refractive measurement. For example, an accurate evaluation is necessary before LASIK (laser-assisted in situ keratomileuses) surgery. In a 2017 meta-analysis, the more popular cycloplegic drug of choice, cyclopentolate, was compared to tropicamide. The research concluded that tropicamide is a viable alternative.

**FDA Non-approved, Off-label Use**

- Parkinson Disease

The properties of anticholinergics can counter the imbalanced dopaminergic to cholinergic activity in neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease. One randomized pilot study observed the safety and efficacy of tropicamide reduce sialorrhea in neurodegenerative diseases. Tropicamide was given orally as a dissolving film. Although the small sample size limited the power, a significant decrease in perceived symptoms on the visual analog scale and saliva volume measured with cotton balls occurred.

# Mechanism of Action

**Mechanism for Dilation**

- As a parasympathetic antagonist, tropicamide exerts its dilatory effects by acting on the pupillary sphincter muscle to cause its relaxation.

**Mechanism for Cycloplegia**

- Accommodation becomes hindered when tropicamide blocks the muscarinic receptors of the ciliary body. Its cycloplegic effect can last anywhere from 4 to 10 hours, with the onset of action occurring within 20 to 30 minutes.

**The mechanism for Reduction of Sialorrhea**

- Inhibition of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors on salivary glands is responsible for decreasing hypersalivation in patients with Parkinson's disease.

# Administration

Administration requires the removal of contact lenses. This topical ophthalmic solution is instilled into the eye in droplet form. The lacrimal sac should be compressed with the fingertip for 2 to 3 minutes after administration to reduce systemic absorption and systemic adverse effects. The tip of the dropper should not touch any surface as it might contaminate the drug. In a child, ensure the drug does not get to their mouth. Hands require washing before and after instilling the drop. The individual should avoid driving and not engage in potentially hazardous activities during pupillary dilation. After pupillary dilation, sensitivity to light may occur, and sunglasses may be necessary.

An infrequently used option is spray application. Several studies have shown that using tropicamide in its vaporized form is just as effective in achieving increased pupil diameter but with less patient-reported discomfort.

Along with the active ingredient (tropicamide), the drop has multiple inactive ingredients. These include benzalkonium chloride (preservative), purified water, edetate disodium dihydrate, and boric acid. Hydrochloric acid and/or sodium hydroxide are used to adjust pH to 4.0 to 5.8. For refraction, one drop of tropicamide 1% is put in each eye 5 minutes apart. For examination of the fundus, 0.5% strength is an option. Tropicamide may dilate pupils in acute anterior uveitis, and one drop every 5 to 10 minutes should optimally dilate the pupil.

# Adverse Effects

Ocular adverse events include transient stinging, photophobia, superficial punctate keratitis, blurred vision, and a rise in intraocular pressure.

Potential anticholinergic effects include dry mouth, high temperature, constipation, increased heart rate, and headache. Young children and the elderly are most susceptible to these side effects. Fortunately, due to its low affinity for muscarinic receptors and very low receptor occupancy in plasma, tropicamide applied as an eye drop rarely causes the systemic effects listed above.

Serious adverse events, especially vasomotor and cardiorespiratory collapse, behavioral changes, and psychotic reactions, have been reported rarely in children with the use of anticholinergic drugs, especially cyclopentolate.

Precipitating angle closure in primary open-angle glaucoma patients, as well as the potential increase in intraocular pressure after mydriasis, is a frequent concern to many ophthalmologists.

**Allergic contact dermatitis or allergic blepharoconjunctivitis**due to mydriatics:

Allergic contact dermatitis has been reported with phenylephrine

# Contraindications

Hypersensitivity to any active/inactive ingredient constitutes a contraindication for its use. There have been no studies on tropicamide use during breastfeeding, but nursing mothers can reduce the amount that reaches the nasolacrimal duct by applying pressure to the lacrimal sac for some time (at least 1 minute) and wiping away any excess solution.

# Monitoring

There are no recommended diagnostic exams for monitoring the use of tropicamide. Pupillary dilation and dimness of near vision denote that the drug's action has started. If the pupil reacts to light, that means that the pupil is not fully dilated, and more time or more administration of tropicamide eye drops is needed for the maximal action to come.

# Toxicity

Although tropicamide is a short-acting drug, and the frequency of associated adverse events is rare, there are certain instances when reversal of mydriasis is necessary, including decreasing the risk of angle-closure glaucoma, improving blurry vision, and decreasing recovery time for patient comfort. Presumably, a cholinergic agent like pilocarpine should be able to undo the effects of an anticholinergic drug. However, several studies have reported conflicting pupillary responses.

A study of 23 healthy subjects demonstrated that pilocarpine had an insignificant impact on returning pupil diameter to baseline. Seventeen percent of subjects reportedly had a reduction in visual acuity, indicating that pilocarpine use is futile and possibly detrimental.

The use of dapiprazole can cut recovery time in half compared to waiting for tropicamide to wear off on its own.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Intravenous injection of tropicamide and other eye drops is a non-clinical use that has been on the rise in polydrug misusers. A recently published review describes factors such as low cost, easy access, and enhancement of heroin's effects as reasons for its misuse.

There is limited information on interprofessional communication and tropicamide, as the absence of associated adverse events is well established. Nonetheless, coordinated care between the interprofessional healthcare team, including the pharmacist, optician, nurse practitioner, and ophthalmologist, ensures better outcomes. Suggestions for improvement include proper medication documentation and routine patient education. The use of tropicamide in the clinical setting requires an interprofessional approach, including open communication and accurate record keeping, with each caregiver operating in a team structure that leads to optimal patient results and minimizes adverse events. [Level 5]