Management of gastroparesis should include a holistic approach to target different aspects of the disease such as assessment of nutritional status, measures to correct fluid, electrolyte, and nutritional deficiencies, relief of symptoms of gastroparesis, improving gastric emptying, recognize and rectify the underlying cause of gastroparesis to prevent progressing of the disease, e.g., tight glycemic control in diabetes, stopping causative medications.

Diet modifications: Small Meal size could limit emptying time and help symptom alleviation. Patients may need to eat 4 or 5 times per day to compensate for the small meal size. Carbonated drinks like soda and beer could release carbon dioxide, which can aggravate gastric distention. Smoking or high doses of alcohol can decrease antral contractility and impair gastric emptying.

Medical treatment: As needed antiemetics such as prochlorperazine (5 to 10 mg up to 3 times a day), diphenhydramine (12.5 mg up to 3 or 4 times a day) and ondansetron (4 or 8 mg up to 3 times a day) can provide symptomatic relief in gastroparesis. Metoclopramide, a prokinetic medication, is the only FDA approved drug for gastroparesis. It is usually started with 5 mg three times a day, fifteen minutes before meals. It can be titrated up to 40 mg per day but need very close monitoring for adverse effects. Also, the duration of treatment approved by the FDA is 12 weeks due to the possibility of severe side effects.

Non-medical approaches: Gastric electrical stimulation (GES) has shown to relieve symptoms, mainly vomiting frequency and the need for nutrition supplementation.

Future prospects: Multiple prospective treatments have been considered or being investigated for the management of gastroparesis. Granisetron, a 5-HT3 antagonist, administered as a transdermal patch, has improved gastroparesis symptoms of nausea and vomiting, as evident in a prospective study.