Aripiprazole is an atypical antipsychotic that is FDA approved and predominantly used for symptomatic management of psychosis in patients with schizophrenia and monotherapy or adjunctive therapy for acute manic episodes associated with bipolar disorder. The oral tablet and solution are also FDA approved to treat autistic spectrum disorder (ASD). Studies show that short-term use of aripiprazole in patients with ASD resulted in decreased irritability, decreased hyperactivity, and fewer repetitive, purposeless actions (stereotyped behaviors). Aripiprazole can also serve as an adjunctive treatment for major depressive disorder and Tourette syndrome (oral tablet or oral solution only).

There is a long-acting aripiprazole formulation, which is used primarily for maintenance therapy for chronic schizophrenia as well as both acute and maintenance therapy of bipolar I disorder in patients who may lack oral tolerance or medication adherence.

Off-label uses of aripiprazole include an adjunctive treatment for patients with comorbid psychotic disorders and substance use disorders. It may also have a role in treating psychosis and agitation associated with dementia; however, aripiprazole may increase the risk of cerebrovascular stroke and cognitive decline in this patient population. Aripiprazole may additionally be used to treat delirium and apraxia of eyelid opening with blepharospasm in Parkinson disease.

Aripiprazole is increasingly replacing first-generation antipsychotics due to its improved side effect profile. The regulation of dopamine neurotransmission in aripiprazole has resulted in decreased motor and metabolic side effects as compared to other typical and atypical antipsychotic medications, thus making aripiprazole a valid alternative for patients struggling with persistent side effects or low efficacy of their current drug. Aripiprazole has been shown to decrease psychiatric hospitalization rates, reduce symptoms of tardive dyskinesia, improve cognitive function, and reduce cardiovascular risk factors, lipid plasma concentrations, and prolactin. It has also restored sexual function and decreased alcohol craving in patients with dependence.