Aligning the need for self-advocacy to different domains of health is pertinent as stress and burnout among nurses have a direct effect on their overall well-being and their ability to provide quality safe patient care in a clinical setting. The Seven Domains of Health (SDH) described by Kane et al can serve as an EBP theoretical framework for researching and promoting self-advocacy among the nursing profession.

**Seven Domains of Health**

SDH are noted as follows:

**Physical Functioning**

The physical domain measures physical health as it relates to the ability of the bedside clinician to carry out the physical necessities of performing the duties within their prescribed unit.

**Psychological Well-being**

The psychological well-being portion of the scale measures the clinician’s emotions and whether they are positive or negative. According to Kane & Radosevich, “Much of the assessment focuses on feelings of anxiety and depression." Anxiety and stress can have a direct effect on the clinician's engagement with the organization as well as the functionality required to work with patients and families assigned to their care.

**Social Functioning**

The social functioning domain measures and addresses the social roles of the clinician. These define the clinician's ability to perform a social responsibility as prescribed by society such as the ability to succeed in a role that involves working to advocate for the patient. The perceived social integration of the bedside clinician is also directly related to the clinician’s perception of how well they can perform their assigned duties within the role of being a patient and family advocate. This perception is also complicated or complimented by the roles that their own family and friends play in their support system as a whole.

**Pain**

The domain of pain is usually addressed as physical pain, yet psychosomatic pain can be associated with great degrees of stress that a clinician may be suffering. Recent studies have shown that chronic pain might not only be caused by physical injury but also by stress and emotional issues, and this pain can interfere with daily living.

**Cognitive Functioning**

The cognitive functioning domain measures an individual’s ability in three different ways: memory, reasoning abilities, and orientation. A bedside clinician must be able to remember, have the aptitude to reason, and have the ability to apply multiple critical thinking concepts during the work assignment when providing care for the patient and family. This skill set may determine how the clinician perceives their ability to succeed in this area.

**Vitality**

Vitality refers to the domain of the fulfillment of basic human needs, such as sleep and rest, as well as the level of energy one possesses. A clinician will require adequate sleep and rest periods to maintain awareness of the impact of the prescribed duties associated with the assignments that they are expected to carry out during their work hours. The inability to keep a keen focus is preceded by inadequate rest, which can lead to a significant margin for errors. Sleep deprivation hinders the ability to perform tasks that require concentrated attention. Critical operational performance of duties can become unstable and result in an increase in errors of omission, such as failing to respond to a stimulus, and commission, such as taking action when a stimulus is not present.

**Overall Well-being**

The last domain, overall well-being, is a comprehensive appraisal of one’s sense of satisfaction with health and happiness. Contentment with overall well-being includes actions based upon a sense of value, dedication, and purpose. These actions may consist of going to work when ill, seeking direction from peers and leaders, as well as obtaining outside support to help decrease the stress associated with the role of a bedside clinician.