As elucidated earlier, about 85% of nontraumatic SAH cases are secondary to aneurysmal rupture. The remaining 15-20% have a diverse cause, and the mechanism of bleeding is often not identified. Determining the precise etiology of the bleeding is very important, as practitioners can tailor treatment to the cause of the bleeding. The most common causes of nontraumatic SAH are mentioned below:

**1) Aneurysmal Subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH)**

- An aneurysmal cause of SAH has similar risk factors associated with aneurysm formation. Hypertension, cigarette smoking, and family history are the most consistently observed risk factors. Other factors include Alcohol, sympathomimetic drugs, and estrogen deficiency.

- Older age (>60 years), posterior circulation location, atherosclerosis, hypertension, and large Intra-arterial aneurysm (IA) size (>5 mm) are contributing factors for an IA to rupture. A family history of IA or SAH, previous history of SAH, or the presence of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease increases the risk of IA rupture.

**2) Nonaneurysmal Subarachnoid hemorrhage (NASAH)**

i) Perimesencephalic nonaneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: It is characterized by a specific pattern of localized blood on CT, normal cerebral angiography, and a benign course of illness.

ii) Occult aneurysm: A small percentage of cases are not diagnosed in initial angiographic studies but may be identified on repeat angiography and are classified under this group.

iii) Vascular malformations: These can be intracranial or spinal in location. Most brain vascular malformations that cause SAH are either arteriovenous malformations (AVM) or dural arteriovenous fistulae.

iv) Intracranial arterial dissection: Dissection of an intracranial artery can produce SAH. When the dissection of the intracranial artery extends through the adventitia, SAH occurs.

v) Other causes: Cocaine abuse is associated with aneurysmal and nonaneurysmal SAH.