In evaluating patients for anxiolytics or sedative toxicity, much of the examination will be guided by history and physical examination. It is important to determine from the patient or a witness, if possible, what drug the patient ingested to tailor treatment. History is often unreliable in patients who intentionally ingested medication in an attempt to commit suicide.

Physical examination should consist of an evaluation of the patient's mental status, vital signs, and pupillary assessment. Looking for signs of physiologic excitation vs. depression or mixed effects can help to determine the potential intoxicant. Looking for signs such as odor, pupillary exam, neuromuscular abnormalities, mental status changes, skin changes, temperature changes, blood pressure, heart rate changes, and respiratory changes can help establish a potential diagnosis.

Electorcardiology may provide diagnostic and prognostic information. It is especially important to pay attention to the QRS and QTc intervals. Many anxiolytics or sedative medications can prolong the QRS interval, potentially leading to lethal arrhythmias. Some antipsychotic drugs can block potassium efflux again, leading to prolonged QT intervals. Toxin-induced QRS interval prolongation occurs in TCA poisoning, and immediate action is necessary.

Radiographic studies are beneficial for appropriate patients.

Toxicological screening can give a definitive diagnosis to providers when history is not readily available. These can be urinary, serum, or bodily fluid based testing can provide further detail. However, false positives can occur. Co-ingestion with other medications is common and proper workup would include testing for co-intoxicants.