Frequently check CBC with differential and platelets during the therapy as it causes myelosuppression and pancytopenia. Cell counts reach a nadir by day 11, and recovery occurs by day 21. Check liver function tests in patients with existing hepatic impairment as it can lead to hepatic failure or abscess formation. Avoid using the drug if liver enzymes increase to 2 to 3 times the upper limit of normal. Evaluate for signs/symptoms of peripheral neuropathy. Frequently assess the volume status and check orthostatic blood pressure during the treatment. Order a baseline chest x-ray and then periodic pulmonary function testing with new or worsening pulmonary symptoms.

**Cautions**

**Reactivation of hepatitis B**: all patients treated with bortezomib should first undergo testing for HBsAg and HBcAb. If either of these tests is positive, the patient should start on lamivudine for the duration of the therapy. Also, these patients need regular monitoring of their liver function and hepatitis B serology. Consider the decision to discontinue therapy if the levels of HBV DNA increase.

**Reactivation of herpes zoster:**Patients treated with bortezomib need to be managed with antiviral prophylaxis as reactivation of herpes zoster is a real possibility.

**Peripheral neuropathy:**Data show that bortezomib can cause peripheral neuropathy when combined with other medications like isoniazid, amiodarone, and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Thus, close monitoring of neurological deficits is a strong recommendation.

**Special Patient Populations**

**Elderly:**While data are lacking, one should take great precautions when administering bortezomib to seniors because of the risk of toxicity. However, the effect of the drug is the same as in younger patients.

**Diabetes mellitus:**Patients taking oral hypoglycemic agents are at risk for developing hypo or hyperglycemia when treated with bortezomib; therefore, the blood sugars require careful monitoring. Most patients do develop hypoglycemia, so reducing the dose of the oral hypoglycemic agent may be necessary.

**Amyloidosis:**Patients with amyloidosis should also receive bortezomib therapy with great caution as there are reports that the use of bortezomib can lead to excess protein accumulation in many organs.

**Hypotension:**Since bortezomib can cause hypotension, dose adjustment of the antihypertensive drugs is required. These patients need close monitoring of their blood pressure.

There have been reports of life-threatening graft versus host disease in patients with myeloma receiving treatment with bortezomib. Thus, all patients with multiple myeloma and lymphoma should receive irradiated blood products to reduce this risk.