Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy, by definition, is a sudden and unexpected death in a person with epilepsy for which no apparent alternative cause has been found. Therefore, evaluation for alternative causes of death is mandatory in making a definitive SUDEP diagnosis.

The diagnosis of SUDEP is based mainly upon history and postmortem examination findings, such as the patient being found in a prone position. The multiple potential confounding factors contributing to a patient's death make the diagnosis difficult, and accurate identification of a cause of death has medico-legal and public health implications.

- Definite SUDEP: Sudden, unexpected death in a patient with epilepsy. The death may be witnessed or unwitnessed, and there does not need to be evidence of a recent seizure. Postmortem examination does not reveal an alternative cause of death besides epilepsy.

- Definite SUDEP plus comorbidity: This is the same as definite SUDEP with a comorbid medical condition that could contribute to death (but not a competing cause).

- Probable SUDEP: Unexpected death in a patient with epilepsy for whom an autopsy was not performed.

- Probable SUDEP plus comorbidity: Same as probable SUDEP with comorbidity that could contribute to death (such as a channelopathy).

- Possible SUDEP: Sudden death in a patient with epilepsy for whom there is a likely alternative cause of death (such as a patient found dead in the water, but no forensic confirmation of drowning made).

- Resuscitated SUDEP: A patient with epilepsy who is resuscitated and survives greater than 1 hour after cardiopulmonary arrest. No alternative cause of the arrest is discovered after evaluation.

- Not SUDEP: A clear alternative cause of death was identified.

- Unclassified: There is insufficient information on which to make a diagnosis.

Examination findings supporting a diagnosis of SUDEP include prone position, as well as signs of recent seizures, including oral trauma, ecchymoses, conjunctival hemorrhage, or lacerations to protruding areas of the head or limbs. These findings are non-specific but may support the diagnosis of a recent seizure.