As previously mentioned, there are two common clinical presentations associated with pars defects. First, imaging of an asymptomatic child or adolescent in whom there is an incidental finding of pars defect. In this case, the physical exam likely will not reveal any findings attributable to the pars defect.

The second common presentation is an adolescent athlete involved in a sport requiring repetitive lumbar loading in extension and rotation, presenting with acute or insidious onset low back pain that is aggravated by continued lumbar loading. The incidence of pars defect in this pediatric athlete population presenting with low back pain is as high as approximately 50%. In light of that, this particular population merits a high index of suspicion followed by an appropriate diagnostic workup.

In the symptomatic patient, classic history will include a child or adolescent athlete playing a sport that requires repetitive lumbar extension and rotation. The onset of pain may be either acute or insidious over several weeks. Patients will report their low back pain increases with strenuous activity or hyperextension and improves with relative rest. Pain typically remains located in the low back with occasional radiation to the buttock and/or proximal lower extremities, while neurologic symptoms such as numbness/tingling in the lower extremities are uncommon.

Physical exam ought to include single-leg hyperextension, otherwise known as the Stork test. The patient should be instructed to stand on one leg while simultaneously hyperextending the low back. A positive single-leg hyperextension test is elicited by the reproduction of pain during this maneuver, typically worse when standing on the leg ipsilateral to the side of the pars defect.  This maneuver is the only potentially pathognomonic physical exam finding.

Potential additional physical exam findings include the hyperlordotic lumbar curve and tight hamstrings.