Work up for a colonic volvulus includes a complete blood count (CBC) with differential, a comprehensive metabolic panel, and a lactic acid. Laboratory findings may be useful; however, they are not diagnostic. A leukocytosis level, a left shift (pandemic), or a metabolic acidosis may indicate systemic sepsis, bowel ischemia, or peritoneal infection. Electrolyte abnormalities may develop in the setting of a bowel obstruction and vomiting.

Radiographic imaging can help differentiate between a sigmoid and cecal volvulus from other abdominal pathologies. For a cecal volvulus, an abdominal x-ray will reveal a dramatic dilation of bowel extending from the right lower quadrant moving upwards to the left upper quadrant of the abdomen (Figure 1). Usually, a patient with a cecal volvulus will present with small and large bowel obstructions, with the collapse of the distal large bowel, and with extensive dilation of the proximal small bowel. A definitive sign of a cecal volvulus is the upward displacement of the appendix with obstruction of the large bowel. Comparatively, a sigmoid volvulus will show findings of a bent inner tube sign with the apex of the volvulus located in the left upper quadrant.

Abdominal plain films are sufficient to make the diagnosis of a sigmoid volvulus; however, abdominal x-rays are less diagnostic for a cecal volvulus. Thus, the additional imaging of a CT scan can help differentiate the approximate location of torsion. An abdominopelvic CT scan is diagnostic for a cecal volvulus in approximately 90% of the patients. About 10% of the time, patients are diagnosed with a cecal volvulus intraoperatively.

A mesentery torsion around the ileocolic vessels as seen on a CT scan is described as a "whirl sign" and is considered pathognomonic for diagnosis of a cecal volvulus.