The cerebellum receives vascular supply from three main arteries that originate from the vertebrobasilar anterior system: the superior cerebellar artery (SCA), the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA), and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA).

The SCA branching varies based on embryology; it can branch either from the junction point of the basilar artery and posterior cerebral artery and pass below the oculomotor nerve, or directly from the posterior cerebral artery and pass above the oculomotor nerve. In the majority of subjects, the SCA encircles the brainstem below the oculomotor nerve and above the trigeminal nerve. The SCA splits into two branches: medial and lateral. The medial branch of the SCA further splits into two branches; one supplies the mesencephalon and inferior and superior colliculi while the second supplies the superior portion of the vermis and the superomedial cerebellar cortex. The lateral branch of the SCA supplies the superolateral cerebellar cortex. Blood vessels have deeper penetration in the vermis that makes it more echogenic on fetal ultrasound.

The AICA branches off the basilar trunk in almost all subjects. It passes the abducens nerve and meets with the facial and vestibulocochlear nerves at the cerebellopontine angle. It then divides into two branches: one supplies the anterior inferior cerebellum while the other supplies the flocculus, choroid plexus, and the middle cerebellar peduncle.

PICA is the largest vertebral artery branch. It passes between the cerebellum and the medulla and supplies the cerebellar nuclei, inferior surface of the vermis, and the undersurface area of the cerebellar hemisphere. Medulla oblongata and the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle are supplied by PICA, which may give rise to posterior spinal arteries in some anatomical variations. The cerebellum is drained by veins that empty into the great cerebral vein or adjacent venous sinuses.