The pleural fluid analysis in a trapped lung is consistent with a transudate or a protein-discordant exudate and has a paucicellular mononuclear cell predominance. Pleural fluid LDH is low, and protein may be in the exudative range. The elevated total pleural fluid protein may be related to factors other than active pleural inflammation or malignancy and does not exclude the diagnosis. The characteristic diagnostic clue is that the pleural effusion reaccumulates rapidly after thoracocenteses and the effusion volume due to trapped lung remains remarkably constant over time.

A high index of suspicion should be maintained in the diagnosis and management of trapped lungs, particularly in the setting of malignant pleural effusions so as to prevent complications from repeated thoracenteses. Repeated thoracenteses can result in various complications like chest pain, the formation of loculations, bleeding, development of hemothorax, and also recurrent effusions. Trapped lung should be suspected in any patient who presents with a stable chronic pleural effusion, particularly if there is an antecedent history of pneumonia, pneumothorax, thoracic surgery, or hemothorax.

**Pleural Manometry**

The trapped lung is can be diagnosed via pleural manometry during thoracentesis. As it is time-consuming and requires technical expertise, currently manometry is not routinely used during thoracentesis. With large-volume thoracentesis, pleural elastance changes throughout the procedure. It is used as a predictor of successful pleurodesis, by measuring the absolute closing pressure and overall elastance. When the elastance is high, the probability of the pleural layers being pulled apart is increased, which interferes with pleurodesis. In the setting of trapped lung, despite the presence of a pleural effusion, the pleural pressure is low, and it drops significantly with the removal of fluid. This high pleural elastance (change in pressure/change in volume) is a hallmark of trapped lung. The presence of these characteristic pleural pressure changes is highly suggestive of a trapped lung. It may aid in the diagnosis of patients with minimal or absent symptoms. However, confirmation with direct visualization via video-assisted thoracoscopy or air contrast CT showing visceral pleural thickening (a pleural rind) is required.

**Imaging Studies**

Upright and decubitus radiographs and chest computed tomography (CT) often show pleural thickening and loculations. Pleural fluid may shift a bit with postural changes but will not be free-flowing. The paradoxical finding that the hemithorax with pleural effusion is reduced in size when compared to the contralateral side is suggestive of significantly higher negative pleural pressure on the affected side than on the opposite side, provides further evidence for the diagnosis of trapped lung. Post-thoracentesis radiographs may show air in the pleural space with the same size and shape as the prior effusion.

**Ultrasound**

Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS)is a rapid, bedside, cost-effective way to diagnose pleural pathologies and must be performed before any pleural intervention. With the patient positioned upright or supine, a low-frequency, 2- to 5-MHz transducer probe is placed in a longitudinal orientation. With the probe marker held cranially from either mid-axillary or posterior mid-scapular views, images are viewed in brightness mode and motion mode. In motion mode, the respiratory movement of an atelectatic lung occurs in a sinusoidal pattern within the surrounding pleural fluid. This represents a “sinusoid sign" which is suggestive of the expandable lung. The absence of this sinusoidal respirophasic lung is known as an “absent sinusoid sign". It suggests an unexpandable lung and coincides with pleural manometry findings.