Chloroprocaine is supplied as a 1%, 2%, and 3% solution. The spinal formation is 1% and preservative-free. Some of the solutions indicated for infiltration, epidural, and peripheral nerve block contain the preservatives methylparaben and disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA).

The maximum recommended chloroprocaine dose for infiltration, or peripheral nerve block is 11 mg/kg when chloroprocaine is administered alone, not to exceed 800 mg.

The 3% chloroprocaine solution is typically used in lumbar epidural catheters to facilitate urgent or emergent cesarean delivery. Because chloroprocaine is used in the obstetric setting to facilitate quick onset anesthesia, the 3% solution is always used.  A volume of 15 to 25 mL is usually sufficient to obtain a T4 dermatome level—the level required to achieve a painless cesarean delivery. Since epidural anesthesia in the non-obstetric setting is often not as urgent, both 2% and 3% chloroprocaine are used.  Similar volumes are used in the non-obstetric population. A repeat dose of epidural chloroprocaine can be administered every 45 minutes to continue anesthesia; recovery following epidural block with chloroprocaine takes 30 to 60 minutes.

The recommended dose of 1% intrathecal chloroprocaine in the non-obstetric population is 50 mg. This has been shown to produce a reliable and dense block to the T10 dermatome. Epinephrine should not be administered with spinal chloroprocaine as it has been associated with the following flu-like symptoms: malaise, myalgias, arthralgias, fever, nasal congestion, and loss of appetite.