The function of various hormones in regulating appetite and satiety is to maintain energy homeostasis. Multiple hormones such as ghrelin, leptin, cholecystokinin, and other peptides all relay peripheral signals to the hypothalamus. Any imbalance of these hormones leads to various pathologies that this article will explore in another section. As such, this section will examine the functions of several hormones in appetite and satiety control. The two hormones most closely associated with energy homeostasis leading to sensations of hunger and satiety are ghrelin and leptin. Any shift in the delicate balance between ghrelin and leptin drastically affects our body's ability to regulate energy demands and storage, leading to pathophysiology.

**Ghrelin.**Originally, ghrelin was discovered as a growth hormone-releasing peptide that acted on the hypothalamus. Subsequent studies then showed that levels of ghrelin increased before meals and had a role in increasing body weight, thus earning the name "hunger hormone."

**Leptin.**Leptin is perhaps best understood as the opposite of ghrelin, acting as the body's satiety signal. Together with ghrelin, leptin exists in balance to regulate energy homeostasis. The ventromedial region of the hypothalamus is responsible for satiety and is stimulated by leptin. Furthermore, leptin inhibits stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus to inhibit the effects of ghrelin. As an adipocyte-derived hormone, leptin sends signals to the medial hypothalamus regarding energy storage within the body. However, leptin also has many other roles within the body, such as reproduction, blood pressure, and vast effects on the immune system.