Female infants will have ambiguous genitalia because of exposure to high concentrations of androgens in-utero. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency is a common cause of ambiguous genitalia in genotypically normal female infants (46XX). Females less severely affected may present with early pubarche. Young women may present with oligomenorrhea, polycystic ovaries, and hirsutism (polycystic ovarian syndrome).

Most males have no signs of CAH at birth. However, some may present with hyperpigmentation and penile enlargement while those with salt-wasting disease present early with hyponatremia and hypovolemia. Males with non-salt-wasting disease present later with signs of virilization. In rare forms, males are under-masculinized.

**Diagnosis**

A two-tier approach to the diagnosis of CAH is recommended. The initial screening test is done by measuring serum 17OHP to screen for 21-hydroxylase deficiency. If positive, then a repeat 17OHP test should be obtained along with a measurement of the serum electrolyte panel. Classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency causes 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone blood levels greater than 242 nmol/L.

Neonatal screening programs typically have specific reference ranges by weight and gestational age because high levels may be seen in sick, stressed, or premature infants without congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Salt-wasting patients may have higher 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone levels than non-salt-wasting patients. In mild cases, 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone may not be elevated initially, but it will rise during a corticotropin stimulation test. In many countries, children are screened for 21-hydroxylase at birth. This test will detect elevated levels of 17-hydroxyprogesterone. Identifying patients with high levels can result in early treatment and relatively normal life.

A second-tier test using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry allows diagnosis of CAH due to other enzyme defects such as 11-beta-hydroxylase. Patients with inconclusive results may need further evaluation using a cosyntropin stimulation test followed by a complete adrenocortical profile. When indicated, the cosyntropin stimulation test should be done 24 to 48 hours after birth to reduce the incidence of false-positive and negative results.

**Laboratory Studies**

Genetic analysis may be helpful, but it is unnecessary if classic clinical, and laboratory findings are present.

In classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency, laboratory tests will show:

- Hypoglycemia (because of hypocortisolism)

- Hyponatremia (because of hypoaldosteronism)

- Hyperkalemia (because of hypoaldosteronism)

- Elevated 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone

**Imaging Studies**

Unless hemorrhage is suspected in the adrenal glands, imaging studies are not required in evaluating patients with CAH. However, in patients with ambiguous genitalia, pelvic ultrasound may be done to assess for other anomalies and define the anatomy of the urogenital tract.

Children with precocious puberty may benefit from a bone scan.

**Other Tests**

- A chromosomal study usually is done in infants with ambiguous genitalia to establish the gender.

- Genetic testing is otherwise only necessary during pregnancy to counsel the patient.

- Some centers routinely screen infants for the 21-hydroxylase deficiency before a life-threatening salt-wasting crisis develops.