R. akari infection presents with a triad of fever, vesicular rash, and eschar. This triad was found in 92% of patients investigated in New York City. Only a few doctors diagnosed the cases found in New York (three physicians diagnosed 75% of cases). Therefore, the knowledge of these infections is not very common among physicians. A high index of suspicion based upon a good epidemiological and exposure history is required. Headache and myalgias may be present at the onset of illness. The eschar appears a week after the mite bite. Since the mouse mite bites are painless, it is hard to ascertain the incubation period. Eschar is the clinical hallmark of the disease. It initially appears as a papule, then a vesicle appears in the center, which dries leaving a brown or black eschar. There is regional lymphadenopathy. The rash begins on day three or four and is, at first, papular in appearance. Furthermore, the rash can be present on day one or appear by day ten, making the clinical diagnosis all the more difficult. The rash undergoes transformation to papulovesicular lesions. The vesicles dry, leaving a black crust. Usually, there are about 30 to 40 skin lesions. These lesions heal without scarring. The palms and soles are not involved. The rash resolves in two to three weeks. While a vesicular rash is typical, it is not present in all patients. The vesicular rash was noted in 92% of cases in one study consisting of 13 patients. The rash could be of any morphologic type, as noted in two other published studies composed of 178 patients.

In the largest case series (n = 144), the reported clinical features were a triad of fever, rash, and eschar (99.9%) and headache in 90%. Abnormalities on cell blood counts were transient; leucopenia or thrombocytopenia had been reported. An abnormal transient rise in aminotransferases was also reported.

The disease is self-limiting, lasting 7 to 10 days. There was a case of a patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) who recovered from the disease with doxycycline. In one series (N=34), 32% of the patients were hospitalized, most likely to exclude more serious diseases such as cutaneous anthrax and chickenpox.