Lymphatic flow in the body is a unique process, which happens to occur in a way that is different from any other bodily fluid. In the interstitial space, the fluid composed of plasma and proteins leaked from the vascular system, cell debris, microorganisms, and immune cells is reabsorbed via the lymphatic capillaries. The overlapping endothelial cells create the “button-like” microvalves found in the blunt-ended lymphatic capillaries allowing only for unidirectional fluid flow. The fluid is under a pressure imbalance and flows into the capillaries secondary to the net hydrostatic and oncotic pressure between the interstitial space and the lymphatic capillaries. Along with the fluid pressure gradient, there is external pressure applied via the contraction of the surrounding tissues when the body is in motion.

Once the lymph travels from the lymphatic capillaries to the collecting lymphatic vessels through passive motion aided by intraluminal valves, simple passive movement is not sufficient to return the increasing amounts of lymphatic fluid. The fluid then flows to the lymphatic collecting vessels, which have a lining of pericytes. These cells express alpha-smooth muscle actin, which allows for contraction in a peristaltic manner along the length of the collecting vessel. These vessels also have unique valves created by the tight adhesions between the cells making “zipper-like” junctions. A stretch in the wall of the collecting vessel causes the pericytes to stretch and allows for the propulsion of fluid from one collecting duct to the next until the fluid enters the lymph node.

The intrinsic pump comprised of the pericytes and valves generates two-thirds of the lymphatic flow at rest. The remaining one-third of the flow of the 8 to12 liters of lymphatic fluid and protein that the system transports each day comes from compression of skeletal muscles.

From the collecting lymphatic vessels, the lymph travels to the lymph nodes, entering through afferent lymphatic collecting vessels. Under non-inflammatory conditions, lymph flows around the outer portion of the lymphatic lobules through the subcapsular sinus. Along the floor of the sinus, there are endothelial cells which express cytokine receptors, such as CCL21 and CCR7. The binding of these receptors increases dendritic cell mobilization into the lymph nodes during the immune response.

From the lymph node sinus, the fluid exits via the efferent collecting vessels, which are in function very similar to the afferent lymphatic vessels. The major difference at this point is a significant change in the composition of the fluid as it has been acted on by the immune cells in the lymph node. Via the lymphovenous valve, the fluid enters the blood at the junction of the thoracic duct and the subclavian vein.