Recognition of this syndrome may be challenging since its presentation may have similar findings as other more worrisome diagnoses. It is a clinical diagnosis, and no definitive test yet exists. Health professionals need to be aware and have a clinical suspicion based on characteristic features in a newly diagnosed diabetic patient to make an adequate diagnosis and avoiding unnecessary testing and procedures.

Laboratory/blood investigations may include blood chemistry (electrolytes, liver function tests), hemoglobin A1C level, inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C reactive protein), etc.

CSF evaluation has demonstrated elevated protein levels and pleocytosis, suggesting inflammation.

Electrophysiologic testing:

- Nerve conduction study: Asymmetrically reduced sensory and motor action potential amplitude in affected muscle sites.

- Electromyography (EMG) has shown wide-spread (sensory, motor, autonomic nerves) patchy involvement, fibrillation potentials, prolonged-duration, and high-amplitude motor unit potentials.

MRI most commonly is seen with a T2 signal increase, with varying severity.

Sural nerve biopsy has been described extensively, to aid for the diagnosis of DLSRP but is not integral in the diagnosis of this syndrome.

Laboratory studies, electrophysiologic studies, biopsies, and imaging (X-ray, CT, MRI suspecting compression) may be useful for exclusion of other etiological causes of neurologic symptoms, but emphasis must focus on DLRPN being primarily a clinically based diagnosis.