A complete history and physical examination can often establish an underlying diagnosis.

**History**

Patients may complain of frequent ankle sprains, arch pain, and occasionally knee pain.

A family history of similar deformities may indicate a hereditary cause, and care should be taken to obtain a thorough family history.

The patient history for the subtle cavus foot is more consistent with long-standing and milder symptoms or chronic lateral foot pain and/or stress fractures.

**Physical Examination**

A thorough orthopedic foot and ankle exam should be performed, and the patient should be examined walking and standing. Overall limb alignment should be evaluated. The shape and symmetry of the feet should be noted from all angles. The heel cord and triceps surae should be evaluated for tightness with both flexion and extension of the knee. The function and strength of all muscles in the lower extremity should be evaluated. The motion of the subtalar joint can provide additional information towards a diagnosis, a more fixed and rigid subtalar joint pointing to etiologies such as a coalition or a primary hindfoot driven cavovarus.

The Coleman block test is a critical portion of the examination as one of the major goals of the physical exam is to determine the rigidity of the deformity.

The Coleman block test is performed by placing a roughly 1-inch block (or 2.5 cm) or a book under the lateral side of the forefoot and heel. The first metatarsal head should hang off the edge of the block, thus removing its effects on the tripod. The examiner must then evaluate the hindfoot to determine if removing the first metatarsal’s deforming effects has allowed the hindfoot to correct from varus to valgus. If the hindfoot varus does not correct, the deformity is rigid and fixed, and this has different surgical implications than a flexible deformity. If the block test restores hindfoot valgus, then the deformity is flexible and driven by the forefoot.

Evaluation should include palpation along the lesser metatarsals and fifth metatarsal for signs and symptoms of stress fractures. Examination of the ankle for stability, joint tenderness, and peroneal tendinopathy should also be undertaken. Anterior ankle pain is common due to impingement of the relatively dorsiflexed talus.

Further detailed examination of the entire patient should include a physical exam of the patient’s spine to evaluate for deformities such as scoliosis, which is suggestive of CMT, and hairy patches or dimples which might be suggestive of spinal dysraphism. The exam should also include a neurologic evaluation consisting of reflexes, sensation, and vibratory sensation.

A major clinical sign of the subtle cavus foot is the “peek-a-boo” heel first described by Manoli et al. in 1993.