# Introduction

Meissner corpuscles, also known as Wagner-Meissner corpuscles or tactile corpuscles, are a subset of mechanoreceptors first described by Professor Georg Meissner and Professor Rudolf Wagner in 1852. Located in the dermal papillae of glabrous skin, these specialized encapsulated nerve endings relay fine touch and low-frequency vibration sensations to the central nervous system (CNS). Meissner corpuscles play an essential role in somatosensory acuity, especially in the digital extremities and palmar skin, meriting clinical significance for peripheral and diabetic neuropathy as well as age-related degeneration of dermatological tactile sensation.

# Structure

Meissner corpuscles are ellipsoid mechanoreceptors located superficially within the dermal papillae at a depth of approximately 150 micrometers. The corpuscles are approximately 20 to 40 micrometers in diameter and 80 to 150 micrometers in length, with their long axis oriented perpendicularly to the skin surface.

Each corpuscle is comprised of three primary components: elongated Schwann cells, a connective tissue capsule, and a central axon.

Each corpuscle is supplied by a nerve ending derived from an intermediate-large amyloid-beta myelinated afferent fiber.

The development of Meissner corpuscles is dependent on brain-derived neurotrophic receptor (BDNF) signaling via tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB). TrkB is an enzyme-linked transmembrane receptor encoded by the NTRK2 gene. Animal studies involving knockout of BDNF or TrkB in mice resulted in a lack of Meissner corpuscles, highlighting the importance of this signaling system in corpuscular development.

# Function

Meissner corpuscles consist of a cutaneous nerve ending responsible for transmitting the sensations of fine, discriminative touch and vibration.

The external force applied to a Meissner corpuscle is transduced by the collagen fibers connected to the lamellae. The resulting physical deformation induces bending of the nerve axon terminals to generate an action potential.

Cutaneous Meissner corpuscles are found in glabrous skin, particularly the fingertips, palms, and soles, enhancing the sensitivity of these tissues to light touch. Additional Meissner corpuscles may be found on the lips, palate, tongue, and genitalia. The density of Meissner corpuscles varies widely between studies, with a consensus on their quantity yet to be reached. One study reported corpuscular densities of 12 and 5.1 corpuscles per millimeter in digit five and the thenar eminence, respectively.

# Tissue Preparation

Meissner corpuscles can be identified on skin biopsy specimens under traditional light microscopy. Immediately after excision, the biopsied specimen is placed into a fixative solution of neutral buffered formalin that forms crosslinks between lysine residues to preserve tissue structure. The specimen is then placed into a small cassette before being infiltrated by paraffin. After the wax cools and hardens, the tissue-containing paraffin block is sliced into thin sections by a microtome. The sections may then be stained according to previously-described protocols for hematoxylin and eosin staining, immunohistochemistry, or immunofluorescence.

Historically, the silver impregnation technique was recommended for staining of peripheral nerve endings, including Meissner corpuscles.

Two-photon excitation microscopy is a novel fluorescence imaging technique enabling high-resolution visualization of living tissue near the skin surface, including Meissner corpuscles.in vivo over a prolonged period to evaluate the mechanical response and structural changes of the corpuscles. A limitation of this visualization method is the inability to highlight other components of the receptors, such as the collagenous capsule or Schwann cells.

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

Immunohistochemical staining targeting differential antigenic expression can distinguish between the neural and supportive components of Meissner corpuscles. Vega et al. reported that double immunolabelling with monoclonal antibodies against human neurofilament proteins (NFP) and S100 could reliably stain the central axon and Schwann cells, respectively.

# Microscopy, Light

Under light microscopy, Meissner corpuscles appear as coiled, spring-like structures composed of stacked, disk-like lamellar cells. The orientation of the lamellae is variable, but they are typically parallel to the skin surface. The Schwann cell-derived lamellar cells have peripherally displaced nuclei and are contained within a fibroblastic capsule that is incomplete at its apex. The neurites that course through the lamellae are not visible by traditional hematoxylin and eosin staining techniques.

# Microscopy, Electron

Much greater detail of Meissner corpuscles may be appreciated on transmission and scanning electron microscopy.

# Pathophysiology

As currently understood, Meissner corpuscles play a relatively minor role in human disease. Meissner corpuscles are often noted as a benign accessory component in some cellular nevi, schwannomas, and neurofibromas. A single case report describes the presence of Meissner-like corpuscles within a mature ovarian cystic teratoma.

Occasional case reports describe benign tumors composed largely or entirely of Meissner corpuscles known as Wagner-Meissner neurilemmomas (WMNs).

Structures morphologically identical to Meissner corpuscles are identified in abnormal locations have been termed tactile corpuscle-like bodies, Wagner-Meissner bodies, pseudo-Meissner corpuscles, and Meissner-oid corpuscles. Several cases have been published detailing the identification of proliferation of these Meissner corpuscle-like structures within the lamina propria, the gastrointestinal mucosa, including the esophagus, stomach, and colorectum.

The origin of these lesions is unclear but may represent hamartomas, neural neoplasms, or a reactive process. Typically discovered incidentally during colonoscopy, these proliferations often resemble colonic polyps, leading to their biopsy and identification. Pathological examination of these lesions reveals discrete clusters of eosinophilic aggregates within the lamina propria. These structures are comprised of spindle-shaped cells, each with a single eccentric, oblong nucleus and lamellated, eosinophilic cytoplasm. Staining for S100 is positive while the histiocytic marker CD68 is negative, indicating the Schwannian or neural origin of the lesions. The differential diagnosis of these proliferations includes mucosal amyloid deposition and mucosal granulomas, although negative staining for Congo red and CD68, respectively, can be reliably used to differentiate these disorders. The presence of bodies within the gastrointestinal tract is benign.

# Clinical Significance

Meissner corpuscles are an integral aspect of the human sensory system, required for discriminatory touch and grip control. The high sensitivity of these receptors also allows for the reading of Braille using the fingertips. Males and females have a similar number of corpuscles in each digit, although, given the larger average surface area of male hands and fingers, men have a lower density of receptors which may contribute to a small difference in touch receptivity.

Differences in corpuscular density have been associated with a number of neurologic disorders, including sensory neuropathy, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Parkinson's disease, HIV neuropathy, and Friedreich’s ataxia.

Meissner corpuscles can survive for long-periods following nerve injury or denervation but can sustain alterations in protein expression. Expression of S100, a marker of lamellar cells within Meissner corpuscles, has been shown to be normal following spinal cord injury, diminished in nerve entrapment, and absent in denervated dermatomes.