Maternal history is a key area of investigation for patients who have a concern for congenital infections. The history of a febrile illness with or without rashes and poor maternal weight gain could raise concern for clinicians. Furthermore, fetal abnormalities such as intracranial calcifications may be detected in routine, or specific maternal testing may occur. Fetal loss can occur, particularly with infections during the first trimester.

The history and physical findings for each individual TORCH pathogen are listed below: In general, a physical exam may reveal rashes, low birth weight, microcephaly, findings suggestive of cardiac abnormalities (murmurs), chorioretinitis and cataracts, and intracranial calcifications.

**Toxoplasmosis:**The primary manifestations of congenital toxoplasmosis include intrauterine growth restriction and low birth weight, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, chorioretinitis, intraparenchymal calcifications, and anemia. Less commonly, petechiae, hydrocephalus, and microcephaly can be found.

**Congenital rubella syndrome:**It includes low birth weight, hepatosplenomegaly, cataracts, congenital heart disease (patent ductus arteriosus, and ventricular septal defect), and a petechial rash. Congenital sensorineural hearing loss is very common.

**Herpes simplex virus:**HSV rarely presents within utero infection but instead presents due to perinatal exposure. Therefore, clinical manifestations normally will present ten to twenty-one days after infection. There are three major manifestations: Skin-eye-mucous membranes (SEM), central nervous system (CNS), and disseminated disease. All will often present with fever in the neonatal period. The disseminated disease will present earliest after approximately one week of age. These children will present with a sepsis-like syndrome with skin lesions to include vesicles, hypotension, hepatosplenomegaly, and lethargy. These patients often have evidence of meningoencephalitis.  SEM disease is thought to be limited to a rash, normally vesicular, and is often noted in areas of trauma such as fetal scalp electrodes or the use of forceps with delivery. CNS disease is more likely to present with lethargies or perhaps seizures. All patients should be evaluated for evidence of disease, including the CNS.

**Cytomegalovirus:**CMV is the most common congenital infection. It will present with intrauterine growth restriction and low birth weight, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, paraventricular calcifications, cataracts, and sensorineural hearing loss and bone marrow suppression that will present with thrombocytopenia and anemia. Patients often have a petechial rash at birth.

**HIV:**Patients with congenital HIV rarely have any evidence of outward manifestations at birth. They may have a low birth weight and hepatosplenomegaly at birth.

**Syphilis:**In utero, there may be fetal loss orhydrops fetalis. In the neonatal period, children with primary syphilis may present with cutaneous lesions on the palms and soles, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, inflammation of the umbilical cord (funisitis) and discharge from the nose (sniffles). Periostitis may be found on x-rays of the bones. Late findings include frontal bossing, high palatal arch, sensorineural hearing loss, a saddle nose, perioral fissures, and Hutchinson teeth.