**Hydrocephalus**

This is a condition in which CSF accumulates in the CNS due to a dis-equilibrium between synthesis, circulation, and resorption of CSF.

It may be classified based on etiology or mechanism.

**Etiology:
**

- **Congenital:**this develops in-utero, a common cause is an aqueductal stenosis. It is usually associated with other congenital disabilities like neural tube defects, Arnold-Chiari malformation, and Dandy-Walker syndrome.

- **Acquired:**This may result from a cerebral infection like meningitis or a space-occupying lesion/tumor, for example, ependymoma or toxoplasmosis.

**Mechanism:
**

- **Communicating:**also called non-obstructive hydrocephalus, this results because the rate of CSF production exceeds the rate of resorption. Causes include ependymoma, arachnoid granulation inflammation due to meningitis.

- **Non-communicating:**also called obstructive hydrocephalus, results from an obstruction in the ventricular system either acquired or congenital.

**Treatment:
**

- **Ventriculostomy:**also called external ventricular drain (EVD), drains away excess CSF using a ventricular catheter to provide immediate relief

- **Ventricular shunting:**drains excess CSF into existing body compartments. Examples are a ventriculoperitoneal shunt, ventriculoatrial shunt, or ventricular-pleural shunt.

- The lumbar-peritoneal shunt drains excess CSF from the spinal subarachnoid space into the peritoneum.

- **Endoscopic third ventriculostomy**is a recent surgical approach, often done with cauterization of the choroid plexus.

**Shunt failure**

This may complicate a shunt surgery with a re-occurrence of presenting symptoms necessitating a shunt revision. Common causes of shunt failure are infections, blocked shunt, or a displaced shunt.