ARDS is a severe disorder of the lung which has the potential to cause death. Patients with ARDS may require mechanical ventilation because of hypoxia.

- Intensivist for managing the patient on the ventilator and other ICU-related issues like pneumonia prevention, deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis, and gastric stress prevention

- Dietitian and nutritionist for nutritional support

- Respiratory therapist to manage the ventilator settings

- Pharmacist to manage the medications, which include antibiotics, anticoagulants, and diuretics, among others

- Pulmonologist to manage the lung diseases

- Nephrologist to manage the kidneys and oversee renal replacement therapy if needed

- Nurses to monitor the patient, move the patient in bed, educate the family

- Physical therapist to exercise the patient, regain muscle function

- Tracheostomy nurse to assist with maintaining tracheostomy and weaning

- Mental health nurse to assess for depression, anxiety, and other psychosocial issues

- Social worker to assess the patient's financial situation, transfer for rehab, and ensure there is an adequate follow-up

- Chaplain for spiritual care

**Outcomes**

Despite advances in critical care, ARDS still has high morbidity and mortality. Even those who survive can have a poorer quality of life. While many risk factors are known for ARDS, there is no way to prevent the condition. Besides restricting fluids in high-risk patients, close monitoring for hypoxia by the team is vital. The earlier the hypoxia is identified, the better the outcome. Those who survive have a lengthy recovery period to regain functional status. Many continue to have dyspnea even with mild exertion and thus depend on care from others.