In a relevant clinical setting, characteristic CT chest findings combined with a microbial presence on sputum culture and serological evidence (serum antibodies) clinches the diagnosis.

The European Society for Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, in collaboration with the European Respiratory Society, has published the most comprehensive guideline for diagnosis and management of chronic pulmonary aspergillosis, including aspergilloma. Consistent radiological findings, in association with serological and microbiological evidence of Aspergillus species in an individual, with symptoms lasting over three months satisfies the criteria for diagnosis after excluding other differentials with certainty.

A chest X-ray is often the first diagnostic test ordered in a patient presenting with symptoms. It shows upper lobe predominant cavitation, thickening, scarring, and occasionally a rounded mass-like opacity within the cavity.

CT scan provides more delineation and has some characteristic findings

- The appearance of a solid spherical lesion within the cavitary space

- Halo sign of surrounding inflammatory reaction around the cavity wall

- Air crescent sign separating the fungus ball from the wall in the entirety or part of its circumference. (also present in lung abscess, hydatid cyst, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis)

- Monod sign is characterized by a change in position of the ball concerning the cavity, with a change in the position of the patient during imaging.

CT  helps in defining the cavity wall thickness, architectural distortion and inflammation of surrounding parenchyma and pleura, relationship of the mycetoma with surrounding blood vessels as well as nature of neovascularization both in lung parenchyma and parietal pleura.

The upper lobe of either lung is the most common location, although the superior segment of the lower lobe can also be involved. Denning et al. have prescribed evidence of endobronchial aspergilloma in HIV patients as has been corroborated by later case reports even in immunocompetent patients or in association with inhaled foreign bodies.

Once imaging is suggestive, evidence of microbial presence, as well as immune response, is the next approach in the algorithm. Assay against galactomannan antigen - a polysaccharide component of the cell wall has high specificity. Usually, the sensitivity of galactomannan antigen is higher in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid than serum, although both tests are available commercially. False-positive are seen in patients concurrently on piperacillin-tazobactam, while false negatives can be seen with high-dose steroid therapy or with other non-fumigatus species of aspergillus.

IgG antibodies against Aspergillus species diagnosed by precipitin assay are positive in over 90% of cases. Aspergillus-specific IgE is also fairly elevated.

Confirmation of Aspergillus species in fungal stain, culture, or polymerase chain reaction, adds weight to the diagnosis but is not diagnostic by themselves because of poor diagnostic yield and low sensitivity as well as specificity. An isolated sputum culture can be negative in over 50% of cases. Occasionally biopsy and video thoracoscopy can also clinch the diagnosis.

On radiological diagnosis of a solitary brain abscess, which is more than 1.5 cm, stereotactic aspiration of contents helps in diagnosis, relief of mass effect, and in improving the efficacy of antifungal therapy. Complete evacuation is, however, not recommended due to the risk of hemorrhage within the evacuated cavity.

CNS aspergilloma is also best confirmed by CT or MRI. Chronic abscess demonstrates ring and homogenous enhancement. Small cerebral abscesses not apparent on CT, can be picked up by increased sensitivity of MR imaging.

In general lumbar puncture is contraindicated due to the propensity of cerebral edema and, therefore, herniation and abscess rupture post puncture. Increased cellularity and CSF proteins with near-normal glucose levels are characteristic, although organisms are rarely found in CSF. The septate hyphae and conidia of Aspergillus species are best detected with Gomori Methenamine silver stain.

Immunoassay by double diffusion counter immunoelectrophoresis, immunofluorescence, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay can be helpful in diagnosis.