Fracture healing starts with **an anabolic phase**where there is recruitment and differentiation of stem cells with subsequent increases in the skeletal and vascular tissue volume. A cartilaginous callus forms at the fracture site, whereas at the periphery of this callus, the periosteum swells, and the primary bone formation starts.**a catabolic phase**where cartilage resorption ensues, resulting in tissue and callus volume reduction.

Fracture healing is complex, and it involves the following stages: **hematoma formation, granulation tissue formation, callus formation, and bone remodeling**. However, there is considerable overlap between these stages. Principle cells and their secretions are involved in the healing process, in which the mesenchymal stem cells play a pivotal role. They are delivered mainly by two major sources; periosteum and endosteum. Others involved include inflammatory cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts.

**Hematoma Formation:**(Immediately after the fracture)

This forms the key step in fracture healing. The blood vessels supplying the bone and periosteum are disrupted during the fracture, causing a hematoma to form at the fracture site, which is rich in hematopoietic cells. The hematoma clots and forms the temporary frame for subsequent healing. An adequate number of MSCs is recruited at the fracture site from the nearby tissues and the circulation.

Macrophages, neutrophils, and platelets release pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), platelet-derived growth factors (PDGF), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-Beta), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and interleukins (IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, IL-11, IL 12, IL-23). These cytokines further stimulate essential cellular biology at the fracture site.

**Granulation Tissue Formation (Primary or fibrocartilaginous callus):**(Within two weeks) This provides provisional stability.

Platelets are recruited to the fracture site. Among the products secreted by platelets are fibronectin (FN), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), which collectively trigger an inflammatory response. Subsequently, other mesenchymal cells and inflammatory cells are recruited to the fracture site, such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells, with resultant **fibrin-rich granulation tissue**formation and angiogenesis.

Mesenchymal stem cells begin to differentiate (driven by BMPs). As a result, chondrogenesis begins to occur, laying down a **collagen-rich fibrocartilaginous**network spanning the fracture ends, with a surrounding hyaline cartilage sleeve. At the same time, adjacent to the periosteal layers, the osteoprogenitor cells lay down a layer of woven bone.

The release of cytokines such as VEGF and TGF B induces angiogenesis at the fracture site.

**Bony Callus Formation**(If bone ends are not in contact, then a soft bridging callus forms):

The endosteum and periosteum serve as primary sources for the Fibroblasts involved in fracture healing.

Fibroblasts differentiate into osteoblasts guided by various bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) released by the body at the fracture site.

The cartilaginous (soft) callus begins to undergo endochondral ossification, and a medullary callus further supports the bridging soft callus. RANK-L is expressed, stimulating further differentiation of chondroblasts, chondroclasts, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts. As a result, the cartilaginous callus is resorbed and begins to calcify. Subperiosteally, woven bone continues to be laid down. The newly formed blood vessels continue to proliferate, allowing further migration of mesenchymal stem cells. At the end of this phase, a hard, calcified callus of immature bone forms. Bone callus formation is dependent upon appropriate relative motion between fracture fragments.

**Bone Remodelling**(Continues for months to years after clinical union)

This involves a complex interaction of signaling pathways, including BMP, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP), and Indian hedgehog (Ihh). All of which are involved somehow in the differentiation of the appendicular skeleton.

The hypertrophic chondrocytes express type X collagen while the extraarticular matrix is being calcified, then degraded by proteases. Cartilaginous calcification occurs at the junction of the maturing chondrocytes and newly forming bone. Then, the chondrocytes undergo apoptosis, and new vessels form with further VEGF release.

Osteoclasts have the capacity for bone matrix resorption, while osteoclasts' differentiation and activity are coordinated by osteoblasts.

With the continued migration of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, the hard callus undergoes repeated remodeling - termed 'coupled remodeling.' This 'coupled remodeling' is a balance of resorption by osteoclasts and new bone formation by osteoblasts. The center of the callus is ultimately replaced by compact bone, while the callus edges become replaced by lamellar bone. Substantial remodeling of the vasculature occurs alongside these changes. The process of bone remodeling lasts for many months, ultimately resulting in the regeneration of the normal bone structure.

The newly formed bone (woven bone) is remodeled via organized osteoblastic-osteoclastic activity and further shaped in response to mechanical stress (Wolff's law) and electric charges (piezoelectric charges); compression side is electronegative and stimulates bone formation, and the tension side is electropositive and stimulates osteoclasts.

An important point to expand on is endochondral ossification, which is the name given for the process of conversion of cartilage to bone. As described above, this occurs during forming a bony callus, in which the newly formed collagen-rich cartilaginous callus gets replaced by immature bone.

This process is also the key to forming long bones in the fetus, in which the bony skeleton replaces the hyaline cartilage model. The second type of ossification also occurs in the fetus; this is intramembranous ossification; this is the process by which mesenchymal tissue (primitive connective tissue) is converted directly to the bone, which no cartilage intermediate. This process takes place in the flat bones of the skull.