A defect in the homologous recombination of double-stranded DNA is the main mechanism of the pathogenesis of Fanconi anemia. Various FA proteins maintain genomic stability through DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) repair. ICLs prevent DNA strand separation and maintain DNA integrity. Genetic defects in DNA repair are present in the FA pathway so that cells cannot properly repair especially detrimental types of DNA damage. It results in genomic instability and increased susceptibility to cytotoxic agents and predisposition to malignancies. Proteins encoded by FA genes include ubiquitin ligase, monoubiquitinated protein, helicase, and breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility proteins. These proteins are responsible for DNA repair and resistance against DNA damage insults. Some of the FA proteins are similar to the BRCA2 protein, such as FANCD1, which works in the FA-BRCA network. An interactive network of these FA proteins with other proteins are responsible for other rare genetic syndromes such as ataxia-telangiectasia, Bloom syndrome, breast-ovarian cancer, etc.

Genetics and genomic instability: There is a large number of FA genes identified (see above). Proteins encoded by these genes have various roles in the DNA repair FA pathway. The formation of ICLs leads to FA core complex arrangement. Among them, the FANCD2 protein has a central role in this pathway. Core proteins FANC (A, B, C, E, F, G, L, M), more specifically, FANCL component acts as E3 ligase responsible for monoubiquitination, and other core proteins for phosphorylation, and translocation of FANCD2 proteins in nuclear foci.

FANCI is monoubiquitylated and phosphorylated after DNA damage, but its role is not prominent. Genetic defects of any component of this pathway result in decreased resistance against damaging agents and ultimately leads to chromosome fragility. Some of the FA core complex proteins FANCC and FANCE localize to nuclear foci along with FANCD2, FANCG with BRCA2, and RAD51. Nuclear foci formation and the monoubiquitination of FANCD2 proteins are the focal steps in the FA DNA repair pathway. FA core protein complex itself, and with the help of one of its proteins FANCM stimulated translocase and ATPase. ATPase causes hydrolysis of ATP that provides energy to translocase for moving FA core complex along the DNA strand, and another FAAP24 protein binds to ssDNA and branching structures at the damaged site. In addition, FANCM contains helicase and endonuclease domain, which separate the double-stranded DNA and cleave the phosphodiester bond at the damage site to repair the damaged part. FANCJ is also a helicase that binds and interacts with BRCA1. FA core complex with other proteins such as BLM, RPA, and topoisomerase III-alpha are also involved in the DNA repair pathway. Some of the FA proteins, for instance, FANCD1 with BRCA2 and FANCJ with BACH1 and BRIP1, work downstream on homologous recombination DNA repair. Ultimately, bone marrow failure and other complications are due to the defect in the DNA repair pathway, increased oxygen reactive species, and inflammatory cytokines.