**Palmar (Volar) Interossei**

The palmar interossei are unipennate muscles that originate from the metacarpals of the respective digit to which they are associated. These muscles adduct the first, second, fourth, and fifth digits about a long axis through the third digit. Adduction occurs at the metacarpophalangeal joints. Additionally, the palmar interossei contribute to flexion at the metacarpophalangeal joints and extension at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints of their respective digits.

When present as an individual entity, the first palmar interossei originates at the medial, palmar surface of the first metacarpal and inserts into the base of the proximal first phalanx as well as into the extensor hood or the first phalanx. The first palmar interosseus muscle is often considered rudimentary, with most anatomy texts deeming it to be often a component of either the adductor pollicis or the flexor pollicis brevis. Recent studies, however, dispute this notion and found that the first palmar interossei, termed the “pollical palmar interosseous,” is present in over 85% of specimens.

The second palmar interosseous originates at the medial surface of the base of the second metacarpal and inserts onto the medial portion of the extensor hood of the first digit, as well as the base of the first phalanx.

The third and fourth palmar interossei originate at the lateral aspect of the fourth and fifth metacarpals and insert into the lateral aspect of their respective extensor hood. They additionally insert into the base of their respective proximal phalanx.

**Dorsal Interossei**

Of all the intrinsic muscles of the hand, the dorsal interossei are the most dorsally located. The bipennate dorsal interossei are the major abductors of the second, third, and fourth digits at the metacarpophalangeal joints. Moreover, they also contribute to flexion at the metacarpophalangeal joints, in addition to the extension of the PIP and DIP joints.

The first dorsal interosseous muscle has its origin on the adjacent surfaces of the first and second metacarpal bones and inserts into the lateral base of the second phalanx and extensor hood of the second digit.

The second dorsal interosseous muscle originates on the medial aspect of the second metacarpal and the lateral aspect of the third metacarpal bone. It inserts into the lateral base of the third phalanx as well as the respective extensor hood.

The third dorsal interosseous muscle originates at the medial portion of the third metacarpal and the lateral portion of the fourth metacarpal. Its insertion is at the medial aspect of the base of the third phalanx, in addition to the extensor hood of the third digit.

The fourth dorsal interosseous muscle originates at both the lateral aspect of the fourth metacarpal and medial side of the fifth metacarpal. This muscle inserts into the lateral base of the fourth phalanx and the extensor hood of the fourth digit.