Biochemical experiments in the 1950s established that alkaptonuria resulted from a failure to synthesize the enzyme homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (called “homogentisic acid oxidase” at the time), leading to its deficiency in the tyrosine metabolism pathway.AKU) gene, to be located on chromosome 3q.

However, scientists were still unsure whether this AKU gene served a regulatory role in homogentisic acid oxidase enzyme synthesis or encoding role for the enzyme itself. In 1996, researchers specified the gene to be the HGD gene and demonstrated that its exons code the amino acid sequence for the enzyme itself. This study also confirmed the autosomal recessive nature of the disorder, as individuals with alkaptonuria were shown to possess two mutated HGD alleles. At the same time, heterozygous carriers with only one mutated HGD did not exhibit any signs of disease.

Although the mutated alleles necessary for the disorder are most commonly derived from the inheritance of two mutations from two heterozygous parents, homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations can also accumulate in other fashions. These alternate methods include inheritance of one mutated allele accompanied by a de novo germline mutation in the other allele, a de novo somatic mutation in a mosaic parent’s gametes, and uniparental isodisomy.

Over 100 alkaptonuria mutations of the HGD allele have been identified. The most common reported mutations are missense, but other mutation types such as deletions, insertions, and nonsense have also been identified. The various mutation types result in different impacts on the molecular bonds and structure of the protein enzyme. Still, ultimately the mutations all result in a complete lack of or substantially decreased homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase function.