Amniocentesis is a commonly performed procedure for several reasons. It is performed for:

- Diagnostic indications

- Therapeutic indications

**Diagnostic Indications**

**Chromosomal Analysis**

Karyotyping and DNA analysis (to diagnose sex-linked disorders, inborn errors of metabolism, and neural tube defects).

- Advanced maternal age (Age > 35years)

- Abnormal biochemical screening markers (maternal alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin, unconjugated estriol) in 1st or 2nd trimester

- Ultrasound detection of an abnormality or soft tissue markers (Nuchal translucency, nasal bone hypoplasia, nuchal pad edema, etc.)

- Family or personal history of chromosomal abnormalities in previous pregnancies

- Abnormal parental karyotype

- Parental balanced translocation

**Genetic Testing**

**Analysis for Alpha-fetoprotein Level and Acetylcholinesterase**

**Assessment of Severity of Rh Isoimmunisation**

**Assessment of Bilirubin Levels in Amniotic Fluid and Grade of the Severity of Alloimmunization**

Recently non-invasive tests, including the middle cerebral artery Doppler, have gained more importance. It is usually done in the third trimester of pregnancy.

**Diagnosis of Fetal Infections**

It can assist in diagnosing TORCH infections.

- CMV

- Parvovirus

- 
Toxoplasma Gondii

**Fetal Lung Maturation (L/S ratio)**

Performed in the third trimester of pregnancy.

**Diagnosis of Chorioamnionitis**

**Diagnosis of Inherited Bleeding Disorders**

Such as moderate to severe hemophilia A and B and type 3 von Willebrand disease (VWD) in the third trimester of pregnancy. These disorders have increased fetal risk of intracranial bleeding during delivery.

**Therapeutic Indications**

- In hydramnios, it has a therapeutic role in relieving maternal discomfort and the instillation of intraamniotic drugs.

- Decompression amniocentesis in twin oligohydramnios-polyhydramnios sequence (TOPS): as it decreases the volume of amniotic fluid in the polyhydramnios sac, amniotic fluid pressures are decreased in both the sacs resulting in increased placental thickness thus improving uteroplacental circulation and improving fetal outcome.

- It can help in amnioinfusion in oligohydramnios to prevent fetal lung hypoplasia and umbilical cord compression during labor.

- It is indicated for fetal blood transfusion in fetuses having severe hemolysis.