Rhabdomyosarcoma has distinct gross and histopathological features. Grossly these tumors usually present as poorly circumscribed, white, soft or firm, infiltrative masses. The tumor is usually greater than 5 centimeters at the time of diagnosis. The cell of origin of RMS is the rhabdomyoblast. These cells usually show an eccentric eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, rich in thick and thin filaments, and a variable cell shape that may be round or elongated, often referred to as strap cells or tadpole cells respectively. There are several histologic subtypes of rhabdomyosarcoma with important treatment and prognostic implications: embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, botryoid and spindle cell (leiomyomatous), sclerosing and spindle cell, alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, and sarcoma not otherwise specified (NOS). The WHO classification for myogenic tumors published in 2013, classifies rhabdomyosarcoma into four categories: (1) embryonal, (2) alveolar, (3) pleomorphic, and (4) spindle/sclerosing. Anaplasia is regarded by many pathologists as an additional factor that leads to adverse prognosis. Anaplasia in RMS is defined as the presence of enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei, three times larger than those of adjacent cells, and multipolar mitoses. The embryonal subtype is the most common, accounting for up to 60% of all rhabdomyosarcoma cases. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma morphologically shows variable cellularity of typical rhabdomyoblasts arranged in sheets and large nests within a myxoid matrix. Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma shows intersecting fibrous septa with rhabdomyoblasts arranged in interseptal nests and discohesive alveolar arrangement and a FOXO1 rearrangement, t (1; 13) (PAX3-FOXO1) or t (2; 13) (PAX7-FOXO1) by genetic testing. The pathological identification of rhabdomyosarcoma is sometimes difficult due to the similarity of this entity to the other small, round, blue, cell tumors of bone and soft tissue in childhood that include, lymphoma, small cell osteosarcoma, mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, and the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors. To confirm the diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma immunohistochemical, molecular genetic and/or ultra-structural techniques may be needed. Immunohistochemistry is a very useful tool that is used to establish the diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma. Rhabdomyosarcoma is usually positive for myogenin, demin, sarcomeric actin, myogenin, and myoglobin. It is usually negative for NKX2.2, CD99, CD45, CK, S100, and NSE. Pathological classification of rhabdomyosarcoma has been shown to be a prognostic indicator. The botryoid and spindle cell types show superior prognosis, the embryonal cell type shows intermediate prognosis, and the alveolar and undifferentiated sarcoma shows a poor prognosis