Nieman-Pick disease (NPD) type A presents in the first few months of life, usually before three months of age, as hepatosplenomegaly and growth retardation. By the age of one year, neurological symptoms appear as psychomotor retardation and regression of developmental milestones. All patients with NPD type A have a classical eye finding called cherry-red spot. These children usually do not survive past early childhood. NPD type B presents in mid-childhood and is not as severe as type A. These patients have hepatosplenomegaly, interstitial lung disease (ILD), causing recurrent lung infections, thrombocytopenia, and slowed bone growth. About one-third of patients with type B NPD have the cherry-red spot and neurological symptoms. NPD type C can present at any age but usually affects children. Affected individuals can have ataxia, dystonia, supranuclear gaze palsy (SNGP), dysphonia, dysphagia, and severe liver and lung disease.

The following findings can be expected while examining the body systems.

**Gastrointestinal**

- Hepatomegaly

- Splenomegaly

**Pulmonary**

- Interstitial lung disease

- Decreased diffusion capacity

- Recurrent lung infections

**Integumentary**

- Jaundice

**Cardiovascular**

- Thrombocytopenia

- Hypercholesterolemia

**Rheumatologic**

- Impaired growth of long bones

- Slowed mineralization of bones

- Coxa vara

**Ocular**

- Bright cherry-red fovea centralis surrounded by a white or pale macula

- Corneal opacification

- Brown discoloration of the anterior lens capsule

**Neurologic**

- Ataxia

- Dystonia

- Dysphagia

- Dysphonia

- Developmental delay and/or regression

- Mental retardation

- Peripheral neuropathy

- Gelastic catatonia

- SNGP

- Tremors