Turner syndrome can be identified prenatally with abnormal ultrasound findings of increased nuchal translucency, nuchal cystic hygroma, coarctation of the aorta/left-sided cardiac anomalies, brachycephaly, horseshoe kidney, polyhydramnios, oligohydramnios or non-immune fetal hydrops. In the female newborn, Turner syndrome can present with congenital lymphedema of the hands and feet, webbed neck, nail dysplasia, narrow and high-arched palate, and short fourth metacarpals or metatarsals. As they grow up, the girls develop short stature, “shield” chest with widely spaced nipples, webbed neck, low hairline at the base of the neck, cubitus valgus, and Madelung deformity of the forearm and the wrist.

Patients with Turner syndrome usually have normal intelligence but may have specific neurocognitive deficits, e.g., problems with visuospatial organization. This situation can lead to an increased risk of learning disabilities, especially involving calculations, memory, and attention. In adolescence, females will often present with delayed puberty or primary amenorrhea, secondary to premature ovarian failure. “Streak gonads” are a characteristic of Turner syndrome. These are the ovaries, mainly consisting of connective tissue and no follicles or only a few atretic follicles.

Patients with Turner syndrome also have an increased risk of cardiovascular malformations, which in turn leads to increased mortality risk in these individuals. Some of the cardiac malformations are aortic valve abnormalities (primarily bicuspid aortic valve), elongated transverse aortic arch, pulmonary venous anomalies. Aortic dissection further increases the risk of death in these patients. Hearing loss is common due to either recurrent otitis media causing conductive hearing loss, or due to the defect in the outer hair cells on the cochlea causing sensorineural hearing loss

Ocular abnormalities can present with Turner syndrome, such as nearsightedness or farsightedness, strabismus, amblyopia, epicanthic folds, ptosis, hypertelorism, and red-green color blindness.