The lung mainly functions in two ways: conduction and respiration. As previously described, these functions can be examined in particular zones of the lung: conduction zone and respiratory zone. Conduction involves the warming and filtration of air, while respiration includes the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. Respiration is highly dependent on the compliance of the lung and chest wall, the resistance of airways, and the rate of ventilation. Together, these components allow an A-a gradient to guide air appropriately into the lungs on inhalation and exhalation.

Compliance of the respiratory system describes the expandability of the lungs and chest wall. There are two types of compliance: dynamic and static. Dynamic compliance describes the compliance measured during breathing, which involves a combination of lung compliance and airway resistance. Static compliance describes pulmonary compliance when there is no airflow, like an inspiratory pause. Pressure-volume curves are common schemes to express the relationship of dynamic and static compliance where the slope is compliance.

C = V/P

- C: Compliance (ml/mmHg)

- V: Volume (mL)

- P: Pressure (mm Hg)

Lung compliance is the change in volume in the lungs for a given change in transpulmonary or transmural pressure. The transmural pressure (PTM) is the difference between intrapleural pressure( PA) and alveolar pressure (Pa), [PTM= PA – Pa]. If the intrapleural pressure is more negative, the lungs increase in volume to expand. However, if the intrapleural pressure is positive, the lungs will collapse, which decreases lung volume. During expiration, the lung volume is higher for a given intrapleural pressure, and, therefore, compliance is higher in expiration compared to inspiration. Lung compliance is inversely related to elastance, which is also known as elastic resistance or elastic recoil. So, a patient with low lung compliance will have a relatively stiff lung and, therefore, higher elastance.

Two important factors of lung compliance are elastic fibers and surface tension. More elastic fibers in the tissue lead to ease in expandability and, therefore, compliance. Surface tension within the alveoli is decreased by the production of surfactant to prevent collapse. Compliance is more easily achieved by decreasing surface tension.

The lung and chest wall, together, form a combined compliance system. Independently each lung and chest wall measures higher compliance than the lung-chest wall system combined. In addition to lung compliance, the combined system factors in the opposing force of the chest wall muscles and diaphragm. These muscles provide the necessary pressure difference for air movement. The combined lung-chest wall system is at equilibrium (no inclination toward collapse or expansion) when lung volume is at functional residual capacity (FRC), which is the remaining lung volume after tidal volume is expired. The negative intrapleural pressure is set by the two opposing forces of the chest and lungs.