The management of C. difficile infection includes a multi-step approach of discontinuing the usage of inciting antibiotics, isolating the patient, and administering the antibiotic based on the severity of the infection. The antibiotics usually used in the treatment of C. difficile infection are vancomycin or fidaxomicin. Asymptomatic patients despite having a positive stool toxin test do not require treatment. Intravenous metronidazole can be used in a patient who suffers from ileus where the delivery of orally administered antibiotics will be delayed. However, vancomycin cannot be administered intravenously because it cannot be secreted into the colon.

As per new IDSA guidelines, an initial non-severe C. difficile infection episode in adults can be treated with vancomycin 125 mg orally 4 times/day or fidaxomicin 200 mg twice a day for 10 days.

Severe C. difficile infection is defined as a white blood cell count greater than 15,000 cells/microL, serum albumin less than 3 g/dL, and a serum creatinine level greater than 1.5 times the premorbid level. A severe initial episode can be treated with the same dosage of vancomycin or fidaxomicin as in initial non-severe C. difficile infection.

For an initial fulminant episode with hypotension, shock, ileus, or megacolon, the treatment is vancomycin 500 mg, 4 times/ day orally or by NG tube. If ileus is present, rectal vancomycin enema (500 mg in 100 ml normal saline per rectum 4 times/day) can be used. Intravenous metronidazole 500 mg, 3 times daily can be added with oral or rectal vancomycin. Surgical intervention such as subtotal colectomy with preservation of the rectum may be required in certain patients who develop fulminant colitis leading to complications such as toxic megacolon, intestinal perforation, and necrotizing colitis.

The first recurrence of C. difficile infection can be treated with a prolonged taper and pulsed vancomycin regimen which is 125 mg, 4 times per day for 10 to 14 days, 2 times per day for 7 days, one time a day for 7 days, and lastly, once every 2 to 3 days for 2 to 8 weeks or fidaxomicin 200 mg, 2 times per day for 10 days if vancomycin was used for the initial episode.

A second or further recurrence can be treated with a taper and pulsed vancomycin regimen as mentioned for the first recurrence, vancomycin 125 mg orally, 4 times per day for 10 days followed by rifaximin 400 mg orally, 3 times per day for 20 days, fidaxomicin 200 mg, 2 times per day for 10 days, OR fecal transplantation.

Bezlotoxumab, a newer human monoclonal antibody against C. difficile toxin, has been recently approved for the management of recurrent infections by C. difficile and a clinical study performed to assess the efficacy revealed positive outcomes.