Approximately 93% of plasma is composed of water, and the remaining 7% is composed of solutes.

**Laboratory Assessment of Serum Sodium**

Serum sodium measurement is most commonly obtained by one of three laboratory processes: flame emission spectrophotometry, indirect ion-selective electrode potentiometry, and direct-ion-selective electrode potentiometry.

- Flame Emission Spectrophotometry: In the early 1950s, serum sodium was measured by a process known as flame emission spectrophotometry (FES), in which a diluted sample of serum was sprayed across a flame. A spectrophotometer then measures the intensity of light generated at the specific wavelength corresponding to sodium. From this data, the serum sodium level is extrapolated with efficiency with the necessary application of a correction factor.

- Indirect Ion-Selective Electrode Potentiometry: In the 1980s, laboratories began to transition to a new method called Indirect ion-selective electrode (IISE) potentiometry. This laboratory method provides an advantage over FES in that only the aqueous components of the solution are measured. However, the serum in IISE is again diluted, which, in turn, requires a corrective factor to be applied. Thus, the IISE method of sodium measurement is also prone to error in the presence of excess solute in the serum, even when considering the percentage of the aqueous component. According to a recent participant summary report conducted by the College of American Pathologists, approximately two-thirds of laboratories in the United States currently utilize this method.

- Direct Ion-Selective Electrode Potentiometry (DISE): like IISE, the DISE method also utilizes potentiometry to precisely detect sodium levels in a given serum sample; however, the direct method does not require dilution of the serum before testing. The serum sodium level reported does not require a correction factor and is therefore not susceptible to an artifactual error by the presence of excess solute in serum. DISE is the most frequently used method in arterial blood gas analysis.