The classification of the muscles of mastication refers to four main muscles including the masseter, temporalis, medial pterygoid, and lateral pterygoid. The actions of the muscles of mastication open and close the mouth by influencing motion on the mandible. The four muscles separate into a superficial group involving the masseter and temporalis muscles, and a deep group involving the medial and lateral pterygoids.

The masseter muscle provides powerful elevation and protrusion of the mandible by originating from the zygomatic arch and inserting along the angle and lateral surface of the mandible. The temporalis muscle originates from the floor of the temporal fossa and inserts onto the coronoid process of the mandible. Contraction causes elevation of the mandible and retraction of the mandible. The medial pterygoid originates from two heads, the medial surface of the lateral pterygoid plate and the tuberosity of the maxilla, and inserts along the medial surface of the mandibular ramus. Contraction of the medial pterygoid is similar to the masseter muscle causing elevation and protrusion of the mandible. The lateral pterygoid also originates from two heads, the infratemporal surface/crest of the great wing of the sphenoid and the lateral surface of the lateral pterygoid plate, and inserts at the joint capsule of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), the articular disc of the TMJ, and the condylar neck of the mandible. Contracting this muscle allows for the protraction of the mandible and anterior motion of the TMJ allowing for the mouth to open. The lateral pterygoid is the only muscle to actively oppose the other muscles of mastication and allow for depression of the mandible.