Rapid management within 3 hours is important to avoid permanent injury to the facial nerve.

Simple maneuvers should be tried to reduce pressure in the eardrum. Yawning and swallowing may open the Eustachian tube. Toynbee maneuver (nose pinch followed by swallowing) and Valsalva (exhale against a closed mouth and pinched nose) maneuver work similarly. Chewing gum or food can likewise open the Eustachian tube. The use of local decongestants has the same goal: to reduce the edema of the Eustachian tube and its meatus in the nasopharynx to allow the air contained in the tympanic cavity to escape. As a last resort, myringotomy may be used.

In the airplane, the pressure variation in the eardrum is resolved upon landing.

Another therapeutic means is to ensure sufficient local oxygenation. The increase in blood oxygen content, by high-rate oxygen inhalation, opposes the effects of ischemia; the air contained in the middle ear is gradually eliminated by ventilation of the Eustachian tube, or resorbed locally.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy, generally with a low-pressure setting of about 1.2 ATA (absolute technical atmosphere) with pure oxygen respiration, has been used to treat this type of barotrauma. This therapy combines the actions of oxygenation and the increase of the ambient pressure.  Recovery under hyperbaric oxygen therapy was observed in less than 2 minutes, under normobaric oxygen therapy at high flow within 15 minutes.

Prophylactic use of topical nasal decongestants is also considered helpful although given rare recurrences it is unlikely to be unnecessary.

Until the palsy is resolved, the most significant risk is of corneal damage due to keratitis from an inability to fully blink. This can be ameliorated with eye lubricant and eye patching.