The incentive spirometer is a mechanical hand-held breathing device in which the patient is instructed to take slow deep breaths through the device’s mouthpiece. The device gives the patient visual feedback on the volume of the inhalation. Incentive spirometers are available either by measuring the volume of inspiration (volume-oriented devices) or measuring the flow rate (flow-oriented devices). A standard flow-oriented incentive spirometer consists of three chambers in a row. The patient inhales through a mouthpiece connected to the unit with the three chambers. Each chamber contains a ball that has printed on the outside of the chamber the least amount of flow needed to raise the ball. With an airflow rate of 600 to 1200 milliliters (mL) per second, the deep breath lifts the balls. When all three balls reach the top of the unit, the patient has reached a flow speed of 1200 mL/second. The colored balls indirectly give the patient a visual indication of the inhaled volume.  The visual feedback works to improve compliance in performing the slow, sustained deep inspiration.

The most common volume-oriented incentive spirometer is a mechanical hand-held device that uses a one-way valve to block exhalation into the device. It consists of a corrugated hose and a mouthpiece that connects the patient to a plastic chamber. Next to the central chamber of the spirometer is a slider. The medical provider can use this slider to set a target breath volume. The target breath volume can be based on the patient's age, height, health, and condition. When the patient breathes in through the corrugated hose, the piston in the chamber rises, which indicates the volume of displacement via an indicator on the device. There is a smaller chamber on the spirometer that measures the speed of the breath. The ball in this chamber will go to the top if the patient breathing in too quickly, and will go to the bottom if breathing too slowly. Many spirometers have a line on this chamber to indicate the optimal speed.

Once the patient has achieved maximal inspiratory volume to the best of their ability, the patient is requested to hold the piston in the same position for 5 to 10 seconds. After completing the inhalation and maintaining that inhalation for the appropriate amount of time, the patient is instructed to remove the mouthpiece, allowing gravity to return the piston to its original starting point.

Studies have proposed that there are significant differences between the volume and flow-oriented incentive spirometer. Volume-oriented devices cause less effort with breathing and more exercise of the diaphragm, whereas flow-oriented devices cause increased muscular activity of the upper chest. Volume-oriented incentive spirometry has shown to be more effective in improving pulmonary function, functional capacity, and functional difficulty questionnaire when compared to flow-oriented incentive spirometry and diaphragmatic breathing exercises.