The pathophysiology of contrast-induced nephropathy remains unclear. The proposed theory is a combination of vasoconstriction, ischemia, hypoxia, and direct toxic effect on renal tubular cells. The hemodynamic alterations and medications can exacerbate the possibility of contrast-induced nephropathy. The risk of contrast-induced kidney injury is much higher with the arterial administration of contrast compared with venous administration of contrast. Metformin can cause lactic acidosis in the setting of kidney dysfunction and acute kidney injury. The FDA recommends holding metformin on the day of contrast exposure and 48 hours after the procedure. Another cause is catheter-induced aeroembolism to the renal microvasculature. Laboratory abnormalities may include eosinophilia and eosinophilia in an acute kidney injury as a result of cholesterol atheroembolism.

Renal microcirculation depends on an interplay of hormonal, neural, paracrine, and autocrine signals. Of note are:

- The vasodilator - nitric oxide (NO)

- The vasoconstrictors - vasopressin, adenosine, angiotensin 2, and endothelins

Nitric oxide seems to be crucial, with antiplatelet, vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant effects. The levels of asymmetrical dimethylarginine, which is an inhibitor of NO synthase, can be utilized as a marker of CIN, particularly in patients with adverse outcomes.

Contrast media-mediated vasoconstriction occurs as a result of a direct action of media on vascular smooth muscle and via metabolites such as endothelin and adenosine. Additionally, it decreases water reabsorption, causing an increase in interstitial pressure. This reduces GFR and compression of the vasa recta follows. These mechanisms contribute to aggravating medullary hypoxemia and vasoconstriction in the kidneys in patients who already have volume depletion.   Finally, contrast media also worsens resistance to blood flow by causing an increase in blood viscosity and by lowering red cell deformability. The ensuing intravascular sludging causes local ischemia and activation of reactive oxygen species leading to tubular damage at a cellular level.