Clinically determining capacity can sometimes be problematic. Many clinicians and other health care professionals opt to use a focused history approach, targeting the components of capacity with open-ended questions. Some example questions for each of the components are listed below.

**Understanding**

Can you please tell me what you know about what's happening right now?

What do you think is causing your symptoms?

Do you have any questions about what we've discussed?

**Expressing a Choice**

After discussing the options, which option sounds best for you?

Are there things you wouldn't want to be done medically?

Is there anyone you with whom would like to discuss your options?

**Appreciation**

Do you think you have [X] medical condition? Why or why not?

Do you think [Y] treatment would benefit your condition? How?

Do you think [Y] treatment carries risk? How?

**Reasoning**

If you don't mind me asking, why would you prefer your choice?

How is your condition going to affect your daily life?

What is going to happen if you don't receive care?

Additionally, there are several validated tools available to help standardize decision-making capacity, which typically are used for research purposes but may provide some benefit to providers in clinical scenarios. The most well-known tool is called the MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool for Treatment, a privatized tool available for purchase from the publisher. This instrument provides a set of questions to guide the interview and has been shown to be efficacious.

If a patient has been found to lack capacity, the next steps in management depend on the individual situation. For example, a patient who is intoxicated and expected to recover from their ingestion relatively quickly warrants a different approach than an elderly patient with Alzheimer disease, who is not expected to see great improvements in their cognitive status or their capacity. When approaching an impaired patient, consider the gravity and severity of the circumstances, and the expected duration of the impairment.

The urgency of the decision must always come first. If the decision is emergent and risks an impaired patient's safety, then the decision making usually falls on the healthcare professional in charge. Barring emergent conditions, efforts should then be made to either seek out the patient's directive or a proxy who can make medical decisions for them.

If in the rare case, no proxy or advanced directive is available, typically healthcare professionals and/or an institutionally designated ethics committee will make decisions for the patient in the short term.  If the patient requires long-term decision-making assistance, formal guardianship can be assigned by a court of law.