A posterior surgical approach to the knee is valuable when treating certain etiologies of the knee and depends on the surgeon's knowledge of anatomy as well as the step-by-step process to ensure success. Multiple knee pathologies may be addressed with this approach, including (but not limited to) the following:

- Baker's cyst excision

- Medial meniscus posterior horn repair

- Tibial inlay technique for posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) reconstruction

- Tibial plateau fracture fixation (ORIF)

Several factors should be kept in mind with a posteromedial approach to the knee in evaluating the popliteal fossa. To avoid skin necrosis, the surgeon should avoid making sharp angles when transitioning from a vertical to a transverse incision and should include adequate subcutaneous tissue of the skin flap. Also, using blunt dissection when handling the neurovascular bundle is important to avoid injury to these structures. Careful closure of the fascia is also important to keep from injuring the tibial nerve which is the most superficial structure of the bundle. Being aware of anatomic variations in patients is vital to avoid damaging nearby structures and is a common issue clinicians face.

There are benefits and risks with any surgical approach. Regarding the posteromedial approach, specifically, using a transverse incision provides a clear view of the femoral condyles, musculature, and ligamentous structures of the knee as well as potential pathology (i.e., Baker cyst). This is the preferred approach for posterior cruciate ligament avulsions, malignancies, and posterior tibial plateau fractures to name a few. Additionally, this incision is cosmetically preferred as it is well hidden in the popliteal fold. One of the concerns with the posteromedial approach is the possibility of a flexion contracture of the knee secondary to inadequate closure of the incision. Anesthesia-related complications may also be seen due to the prone positioning of the patient during the operation.