A thorough history and physical examination are key to the diagnosis of shoulder impingement syndrome. Individuals will often present with complaints of pain upon lifting the arm or with lying on the affected side.  They may report loss of motion as the primary reason they come in to be evaluated, or that nighttime pain prevents them from sleeping. Weakness and stiffness often result secondary to the pain.

Physical examination should consist of inspection, palpation, passive, and active range of motion, and strength testing of the neck and shoulder, all of which are compared bilaterally. Often, patients will have weakness of abduction and/or external rotation of the affected side.

Special tests are key components of the physical examination.

Hawkins test: The Hawkins test is performed when the patient's arm is passively internally rotated with the shoulder in 90 degrees of shoulder forward flexion and elbow flexion. Pain over the acromion indicates subacromial impingement but may be negative in internal impingement.

Neer sign: With the scapula fixed into a depressed position, this test is performed by the examiner maximally forward flexing the patient's arm (passive range of motion testing). Localized pain on the anterior shoulder suggests subacromial impingement, whereas posterior shoulder pain suggests internal impingement.

Jobe test: Also known as the empty can test, this test is performed by placing the patient's arms at 90 degrees of abduction within the scapular plane, maximally internally rotating the arms and resisting further abduction by the patient. A positive test occurs with localized pain to the affected arm.

Painful arc of motion: The painful arc is a physical exam finding in which pain is appreciated with abduction of the arm between 70 and 120 degrees and forced overhead movement.

Special tests to evaluate for shoulder instability include the sulcus sign, anterior apprehension, and relocation. Classically, these tests are negative in shoulder impingement syndrome.

Sulcus sign: With the patient sitting upright with arm resting at their side, the clinician stabilizes the shoulder proximally and applies an inferiorly-directed force at the elbow. A positive test is noted based on the inferior displacement of the humeral head.

Anterior apprehension: With the patient lying supine, this test is performed by placing the patient's shoulder in 90 degrees of abduction and 90 degrees of external rotation. While supporting the proximal shoulder, the clinician then applies greater gentle external rotation movement. The exam is considered positive when the patient reports a subjective feeling of impending subluxation or near dislocation.

Relocation test: This test for shoulder instability requires a positive anterior apprehension test. After the patient reports the prodrome of dislocation or subluxation described above, the clinician applies a posteriorly directed force on the anterior humeral head, which relieves the patient's symptoms.