Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy has widespread applications for imaging the eye and can be classified as angiography, reflectance, and autofluorescence. Its main application is in detecting and monitoring the progression of the vitreoretinal disease and the optic nerve head in patients with glaucoma.

- Diabetic retinopathy

- Vascular occlusions

- Retinal dystrophies

- Macular disorders, including idiopathic juxtafoveal telangiectasia

- Vitreoretinal interface disorders, including epiretinal membrane and macular hole

- Ocular tumors

- Inflammation

- Choroidal and optic nerve head disorders, including glaucoma.



- Age-related macular degeneration

- Retinal dystrophies

- Drug toxicities of the retina

- White dot syndromes

- Posterior uveitis

- Central serous chorioretinopathy

- In diabetic retinopathy: to detect macular ischemia, confirm neovascularization, asymmetric diabetic retinopathy, to differentiate from other etiology of macular edema, and in patients with asteroid hyalosis.

- In retinal vein occlusions, look for capillary non-perfusion areas and detect neovascularization, foveal ischemia, and clinically undetectable tributary vein occlusions.

- In patients with wet age-related macular degeneration (ARMD), document choroidal neovascular membrane activity (CNVM) activity. It is superior to optical coherence tomography in these settings as it can show leakage.

- In patients with Non-ARMD causes of CNVM, Myopia, angioid streaks, trauma, uveitis, and dystrophies.

- Ocular ischemic syndrome

- Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR)

- Posterior uveitis, including vasculitis, choroiditis, and posterior uveitis

- Intraocular tumors

- Retinal vascular diseases like sickle cells disease

- Pediatric retinal pathologies like retinopathy of prematurity, familial exudative vitreoretinopathy, and coats disease

- Ischaemic optic neuropathies

- Wet age-related macular degeneration (wet AMD)

- Polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV)- ICG is the gold standard in diagnosing white dot syndromes.

- Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR) and other pachychoroid spectrum disorders

- Choroidal tumors

- White Dot Syndromes

- Ocular inflammatory diseases

- To visualize the cone photoreceptors in healthy eyes and in eyes with conditions like age-related macular degeneration and inherited retinal diseases.

- Detect the progression of glaucoma by detecting optic nerve head changes preceding defects in the field of vision.