The complex strata of action and the multifactorial nature affect its concentration, function, and regulation. The complexity is demonstrated as 5-HT has a multiorgan, physiological mechanism, including:

- Coagulation: the effect is particularly predominant in patients using an anticoagulant, such as warfarin, in which a combination between warfarin and antidepressant may increase the risk of bleeding.

- Cardiac arrhythmia: 5-HT will increase myocyte intracellular calcium, having an ionotropic and chronotropic effect (increases contractility and heart rate), leading to an increase in the likelihood of arrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia), which can be explained by the extreme poles of emotional expression, as persistence or an acute shift of a high to a low mood and vice-versa, by any trigger (I.e., in the form of death of a relative, loss of a valued item or winning the lottery or a dose of ecstasy), may induce cardiac manifestations.

- Neurological disorders: 5-HT is hypothesized to be a major pathophysiological factor in inducing epilepsy, and a shift in 5-HT's concentration may initiate an episode of migraine and other neuropsychiatric disorders (discussed above).

- In hypertensive patients, serotonin's vasoconstricting action can lead to disrupted feedback and regulation of blood pressure by the baroreceptors, which can cause mild to severe fluctuations in the blood pressure affecting the patient's status.

- Endocrine and metabolic processes: increasing serotonin causes a decrease in bone mineral density and dysregulation of several metabolic processes (e.g., lipolysis,  gluconeogenesis).

- Ocular disorders: Different types of 5-HT receptors are present in the eye and orbit. 5-HT can affect the intraocular pressure by physiologically decreasing it and causing mydriasis. However, there is a possibility that using drugs that elevate the 5-HT concentration chronically (discussed in the Function section) may dispose to disorders such as glaucoma.