During evaluation for possible cardiac ischemia from an occluded vein graft, a 12-lead electrocardiogram (EKG) is essential. Comparison with previous EKGs should be assessed for new bundle branch blocks, significant ST deviations, and possible T wave abnormalities. Laboratory evaluation should include cardiac troponin, creatine kinase-MB, and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels. A baseline chest X-ray is unlikely to show evidence of vein graft occlusion. Still, in the case of new-onset congestive heart failure due to ischemia, it may demonstrate cardiomegaly and pulmonary congestion.

Evaluation of the patient presenting with signs and symptoms of VGS following PABG includes clinical and radiographic methodologies. Evaluation starts with a distal pulse assessment using a handheld doppler. This can be augmented with extremity blood pressure measurements to determine an ankle-brachial index. A normal ratio of greater than 0.9 to 1.1 demonstrates that one’s peripheral vasculature is most likely patent. Claudication is typically denoted as those individuals obtaining a ratio of ankle systolic blood pressure to brachial systolic blood pressure of 0.4 to 0.9. Rest pain typically develops as this ratio falls to 0.2 to 0.4; non-healing wounds with ulceration and gangrene develop with ratios of 0 to 0.4. With abnormal findings, further evaluation is indicated. Vascular imaging may be completed using non-invasive imaging modalities such as Doppler ultrasonography, computed tomography angiography, or magnetic resonance angiography. Invasive imaging and digital subtraction angiographies may also be used; however, this method requires direct cannulation of the artery and is associated with a higher degree of morbidity and mortality compared to less invasive imaging strategies.