The collaboration of multiple healthcare professionals is necessary to enhance patient-centered care in reserpine treatment. Every interprofessional team member needs to understand the mechanism of action of reserpine, proper dosage administration, adverse effects, and toxicity treatment to provide proper care for patients. Every team member has a role, from the physician who prescribes the drug to the pharmacist who provides the appropriate dosing. Understanding the side effects and knowing the timing of ingestion will help the healthcare team monitor possible toxicity and plan for treatment. If the nurse notices any adverse effects or signs of toxicity, he/she will have to report the findings to the physician and pharmacist to determine the best course of action to stabilize the patient. The clinician would have to consult with the pharmacist regarding the use of activated charcoal if the ingestion of reserpine was within a few hours. Once the patient stabilizes, the healthcare team must work together to determine the cause and reason for toxicity. The team should monitor the patient until all signs of toxicity have dissipated. Depending on the cause of overdose or toxicity, the healthcare team may have to consider a different medication to replace reserpine.

An integrated interprofessional team approach with collaborative decision making, mutual respect, and communication with the patient are vital elements to enhance team performance and improve patient-centered care. [Level 5]