Stereotactic radiosurgery is a non-invasive, outpatient procedure, which does not require a general anesthetic. The first step is to localize the target. Focused gamma rays involve a specialized helmet surgically fixed to the patient’s skull under local anesthetic. The patient is immobilized with a head frame, secured with screws that pierce the scalp. A frameless version of the technology is also available. A fiducial reference box is placed onto the frame to provide coordinates, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomogram (CT) or angiogram is performed to define the target in three dimensions. With focused gamma-ray treatment, the patient and the machine remain stationary throughout the procedure.

With the linear accelerated surgery, either the patient or the gantry can move in space to change the delivery point. In the past, a stereotactic frame was used to restrict movement. However, newer frameless approaches have been developed, with improved patient comfort.

Next, an individualized treatment plan is developed to focus the radiation as precisely as possible. A computerized treatment planning system is used and requires depth doses, tissue maximum ratio (the ratio of the dose at a given point in a phantom to the dose at the same point at the reference depth of maximum dose), off-axis factor and collimator output factor for each stereotactic collimator.

Once quality assurance is guaranteed, and an independent output check performed, the patient gets positioned on a treatment couch, and the radiation is delivered.