The prevalence of sleep disorders differs based on the specific condition. A link between SDB, short sleep duration, and non-restorative sleep has recently been reported.

**Insomnia**

Difficulty sleeping or insomnia symptoms are among the most common medical complaints affecting nearly a third of the adult population. When the symptoms are severe enough to cause daytime consequences, the prevalence is estimated to be approximately 10% and is higher among women than among men (17.6% vs. 10.1%%, respectively).

**Sleep-Disordered Breathing (SDB)**

The prevalence of SDB is dependent on the type of disease. As people age, the incidence of sleep problems also rises. Approximately 50% of older adults have sleep problems.

**Central Disorders of Hypersomnia**

The prevalence of narcolepsy in the general population is approximately 142,600 individuals (44.3 per 100,000 persons), but there is a reported trend of increase over the last decade (by 14% from 38.9 in 2013 to 44.3 in 2016).

Likewise, The prevalence of idiopathic hypersomnia also increased by 32% (from 7.8 to 10.3 per 100,000 persons), with similar rates between both sexes.

****Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders (CRSD)****

The prevalence of CRSD among the general population depends on the type and is reported to be between 0.13 to 0.17%.

**Parasomnia**

Parasomnia, such as sleepwalking, confusional arousals, sleep terrors, sleep talking, and nightmares, are prevalent, including during childhood. The overall parasomnia prevalence in the no OSA group is approximately 3% in the NREM group (such as in sleepwalking, sexual acts during sleep, and sleep-related eating), 43.8% in nightmares, and the prevalence of RBD is estimated to be 8.7 per 100,000 people (with men to women ratio is 3:1).

**Sleep-Related Movement Disorders**

Restless leg syndrome and periodic limb movement disorder are also more prevalent in the elderly.

There are gender differences in many of these sleep disorders. The prevalence of insomnia is higher in women than men throughout most of life (with a ratio of 1.4:1.0).

There are also racial and ethnic differences in the prevalence of sleep disorders.