Quetiapine is available both as quetiapine extended-release (ER; once-daily dosing) or quetiapine immediate release (IR; twice to three times daily dosing) tablets. The tablets are available in 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, 200 mg, 300 mg, and 400 mg tablets, with the ER dose formulation available in 50 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg, 300 mg, and 400 mg tablets. Figueroa et al. also reported that 800 mg/day is the maximum recommended dose for quetiapine IR formulation twice or thrice daily divided doses. After oral administration, it is promptly absorbed and reaches its peak plasma concentration in approximately 1 to 2 hours. The reported half-life (t1/2) for quetiapine is about 7 hours.

Dosing is as follows (all dosing is oral):

**For Schizophrenia**

- IR: 150 to 750 mg daily in two or three divided doses; start at 25 mg twice daily, and titrate up to 300 to 800 mg daily in two or three divided doses, with daily increases of 50 to 150 mg. In elderly patients, increase 25 to 50 mg daily.

- ER: 400 to 800 mg each evening; start with 300 mg daily with up to 300 mg increases daily or as needed. In the elderly, start at 50 mg daily with 50 mg dose increments. Patients should not chew, crush, or cut the ER tablets.

**For Bipolar I Disorder (manic)**

- IR: 200 to 400 mg twice daily. Start at 50 mg twice daily, increasing by 100 mg a day to 200 mg twice daily by the fourth day, then begin increasing by 200 mg each day as needed. The maximum dose is 800 mg daily.

**For Bipolar I Disorder (manic/mixed)**

- ER: 400 to 800 mg each evening. Start at 300 mg daily for one day, then 600 mg in the evening for one day; adjust by 200 mg per day or as needed to a maximum dose of 800 mg daily. In the elderly, start with 50 mg in the evening with 50 mg increments daily for therapeutic effectiveness.

**For Acute Depressive Bipolar Disorder**

- IR: 300 mg daily at bedtime; start at 50 mg at bedtime for one day, then 100 mg at bedtime for one day, 200 mg at bedtime for one day, then 300 mg at bedtime. The maximum dose is 600 mg daily, with doses over 300 mg daily rarely demonstrating effectiveness. For the elderly, start with 25 mg at bedtime, with 25 to 50 mg dose increases daily.

- ER: 300 at bedtime; start with 50 mg in the evening, then 100 mg each evening for one day, 200 mg in the evening for one day, then 300 mg in the evening. The maximum dose is 300 mg daily. In the elderly, start with 50 mg in the evening, with 50 mg daily dose increments. Patients should not chew, crush, or cut the ER tablets.

As an adjunct treatment measure for various forms of major depressive disorder, the dose ranges from 50 to 300 mg daily with the IR form and 150 to 300 mg daily with the ER form, using similar titration schedules to a maximum of 300 mg daily.

For efficacy, a range of 300 mg to 800 mg a day should be optimal, and for some patients, prescribers can try a non-FDA-approved dose of 1200 mg to 1600 mg per day for benefits, with QT interval monitoring.