# Continuing Education Activity

A single ventricle is an uncommon occurrence in embryogenesis, which results in the anatomical or functional loss of a ventricular cavity. These malformations are life-threatening and necessitate quick revision to correct. Prompt identification and goals of care discussions provide optimal outcomes for potential interventions. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of a single ventricle and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of a single ventricle.
- Review the common presentation of a patient with a single ventricle.
- Identify treatment considerations for patients with a single ventricle.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by a single ventricle.

# Introduction

A single ventricle or univentricular heart is a broad term covering various cardiac structural abnormalities in which one ventricle is severely underdeveloped, or a ventricular septal wall did not form. Through various mechanisms, the anomalous structure typically results in the mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood. Occurrences are generally caused by genetic factors, though environmental factors are known to promote malformation.

# Etiology

The origin of each condition varies by type and is influenced by multiple factors. The development process for each variation is not entirely understood.

Malformation occurs in embryogenesis, during days 30 to 56 of gestation.

Environmental factors also influence cardiac structural formation. Risk factors include:

- Increasing parental age

- Phenylketonuria, pregestational diabetes, febrile illnesses, influenza, maternal rubella, anticonvulsants, ibuprofen, sulfasalazine, thalidomide, trimethoprim-sulfonamide, retinoids, marijuana, and organic solvents

- Lithium is associated with an increased risk of cardiac malformations, specifically at higher doses and with use during the first trimester

Key univentricular variations and typical features:

- Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS): The left ventricle, mitral valve, aortic valve, and aorta are underdeveloped.

- Tricuspid atresia: The tricuspid valve fails to develop, leading to an underdeveloped right ventricle.

- Ebstein anomaly: Abnormal development of tricuspid valve leaflets causes right ventricular atrialization. The anomaly is associated with various cardiac structural abnormalities, including pulmonary valve pathologies, septal defects, and electrical conduction lesions.

- Double outlet right ventricle: The aorta and the pulmonary artery exit from the right ventricle, leaving the left ventricle underdeveloped.

- Double inlet left ventricle: Both atria connect to the left ventricle, resulting in an underdeveloped right ventricle.

- Atrioventricular canal defect: An atrial or ventricular septal defect forms large enough to make a functionally single ventricle.

# Epidemiology

The occurrence of congenital heart disease is between 6 and 13 in 1,000 live births.

# Pathophysiology

With a single ventricle, mixed oxygenated blood circulates throughout the body. Depending on the structural anomaly, a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect (VSD), or communication in the great arteries may be required to maintain pulmonary and systemic circulations. More information about anatomical requirements can be found under each disease's respective chapters.

# History and Physical

The presentation of a single ventricle may be identified as early as the 18th week of gestation.

Post-natal presentations vary depending on underlying structural variations. Typically, a heart murmur, tachypnea, respiratory distress, cyanosis, or hypotension may be present when circulation and oxygenation are not satisfactory.

# Evaluation

Prenatal diagnosis is made through routine ultrasound techniques for gestation and fetal echocardiography. Visualization of structural abnormalities or deviations from standard flow patterns may distinguish a single ventricle in utero.

Post-natal diagnosis is made through a variety of techniques. Echocardiography is the best modality for the diagnosis of a single ventricle. Other techniques may aid in the diagnosis of a single ventricle, including electrocardiography, plain chest films, and pulse oximetry.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment options of the univentricular variants depend on the time of discovery, prognosis, and goals of care. Prognosis must be discussed in depth before proceeding with treatment, as an intervention may be futile in some instances.

Univentricular heart syndrome medical management is targeted to the underlying pathology. Supplemental oxygen will help alleviate hypoxemia, and acid-base or metabolic disturbances should have correctable factors mended.

Catheter-based management is also based on underlying etiology, time of discovery, and prognosis. When discovered in utero, catheter-based structural interventions and valvuloplasty can mitigate sequala by correcting anomalies during the developmental process.

Surgical intervention can also correct any of the abovementioned anatomical variations, though technique varies by condition. The Fontan procedure, a popular choice for intervention, works by delivering blood to the lungs utilizing central venous pressure, and reduced intrathoracic pressure.

In patients with severe disease, palliative surgery may be the best option and is typically preferred over choosing strict comfort measures.

# Differential Diagnosis

The neonatal presentation may be seen emergently after birth or develop within a few days of delivery, as collateral circulations diminish. Emergent presentations after delivery should consider sepsis, infantile respiratory distress syndrome (IRDS), independent aortic and pulmonary disorders, and transposition of the great arteries.

Less severe cases may present after a few months or years when growth rates are affected; infection, failure to thrive, and malnutrition etiologies should be considered.

# Prognosis

Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is almost universally fatal if untreated but improves to 60% to 70% survival with partial revisions.

Patients with tricuspid atresia are typically better with intervention, noting 90% survival at one year of age and 80% survival at ten years.

The prognosis for other causes of single ventricles vary by etiology; nevertheless, more than half survive two years with the average length of up to 30 to 40 years.

# Complications

Single ventricle heart syndromes are typically corrected through direct intervention, obfuscating the origin of certain complications. Expected complications of corrected single ventricle hearts are listed below:

- Arrhythmias

- Esophageal varices

- Heart failure with thrombus formation and increased risk of bleeding from treatment

- Increased risk for decompensation with anesthesia

- Long-term cyanosis

- Restrictive and diffusion-limited lung disease.

- Protein-losing enteropathy

- Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury

- Reduced height and somatic development

- Renal dysfunction

- Systemic venous-to-pulmonary venous and systemic artery-to-pulmonary artery collaterals

# Consultations

Consultations with interventional specialists and thoracic surgeons should be made when the anomaly is discovered. Prompt referral allows for earlier intervention with optimal informed consent.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Intervention is not always sensible or the best option. In-depth discussions about prognosis and outcomes should be discussed with family members. A specific expression that staged procedures may not be curative should be given, mentioning the possible need for cardiac transplantation in the future. If found in utero, elective termination may be necessary for the discussion of available options. Living conditions should also be discussed with patients. Families residing at altitudes higher than 1700 meters above sea level may impair long-term survival benefits.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The identification of a single ventricle can be made in utero or after birth. When made in utero, healthcare teams must report this finding and begin goal discussions with the mother as soon as possible. When found emergently after delivery, healthcare employees need to work as an interprofessional team to provide an urgent resolution quickly. Overall, general practitioners should understand the severity of single ventricles and the suboptimal prognoses to guide decision-making better.