Nursing care for bariatric patients is different in several ways. Specialist equipment must be larger to adjust for patient size - including BP cuffs, hospital gowns, anti-slip socks, TED stockings, beds, and bedside commodes. The weight capacity of various equipment is another essential consideration for chairs/beds/wheelchairs/toilets. Relative immobility of bariatric patients puts them at increased risk of pressure sores, and a thorough assessment of skin integrity at pressure areas is important to assess, document, and monitor. Regular evaluation and care to these areas is necessary to prevent hospital-acquired sores during the inpatient stay. Encouragement of mobilization postoperatively and involvement of physiotherapy and occupational therapy is also important. Manual handling training should focus specifically on the additional needs of bariatric patients; these may include hoist transfer. The moving and handling requirements of these patients should be brought to nursing staff attention before elective admission. Should a bariatric patient die as an inpatient, early communication with the morgue should ensure appropriate care of the deceased.

The interprofessional team also includes a specialist bariatric nurse, for providing support and education to patients. The specialist bariatric nurse acts as a center for patient communication and referral between specialist teams involved in the patient's care. In the USA, a recognized certification program exists for training the specialist bariatric nurse; however, in the UK, the role is not as well established. Another benefit of having a specialist bariatric nurse is their ability to follow the patient throughout their journey and provide clarity in potentially conflicting information provided by the many specialties involved in care.