It is imperative to assess and address the barriers that obese patients face which delay pursuing their healthcare needs. Inadequate healthcare in these patients regarding their presenting complaints and preventive health visits leads to public health consequences in obesity. Impairment of efforts in the prevention of obesity cause health and social inequalities.

**Public Health Policy and Environmental Changes**

Environmental changes are the best initiative in preventing the burden of obesity. A drastic public policy can bring a significant environmental change, of which some are listed below.

- Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has made food labeling regulations that mandate calorie and nutrition labeling in all food products.

- The FDA has officially banned trans fats in all foods sold in restaurants and grocery stores.

- Obesity prevention priorities should focus more on children, particularly in schools encouraging healthy habits.  The local government should restrict commercial permits for fast-food restaurants nearby schools (within 0.5 miles) and encourage healthy food vendors to establish near schools.

- School-level policies should improve physical education at school and encourage walking or biking to school.

- Levying significant tax for unhealthy food and subsidizing healthy food are crucial strategies to prevent obesity but with few ethical limitations. Taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages such as soft drinks have been applied at most state and city levels.

- Public health policy should focus on designing activity-friendly communities by creating bike and walking paths.

**Family-Based Interventions**

The family-based approach is the best intervention to sustain weight loss and have weight maintenance among patients with overweight or obesity. The overweight subjects living in a family will have significant difficulties changing their lifestyle without family support. Several studies have proven that a low-fat diet with high protein and a low glycemic index effectively sustains weight maintenance and weight regain.

**Weight Bias in Health Care**(Figure 3)

The weight bias in the health care system can be explicit (consciously expressed) or implicit (involuntarily expressed). Implicit weight bias is not rare to see among Health care providers. Society's negative biases towards overweight or obesity often are shared and exhibited by the health care provider (HCP). The weight bias by the health care team can impair the patient's health care quality. Most HCPs believe in the energy balance theory of weight control, which encourages the thinking of obesity issues being a personal responsibility and limiting the scope of appropriate counseling.

- To educate the health care professionals about the complex etiology of obesity, including genetic, metabolic, and social factors.

- To make providers aware of the fact that the weight bias could influence the quality of the care.

- To train the medical trainees how to communicate without implicit bias.

- Another strategy is to expose counter-stereotypical exemplars of people with obesity who are successful and intelligent.

- HCPs should address the overall health and the patient's understanding of obesity-associated comorbidities along with weight loss management.

- HCPs should be encouraged to use people-first language, e.g., patients with obesity instead of obese patients. Also, using terminology like high BMI instead of morbid obesity will help in motivating the patient.