PAD usually involves atherosclerotic disease in the abdominal aorta, iliac, and femoral arteries. The pathophysiology of atherosclerosis involves complex interactions between cholesterol and vascular cells the details of which are beyond the scope of this article. Atherosclerotic plaque builds up slowly on the inside of arteries. In the early stages of PAD, the arteries compensate for the plaque buildup by dilating to preserve flow through the vessel. Eventually, the artery cannot dilate any further, and the atherosclerotic plaque starts to narrow the arterial flow lumen.

In some cases, the cause of sudden ischemia may be emboli either of cardiac origin or from atherosclerotic disease of the aorta. Emboli tend to be most common at sites of arterial bifurcation or where vessel branches have an abrupt takeoff. The femoral artery is the most common site for emboli, followed by the iliac arteries, aorta and the popliteal arteries.

The hemodynamic consequences of atherosclerosis depend on the degree of arterial narrowing. A 50% decrease in vessel diameter corresponds to a 75% loss of cross-sectional area which is usually considered flow limiting. As the narrowing progresses or completely obstructs the artery, blood flow shifts to smaller arteries which parallel the diseased artery. Although this collateral flow preserves distal perfusion, the network of smaller vessels never carries as much blood flow as the main artery. This blood flow restriction represents the hallmark of PAD and its typical symptoms. The muscles of the lower extremity require increased blood flow during ambulation to meet the increased energy demand. Patients with PAD reach a point during walking at which collateral blood flow is maximized and cannot provide any more perfusion to the lower extremity muscles. This supply-demand mismatch causes temporary ischemia of the muscles which manifests as pain, cramping, or fatigue and ultimately makes the patient with PAD slow down or stop walking. Lowering the energy demands of the muscle (by slowing or stopping) allows the blood supply to “catch up,” and the ischemic symptoms resolve. This cycle of blood flow restriction increased energy demand, and temporary muscle ischemia describes the pathophysiology of claudication due to PAD.

Patients with PAD usually have enough collateral blood flow that they only have symptoms during activities that increase energy demand such as walking. Rarely, the PAD becomes progressively more severe, and the blood flow cannot meet the resting metabolic demands of the lower extremity. Poor perfusion to the nerves can result in ischemic rest pain which is often described as an intractable, burning pain in the soles of the feet. Non-healing wounds and ischemic ulcers represent tissue loss due to poor blood flow. In the most severe cases, the toes or entire forefoot can become black and mummified as gangrene develops.