During embryology, the fetus starts with undifferentiated gonads. The gonads will either develop into testes or ovaries. The gonads form into testes due to the influences from the SRY gene, but without the SRY gene, the gonads will default into ovaries. The ovaries are the dominant organ in females that make and secrete sex hormones for females. The theca cells and granulosa cells within the ovaries produce sex hormones for females. The theca cells make androgens, and the granulosa cells take the androgen and convert it into estrogen. Estrogen is the dominant influence on the development of the female external genitalia.

The female external genitalia develops from many default structures such as the genital tubercle, urogenital sinus, urogenital folds, and the labioscrotal swellings/folds. The genital tubercles will differentiate into the glans clitoris and the vestibular bulbs in the females while the equivalent in males is the glans penis and the corpus cavernosum and spongiosum. The urogenital sinus will develop into the Bartholin's glands, Skene's glands, and the urethra in females. The urogenital sinus forms the bulbourethral glands and the prostate glands in males. The labia majora originates from the labioscrotal folds in females while it forms the scrotum in males. Lastly, the urogenital folds form the labia minora in females and it forms the ventral shaft of the penis in males. The reason that these default structures differentiate into female external genitalia instead of males' is due to the influence of estrogen. If these structures were under the influence of testosterone, they would develop into male external genitalia.