**Extrapyramidal Side Effects (EPS)**

Similar to other typical antipsychotics, thioridazine is associated with a risk of developing EPS. Because it is a low potency antipsychotic, however, the development of EPS occurs less frequently than with high potency antipsychotics. Extrapyramidal side effects include symptoms of dystonia, parkinsonism, and tardive dyskinesia. Dystonic reactions are muscle spasms that may occur early on and involve the eyes, tongue, or neck. Dystonic reactions precipitate in response to the decreased ratio of dopamine to acetylcholine and thus are treatable by normalizing the ratio with anticholinergic medications, such as benztropine or diphenhydramine. It is essential to monitor patients for dystonia to avoid problems breathing, such as laryngospasm, which may require intubation. Parkinsonism results from DA antagonism and can manifest as resting tremor, cogwheel rigidity, postural instability, and shuffling gait.

Parkinsonism is also treatable with benztropine or diphenhydramine, as well as the NMDA antagonist amantadine. And lastly, typical antipsychotics are associated with an even higher risk of tardive dyskinesia (TD) than atypical antipsychotics. TD is the result of the chronic administration of antipsychotics. The abnormal choreoathetoid movements seen in patients with tardive dyskinesia can affect the head, tongue, or face. Tardive dyskinesia is a serious adverse effect as it is not only embarrassing and uncomfortable for the patient, but it is mostly irreversible in nature. If a patient begins to develop tardive dyskinesia, the best treatment is to stop the antipsychotic medication and substitute thioridazine for an atypical antipsychotic with less risk.

**Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS)**

NMS is another serious side effect of all antipsychotics and occurs more frequently with typical antipsychotics. This adverse effect may occur suddenly. The provider should monitor for unstable vital signs, such as tachycardia, fever, muscle rigidity, elevated white blood cell count, and creatinine phosphokinase. If the patient develops NMS, the clinician should immediately initiate hydration and supportive therapy. The antipsychotic should be discontinued as well. If necessary, further management is possible with dantrolene and bromocriptine.

**ECG Changes**

Thioridazine is associated with prolonged QTc intervals, which may have serious or even fatal consequences, such as torsades de pointes. The recommendation is that patients with known prolonged QTc or arrhythmias avoid thioridazine. Before starting this medication, it would be wise to order an ECG and monitor QTc prolongation or other ECG changes during treatment.

**Other Side Effects**

The development of pigmentary retinopathy is a unique adverse manifestation associated with thioridazine and not with other antipsychotics. Patients may have nonspecific symptoms while taking thioridazine, such as dry mouth, dry eyes, sedation, weight gain, dizziness, erectile dysfunction, pruritus, photosensitivity, and constipation. Other rare and more unique side effects of thioridazine include irreversible retinal pigmentation, poikilothermia, and agranulocytosis.