Both the retina and the choroid receive their blood supply from the ophthalmic artery, which is the first branch of the internal carotid artery. The ophthalmic artery divides into a proximal branch, the posterior ciliary arteries, and a distal branch, the central retinal artery.

The central retinal artery divides into the superior and inferior branches after entering the eye and piercing the lamina cribrosa. These further branch into nasal and temporal arcades. These arcades further bifurcate and supply the inner retinal layers. The larger retinal arteries and veins are located in the nerve fiber and ganglion cell layer. The retina may be supplied by up to 4 layers of vessels, including radial peripapillary capillary network (around the optic disc at the nerve fiber layer), superficial capillary plexus (at ganglion cell layer), and two capillary beds of deep capillary plexus (located one on either side of the inner nuclear layer). In a certain percentage of the population (6.9 to 49.5 percent, usually 20%), an additional vessel, a cilioretinal arteriole, originates from the short posterior ciliary plexus around the disc and supplies the macula.

The choroid receives its blood supply via the posterior ciliary arteries. The posterior ciliary arteries (PCA) divide into two long and numerous short posterior ciliary arteries. The two long PCA enter the sclera on the medial and lateral sides and are named accordingly. These run anteriorly towards the iris to anastomose with the anterior ciliary arteries. The choroidal watershed area represents the area between the supply of each posterior ciliary artery.

The fovea is the central part of the retina. This area comprises a total of six layers, including the internal limiting membrane and the RPE.

Venous drainage of the inner retina occurs into the branch retinal veins, which then flow into the central retinal vein. The central retinal vein drains into the cavernous sinus. The choroid is drained through the vortex veins. These veins drain into the superior and inferior orbital veins, which drain into the cavernous sinus and pterygoid plexus, respectively.