In most cases, analgesia and rest are the only steps needed for metatarsal stress fracture healing. Acetaminophen and ice are implemented for pain and swelling. The effect of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on fracture healing remains contested.

Immobilization is often unnecessary, and a stiff-soled orthopedic boot or walking boot may be used for 4 to 8 weeks. Weight-bearing is allowed as long as the patient is pain-free. Thus, exercise may resume with lower impact exercises such as swimming, cycling, or deep water running. The exception to this treatment is areas at higher risk for nonunion, consisting of the base of the fifth metatarsal and the neck of the second metatarsal. Special consideration should be given to pain elicited in these areas for advanced imaging if radiographs are negative. In addition, if a fracture at these sites is present, non-weight bearing status can be achieved with crutches and casting. Additionally, a referral to an orthopedic surgeon should be placed in cases of nonunion that may need surgical fixation.

Modifiable risk factors should be treated. Nutritional deficiencies such as low levels of vitamin D, calcium, or calories should be addressed by ensuring adequate intake and supplementation as needed. Environmental changes should be considered. Shock-absorbing insoles for shoes or boots can distribute force during weight-bearing exercises. The type of training activity, surface, and intensity can be adjusted.

A graded return to activity should be employed as a march fracture heals. When the patient is fully weight-bearing and pain-free with low-intensity exercise, the patient gradually increases their exercise intensity by 10% every week to avoid further stress fractures.

Prevention of march fractures includes stretching with gradual increments in exercise intensity and duration to avoid abrupt changes in stress. In addition, correcting predisposing biomechanical conditions such as gait training and arch supports can be beneficial.