**Issues in Digital Health Design, Validation, Testing and Deployment**

- There is a difference between an industry and a market. Those companies that provide products and services comprise the industry. The customers who use those products and are looking for ways to get a particular job done are the market.

- Like all investors, digital health investors are looking for the highest rate of return with the least amount of risk. Given the foggy legal, regulatory, and reimbursement atmosphere, it is difficult to determine which tools will be supported by industry and users.

- Most digital health technologies have not been validated clinically. Clinical trials may be necessary to validate the digital tools even before stakeholders decide on the best technology.

- The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) continues to offer periodic guidance documents and regulations that contribute to a level of uncertainty.

- Given the multiple stakeholders in healthcare, for example, payers, providers, patients, business associates, partners, and others, it is hard to target any one customer. Several stakeholders need to see the value of any given product or service.

- The industry is new, and there is not enough research to know which customers, patients, or other stakeholders will adopt a product and why.

- Scale trumps innovation. The single most important characteristic of those companies that have received substantial follow-through investments is that they have scaled their customer rate rapidly by at least 70% per year.

- Doctors may not have the information they need to prescribe or use a given digital health technology.

- Most doctors don't get paid to use digital health technologies, they disrupt workflow, and there are nagging behavioral and emotional barriers to adoption by both patients and their families and their doctors.

- There are significant confidentiality, security, and data privacy issues that are still not addressed.

**Digital Health Entrepreneurship Competencies**

Like other medical school subjects, there are basic science and clinical components and the apprenticeship model is used to develop competent graduates. The same should apply to digital health and learning objectives, curriculum design and assessment should be in three basic and applied areas:

- The Embryology, Anatomy, and Physiology of Digital Health. In other words, how are digital health systems, products, and services evolving? How are they built and how do they work?

- Clinical Digital Health. How are digital health products and services used? Where are the gaps and opportunities and when are they effective? Like all drugs and technologies, what are the side effects or complications using them and when are they indicated?

- Digital Health Innovation and Entrepreneurship. How are digital health products and services designed, developed, tested, validated, deployed, and transferred to human subjects?

The course should be mandatory for every medical student. We should also separate education from training. Here is a summary of the topics covered:**Section 1: Technologies**

- Social Media

- Telemedicine

- Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence and Business Intelligence

- Personalized and Precision Medicine

- Wearables

- Mobile Health Platforms

- Electronic Medical Records

- Health Information Exchange and Interoperability

**Section 2: Applications**

- Diagnosis

- Treatment

- Prevention and Wellness

- Prognosis

- Rehabilitation

- Behavioral Health

- Disease Management

- Public Health

**Section 3: Innovation and Entrepreneurship**

- Intellectual Property Protection

- Regulatory Issues

- Reimbursement

- Business Models

- Financing Digital Health Startup Ventures

- Leading High-Performance digital Health Teams

- Product and Customer Development

- Lean Startup Methodologies

- Clinical Validation and Translational Research

- Data Security and Confidentiality

**Section 4: Leading interprofessional and Inter-Professional Teams**

- Team Dynamics

- Leadership

- Outcomes and Metrics

- Conflict Resolution