Stress fractures are within a spectrum of overuse injuries to the bone caused by changes in training regimens in professional athletes, highly competitive recreational athletes, and military recruits.

General risk factors for stress fractures include running, jumping, marching, decreased bone density, female gender, and poor pre-activity conditioning.

Increased levels of fitness activities in today's population and advanced imaging technologies have caused a rise in reported cases of stress fractures, which now make up 10% of cases in a typical sports medicine practice.

The thinking regarding the underlying etiology of stress injuries to the bone is that they are the result of repeated mechanical stress, which can be either compressive or tensile.

These stresses, in particular for cuboid stress fractures, can be increased when there is overloading of the lateral column due to structural abnormalities or deficits in supportive soft tissue structures, such as weakening or rupturing the plantar fascia.

Taken individually, the single loading does not lead to a failure of the bone cortex. However, the amalgamation of the individual loading stresses can lead to mechanical failure of the bone, leading to a stress fracture. The initial stage of bone failure is generally called a stress reaction. This diagnosis is made in a symptomatic patient who has a bone scan or MRI evidence of bone periosteal reactive changes without a true fracture line. Many factors influence the risk of stress fractures, these being divided into intrinsic (gender, age, race), extrinsic (training regimen, footwear, surface, sport), biomechanics (bone geometry), hormonal (menses abnormalities, contraception, thyroid) and nutritional (eating disorders).