PCA dosing contains a variety of variables, including the initial loading dose, bolus or demand dose, lockout interval, continuous infusion rate, and one and four-hour limits. The initial loading dose can be titrated by a nurse to reach the minimum effective concentration (MEC) of the desired medication. The bolus or demand dose is the dose of medication delivered each time the patient presses the button. A lockout interval is the time after a demand dose in which a dose of medication will not get administered even if the patient presses the button; this is done to prevent overdosing. A continuous infusion rate can be used in the background of PCA dosing to maintain the MEC of the medication independent of patient demands. One and four-hour limits put a cap on the maximum allowed amount of medication to be administered within those time periods and are usually less than the dose given if the patient were to press the dosing button at every possible interval. This mechanism allows for an added safety benefit and can notify the nurse and provider that the patient’s pain is not under adequate control with the prescribed medication and dosing parameters.

There is a variety of debate and discussion about different dosing strategies regarding PCA such as how much of a loading dose to administer, which medications to use, the amount of drug in the demand dose, the duration of lockout interval, whether to add a continuous background infusion, and what one and four-hour maximums should be. It is best to review the specific literature on PCA dosing strategies for the pain condition you are attempting to treat with PCA.