The rationale for prophylactic antibiotic therapy for subacute bacterial endocarditis is the following:

- Infective endocarditis is a fatal disease, and prevention is preferable to treatment of established infection.

- Specific cardiac conditions predispose to infective endocarditis.

- Reduce the incidence of bacteremia associated with invasive dental, oral, gastrointestinal (GI), and genitourinary (GU) tract procedures.

- There is evidence that antimicrobial prophylaxis effectively prevents infective endocarditis in animal studies.

- In humans, antimicrobial prophylaxis effectively prevents infective endocarditis in high-risk dental, oral, GI, or GU tract procedures.

Infective endocarditis is fatal if untreated or unrecognized. It causes significant morbidity and mortality, despite present-day advances in antimicrobial therapy and surgical treatment. As a result, the prevention of infective endocarditis is necessary. Some animal studies have shown antibiotic prophylaxis may prevent infective endocarditis, but the data on humans is still lacking. Therefore, current guidelines in the United States still recommend using antimicrobial prophylaxis for patients undergoing several procedures at risk for infective endocarditis.

The American Heart Association currently recommends antibiotic prophylaxis only in patients with the following high-risk cardiac conditions:

Patients with prosthetic cardiac valves

Patients with previous infective endocarditis

Cardiac transplant recipients with valve regurgitation due to a structurally abnormal valve

Patients with congenital heart disease with:

- Unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart disease, including palliative shunts and conduits

- A totally repaired congenital heart defect, repaired with prosthetic material or device that has been placed by surgery or catheter intervention during the first six months after the procedure.

- Repaired congenital heart disease with residual defects at the site or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device

Patients with these high-risk conditions should receive antibiotics for the following procedures:

- Dental procedures involve manipulating gingival tissue, manipulating the periapical region of teeth, or perforating the oral mucosa. This does not include routine anesthetic injections through noninfected tissue, dental radiographs, placement or adjustment of orthodontic devices, or trauma to the lips and teeth.

- The 2007 AHA guidelines also recommended prophylaxis for invasive respiratory tract procedures that involve incision or biopsy of the respiratory mucosa (e.g., tonsillectomy, adenoidectomy). Antibiotic prophylaxis has not been recommended for bronchoscopy unless the procedure involves an incision of the respiratory tract mucosa.

- Procedures of infected skin, skin structures, or musculoskeletal tissue.