Most forms of open-angle glaucoma are asymptomatic in the early stages. Similarly, in PG, chronic elevated IOP eventually leads to axon damage and retinal ganglion cell death with consequent glaucomatous optic neuropathy and visual field loss that affects central vision in only very late stages of the disease. Liberation of pigment in PDS/PG can be associated with IOP spikes and corneal edema, which may cause episodic symptoms of short-lasting blurred vision, eye pain, redness, photophobia, colored halos, and headaches that tend to be more frequent with extensive exercise, head movements, pupillary dilation, blinking, and prolonged reading.

Eyes with a deep AC and moderate myopia tend to favor mechanisms of pigment release due to irido-lenticular touch in PDS/PG. Posterior bowing of the iris can occur in these elongated myopic eyes at risk that tend to have a large iris and a deep AC.

The principal signs and symptoms of PDS/ PG result from the release of pigment and pigment showers in the AC from the friction and rubbing of the posterior pigmented surface of the iris on lens structures. The clinical manifestations of PDS and PG are similar, with the latter showing a disease phase of the spectrum characterized by elevated IOP, retinal ganglion cell loss, glaucomatous optic neuropathy, and visual field defects. The classical triad of clinical signs for PG

During a routine or emergency ophthalmic examination, patients with PDS/PG usually undergo slit-lamp examination and gonioscopy. The clinical signs related to this condition involve pigment showers that leave deposits on AC structures. Corneal epithelial edema may be noted in acute episodes of IOP. The IOP in the acute episode is usually in the twenties or thirties, but it may rarely rise to 50 mm Hg or more.

Krukenberg spindles (Figure) or pigment deposits on the corneal endothelium usually take a vertical spindle-like pattern on the central portion of the cornea. This pattern is due to the convection currents of the aqueous. The aqueous usually moves upwards near the iris and lens (posteriorly), and a downward current is seen near the corneal endothelium. Histological studies suggest melanin granules phagocytosed by endothelial cells as opposed to simple external deposits.

Patients with PDS/PG can show abnormal shapes or sizes in corneal endothelium cells; however, function tends to be conserved with no signs of endotheliopathy.

The anterior chamber is deep, and peripheral posterior bowing or concave appearing iris may be noted on slit-lamp examination. Floating melanin granules or pigments may be noted in the anterior chamber. These are brown-colored and smaller compared to white blood corpuscles (AC cells) which are round, white, and larger.

Iris trans-illuminating defects in a spoke-like pattern ('church window defects') in PDS/PG can easily be found by illuminating the slit-lamp light beam slightly from the temporal side through the pupil while the patient looks straight ahead. These defects are not pathognomonic of the condition but are seen in more than 85 % of cases and tend to be more detectable in light-colored eyes.

The pigment loss and shower dispersion come from melanin granules that are released from the posterior iris pigment epithelium due to chronic mechanical contact and friction with the lens zonules during physiological pupil movement. Posterior bowing of the iris and reverse pupillary block can occur in myopic eyes that have deep AC with a large iris.

The iris can show heterochromia (due to asymmetric involvement) and trough pigmentation due to the pigment deposits preferentially within the furrows on the anterior surface of the iris.

Dilated examination shows deposition of pigments over the zonules, on the anterior hyaloid face, and circumferentially at the equatorial region of the posterior lens capsule near the area of zonular attachment (Scheie stripe or Zentmayer line or Zentmayer ring). There may be pigments over the anterior lens surface also.

Gonioscopy can show pigment dispersion in the TM (Figure). Pigmentation tends to be full circumference and homogenous, as opposed to patchy patterns found in the TM of eyes with pseudoexfoliation glaucoma.

The pigment overload in the TM can lead to anatomic alterations, apoptosis, and cell necrosis. Structural alterations of the TM beams can lead to poorly functioning outflow mechanisms that explain the elevated IOP in PG.

The dilated retinal examination must be done in cases with PDS/PG as these eyes may be more likely to harbor retinal lattice degeneration, and chances of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment may be more irrespective of the degree of myopia.