Cardioembolic strokes can occur as a consequence of any cardiac insult that could cause the fulfillment of Virchow triad of endothelial injury, stasis, and hypercoagulability.

Commonly encountered causes include:

- Atrial disease:

- Arrhythmias:

- Atrial fibrillation, specifically non-valvular atrial fibrillation, is believed to be the most prevalent cause of cardioembolic strokes.
- Sick sinus syndrome, also known as a bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome, is also associated with an increased risk of stroke.


- Structural disease:

- Patent foramen ovale:

- Valvular heart disease: Even with the absence of arrhythmias, valvular heart diseases correlate with an increased risk of stroke. These include:

- Rheumatic valvular disease; the most common is rheumatic mitral stenosis. Without anticoagulation, the risk of stroke is very high.
- Infective endocarditis: Approximately 10% of cases of infective endocarditis develop embolic strokes. The risk of stroke occurrence is highest before instituting, or within the first two weeks of antibiotic therapy.
- Non-infective endocarditis such as marantic endocarditis
- Valvular calcifications: Native valvular calcification, particularly of the mitral valve, increases the risk of developing a cardioembolic stroke. Mitral annular calcification correlates with a relative risk of 2.1 for the development of embolic stroke.
- Mechanical prosthetic heart valves have a stroke rate of 2% to 4%, even in patients maintained on oral anticoagulation. Permanent anticoagulation with an INR between 2.5-3.5 is mandatory. Bioprosthetic heart valves have a lower risk of stroke, and aspirin is recommended unless the patient has atrial fibrillation.
- Mitral valve prolapse has a low risk of stroke, and anticoagulation is not recommended. However, long-term aspirin is recommended.

- Structural and functional ventricular diseases:

- Ventricular aneurysms
- Septal aneurysms
- General ventricular hypokinesia (heart failure with reduced ejection fraction): The annual rate of stroke in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) is approximately 2%, with a direct correlation between the risk of a stroke, and the degree of ventricular compromise.

- Myocardial infarction: The occurrence of myocardial infarction increases the risk of the development of a stroke, with the degree of left ventricular dysfunction, the presence of a ventricular aneurysm or mural thrombus, and the presence of arrhythmias significantly influencing the degree of risk. Approximately 2.5% of cases will develop a stroke within the first four weeks of the infarction, and nearly 10% will over six years.