Prescribers should exercise extreme caution when prescribing beta-blockers to patients with diabetes. This is because this class of medication can mask the symptoms of hypoglycemia, which includes flushing, tachycardia, sweating, and dizziness.

Furthermore, since the main effect of propranolol is to decrease heart rate, it is contraindicated in those who have bradycardia (less than 60 beats per minute).

Propranolol is also contraindicated in those with any lung pathologies, such as COPD, asthma, or emphysema. The pathophysiology of this mechanism is solely due to the effects that beta-2 receptors have on lung function. Normally, activation of beta-2 receptors vasodilates the smooth muscle in the lungs. When using agents like propranolol in patients with underlying lung issues, the blockage of beta-2 causes vasoconstriction of smooth muscle, worsening respiratory function. Physicians should only prescribe selective beta-blockers in such patients; these drugs only block beta-1 receptors and spare beta-2 receptors.

During cocaine toxicity, prescribers should never use any beta-blocker with an unopposed alpha blockade since this can lead to massive unopposed alpha-adrenergic activity and lead to an enormous spike in blood pressure which may even result in death.

Since propranolol is metabolized by hepatic enzymes and excreted through the renal system, prescribers should proceed with caution when prescribing it to a patient with known hepatic or renal impairments. Furthermore, dosages may need to be adjusted to avoid toxicity resulting from the inability to metabolize or clear the medication from the body properly.