Routes of administration include oral, intramuscular (IM), and intravenous (IV). Oral formulations are available in dissolving tablet and soluble film forms. Ondansetron tablets should be administered 1 to 2 hours before radiotherapy, 30 minutes before chemotherapy, and an hour before anesthesia induction. Oral and IV formulations have been shown to have similar efficacy for treating emetogenic chemotherapy.

Dosing varies depending on the route of administration and the etiology. However, 16 mg per dose IV is the maximum recommended single dose due to the risk for QTc prolongation and arrhythmias. Standard dosing to prevent postoperative nausea and vomiting includes 8 mg every 12 hours orally or 4 mg given intravenously. No dosage adjustments are necessary for IV or oral administration in patients with renal impairment. The same holds for patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment, but the maximum daily dosing is reduced to 8 mg IV or 8 mg orally in patients with severe hepatic impairment. Pediatric dosing is weight-based at 0.15 mg/kg per dose, with a maximum of 16 mg per dose.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustments of ondansetron are necessary for mild to moderate hepatic impairment. In patients with severe hepatic impairment, clearance of ondansetron is reduced; the volume of distribution and the plasma half-life is increased. Consequently, ondansetron should be used with caution, and the maximum recommended daily intravenous dose isis reduced to 8 mg.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dosage adjustments are necessary for IV or oral administration in patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Ondansetron is a former FDA  “Pregnancy Category B” drug. It should only be used when other medications have been trialed and failed to treat pregnancy-associated nausea, vomiting, and hyperemesis gravidarum.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**In a pharmacokinetic study, the relative infant exposure to ondansetron is less.