# Continuing Education Activity

Quinidine is one of the oldest known antiarrhythmics; an interprofessional approach is necessary when using this drug, including specialties such as cardiology, rheumatology, infectious disease, intensive care, and nursing. Quinidine is a medication used in the management and treatment of specific arrhythmias and malaria. It comes under the "class 1a antiarrhythmic" class of drugs. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for quinidine as a valuable agent in managing certain arrhythmias and malaria. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in managing patients with certain arrhythmias-related conditions, and malaria.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of quinidine.
- Describe the adverse effects of quinidine.
- Outline the appropriate monitoring of quinidine.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance quinidine and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Quinine is a derivate of the bark of the South American cinchona tree. Quinidine is a stereoisomer of quinine; it is a "class 1a antiarrhythmic drug" and also an antimalarial agent.

**As an "Antiarrhythmic"**

- Atrial fibrillation (safe and efficacious in combination with verapamil for the treatment of atrial fibrillation

- Atrial flutter

- Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia

- Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia

- Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia

- Wolf Parkinson White syndrome

- Ventricular tachycardia

- Brugada syndrome

- Short QT interval syndrome

Note: The use of quinidine for the above indications has mostly been replaced by better pharmacological therapies such as amiodarone and procainamide.

**Plasmodium Falciparum Malaria**

- Quinidine gluconate is acknowledged as an effective treatment of severe and complicated malaria both alone as a therapy or in combination with exchange transfusion.

# Mechanism of Action

**Antiarrhythmic:**Like other Class 1a antiarrhythmic agents, quinidine works by inhibiting the fast inward sodium current, depressing the phase 0 of the action potential hence dampening the excitability of cardiac muscles, which in turn prolongs the action potential and decreases automaticity. Quinidine's effect on fast inward sodium current is known as a 'use-dependent block' - this means at higher heart rates, the block increases, while at lower heart rates, the block decreases.

**Antimalarial**: It works as an antimalarial agent by having activity against the erythrocytic stage of thePlasmodium species. It acts by building up in the parasite's food vacuole; it forms a complex with heme which prevents the crystallization in the parasite's food vacuole. Cytotoxic-free heme accumulates secondary to inhibited heme polymerase activity.

Quinidine also has anticholinergic activity.

**Pharmacodynamics and Pharmacokinetics:**

- **Distribution**: Volume of distribution "Vd" is increased with cirrhosis and decreased with congestive heart failure.

- **Metabolism**: Hepatic metabolism by a series of hydroxylation reactions by cytochrome P450 enzymes (60% to 80%) is converted into active compounds, the most important with antiarrhythmic activity 3-hydroxy-quinidine (3HQ); dose adjustment necessary per hepatic impairment.

- **Excretion**: Less than 20% of the drug gets excreted in the urine in an unchanged form, and dose adjustment may be needed only in severe renal impairment.

- **Half-life elimination**: Increases with age and conditions such as cirrhosis and congestive heart failure.

- **Time to peak**: Oral preparation is approximately 2 hours, and extended-release preparations have around 3 to 4 hours.

- **Bioavailability**: Sustained release quinidine gluconate has shown to have higher serum concentrations than sustained-release quinidine sulfate.

# Administration

Quinidine is available in both parenteral and oral preparations.

- **Parenteral:**(only gluconate preparations): quinidine is available in an injectable dose form, given via intravenous route.

- **Oral:**Quinidine tablets are available as immediate-release 200 mg and 300 mg (quinidine sulfate salt), and each tablet of 200 mg of quinidine sulfate is equivalent to 166 mg of quinidine base, and 300 mg of quinidine sulfate is equivalent to 249 mg of quinidine base. Quinidine extended-release 324 mg (quinidine gluconate salt) tablets are equivalent to 202 mg of quinidine base. For the extended-release preparations, patients should receive counsel to swallow the whole pill and not chew, crush or break the tablet.

**Dosing Regimens**

**Atrial Fibrillation/Flutter to Sinus Rhythm Conversion**

- **Oral immediate-release:**As initial therapy, administer two 200 mg tablets every six hours. If that did not result in desired pharmacological conversion after 4 to 5 doses, the dose might be increased with caution.

- **Oral extended-release:**As one regimen option, administer two 324 mg tablets (403 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours. If that did not result in desired pharmacological conversion after 3 or 4 doses, the dose might be increased with caution.

- As another regimen, patients may have been administered one tablet (202 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours for two days followed by two tablets (403 mg of quinidine base) every twelve hours for two days, and finally two tablets (403 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours for up to four days. The lower dose may be used based on the physician's judgment for the final four-day treatment plan.

- During any of these regimens, if the QRS complex or QTC interval widens to 130% of its pre-treatment duration, QTC interval is longer than 500 ms; P waves disappear; the patient develops significant tachycardia, bradycardia, or hypotension, then quinidine therapy should be discontinued.

**Reduction of Atrial Fibrillation/Flutter Relapse**

- **Oral immediate-release:**As initial therapy, administer one tablet (166 mg of quinidine base) every six hours. If the regimen is well-tolerated and serum quinidine level is well within the therapeutic index range, the dose may be increased with caution to achieve the desired pharmacological effect.

- **Oral extended-release:**As one regimen option, patients may have been administered one tablet (202 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours or twelve hours. If the regimen is well-tolerated and serum quinidine level is well within the therapeutic index range, the dose may be increased with caution to achieve the desired pharmacological effect.

- During any of these regimens, if any times the QRS complex or QTC interval widens to 130% of its pre-treatment duration; QTC interval is longer than 500 ms; P waves disappear; the patient develops significant tachycardia, bradycardia, or hypotension, then the total daily dose of quinidine should be reduced.

**Ventricular arrhythmias suppression:**The dosing regimens for ventricular arrhythmias suppression have not been adequately studied. However, these regimens have generally been similar to the regimen described above for the treatment of atrial fibrillation. Therefore, this therapy should be managed and optimized based on the results from programmed electrical stimulation and/or Holter monitoring with an exercise where ever possible.

**Treatment of P.Falcipum malaria:**As per the manufacturer label, the dosing regimen for quinidine sulfate tablets should be similar to the regimen is described in the package insert of quinidine gluconate injection. However, a couple of years ago, the sole manufacturer of quinidine IV products has discontinued this product in the US.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, most quinidine is metabolized and eliminated via cytochrome 3A4, so the drug should be used with caution in these patients.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment. However, 20% of quinidine is eliminated in the urine, so the drug should be used with caution, and a lower dose may be needed in patients with severe renal impairment.

- **Pregnant women:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine. Quinidine and its metabolites may cross the placenta membrane and appear in the neonatal serum.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**The manufacturer recommends avoiding quinidine therapy in nursing mothers as the drug presents in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of quinidine are not established for antiarrhythmic use in pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of quinidine are not systematically studied in geriatric patients.

# Adverse Effects

**Cardiovascular**

- Quinidine is one of the most common drugs to cause a prolongation of QT interval, which sometimes can progress to a pleomorphic tachyarrhythmia torsades de pointes occurring in 1 to 3% of patients.

- Cardiac adverse effects tend to be more in the setting of lower heart rates and hypokalemia.

- The prolongation of QT interval is more pronounced in females than males, and a new onset severe QT prolongation tends to be an indicator of drug toxicity.

- Palpitations, angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia - new or worsened, and syncope are all signs.

**Central Nervous System**

- Quinidine crosses the blood-brain barrier by passive diffusion and active transport system, dizziness, fatigue, headache, disturbed sleep, nervousness, ataxia.

**Dermatologic**

- Skin rash

**Gastrointestinal**

- Hepatotoxicity, diarrhea, digestive distress, nausea and vomiting, esophagitis

**Neuromuscular and Skeletal**

- Weakness, tremor, Lupus-like syndrome

**Ophthalmic**

- Visual disturbance

**Miscellaneous**

- Fever, hypersensitivity reactions in people allergic to the drug.

- Hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia can precipitate drug toxicity.

- Hemolysis may occur in patients suffering from G6PD deficiencies.

- Cinchonism (quinidine is a stereoisomer of quinine derived from the bark of the cinchona tree) which can present as tinnitus, high-frequency hearing loss, blurring of vision, diplopia, photophobia, confusion, headache, delirium, decreased hearing to profound deafness, lupus-like syndrome, Sjogren syndrome.

# Contraindications

**Contraindications**

- Thrombocytopenia

- Thrombocytopenic purpura

- Hypersensitivity to quinine, mefloquine, quinidine, or to any component used in the drug preparation

- Heart block greater than a 1st degree

- Concurrent, amprenavir, cisapride, or ritonavir, fluoroquinolones drugs responsible for prolonging QT interval

- Congenital long QT interval

- AV block as the concurrent use of the drug can progress to complete block

**Precautions**

- Patients on digoxin demonstrated higher plasma quinidine levels and a shorter half-life on low doses when compared with patients who are not on quinidine.

- Children require a larger dose of quinidine as compared to adults.

- The elderly population shows reduced clearance of quinidine, and increased drug half-life, which can predispose to toxicity. Hence appropriate drug dose adjustment is necessary.

- Quinidine should be dose adjusted in patients with congestive heart failure as normal dosing of the drug may lead to abnormally high serum concentrations.

- Pregnancy - Quinidine is an "FDA pregnancy risk category C" and is not safe during pregnancy; it can only be given when potential maternal benefit justifies the possible risk to the fetus

- Although concentrations lower than maternal plasma, quinidine does pass in breast milk; breastfeeding neonates can develop serum quinidine concentration lower than maternal serum concentration. Neonates can develop toxicity with lower plasma quinidine levels.

- Myasthenia Gravis - Anticholinergic activity of quinidine can potentially worsen the patient's condition. Quinidine can also interact with drugs used for the treatment of the disease.

- Asthma and other allergic conditions - Its use requires caution in patients with asthma and other allergic conditions because these conditions can hide the hypersensitivity of the drug.

**Safe Practice**

- Quinidine can sometimes be confused with clonidine and quinine.

- Dose modulation may be necessary for patients with hepatic and renal disorders.

- To be used in caution with drugs that prolong QT interval such as thiazide diuretics, ondansetron, opioids, fluoroquinolones, risperidone, sotalol, antihistaminics, tricyclic antidepressants, macrolides (erythromycin), SSRIs.

**Drug Interactions**

- Quinidine is an inhibitor of CYP450 and can interact with drugs metabolized by this enzyme system.

- Quinidine has been shown to decrease digoxin's total clearance by 30 percent, renal clearance by 32 percent, and nonrenal clearance by 29 percent.

-  Erythromycin has been shown to decrease quinidine clearance, increase serum concentrations and possibly predispose to quinidine toxicity; hence when given concurrently with quinidine; it is advisable to monitor patients' serum potassium, magnesium, and timely EKGs for possible toxicity.

- Phenobarbital and phenytoin have been shown to decrease the half-life of quinidine by half, possibly by increasing its metabolism by induction of CYP450 class of enzymes.

- Cimetidine competes for the renal tubular secretion of quinidine in its unchanged form and its metabolites, increasing its concentration in plasma.

# Monitoring

EKG monitoring for prolongation of QT interval and QRS changes along with CBC, liver, and renal function testing should be done on a routine basis when giving quinidine as an IV infusion or for a prolonged period.

# Toxicity

Quinidine is well known for its toxicity, causing QT prolongation and, in severe cases, a pleomorphic arrhythmia, a.k.a. "Torsades de pointes." This condition can be fatal, and the management of the situation includes discontinuation of the drug, institution of cardiac and electrolyte (potassium and magnesium) monitoring, management of hypoxia. Clinicians can promptly manage torsades de pointes by giving magnesium sulfate and terminating prolonged episodes by electrical cardioversion; in refractory cases, isoproterenol or transvenous pacing is an option.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Quinidine is one of the oldest drugs known for managing arrhythmias and still has utility in managing early repolarization syndrome, Brugada syndrome, idiopathic ventricular fibrillation, and certain infections such as Plasmodium falciparum malaria. An interprofessional team approach is necessary amongst physicians, nurses, cardiologists, rheumatologists, and pharmacists to detect and manage drug toxicity, which can be fatal at times. The cardiology team is involved as quinidine is used as an antiarrhythmic/proarrhythmic agent, rheumatologists are involved as it is known to cause a lupus-like syndrome, infectious disease specialists are involved when it is used in severe malaria. Nurses should ensure proper drug administration and adverse effect monitoring, and pharmacists should verify correct drug dosing. When initiating therapy with quinidine,  dose adjustment may be required in neonates, the elderly, patients with CHF, hepatic or renal dysfunction, patients who are on other drugs such as digoxin, and the ones known to prolong the QT interval. While patient hospitalization is indicated, cardiologists and intensivists provide inpatient consults, ICU care, and monitoring.  All responsibilities demonstrate an interprofessional healthcare team approach is necessary for effective and safe therapy with quinidine. [Level 5]