Colorectal malignancies are considered the third most common cancer for both male and female individuals. Moreover, they are the second most common cause of malignancy-related mortalities in the United States.

Histological diagnosis of invasive adenocarcinoma should be confirmed before surgical planning for rectal cancers because in the management of rectal neoplasms of other histologies, including squamous cell carcinomas, non-surgical or different multimodality options are indicated.

Operative management with excisional biopsy is typically not indicated unless it is feasible to perform with adequate radial margins and curative intentions. Local excision in the management of rectal cancer is an acceptable surgical option with curative intent and is limited to the highly selected patients with cT1N0. Moreover, the patient should have favorable clinical and histological characteristics. Accordingly, transanal excision may be indicated in patients with more advanced cT disease who do not meet the eligibility criteria for radical cancer surgery.

Local excision in treating rectal cancers provides several advantages, including limited operative risk and minimal functional morbidities. However, it does not adequately excise the tumor, and the mesorectal lymph nodes' pathological staging is less than optimal.

Determining the exact depth of tumoral invasion (Tis, T1, or T2) may be complicated using MRI only. Therefore, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) may be applied as a complementary tool for more precise staging.

The optimal approach for managing rectal adenocarcinoma depends on several factors, of which the tumor location in the rectum and tumoral extension are the most important. The surgical approach remains the only curative treatment for rectal cancer. Curative resection demands a wide resection with histologically negative margins and total mesorectal excision (TME). Total mesorectal excision includes local lymph node resection via transabdominal approach. The trans-abdominal approach in the management of rectal cancer refers to low anterior resection or abdominoperineal resection.

Rectal microsurgery is a form of minimally invasive surgery used in the treatment of early rectal cancers, defined as an adenocarcinoma invading the rectal wall up to the submucosa.

Transanal excision (TAE) using a conventional retractor was one method of managing benign neoplasia and early rectal cancer. This technique is significantly limited by exposure and visibility, making it incredibly difficult to achieve high-quality oncological resections. High lesions in the proximal two-thirds of the rectum are also not reachable by TAE, leaving transabdominal resection the only curative option.

Widespread use of screening programs has led to a significant increase in the detection of rectal cancers, which has propagated greater interest in developing organ-preserving techniques. Transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEMS) was established in the 1980s as a minimally invasive procedure capable of performing full-thickness excision of rectal tumors down to the perirectal fat under general or spinal anesthesia. Current evidence supports using TEMS as a curative method for T1 rectal cancers.

Transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS) was introduced more recently as an alternative to TEMS. TAMIS works on the same principles as TEMS but uses a slightly different platform on which to operate. As a technique, TAMIS has gained considerable international experience since its inception but remains relatively infantile compared to TEMS.

Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is an endoluminal technique that can also remove lesions within the rectum and other parts of the colon. ESD is not covered in the scope of this article but is considered another viable option for treating pre-malignant and early rectal cancer, depending on locoregional experience and expertise.