Abnormal follicular development is a hallmark of polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), a disorder characterized by enlarged polycystic ovaries, abnormal menstrual bleeding, and increased androgen production. Compared to females without PCOS, ovaries of patients with PCOS have at least twice the number of growing pre-antral and antral follicles. Additionally, these follicles do not develop properly. Many follicles do not progress through the antral stage, accumulate excess fluid, lose their granulosa cell border, and degenerate into cystic structures. Patients with PCOS also have increased levels of LH, androgens, and insulin and decreased levels of FSH. The precise mechanism resulting in the cystic changes associated with PCOS remains unknown. The cystic changes can cause anovulatory infertility.

Premature ovarian failure is rare and most commonly presents as loss of ovarian reserve, defined as a decreased number of primordial follicles before 40 years of age. Patients present with absent menstruation and disrupted ovarian follicular development leading to symptoms of menopause and infertility. Premature ovarian failure also can present in patients who never reach menarche because of ovarian dysgenesis.

A proper understanding of ovarian follicular development is essential when counseling a patient regarding her fertility. Healthcare providers must understand and explain an assessment of her ovarian follicular reserve and the potential benefit of assisted reproductive technology (ART), including in-vitro fertilization and controlled ovarian hyperstimulation**.**As previously discussed, women under 35 years of age lose about 1000 primordial follicles per month, and this rate increases after 35 years of age. If a patient needs or desires ART, it is important to assess the patient’s ovarian reserve to maintain patient safety and define expectations. Ovarian reserve status is related to the production of antral follicles, which can be measured via transvaginal ultrasound. A decreased antral follicle count correlates to a lower ovarian reserve and decreased fertility. Patients with a smaller ovarian reserve are less likely to respond to ovarian stimulation, and women with a large ovarian reserve are at an increased risk of severe adverse effects. Knowledge of an individual patient's ovarian reserve will enable healthcare providers to determine a patient’s reproductive capability before and during ART and establish an appropriate ART regimen.