Listed below are a few select diseases that either directly involves defective fatty acid metabolism through intrinsic enzyme deficiencies or indirectly prevent the proper functioning of fatty acid metabolism through extrinsic enzyme deficiencies. Many, but not all, deficiencies of enzymes involved in fatty acid oxidation result in abnormal neurological development and or function early in life; a brief list of signs and symptoms appears under the selected diseases mentioned.

**MCAD Deficiency**

Medium-chain acyl dehydrogenase is the most common inherited defect of fatty acid oxidation in humans; as one would expect, medium-chain, 6-8 carbon molecules accumulate in this disease. Clinical manifestations of MCAD deficiency primarily present during fasting conditions and include lethargy, weakness, diaphoresis, and hypoketotic hypoglycemia, most commonly in children under the age of 5.

**Zellweger Syndrome**

Zellweger syndrome results from autosomal recessive mutations in the PEX genes; these DNA sequences code for peroxin proteins, which are involved in the assembly of peroxisomes. Almost 70% of all peroxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBDs) result from a PEX1 gene mutation. Many different fatty acid compounds can accumulate without the oxidative machinery of peroxisomes, including VLCFAs and phytanic acid.

**X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD)**

X-ALD is a genetic deficiency of the ABCD transporters in the membrane of peroxisomes, as mentioned previously, resulting in the pathological accumulation of phytanic acid and VLCFAs within cells and is most clinically significant when the ABCD1 transporter is absent. The disease presents with neurodegenerative and adrenal abnormalities.

**Refsum Disease**

Refsum disease results from a genetic deficiency of the enzyme phytanyl CoA 2-hydroxylase, which, as previously mentioned, is involved in the alpha-oxidation of phytanic acid, a breakdown product of chlorophyll.