Cyclobenzaprine administration is via the oral route. It is available in immediate-release tablets of 5 milligrams, 7.5 milligrams, and 10 milligrams and extended-release capsules of 15 milligrams and 30 milligrams and is usually given three times daily. The maximum recommended dose per day is 30 milligrams. The extended-release formulation should be administered at the same time each day. The capsule may be swallowed whole, but its contents also may be sprinkled onto a tablespoon of applesauce for immediate consumption without chewing the granules. The patient should rinse their mouth to ensure that they have swallowed all the contents.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Steady-state plasma concentrations are twofold higher in patients with mild hepatic insufficiency than in healthy controls. Cyclobenzaprine should be used cautiously in patients with mild hepatic impairment. The usual starting should be a 5 mg dose, and if needed, it can be titrated upwards. Cyclobenzaprine is not recommended in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment due to the lack of clinical data and safety concerns.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No information about dose adjustment has been provided in the manufacturer's product information. However, due to its potent anticholinergic adverse effects, sedation, and increased risk of fractures, use should be avoided in chronic kidney disease, especially in elderly patients(American Geriatric society, Beers criteria).

**Pregnancy Considerations:**The use of cyclobenzaprine is reported safe in animal reproduction studies. However, there is a lack of clinical data regarding the use of cyclobenzaprine in human pregnancy and its outcomes. Consequently, cyclobenzaprine should be used during pregnancy only if needed.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Breastfeeding Considerations: Amounts of cyclobenzaprine in milk appear to be extremely low. If cyclobenzaprine is indicated for the mother, breastfeeding can be continued with caution. Monitor the infant for sedation and developmental milestones, especially in neonates, preterm infants, and when using sedating drugs concomitantly.