Usually, adults have the maximum amount of Hemoglobin A (HbA), which makes up 95 to 98% of the total hemoglobin. Other variants like hemoglobin A2 (HbA2) make up 2 to 3%, and hemoglobin F (HbF) makes up <2% of total adult hemoglobin. All alpha-thalassemia-affected individuals show a variable degree of anemia (low Hb), decreased mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), decreased mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and a normal to slightly decreased level of HbA2.

**Alpha-Thalassemia Carriers**

α trait is an asymptomatic carrier state. A slight microcytosis can be seen sometimes, but the RBC can be normal too. HbA and HbF levels are normal. Notably, in the neonatal period, a minor amount (1 to 3%)  of Hb Bart's (γ) may sometimes be detected. α°-trait is usually marked by slight anemia, slightly reduced MCV and MCH, RBC microcytosis, hypochromia, and anisopoikilocytosis. During the neonatal period, Hb Bart's can be detected in moderate amounts (3–8%). Some Heinz inclusion bodies (intracellular Hb precipitates) may also be detected. The carriers have increased RBC count, which helps differentiate it from iron deficiency anemia.

**Alpha-Thalassemia Minor**

The patients have mild-moderate anemia with Hb, not going below 7 g/dL, ranging from 7 to 10 g/dL, even in severe forms. HbA2 from 3 to 3.5%, and HbF ranges between 10 to 50%. Molecular testing is a more accurate diagnostic tool.

**HbH Disease**

The predominant characteristic of this disease is anemia with varying amounts of HbH (0.8 to 40%). The type of mutation (deletional/non-deletional) affects the clinical severity. The patients present early in life with severe anemia that is normocytic/microcytic. The Hb levels can go below  7 g/dL. The MCH is low (<20 pg), and the peripheral blood film shows poikilocytosis with tear-drop cells, increased erythroblasts, and target cells.

In adult life, due to decreased alpha-globin chains, the excess β globin chains form β tetramers of HbH (0.8 to 40%), known as Inclusion bodies, can be identified by using 1% brilliant cresyl blue stain (BCB), or when this HbH is present in large quantities, it can be detected by routine Hb analysis.

The laboratory findings in the deletional type of HbH disease show microcytic hypochromic anemia and inclusion bodies. On performing electrophoresis or HPLC in the sample of these patients, HbH and Hb Bart appear as fast-moving hemoglobin. The more severe form is the non-deletional type of HbH disease. The erythropoiesis is largely ineffective. The Hb is quite low (average 2 g/dL).

**Alpha-thalassemia Major (Hb Barts Hydrops Fetalis Syndrome)**

The Hb Bart hydrops fetalis syndrome shows the presence of Hb Bart and the complete absence of HbF. When α globin synthesis falls lower than ~70% of normal, in the fetal period, the relatively excess γ globin chains form Hb Bart's, which can be identified on routine Hb analysis. The non-functional homotetramers γ and β constitute most of the Hb in the affected fetus' erythrocytes. The only functional Hb in these infants is found to be Hb Portland (ζγ) which acts as the carrier of oxygen.