Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the solitary thyroid nodule or dominant nodule for multinodular thyroid is potentially helpful in establishing the diagnosis. If the FNA is nondiagnostic, the diagnosis can be made after thyroid lobectomy on permanent histology. As the tumor cells originate from the parafollicular C cells, the pathology shows spindle-shaped cells without follicle development. Measuring serum calcitonin before FNA diagnosis is complicated by a high false-positive rate. Once the diagnosis of medullary thyroid cancer is made based on histology, serum calcitonin, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) should be measured. These tests help with the discovery of the hypersecreting tumor, and pre-operative levels can be compared to postoperative levels to confirm the biochemical response and can be used to measure treatment efficacy after total thyroidectomy. The postoperative calcitonin and CEA doubling time provide a sensitive marker for disease progression.

Ultrasonography, or other imaging of the neck such as computed tomography, is indicated once the histological diagnosis is made to evaluate for cervical lymph node involvement. The evaluation for systemic disease using CT neck and imaging of the liver by CT or MRI can be done in patients suspected of having metastatic disease. This can include patients with nodal disease and calcitonin levels greater than 400 pg/ml. The sensitivity of PET and the nuclear scan is variable and is not recommended for primary evaluation for metastatic disease.

It is recommended to discuss the risks and benefits of genetic testing with the patient. Genetic testing for RET protooncogene sequencing of exons 10, 11, and 13 through 16 is necessary for all patients with parafollicular C cell hyperplasia or sporadic medullary thyroid cancer.

Since the results of genetic testing are rarely available before surgery in sporadic cases, it is recommended to do a biochemical evaluation of possible co-existing tumors associated with MEN2 syndromes before surgery. Screening for hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma by using serum calcium and plasma metanephrines respectively is recommended for a patient with unknown RET mutational status and confirmed germline RET status.

**The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Staging**

The American joint committee on cancer (AJCC) used different tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification for differentiated and anaplastic thyroid cancer.