Knowledge of the equipment used in fluoroscopy is mandatory to understand the manipulation of X-rays for safe and sharp imaging that can be used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. The basic equipment necessary to generate X-rays include:

- X-ray generator and X-ray tube: A high voltage generator and X-ray tube are used to generate X-radiation. Electrons are emitted by heating from the negatively charged cathode, and they are accelerated towards the positively charged tungsten anode by the electric field between the cathode and anode. The spectrum of X-ray photons (bremsstrahlung) is generated when these high-energy electrons are slowed down in the anode. The radiation output can be pulsed or continuous waves as necessary.

- Beam filters: Aluminum or copper filters are used to filter the low-energy X-ray photons from the beam. These low-energy X-ray photons are absorbed in shallow depths and hence do not contribute to the image quality. If they are not filtered, they contribute to the Entrance Surface Dosage and increase the effective radiation dosage given to patients. The selection of an appropriate filter is a balance between the quality of the image and the absorbed dose of the patient. As the photons pass through filters, the average photon energies are higher than the unfiltered spectra. The radiation penetrates easily, reducing the average dose needed to achieve a good image, but the image contrast may be reduced, so a compromise is to be reached.

- Collimator: X-rays are emitted in all directions from the X-ray tube. Collimators are used to limit the X-ray field to a particular area and minimize spillover radiation out of the field of view. Unnecessarily large X-ray fields have two major disadvantages: 1) increased patient dose and 2) reduced image quality. Therefore, two sets of separately adjustable shutters are attached to the X-ray tube to limit the field. To help alignment, a light is used to form a field projecting an image of the X-ray field on the patient.

- Patient table: The table must be strong enough to support the patient but absorb less radiation to minimize over-exposure to obtain an adequate image.

- Grid plate: Anti scatter grids are common components of fluoroscopy and are used in procedures with high scatter. They consist of absorbing lead strips separated by transparent materials like paper. They minimize scatter of radiation and can be detached based on the requirement of the procedure.

- Image intensifier: The image intensifier is an important component that converts the intensity of the remnant ray beam into an image suitable for video capture or display on the monitor. Image intensifiers electronically amplify electron optics to obtain a higher quality image at modest dose radiation. In recent years, the image intensifier with video capture has been replaced by flat-panel receptors. These are physically compact, flexible, without image distortion, and the entrance dose is proportional to the field of view.

- Television and recording system: High-quality displays are required for the investigator to appreciate fine details and subtle contrast differences. Usually, flat-panel LCDs with high contrast ratios are calibrated to achieve the widest range of grey levels possible.