Patients are often completely asymptomatic, and a chest X-ray, CT, or MRI may incidentally detect substernal goiter. Symptoms are typically mechanical/compressive in nature, and clinical manifestations due to hypo or hyperthyroidism can also be present. The patient may complain of local obstructive or compressive symptoms. The most common obstructive symptom is exertional dyspnea, followed by choking sensation, cough, and stridor. As patients with substernal goiter are usually in their sixth decade or later, the etiology of dyspnea must accurately be determined because other comorbidities common in the elderly, like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, or congestive heart failure can also cause dyspnea.

Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism may coexist with substernal goiter and may have their respective signs. The enlarged cervical component of the substernal goiter may be visible or palpable. If there is compression of the trachea, stridor might be audible. Stridor refers to obstruction of the airway outside the chest cavity, producing a high-pitched sound heard more on inspiration. This differs from wheezing, which is an obstruction of the lower respiratory tract that causes a continuous whistling sound heard more during expiration.

Pemberton sign may be sought during physical examination. The patient is asked to raise both arms until medial parts touch to lateral sides of the head for at least a minute. The development of facial congestion, bulging of neck veins, hoarseness or dyspnea indicates a positive Pemberton sign, indicating compression at the thoracic inlet. Arm elevation spirometry with flow volume loops has been suggested to increase the sensitivity to detect upper airway obstruction and also as an objective assessment of the Pemberton sign.