The treatment of upper extremity DVTs depends on the clinical presentation. The majority of patients present with limb swelling in the setting of central venous catheterization. The American College of Chest Physicians recommends that the clinician first determine the necessity of the line. If required (e.g., total peripheral nutrition), it should remain in place, and the patient should be started on anticoagulation therapy. If the line is not needed, it should be removed but only after the completion of 3 to 5 days of anticoagulation therapy. In the hospital, patients can be bridged to warfarin with unfractionated heparin. Patients should continue on warfarin for 3 to 6 months after diagnosis. The role of novel oral anticoagulant agents (e.g., dabigatran) is under current investigation. Still, recent data from the Swedish national anticoagulation registry (National Quality Registry for Atrial Fibrillation and Anticoagulation [AuriculA]) suggests that these drugs can be used to treat upper extremity DVT with acceptable efficacy and safety.

In the case of PSS, the treatment course differs as it typically involves acute thrombosis. As such, patients develop significant pain and swelling requiring intravenous catheter-directed thrombolysis. This often resolves pain and swelling but does not treat the underlying etiology. Patients with PSS will, therefore, require urgent surgical intervention for first rib removal. This provides additional space in the thoracic outlet to prevent future compression of the neurovascular bundle.