Causes of urinary retention are numerous and categorized as obstructive, infectious, inflammatory, pharmacologic, neurologic, or other.

**1. Obstructive causes of urinary retention**

The mechanisms of acute urinary retention can include outflow obstruction, which can be mechanical such as from physical narrowing of the urethral channel. The other dynamic is from an increase in the muscle tone within and around the urethra as in with benign prostatic hypertrophy and hyperplasia.

Other obstructive causes can occur by constipation, cancer of the prostate or bladder, urethral stricture, urolithiasis, phimosis, or paraphimosis.

**2. Infections**

This category includes prostatitis, urinary infection causing urethritis, and urethral edema. Herpes infections from genital herpes or varicella-zoster affecting the sacral nerve.

**3. Neurologic causes**

Neurologic impairment, another etiology of urinary retention, is because of the interruption of the sensory or motor innervation of the detrusor muscle.  The process of voluntary urination involves the integration and coordination of high cortical neurologic functions involving sympathetic, parasympathetic, and somatic nerves and the detrusor and sphincter smooth muscle. Discernment of a full bladder is by nerves sensing pressure creating a sensory impulse to the cortical centers, allowing the cortical areas to coordinate voluntary urination, which leads to continence of the bladder storing urine through relaxation of the detrusor muscle through beta-adrenergic stimulation and parasympathetic inhibition.  The contraction of the bladder detrusor muscle(voiding) is brought on by cholinergic muscarinic receptors and relaxation of the internal sphincter, the bladder neck, and the urethral sphincter through alpha-adrenergic inhibition. The dyssynergia occurs by interruption of the neurologic pathways such as from a stroke, spinal cord injury, infarction, demyelination along with other neurologic disorders (e.g., traumatic cord injuries, epidural abscess, epidural metastasis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, diabetic neuropathy, multiple sclerosis). These neurologic impairments may develop acute on chronic urinary retention.

**4. Muscle dysfunction**

Inefficient detrusor muscle can cause acute urinary retention and can be brought on by the result of the fluid challenge, during general or epidural analgesia without an indwelling catheter. Patients with symptoms of obstructive uropathy at baseline are most at risk for this.

**5. Medications**

Medications can cause acute urinary retention by their effects on neurotransmitters, neuroreceptors, cholinergic, and muscarinic receptors. The classification of the drugs associated with urinary retention are sympathomimetics alpha-adrenergic (ephedrine sulfate, phenylephrine, phenylpropanolamine, pseudoephedrine), sympathomimetics beta-adrenergic agents (isoproterenol, metaproterenol, terbutaline), antidepressants (imipramine, nortriptyline, amitriptyline, doxepin, amoxapine, maprotiline), antiarrhythmics (quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide), anticholinergics (atropine, scopolamine, glycopyrrolate, mepenzolate, oxybutynin, flavoxate, hyoscyamine, belladonna, propantheline, dicyclomine), antiparkinsonian agents (trihexyphenidyl, benztropine, amantadine, levodopa, bromocriptine), hormonal agents (progesterone, estrogen, testosterone), antipsychotics (haloperidol, thiothixene, thioridazine, chlorpromazine, fluphenazine, prochlorperazine), antihistamines (diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, brompheniramine, cyproheptadine, hydroxyzine), antihypertensives (hydralazine, nifedipine), muscle relaxants (diazepam, baclofen, cyclobenzaprine) and multiple other drugs (indomethacin, carbamazepine, amphetamines, dopamine, vincristine, morphine/other opioids, anesthetic agents). These agents act through a variety of mechanisms; some are apparent such as sympathomimetics and anticholinergic, and there effects on smooth muscle tone of the urethra or bladder neck and the detrusor muscle.

Other etiologies such as trauma and operative procedures can cause urinary retention by altering the anatomy or injury of the bladder, sphincter, or the urethra.

The above etiology and pathophysiology need to be kept in mind when evaluating acute urinary retention.

**Chronic Urinary retention:**

Causes of chronic urinary retention are mostly neurologic in nature and detrusor muscle dysfunction. The neurologic causes of chronic urinary retention are related to diabetes mellitus and are the result of neuropathy developed from myogenic and neurogenic alterations as of the result of prolonged hyperglycemia and production of oxidative stress products.

Detrusor dysfunction may occur in patients with weakening of the muscle from chronic overdistention of the bladder muscle.  The patient has incomplete bladder emptying during infection or from stricture. The patient presentation for urinary retention gets delayed, and when corrected, the muscle has lost tonicity; this can occur acutely during spinal anesthesia and postoperatively during general anesthesia without foley catheter.

Most cases of chronic urinary retention are the result of permanent injury or dysfunction that caused an acute urinary retention condition.