Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) is a condition that characteristically presents with hip pain secondary to mechanical impingement from abnormal hip morphology involving the proximal femur and/or acetabulum. With hip rotation to extreme arcs of motion or when there is repetitive, abnormal contact between the bony prominences, this leads to soft tissue damage of the femoroacetabular joint. Over time, this chronic repetitive trauma can lead to hip pain and decreased function. The abnormal bony features include cam deformity of the femoral head-neck junction as well as pincer lesions of the acetabulum. Cam deformity is an abnormal bony prominence or "bump" at the junction of the femoral head and neck resulting in an aspherical-shaped head, occurring most commonly along the anterosuperior femoral head-neck area. A pincer lesion is an abnormal bony overhang of the anterolateral acetabular rim resulting in over coverage of the femoral head, which can also contribute to impingement and pain. Both cam and pincer lesions are visible on plain radiographs (X-ray). Patients may present with either one or both (mixed) morphologies, with the mixed morphology being the most common in symptomatic patients. When impingement occurs, it results in a mechanical collision of the femoral cam with the rim of the acetabulum, which results in pinching of the labrum and cartilage. Over time, this can result in cartilage wear and tearing of the labrum.

As a result of labral and cartilage injury, FAI can lead to hip osteoarthritis over time. The diagnosis of this condition is dependent on history, physical exam, and radiography of the hip and pelvis. Treatment typically consists of initial non-operative measures; however, if conservative management fails, then there should be consideration of surgical management by an orthopedic surgeon.