Delayed hypersensitivity diseases can develop in humans due to mycobacteria, protozoa, and fungi, although in another granulomatous disease such as Crohn disease, no infectious microbes have been found. Some of the most critical diseases include leprosy, tuberculosis, schistosomiasis, sarcoidosis, and Crohn disease.

Leprosy is divided clinically into three essential types: tuberculoid, borderline, and lepromatous. In tuberculoid leprosy, the affected skin has a few, well-defined, hypopigmented patches that show epithelioid infiltrate with no microorganisms. In lepromatous shows, multiple confluent skin lesions characterized by numerous bacilli. Borderline leprosy shows physical findings of the two others.

Tuberculosis in the lungs causes a granulomatous reaction that leads to cavitation and the spread of bacteria. There are extensive areas of fibrosis that can see in the chest x-ray. This lesion is typically granulomatous.

Schistosomiasis causes by schistosomes, once the body is sensitized by a granulomatous reaction developed in the parasitized tissue mediated by Th2 lymphocytes.

Sarcoidosis is a chronic and idiopathic disease in which activated macrophage and granuloma accumulate in many tissues along with fibrosis. The condition can be characterized by the presence of enlarged lymph nodes, which may be identified in chest radiographs. This disease is associated with depression of cell-mediated immunity both in vivo and in vitro. A tuberculin test is negative in this disease. The clinical manifestations include granuloma development in the lungs, lymph nodes, nervous system, bones, and skin and are associated with fever, malaise, and shortness of breath due to lung fibrosis.

Crohn disease is another granulomatous disease that is not caused by a microorganism. Granulomas are prominent. It is a chronic disease that affects ileum and colon, and where T-helper cells and APC accumulate in all layers of the intestines.