Factors affecting the male are crucial contributors to infertility amongst infertile couples. The overall incidence of infertility accounts for nearly 15% of the total population. Male infertility in its most severe form is known as azoospermia. Azoospermia is defined as the complete absence of spermatozoa in two separate centrifuged semen specimens. It affects nearly 1% of the male population and about 10%-15% of all males with infertility.

Azoospermia can be subdivided into pre-testicular, testicular, or post-testicular causes. Based on the presence or absence of obstruction of the ducts or vas deferens, azoospermia can be classified into obstructive azoospermia (OA) and nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA). It is important to differentiate between obstructive and nonobstructive azoospermia, i.e., primary testicular failure. With the advanced assisted reproductive technologies, various fertility options are available for couples having difficulties in conception due to male infertility, even with azoospermia.

Amongst azoospermic males, 40% will have obstructive azoospermia.

In obstructive azoospermia, spermatogenesis is often normal. Therefore, treatment options for obstructive azoospermia often include the surgical correction of the blockage in addition to other assisted reproductive techniques.

The majority of azoospermic men, about 60%, will have nonobstructive azoospermia making it the most common type of azoospermia. Nonobstructive azoospermia is most often due to severe defects in spermatogenesis, which are frequently due to primary testicular failure or dysfunction. It can also result from dysfunction of the pituitary or hypothalamus. The exact pathology of nonobstructive azoospermia is often idiopathic. Advanced assisted reproductive techniques can often treat nonobstructive azoospermia (primary testicular failure).

Testicular biopsies of patients suffering from severe spermatogenic failure often show various areas of normal spermatogenesis.

Health care professionals face many challenges in providing care to infertile men with spermatic failure. Diagnostic modalities used for patients with azoospermia are hormonal assessment, biomarkers in semen, ultrasonography, testicular biopsy, and vasography. The best tool for diagnosing distal male reproductive system obstruction is transrectal ultrasound.