Initial evaluation of the underlying rhythm is necessary, and determination of possible etiology or trigger is crucial.

**Electrocardiogram:**

Electrocardiogram generally shows flutter waves with the absence of an isoelectric line between QRS complexes, with an atrial wave around 300 beats per minute with ventricular conduction that can be 2 to 1, 3 to 1 or 4 to 1 or with variable conduction due to Wenckebach phenomenon.

In inferior leads, typical flutter waves resemble a picket fence or sawtooth because the P waves are negative due to the direction of the vector.

Typical atrial flutter with counterclockwise activation will show inferior leads with negative flutter waves with low amplitude in lead I and upright flutter wave in aVL.

**Echocardiogram**

Echocardiography for the evaluation of atrial flutter bases its value on the determination of underlying structural heart disease. Presence of dilated atrial chambers is a sign of chronicity and also fibrosis of the atrium that could make the circuit persist and more challenging to control.

Assessment of left ventricular ejection fraction can be the cause or consequence of underlying atrial flutter because the persistence of tachycardia can generate tachycardia induced-cardiomyopathy or the cardiomyopathy and volume status can trigger the atrial flutter.

Evaluation for atrial or ventricular thrombus is also important, especially when desiring cardioversion to sinus rhythm. A transesophageal echocardiogram is the modality of choice because it can visualize the atrial appendage where atrial thrombus is more frequently present.

**Laboratory evaluation**

An initial determination of atrial flutter triggers is necessary. Laboratory evaluation of electrolytes disturbance, abnormal thyroid function, infection, anemia, hypoxia. Correction of these abnormalities can improve symptoms and decrease the threshold of development of atrial flutter and rapid ventricular response.

Pulmonary function test might be necessary for this set of patients; there is a correlation between lung disease and presence the atrial arrhythmias including atrial flutter. Management of the underlying lung condition can improve the control of the atrial flutter.