ADH principally exerts its effects by binding to the kidneys principal cells within the late distal tubule and collecting ducts. ADH binds to the V receptor on these cells and leads to the activation of adenylate cyclase, which causes a subsequent increase in the second messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP). cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA), a phosphorylating enzyme that initiates an intracellular phosphorylation cascade. Ultimately, intracellular aquaporin-2 (AQP2) storage vesicles are phosphorylated, which promotes their movement and insertion into the apical membrane. AQP2 is a water channel that allows water to move passively into the cell guided by the osmotic gradient established by NaCl and urea, and thus promotes reabsorption of water in the kidney. This activity creates concentrated, or hyperosmotic, urine, and allows our body to conserve water in times of dehydration or loss of sufficient blood volume, as seen in hemorrhagic or edematous states.

ADH also has a second action on vascular smooth muscle. ADH binds to V receptors on vascular smooth muscle and activates G protein. G activates phospholipase C (PLC), which results in the production of inositol triphosphate (IP-3) as well as diacylglycerol (DAG) from the cell membrane. IP-3 causes a release of intracellular calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum. DAG and calcium activate protein kinase C (PKC), which, like PKA, results in a signaling phosphorylation cascade. The net effect of this signaling cascade is a contraction of vascular smooth muscle leading to increases in total peripheral resistance and thus increases in blood pressure. This mechanism is synergistic with water reabsorption in that both mechanisms elevate blood pressure. This mechanism is crucial in periods where sufficient arterial blood volume is low to maintain tissue perfusion.