Teprotumumab is generally well tolerated, with most reported adverse events classified as mild, mostly grade 1 or 2. Common adverse reactions>5% were reported in teprotumumab clinical trials. According to pooled data analysis from phase 2 and 3 clinical trials.

- Infections and infestations (35%)

- Muscle spasm (25%)

- Nausea (17%)

- Diarrhea (13%)

- Hearing impairment (10%)

- Alopecia (13%)

- Weight loss (9%)

- Hyperglycemia (8%)

- Dry skin (8%)

- Headache (8%)

- Dysgeusia (8%)

- Paraesthesia (7%)

Serious adverse events occurred in 5 of 43 patients (12%) in the teprotumumab group in the phase 2 trial, which comprised one case of severe diarrhea in a patient with pre-existing ulcerative colitis, inflammatory bowel disease, Escherichia sepsis, Hashimoto encephalopathy, urinary retention, and one infusion-related reaction.

In the phase 3 trial, serious adverse events occurred in 2 of 41 (5%) patients in the teprotumumab group, which was a grade 2 infusion reaction that led to discontinuation of trial, and pneumothorax which was considered unrelated to the trial drug. No deaths occurred during teprotumumab clinical trials.

Hoang et al. described a case of teprotumumab-induced encephalopathy in a 76-year-old man with a resolution of symptoms following plasmapheresis.

**Hyperglycemia**

Hyperglycemia is identified as related to drug action for teprotumumab. In patients who did not have underlying diabetes, hyperglycemia was mild (55 to 70 mg/dl), intermittent, and occurred at similar rates in the placebo and teprotumumab groups. Moderate or severe hyperglycemia occurred in some patients with diabetes who received teprotumumab, which was well controlled after adjusting the medication for diabetes. Hemoglobin A1c levels returned to baseline after cessation of therapy. The OPTIC trial reported two grade 1 hyperglycemia cases (<5%) which resolved spontaneously.

OPTIC-X study reported three other cases of hyperglycemia (8.1%) in the OPTIC placebo group who later received teprotumumab, two with new-onset type 2 diabetes, and one with a transient increase in blood glucose.

**Hearing Impairment**

Hearing impairment is a common adverse reaction of teprotumumab. Hearing complications range from deafness, eustachian tube dysfunction, hyper and hypoacusis, tinnitus, and autophony at a rate of 10% in phase 2 and 3 teprotumumab clinical trials. These adverse events were noted to resolve either while on therapy or after completion of treatment.

In the phase 3 trial, five patients reported hearing disturbances in the teprotumumab group (2 hypoacusis, 1 deafness, 1 autophony, and 1 patulous eustachian tube), which all subsequently resolved.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) plays an essential role in developing the inner ear and cochlear hair cells.

In a large English longitudinal study, higher IGF-1 levels correlated with lower odds of hearing impairment in people aged 50 to 60.

The post-clinical trials' use of teprotumumab raises concerns that the incidence of hearing complications may be higher and, in some instances, does not reverse after cessation of teprotumumab therapy. Two of the earliest reported TED cases developed hearing deficits after the third and fifth teprotumumab infusions, respectively, with severe hearing loss after the seventh infusion, after which treatment was ceased. Routine audiograms with teprotumumab therapy have been suggested.

Both cases showed moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss, with no significant recovery of neurosensory loss 4 and 9 months after discontinuation of teprotumumab treatment. Another TED patient developed irreversible hearing loss in the setting of rifle shooting without ear protection two months into teprotumumab treatment. He continued to require hearing aids 12 months following completion of teprotumumab infusions.

In a compiled case series, 4 cases out of 28 teprotumumab-treated thyroid eye disease patients (16%) developed neurosensory hearing loss based on audiometry. Severity ranges from mild and transient to severe and chronic. The milder form of ototoxicity is only detected on high-frequency testing.

In a prospective observational study, 27 patients underwent otologic assessment at baseline after second, fourth, and eighth teprotumumab infusions. 22 of the 27 (81.5%) of the patients developed new subjective otologic symptoms after a mean of 3.8 infusions, ranging from mild to declines in word recognition. While tinnitus, ear fullness, and autophony resolved well (83% to 100%) by 39 weeks, only 5 of 11 (45.5%) patients with subjective hearing loss/decreased word comprehension experienced resolution.

Subjectively, most patients were not functionally impacted by their otologic symptoms, but four did require hearing aids. Six patients had baseline and post-treatment audiometry, 5 met the criteria for ototoxicity due to teprotumumab-related sensorineural hearing loss, and one patient also had a patulous eustachian tube. Importantly the patients experiencing sensorineural hearing loss were older, and all had baseline hearing loss compared to the asymptomatic group (p<0.05).

Given the ototoxicity potential, baseline audiometry and tympanometry with repeat audiology testing during the course of teprotumumab are recommended for early detection and management of otologic symptoms. This practice would help with pre-treatment patient counseling, as having a baseline hearing impairment is a predictor of hearing loss with ototoxic medication. Patients should be counseled to avoid loud noise exposure and other ototoxic medications during teprotumumab treatment.

Clinical trials have revealed encouraging results with the use of topical IGF-1 to treat sudden sensorineural hearing loss.

**Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD)**

Pre-existing inflammatory bowel disease is a labeled precaution for the use of teprotumumab. Greater care is needed while using teprotumumab in these patients. In the phase 2 teprotumumab trial, a patient in the teprotumumab group with pre-existing ulcerative colitis for six months experienced severe diarrhea, which necessitated discontinuation of intervention after the sixth infusion. Another participant in the trial with a 7-month history of abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea before commencing teprotumumab was diagnosed with exacerbation of inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis) 3 months into the study and was withdrawn from the study.

In another recent case report, a patient with thyroid eye disease was treated with teprotumumab and developed symptoms suggestive of IBD after her sixth infusion. Colonoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis, and the patient required subsequent treatment with infliximab to control her IBD.

IGF-1R is expressed on intestinal epithelium and smooth muscle cells. It is thought that its stimulation with IGF-1 contributes to mucosal proliferation and repair and reduces intestinal inflammation.