Lipoprotein(a) is screened via a serum blood test. The general purpose of screening for Lp(a) is to further identify those at higher risk for cardiovascular disease.

Today, there is variability in expert opinion on when to screen for elevated lipoprotein(a). The National Lipid Association recommends that Lp(a) be considered for testing when there is a significant family history of premature ASCVD in first-degree relatives, personal history of premature ASCVD, and severe primary hyperlipidemia. The National Lipid Association also recommends it to aid in the process of shared decision-making for statin therapy for those in the borderline ASCVD risk category.

The European Atherosclerosis Society has set criteria for when Lp(a) screening is generally recommended. Patients with a personal history of premature cardiovascular disease, recurrent cardiovascular disease while on statin therapy, and a ≥10% ten-year risk of cardiovascular disease. A family history of premature cardiovascular disease, elevated lipoprotein(a), and familial hypercholesterolemia are also indications for Lp(a) screening. The European Society of Cardiology has a general recommendation to screen Lp(a) at least once in a person’s lifetime.

There is currently no recommendation or guideline regarding testing pediatric patient populations for Lp(a). This is primarily due to the lack of data on Lp(a) in the pediatric patient population. More research is required in this patient population to help develop better screening guidelines.