The pelvic girdle contributes to several essential functions, especially in locomotion, despite being composed of relatively fixed joints. Several muscles originate from pelvic attachments on the external and internal surfaces of the pelvic girdle. The muscles originating from the external pelvic girdle assist primarily with locomotion, with attachments along the femur and femoral head within the acetabulum. Additionally, these muscles are crucial for stability and proprioception. The internal surfaces of the pelvic girdle serve as attachments for muscles forming the pelvic “floor.” The pelvic floor muscles support the pelvic viscera by supplying structural integrity, preventing prolapse, and contributing to the control of the anal sphincter, urinary sphincter, and vaginal canal.

The pelvic musculature subdivides into three major categories; muscles that cross the lumbosacral joint, hip joint muscles, and muscles located wholly within the pelvis that form the pelvic floor. Pelvic muscles that cross the lumbosacral joint attach the pelvis to the trunk. These muscles assist with the sacral and lumbar spine in flexion and extension and the lumbar spine in rotation and lateral flexion. Lumbosacral flexion is performed with contraction of the rectus abdominis anteriorly as well as the external and internal oblique muscles. The psoas major is believed to also play an accessory role in flexion. Extension occurs with contraction of the erector spinae muscle group, consisting of the iliocostalis, longissimus, and spinalis muscles, and assisted by the multifidus muscles.

Pelvic muscles that cross the hip joint are also divisible at the hip into general territories; the hip flexors are in an anterior location, the hip extensors are posterior, the adductors are medial, and the abductors are lateral. These groups derive their names from their major actions, i.e., the hip flexors assist with flexion; however, this is an oversimplification as many of the muscles contribute to more than one motion.  The hip flexors are the psoas major, iliacus, sartorius, pectineus and rectus femoris.  The hip extensors are the gluteus maximus and hamstrings (long head of biceps femoris, semimembranosus, and semitendinosus). The adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis, and pectineus comprise the adductor group. The tensor fascia lata (TFL), gluteus minimus, and gluteus medius are hip abductors.

Finally, the pelvic floor muscles consist of thin layers. The pelvic floor muscles are located entirely within the pelvis and therefore do not move the pelvis. Instead, these muscles stabilize the sacroiliac joint as well as the pubic symphysis, in addition to creating a stable floor for pelvic viscera.