Clinically, infective endocarditis may present with a myriad of signs and symptoms, and clinicians should consider this diagnosis in any patient with risk factors who present with fever or sepsis of unknown origin.

History often reveals predisposing conditions and risk factors that aid with diagnosis. Current or previous indwelling catheterization, intravenous drug use, recent pacemaker placement, or history of prosthetic valves suggests predisposing endocardial injury.

A thorough physical exam may identify stigmata that reinforce the diagnosis and highlight complications of peripheral embolization. As discussed above, a fever will often be present, but tachypnea and tachycardia may also emerge in the setting of underlying valvular insufficiency or systemic infection. Hypotension can similarly develop secondary to either septic or cardiogenic shock in the event of acute valve perforation. Although classically associated with infectious endocarditis, a new or worsening murmur presents in less than 50% of all cases; nonetheless, identification will help localize valve involvement. If severe mitral or aortic valve regurgitation develops, auscultation can demonstrate bilateral pulmonary rales. The dermatologic exam may show the classic immunologic and hemorrhagic cutaneous sequela of infectious endocarditis. However, Osler nodes (painful subcutaneous nodules typically found on the palm), subungual splinter hemorrhages, and Janeway lesions (painless hemorrhagic plaques on the palms/soles) are each individually observed in less than 10% of all cases.