Omalizumab is a recombinant humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody targeting human immunoglobulin E (IgE) and thereby preventing its interaction with the high-affinity receptor Fc-epsilon-RI typically found on eosinophils, mast cells, and basophils, and is critical in the allergic cascade.

It received initial approval for use in 2003 for the treatment of moderate to severe asthma. It later received approval for use in patients with chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria in 2014 in both the United States and Europe. It is the first drug to be licensed for the treatment of chronic urticaria in a patient who remains symptomatic despite H1-antihistamine treatment.

**Asthma**

It is FDA-approved for moderate to severe persistent asthma for adults and pediatric patients six years of age and older who have a positive skin test or in vitro reactivity to a perennial aeroallergen and symptoms are not adequately controlled with inhaled corticosteroids. It is not approved for the relief of acute bronchospasm or status asthmatics. It is not approved for the treatment of other allergic conditions.

**Nasal Polyps**

It is FDA-approved as an add-on maintenance therapy of nasal polyps for adults 18 years of age and above with inadequate response to nasal corticosteroids.

**Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria**

It is FDA-approved for treating adolescents 12 years of age and older and adults with chronic spontaneous urticaria who has symptoms despite H1 antihistamine treatment. It is not approved for other types of urticaria.