Diagnosis of asymptomatic bacteriuria is made by urine culture. Either a properly collected clean-catch specimen or a catheterized specimen is acceptable. The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) has established criteria for diagnosing asymptomatic bacteriuria.

Midstream clean catch urine specimen:

- For women, two consecutive specimens with isolation of the same bacteria species with at least 100,000 colony-forming units (CFUs) per ml of urine.

- For men, a single specimen with isolation of one bacteria species with at least 100,000 CFUs per ml of urine.

Catheterized specimen:

- For women or men, a single specimen with isolation of one bacteria species with at least 100 CFUs per ml of urine.

Urine dipstick for leukocyte esterase will reliably identify pyuria, but it is not specific for asymptomatic bacteriuria. (Pyuria may result from other inflammatory disorders of the genitourinary tract.) Urinary dipstick for nitrites is also of limited usefulness because of infection with non-nitrite-producing organisms, the delay between collection and testing of the specimen, and insufficient time since the last voiding for nitrites to be produced at detectable levels. The combination of the dipstick for leukocyte esterase and nitrites is more specific for asymptomatic bacteriuria than either test alone. Urinalysis with microscopic exam for bacteria is a useful, but non-quantitative, way to identify bacteriuria.

Pregnant women should be screened for asymptomatic bacteriuria with a urine culture. The optimal timing and frequency of screening urine cultures in pregnancy have not been established, but obtaining a screening urine culture at the end of the first trimester of pregnancy is recommended.

Other than in pregnancy, there are few indications to screen for asymptomatic bacteriuria. Two possible clinical scenarios in which a screening urine culture might be appropriate include patients undergoing urological procedures in which mucosal bleeding is expected, such as resection of the prostate, and patients who are in the first three months following renal transplantation.