# Continuing Education Activity

Baricitinib is a medication traditionally used in the management and treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis. However, with the recent advent of the COVID-19 global pandemic, several agents have been evaluated for the management of this disease. Baricitinib is in the JAK inhibitor class of medications. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for the concurrent use of Remdesivir and Baricitinib as valuable agents in the management of COVID-19. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors like indications and contraindications, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with COVID-19 and related conditions

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of COVID-19 and the role of Baricitinb in the management of the disease.
Summarize the epidemiology of Addison disease.
- Identify the indications for using Baricitinib in combination with Remdesivir in hospitalized patients. 
- Review the contraindications and adverse events associated with the use of Baricitinib and Remdesivir. 
- Describe the importance of a multidisciplinary team in the management of COVID-19 leading to safe and effective use of Baricitinib and Remdesivir in hospitalized COVID-19 patients.

# Introduction

The World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. Since the isolation and recognition of SARS-CoV-2 as the causative agent behind COVID-19, as of 9th May 2021, there have been 157,289,118 confirmed cases of COVID-19, including 3,277,272 deaths, reported to WHO. SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped virus with ribonucleic acid as its genetic material. Due to its high virulence, it has wreaked havoc on countries worldwide, with an overwhelming number of infections following outbreaks. This has led to a near-collapse of the healthcare infrastructure in some countries. With the advent of a better understanding of the disease process and the pathophysiology of severe disease, it has become clear that there is a need for therapeutic agents that can hamper the course of the disease.

**Pathogenesis of COVID-19**

The pathogenesis of COVID-19 is a complex interplay between direct tissue injury from viral invasion and a heightened immune response from the host. The early phase of the disease is characterized by viral entry into the host cells. The SARS-CoV-2 virus enters the host cells by attaching to the ACE-2 receptors that are present in abundance in the respiratory epithelium, the nasal mucosa, esophagus, etc.

Following the entry of the virus into the cells and direct virus-mediated tissue damage, the late phase of the disease commences. The host cells trigger an immune response by activating T-lymphocytes, neutrophils, and monocytes. Neutrophil recruitment is followed by the release of cytokines such as Interleukin-1 (IL-1), Interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1β, IL-8, IL-12, Interferon Gamma (IFN)-γ, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF α). In cases of severe COVID -19, there is evidence of a heightened immune response categorized as “Cytokine Storm” which leads to several deleterious effects on the body. The Cytokine storm is caused by the release of high levels of cytokines, especially IL-6 and TNF-α causing an intense inflammatory response

**The need for additional therapeutic agents**

Over the course of the past year, our understanding of the pathophysiology of COVID-19 has improved. With ongoing randomized controlled trials evaluating therapies for COVID -19, like the RECOVERY Trial recruiting over 39,000 individuals, the guidelines for therapy for COVID-19 remain fluid. Despite a better understanding of the disease, the mortality and morbidity associated with COVID-19 remains unacceptably high.  The recent wave of overwhelming cases in the Republic of India is a grave example of the potential for disaster with COVID-19. There is a need for agents that can be added to the existing arsenal of approved medications. An ideal therapeutic agent should be reliable with robust clinical benefits. The recommendation for its use should be backed by evidence, and it should have a favorable and benign side effect profile. Apart from this, the agent should be readily available to the masses, should be inexpensive, and should be able to meet an exorbitant demand with an efficient supply chain. In an attempt to apply these criteria through this review; we evaluate the evidence for and against the concurrent use of Remdesivir and Baricitinib, indications and contraindications, mechanism of action, and the side effect profile of these drugs.

# Function

**Anti-inflammatory properties of Baricitinib**

Baricitinib is a selective and reversible inhibitor of Janus Kinases (JAK) JAK1 and JAK2 originally approved for use in individuals with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Its use has been justified by proven dampening of the inflammatory response

**Antiviral Activity of Baricitinib**

The potential antiviral activity of Baricitinib is embedded in the mechanism of viral cell entry of several viruses including SARS-CoV-2. The virus gains entry into the cells by a process known as clathrin-mediated endocytosis

**Evidence**

To categorize and interpret the current evidence in the context of COVID-19 therapy, it is important to discuss the 8-point ordinal scale which categorizes COVID-19 based on disease severity. **Figure 3**depicts the widely accepted 8-point ordinal scale for COVID 19 severity and clinical improvement. The scores ranging from 4 to 7 include hospitalized individuals requiring some form of oxygen supplementation, with incremental severity based on oxygen requirements, and supportive care. Goletti and Cantini

The Randomized Evaluation of COVID-19 therapy (RECOVERY) trial investigators on the other hand evaluated the utility of using dexamethasone in hospitalized individuals

Based on the findings of the abovementioned trials, Goletti and Cantini extrapolate that Remdesivir is most effective in early disease with an ordinal scale of 4-5 and dexamethasone is more effective in the later course of the disease with an ordinal scale of 6-7. They point out a need to evaluate therapy for the so-called “Grey Zone” or individuals with an ordinal scale severity of 5-6.

Kalil et al in their recent study the Adaptive COVID-19 Treatment Trial -2 (ACTT-2)

A limitation to the interpretation of the ACTT-2 trial is the absence of data on concurrent use with corticosteroids, as this trial was conducted before the results of the RECOVERY trial. Rodriguez -Garcia et al performed an observational study comparing the use of a combination of Baricitinib with corticosteroids vs steroids alone

# Issues of Concern

Baricitinib is a relatively new drug, and our knowledge about its safety and efficacy profile will build over time. Baricitinib is orally administered and gets rapidly absorbed leading to a peak concentration within 60 minutes, food appears to have no effect on the pharmacokinetics of the medication. The pharmacokinetics of Baricitinib follows a linear curve and there is no accumulation of clinical significance. It is moderately distributed into tissues with 50% binding to plasma proteins and a volume of distribution of 1.1L

Jorgensen et al

Baricitinib has also been associated with a dose-dependent increased tendency to have venous as well as arterial thromboembolism, which is similar to other disease-modifying anti rheumatoid drugs (DMARD’s). It is for this reason that the FDA approved a 2 mg/day dose of Baricitinib for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, as the benefit of administering a 4 mg/day dose was unclear with an increased risk of thromboembolic events

Based on the guideline issued by the FDA for the administration of Baricitinib, dose adjustment should be made for renal impairment. For eGFR between 30-60, the recommended dose is 2 mg /day. For eGFR between 15-30 the recommended dose is 1 mg /day while evaluating risks and benefits and its use is not recommended for eGFR below 15. Its use is also not recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment. As hematologic derangements have been noted with Baricitinib use, its administration is not recommended in patients with a hemoglobin of <8gm/dl, an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of <1000 cells/mm, and an absolute lymphocyte count of <500 cells/mm.

# Clinical Significance

Despite the advent of a better understanding of COVID-19, the mortality and morbidity in hospitalized individuals with mild to moderate disease remain unacceptably high. During phases of overwhelming crisis as seen in countries worldwide over the past year, it has become evident that healthcare infrastructure across the globe can get overwhelmed. While oxygen supplementation can be provided in regular ward settings, mechanical ventilation with endotracheal intubation requires a significant amount of resources. Specialized equipment, trained physicians, and nursing staff fluent in managing critically ill patients and ICU beds remain in shortage across the globe. Combination therapy with Remdesivir and Baricitinib holds the promise of potentially decreasing oxygen requirements, as well as avoiding worsening in patients with an ordinal score of 5 and 6. This group of patients is at a high risk of requiring escalation of care, as well as having clinical worsening requiring mechanical ventilation. Hence the combination therapy can avoid significant morbidity as well as conserve valuable resources. Further studies are underway for the evaluation of Baricitinib and Remdesivir in combination with corticosteroids.

# Other Issues

**Limitations**

The ACTT-2 study was well designed and provided valuable data, however, it was not powered to evaluate a mortality benefit associated with combination therapy of Remdesivir and Baricitinib. This proves to be a limitation in making this combination a standard of care. It will be interesting to see the results of the next phase of the Recovery trial, which will shed light on the concurrent use of steroids with Baricitinib.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Over the course of the past year, the utility of a multidisciplinary approach has been proven in the care of patients with COVID-19. For hospitalized patients requiring oxygen, early involvement of infectious disease consultants as well as pulmonary physicians can help direct therapy. This leads to standardization of care for patients with respiratory failure due to COVID-19. Hospitals have formulated peer review and planning committees for early incorporation of evidence as soon as new trials are published. The involvement of physicians working at the grass-root level in such committees leads to efficient incorporation of new policies and guidelines. The involvement of pharmacists in the process of patient selection and drug approval has been a tried and tested patient safety mandate. Regular education and knowledge update are key to the efficient management of patients with COVID-19.