Pseudobulbar palsy is a condition in which there is bilateral damage to corticobulbar fibers leading to dysarthria, dysphagia, spasticity of the tongue, hyperreflexia, and difficulty with jaw and facial movements. The pseudobulbar impact of the labile effect is a common symptom of pseudobulbar palsy. The pseudobulbar affect or labile effect characteristically presents as an episode of emotional imbalance (excessive crying or laughing).

Pseudobulbar palsy can be due to multiple reasons such as:

- Infarction of cerebral hemisphere bilaterally

- Demyelinating motor neuron disease

- Tumors in the upper part of the brain stem

- Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

- Parkinson’s Disease

- Multiple sclerosis

- Trauma

If there is damage to the corticobulbar tract of one side anywhere between precentral gyrus to the motor nucleus of the facial nerve. It results in paralysis of muscles of the opposite lower half of the face.

For example- If a corticobulbar tract of right side carrying fibers to the facial nucleus gets damaged, facial muscles of the lower half of the face on the left side get paralyzed. Muscles of the upper half of the left side remain unaffected as it receives innervation from corticobulbar fibers of facial nerve of both sides.

Supranuclear lesions of the hypoglossal nerve can occur at any site extending from the cerebral cortex to hypoglossal nerve nuclei. Tongue atrophy does not occur in supranuclear lesions, but it can lead to uncoordinated, slow but spastic tongue movements. Infranuclear lesions of hypoglossal nerve cause weakness, ipsilateral atrophy of the tongue with fasciculations.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a disease in which there is the progressive degeneration of neuronal tissue. When degeneration involves corticobulbar tract signs and symptoms of upper motor neuron disease in the form of muscular weakness, difficulty in speech, difficulty in tongue movement appears.