The term disorder of sex development or disorder of sexual development (DSD) has replaced outdated terms such as 'intersex' or 'ambiguous genitalia.'

The differential diagnosis can be overwhelming, so a systematic interprofessional approach is paramount.

A disorder of sex development(DSD) is suspected in any infant who has the physical examination findings of bilateral nonpalpable undescended testes or hypospadias with unilateral undescended testis.

Three essential details on the evaluation of a newborn with suspected DSD are ascertaining if there is a patent anus on assessment, are the genitalia symmetric or asymmetric, and does the infant has a XX or XY karyotype?

Up to one-half of males with hypospadias and cryptorchidism will have a DSD.

The most important initial finding on physical examination is the presence and number of gonads.

A uterus may be palpable on digital rectal examination.

The newborn period requires a karyotype and laboratory evaluation.

To summarize DSD evaluation:

**Evaluation Begins with Palpation of the Gonads**

0 gonads palpated (46XX DSD, GD, 46 XY, ovotesticular DSD)

1 gonad palpated (partial GD ovotesticular DSD, 46 XYDSD)

2 gonads palpated (46 XY DSD Ovotesticular DSD (rare))

**The most important aspects of diagnosis and treatment include:**

1. Karyotype evaluation

2. Laboratory evaluation: serum electrolytes, 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17 0H-P), testosterone (T), dihydrotestosterone (DHT), luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels

3. Pelvic ultrasound

4. Possible laparoscopy with gonadal biopsy

**Based on Laboratory Values**

1. If 17 OH-P (>2000 ng/dl) and high testosterone with uterus present, then the diagnosis is 46 XX DSD  (CAH). There is further differentiation based on 11 deoxycortisol level and deoxycortisone (DOC)- (if low 11 deoxycortisol and low DOC, then 46XX DSD or 21 alpha-hydroxylase deficiency) (if high 11 deoxycortisol and high DOC, then 11 beta-hydroxylase deficiency)

2. If normal 17 OH-P  (testosterone increased and uterus seen, and on laparoscopy, with gonadal biopsy, and  there are ovaries 46XX DSD (maternal virilizing syndrome)

3. If normal 17 OH-P (possible uterus and normal testosterone, perform laparoscopy with gonadal biopsy). If testis, ovary, ovotestis- diagnosis is ovotesticular DSD: 46XX, 46 XX/XY, 45X/46XY. If streak, this is gonadal dysgenesis, either pure 45X, 45X/46XX, 46XX, 45X/46/XY, or partial 45X/46XY, 46XY.

4. If normal 17 OH-P ( possible uterus and normal testosterone, perform laparoscopy with gonadal biopsy). Two testes, HCG stimulation pre/post, are performed, testosterone/DHT, and DHEA/androstenedione obtained. The diagnosis is 46XY DSD: 46XY, 46XX, 45X/46XY. Consider one of the following diagnoses: 5 alpha-reductase deficiency, androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS),  steroid deficiency- male CAH, dysgenetic testes, persistent Mullerian duct syndrome (PMDS), and primary testicular failure.