The majority of anaerobic infections in children are local, and bloodstream infections compromise less than 2% of the cases. The approach to anaerobic infections includes the identification of predisposing factors. They are as follows:

- An organ site infection contagious to a site with indigenous colonization (oral cavity, bowel)

- Obstruction: For example, nasal foreign body, appendiceal obstruction, bowel obstruction

- Perforation: Of hollow viscus such as bowel perforation.

- Host's inability to clear secretions, for example, children with cerebral palsy, are predisposed to aspiration pneumonia.

- Animal and human bites resulting in penetrating trauma from oral anaerobes

Other important clues of anaerobic infection include the presence of a condition predisposing an individual to an anaerobic infection, for example, tissue necrosis, a foul-smelling discharge, infection leading to thrombophlebitis, no improvement with antibiotics in suspected anaerobic activity.

The clinicians should obtain an anaerobic culture when suspicion of anaerobic infection is present.

**Common Organ Site Infections in Anaerobic and Aerobic Infections**

Head and neck infection: Anaerobes are commonly implicated in dental infections such as dental abscesses, gingivitis, and periodontitis. Exam findings of dental caries or poor dentition are usually present. Anaerobes are also implicated along with other aerobes in suppurative infections of retropharyngeal abscess, peritonsillar abscess, cervical lymphadenitis, deep neck abscesses, and parotitis. The anaerobe associated with Fusobacterium is linked with a complication of peritonsillar abscess known as Lemierre syndrome. Lemierre syndrome is caused by jugular vein septic thrombophlebitis and metastatic emboli to the lungs and liver.

Anaerobes are also caused by chronic otitis media and chronic sinusitis, along with other aerobes such as Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas.

Central nervous system (CNS) infections: Anaerobes are commonly isolated in cultures from brain abscesses which result from a complication of sinusitis, otitis media, dental infections. The 3 anaerobes commonly isolated are Fusobacterium, Prevotella, and Bacteroides. The same organisms are also seen in epidural infections.

Intra-abdominal infections: Damage to the intestinal wall as seen in the perforated appendix gives enteric anaerobes access to the peritoneal cavity. Over days to weeks, it results in the formation of abdominal abscesses. Abdominal abscesses are almost always mixed infections containing both aerobes and anaerobes. The most common anaerobe implicated in abdominal infections is Bacteroides fragilis, followed by Lactobacillus and Clostridium species.

Anaerobes are also a common cause of liver abscesses. The common anaerobes associated are Bacteroides and Fusobacterium species.

Pelvic inflammatory disease: Anaerobes are all are involved in pelvic inflammatory diseases (PID). In a sexually active female with signs and symptoms compatible with pelvic inflammatory disease, empiric antimicrobial therapy against anaerobes and anaerobes is indicated. The common anaerobes involved in PID are Prevotella, Porphyromonas, Clostridium.

Pulmonary infections are seen in children who are unable to control upper airway secretions or lack a normal cough reflex, such as in children with cerebral palsy and tracheoesophageal malformations. Aspiration results in pneumonia which can develop into an abscess if untreated. The predominant pathogens involved in aspiration pneumonia are part of the oropharyngeal flora and include Peptostreptococcus, Prevotella, Bacteroides fragilis, and Fusobacterium.

Skin and soft tissue infections: Anaerobes can cause a perirectal abscess or facial abscess in children. Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium species are usually involved in perirectal infections, and Prevotella, Porphyromonas, and Fusobacterium are involved in oral infections.