Defects in any aspect of digestion can result in uncomfortable gastrointestinal symptoms and the inability to absorb certain nutrients. Several defects of digestion are discussed below.

As mentioned previously, lactose intolerance results from defective or deficient lactase and can result in bloating, flatulence, diarrhea, and the inability to acquire glucose and galactose from lactose. Management can involve avoiding dairy products, which contain significant amounts of lactose. In this case, supplemental calcium may be necessary. Additionally, beta-galactosidase (lactase) tablets are available as supplements for people who are lactose intolerant.

Paralytic ileus is a condition where the normal peristaltic movements of the gastrointestinal tract are inhibited due to abdominal surgery or the use of anticholinergics. Inhibitory neurons in the myenteric plexus between the inner circular and outer longitudinal muscle layers of the gastrointestinal tract release excessive vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) or nitric oxide (NO), inhibitory neurotransmitters that prevent peristalsis. Anticholinergics can interfere with the action of acetylcholine, a stimulatory neurotransmitter from the parasympathetic nervous system that stimulates peristalsis. In both cases, peristalsis is inhibited, hindering the movement and mechanical digestion of food through the gastrointestinal tract.

Sjogren syndrome is an autoimmune condition that destroys the salivary and lacrimal glands. Without the production of saliva, the patient develops xerostomia or dry mouth. The lack of saliva results in difficulty speaking and swallowing, dental caries, and halitosis.

Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a condition where a gastrinoma produces excessive gastrin, leading to overstimulation of gastric parietal cells and excessive hydrochloric acid production. This can result in ulceration of the lining of the gastrointestinal tract, extreme discomfort, and hematemesis. Treatment includes proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole, H2 receptor antagonists such as ranitidine, and removal of the offending tumor.

Cystic fibrosis, aside from respiratory effects, also has consequences for the digestive tract. In cystic fibrosis, the CFTR chloride channel is defective. This channel is important in the pancreas for transporting chloride into the lumen of the pancreatic ducts, in order to draw Na and water into the lumen. This serves to make the pancreatic secretions less viscous and allow their passage through the duct of Wirsung and into the duodenum. If this CFTR chloride channel is defective, such as is the case in cystic fibrosis, the pancreatic secretions become extremely viscous and clog the pancreatic ducts.

Cholelithiasis, or gallstones, are solidified particles of bile that can obstruct the common bile duct. This results in the inability of bile to enter the lumen of the duodenum, and, as such, fats are not emulsified. Pancreatic lipase cannot access the triglycerides, and fats remain undigested. This also results in steatorrhea and can lead to deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins. Treatment often involves the removal of the gallbladder or cholecystectomy.