The adverse effects of betaxolol divide into local and systemic side effects. The local side effects include transient irritation (25 to 40% of patients), burning, pruritus, punctate keratitis, and blurry vision. When compared to topical timolol (a nonselective beta-blocker), betaxolol showed a higher incidence of ocular side effects.  Compared to nonselective topical beta-adrenergic receptor blockers, betaxolol seems to be less likely to cause adverse effects on pulmonary function. However, betaxolol use still requires caution in patients with underlying pulmonary disease. One study showed that 5, out of 85 patients, with glaucoma and asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or timolol-induced bronchoconstriction developed symptomatic pulmonary obstruction. Another study found 8 cases of asthma exacerbation requiring hospitalization, out of a total of 56 spontaneous adverse effect reports, were reported during the first year of betaxolol marketing in the United States.

The systemic side effects are more often seen in the oral form but can also occur with the topical administration of betaxolol. Although betaxolol is considered a “selective” beta-blocker, it loses its selective binding at higher doses and starts to antagonize beta-2 and 3 receptors. Some of the systemic adverse effects include bradycardia, hypotension, fatigue, sexual impotence, hair loss, confusion, headache, dizziness, and bronchospasm at higher doses. Other cardiac problems like arrhythmia, bundle branch block, myocardial infarction, sinus arrest, and congestive heart failure have also been reported in association with betaxolol use. Additional adverse effects reported are depression, disorientation, vertigo, sleepwalking, rhinitis, dysuria, alopecia, and prolonged prothrombin time.