Electroencephalogram is an important tool to investigate central nervous system pathologies associated with seizures and altered mental status in routine practice. It is a complementary test to the more advanced imaging studies. EEG is widely used in the evaluation of epilepsy patients, altered mental status or altered consciousness, parasomnias, encephalopathies secondary to various metabolic and toxic derangements, dementias, and strokes presenting as seizures. EEG is also useful to assess for prognostication in patients with anoxic brain injury, traumatic brain injuries, determining brain death, and drug toxicities. EEG is fundamentally a universal tool to assess any interictal brain wave activity and to better understand the underlying progress in an unresponsive or comatose individual. It is also useful to assess patients with behavioral or psychogenic spells that appear to be similar to seizures.

The activation procedures help or facilitate capturing abnormal discharges that are useful to classify the areas of the brain involved in focal epilepsies or determine if the individual has a genetic or primary type of epilepsy. Long-term EEGs with video are useful to capture seizures and characterize their semiology. From a diagnostic and treatment standpoint, this information would be useful for presurgical work with curative intent if the patient's seizures tend to be medically intractable. The more invasive form of EEGs using the grid and depth electrodes is applied to assess the brain's electrical activity from the surface of the cortex and subcortical white matter, respectively.