If serum calcium levels are normal (which rules out hyperparathyroidism), dietary calcium should be moderated if excessive but not overly restricted to avoid increased oxalate absorption and bone demineralization. A diet that is low in animal protein and salt (sodium) is recommended. Then, a repeat 24-hour urine test can be done to determine the response.

Thiazides can induce a positive calcium balance and reduce urinary calcium by up to 50%. Hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone are used most often, but indapamide also can be used. The advantage of chlorthalidone and indapamide is their longer half-life as hydrochlorothiazide would need to be given twice a day. Thiazides will not be effective unless dietary salt intake is limited. For every gram of daily dietary salt decrease, 24 hour urinary calcium would be expected to drop by 5.46 mg.

Thiazides will also tend to reduce serum potassium, increase uric acid levels, and lower urinary citrate excretion. For that reason, it often is useful to add potassium citrate to these patients when they start on thiazide therapy.

When thiazides fail even at adequate dosages in patients with reasonable sodium restriction, it could be due to a Vitamin D-dependent form of hypercalciuria such as Renal Phosphate Leak. This variant can be treated with orthophosphates, which generally lower serum Vitamin D, or with ketoconazole which blocks cytochrome P450 3A4 resulting in a 30% to 40% reduction in circulating Vitamin D3 levels.

Orthophosphate therapy not only increases serum phosphate levels, which naturally lower Vitamin D3 activation, but also increases renal calcium reabsorption and urinary stone inhibitors like pyrophosphate. They also may act as gastrointestinal calcium binders to help reduce absorption. Orthophosphates can reduce urinary calcium excretion by up to 50% and may be given together with thiazides when necessary. However, they are most useful in cases where thiazides have failed or cannot be used as well as for Renal Phosphate Leak Hypercalciuria.

Amiloride, a potassium-sparing diuretic, is not a thiazide but when added to thiazides may further increase calcium reabsorption as well as minimizing potassium loss. (Amiloride is not usually recommended with potassium citrate due to the potential for hyperkalemia.) Triamterene is not recommended in stone formers as it can form triamterene calculi.

Potassium citrate therapy will not only increase urinary citrate levels, but it may also increase renal calcium reabsorption reducing hypercalciuria.

In children, treatment of hypercalciuria is primarily dietary, at least initially. Calcium intake should not be restricted unless it exceeds the usual recommended amount. Vitamin D supplementation should be avoided, and dietary animal protein intake should be limited to within the usually recommended limits. A three to six month trial of dietary measures alone is reasonable before resorting to thiazide medications.