There are several different ways to evaluate for cystic kidney disease due to various types of presentations.

The diagnosis of ADPKD is clinical; however, genetic analysis and sonography can be used for early detection for patients who are asymptomatic but have a family history.

ARPKD is diagnosed with genetic testing and sonography. Serum sodium concentration can be used for evaluating hyponatremia; urine osmolality for displaying reduced concentrating ability. Also, bilirubin and hepatic enzyme, complete blood cell counts (CBCs), can be performed for the risk of portal hypertension and splenic dysfunction.

JNPHP and MCKD are diagnosed with increased serum sodium concentration, minimal proteinuria, normal sediment. Sonography and CT scan can show shrunken kidneys.

Another helpful tool is the Bosniak classification, which helps to diagnose and manage cystic lesions with pre- and post-contrast CT scanning.

- Category 1 shows benign simple cyst with a thin wall without septa, calcifications, or solid components, and do not require further evaluation.

- Category 2 shows a benign simple cyst with a few thin walls and septa with fine calcifications. Follow-up in selected patients to confirm the diagnosis 6 to 12 months later.

- Category 2F is indeterminate between category 2 and 3; and has multiple thin septa, minimal smooth thickening wall with nodular calcification — follow-up with imaging.

- Category 3 that 40% to 60% are malignant, a multilocular lesion with thickened walls or septa, irregular calcifications — follow-up with periodic imaging, needle biopsy, or surgery.

- Category 4 that 85% to 100% are malignant, large nodular lesions with enhancing solid components, and requires surgery.