# Continuing Education Activity

Leiomyomas, also known as fibroids, are a group of benign smooth muscle tumors commonly present in premenopausal women. These tumors are of monoclonal origin which arises from the smooth muscle of the uterus. This activity describes the evaluation and treatment of leiomyomas and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the risk factors for developing leiomyoma.
- Describe the hormone responsiveness of tumors in the pathophysiology of leiomyomas.
- Explain the FIGO classification in the evaluation of leiomyomas.
- Outline the imporatance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance delivery of care for patients affected by leiomyoma.

# Introduction

Leiomyomas, also called fibroids, are the most common benign gynecological tumor in premenopausal women

# Etiology

Leiomyomas are comprised of monoclonal cells arising from the myometrium

# Epidemiology

Leiomyomas are diagnosed in close to 70% of white women and more than 80% of black women by age 50, but the incidence of clinical symptoms in blacks is double that found in whites

# Pathophysiology

Clinically, it is well established that leiomyomas are highly sensitive to the effects of steroid hormones. Leiomyomas have an increased expression of both estrogen and progesterone receptors when compared to normal myometrium

# Histopathology

Leiomyomas are benign tumors of monoclonal origin which arise from the smooth muscle of the uterus

# History and Physical

The clinical presentation of fibroids is variable, ranging from asymptomatic patients to those with recurrent, progressive symptoms that adversely affect a woman’s daily activities. The most common presenting symptoms are pain, pressure, and abnormal vaginal bleeding

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of uterine leiomyomas is generally made by comprehensive physical examination and clinical history. On physical exam, the most common finding is an enlarged uterus that is often irregular in shape. Confirmation of clinical diagnosis is most easily accomplished with ultrasonography. A pelvic sonogram is a cost-effective method that allows for rapid diagnosis

Further imaging, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), can be useful for determining the extent of vascularization or degeneration of the leiomyomas. MRI can also better define the relationship of the leiomyomas to the serosal and mucosal surfaces. The proximity to these surfaces often dictates the type of intervention recommended

The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) has developed a classification system that allows for the determination of the extent of invasion into the endometrial cavity. The FIGO scale ranges from 0 to 8, with the lower number indicating closer proximity to the endometrium

If bleeding is the predominant symptom and there is a concern for anemia or other sequelae of recurrent blood loss, a complete blood count (CBC) is indicated. Further evaluation of blood work should include a thyroid-stimulating hormone level to rule out thyroid disease as the cause of abnormal bleeding if the index of suspicion is low for leiomyomata as the etiology

At this time, there is no recommendation for surveillance imaging. While the growth of the leiomyoma can be surveyed, there is no current basis for a set time interval or current guidelines on how the growth should be monitored. Interval reassessment is usually based on a change in clinical symptoms

# Treatment / Management

The economic impact on the United States by the cost of care for symptomatic leiomyomas is excessive

The patient’s age and reproductive goals direct the modality and goals of treatment. Treatment options include both medical and surgical intervention

- Relieve bothersome signs and symptoms

- Reduce the leiomyoma size

- Maintain or improve a woman’s fertility if desired

Medical management is often the initial intervention for symptomatic fibroids and includes hormonal therapy, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and/or modulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. The major drawback of medical management is the limited duration of use. Many of the medical management options are only able to be used for a short duration, and after the cessation of treatment, symptoms reoccur, and the fibroids often continue to grow

Hormonal options for treatment include combination oral contraceptives, single agent progesterone suppression or GnRH agonists. Systemic hormonal therapy is primarily used to control menorrhagia caused by fibroids, rarely impacts the size of fibroids and does not improve fertility.  Additionally, increased complications are associated with long-term treatment using exogenous hormones; therefore, they are generally only used for short durations

Intrauterine devices that release levonorgestrel act locally to achieve results similar to systemic progesterone suppression, resulting in decreased menstrual bleeding and improved quality of life

Non-hormonal options involve NSAIDs and tranexamic acid. Tranexamic acid is a derivative of the amino acid, lysine.  This medication is a reversible inhibitor of lysine receptor sites on plasminogen that, when bound, prevent fibrin degradation and functionally stabilize clot formation

NSAIDs have been useful for reducing menstrual blood loss

Surgical intervention remains the most successful treatment for leiomyomas. Endometrial ablation is hysteroscopic destruction of the full-thickness endometrium, but this treatment precludes future endometrial assessment and requires permanent contraception.  Uterine artery embolization reduces blood flow to individual fibroids to reduce growth and mitigate symptoms.  Successful myomectomy (surgical removal of fibroids only) enables future fertility while reducing size and symptoms from fibroids; however, many women will require additional subsequent procedures for recurrent symptomatic fibroids.  Hysterectomy is the only treatment that provides definitive therapy

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for uterine leiomyomas includes both benign and malignant diseases that cause uterine enlargement, bleeding or pelvic pain. The most common diagnoses to consider are adenomyosis, endometriosis, pregnancy, leiomyosarcoma, endometrial carcinoma and uterine carcinosarcoma

# Prognosis

The prognosis of uterine fibroids varies extensively for individual patients. Many patients have an excellent prognosis and remain asymptomatic for many years or indefinitely. Whereas, others will fail medical management and depending on their desire for future fertility, may experience recurrent fibroids requiring multiple surgeries.

# Complications

- Chronic pelvic pain

- Heavy menstrual bleeding, which can lead to anemia

- Poor pregnancy outcomes

- Infertility

- Constipation

- Urinary tract infections or urinary incontinence

- Torsion of a pedunculated fibroid

- Degeneration with or without infection

# Deterrence and Patient Education

- Leiomyomas are benign and rarely become cancer

- Extremely common among women

- Genetics may play a role in your chance of developing them

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Considering the high prevalence and incidence of uterine leiomyomas, the need for full integration of care among health care professionals is essential. To expand our knowledge of leiomyomas, we need further research to identify predisposing genetic factors for potential use to better target preventive care. Current randomized trials have shown progress in the treatment of symptoms to improve quality of life. One of the most recent phase three trials found the use of ulipristal acetate, an oral progesterone receptor modulator significantly improves bleeding among women with symptomatic leiomyomas