The first and most critical aspect in treating any illness is having a patent airway. All healthcare workers should know the basics of airway management; the patient is doomed without an airway. Most patients are evaluated by anesthesiologists and anesthesia nurses for their airway prior to any elective surgery. However, sometimes, patients are admitted through the emergency department or after surgery and run into airway problems. The best recommendation is to first consult with an anesthesiologist on airway management. If a healthcare worker has never intubated a patient, call the anesthesiologist first rather than jeopardize the patient's life.

**Skills**

In today's healthcare environment, knowledge of airway assessment is essential. This also implies collaboration between interprofessional and multidisciplinary teams. The choice of airway management in patients should consider multiple factors, including the patient's preferences, the surgeon's input, and the expertise of the anesthesiologists to ensure safe airway management. Adhering to established guidelines and protocols is recommended to facilitate appropriate and effective airway management.

**Strategy**

It is most appropriate and ideal to maintain continuous closed-loop communication between all members of the perioperative care team regarding the need, technique, and potential management issues associated with airway assessment.

**Ethics**

Obtaining thorough and comprehensive informed consent from patients or their authorized decision makers is crucial before administering anesthesia and conducting an airway assessment. All team members should feel empowered to voice any concerns during the process, fostering buy-in from all stakeholders and facilitating early identification and resolution of any issues that may arise. This collaborative approach enhances patient safety and ensures a comprehensive review of the procedure.

**Responsibilities**

All team members have a duty to communicate their concerns, responsibilities, and activities with all other team members both contemporaneously and as indicated throughout the perioperative period based on their professional discretion.

**Interprofessional Communication**

All team members should respect the free flow of information and concerns among team members without allowing or producing an environment of hostility.

**Care Coordination**

All team members have a responsibility to avoid disrupting the work performed by other team members and to refrain from actions or inaction that may create additional issues or increase the workload for their colleagues. By maintaining a collaborative and supportive approach, team members can work together effectively, ensuring smooth workflow and minimizing any unnecessary burden on their fellow team members. This commitment to teamwork and mutual respect ultimately contributes to the delivery of high-quality patient care. [Level 1]