The sensory territories for the alveolar nerves divide between the superior alveolar nerves and the inferior alveolar nerves. The superior alveolar nerves will come from the branching of the maxillary nerve. The maxillary nerve will branch into the three superior alveolar nerves before it exits the infraorbital foramen. The superior alveolar nerves are named based on their anatomical location. The first branch is the anterior superior alveolar nerve. The anterior superior alveolar nerve travels toward the maxillary sinus. The sensory innervation of the anterior superior alveolar nerve includes the premolars (canine teeth and incisor teeth), maxillary sinus, and inferior meatus. The second branch of the maxillary nerve is the middle superior alveolar nerve. The middle superior alveolar nerve is responsible for providing additional sensory innervation to the sinuses and the maxillary premolar teeth. The third branch of the maxillary nerve is the posterior superior alveolar nerve. The posterior alveolar nerve provides sensory innervation to the cheeks, maxillary sinus, and gingivae. All of the alveolar nerve branches from the maxillary nerve provide sensory innervation to the gingivae and sinuses. These superior alveolar nerves have overlaps in their sensory territory innervation with one another. This provides collateral sensory innervation via a dental nerve plexus.

The inferior alveolar nerve comes from a different branch of the trigeminal nerve. The inferior alveolar nerve is a mandibular nerve branch. The inferior alveolar nerve is responsible for sensory innervation to the gingivae on the lower jaw. The inferior alveolar nerve also branches into the mylohyoid nerve and the mental nerve. As the inferior alveolar nerve descends the mandible, it will branch into the mylohyoid nerve to provide motor innervation to the mylohyoid muscle and the anterior belly of the digastric muscle.