The SIR provides recommendations for the cessation of a list of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications for interventional radiology procedures, which it categorizes based on hemorrhage risks, from level 1 to level 3

The SIR also lists anticoagulants that should be withheld (or their side effects medically corrected) to reduce bleeding risks. Any dose of aspirin is recommended to be withheld for 5 days. Enoxaparin at prophylactic doses does not require delaying the procedure, but at therapeutic dosing should result in scheduling the procedure 24 hours later than the most recent dose when possible.

Determination of periprocedural anesthesia risk is site dependent. Many hospitals require physicians to assess the patient using the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) physical classification system and a Mallampati score. If the patient is ASA class 4 or higher and/or has any other anesthetic risk factors, such as an advanced airway, then some institutions and authors recommend that the patient should have anesthetic consultation prior even to "low risk" procedures such as PCN (Cohn S, ed. Perioperative Medicine. London: Springer-Verlag; 2011).

Pre-procedure antibiotics are given an hour before the procedure if there is a suspicion of an infected collecting system, which is frequently the setting in which the request for PCN is made. The main bacteria to cover empirically are gram-negative Escherichia coli, Proteus species, and Klebsiella species as well as gram-positive Enterococcus. Less common, but often resistant to early generation penicillins and cephalosporins, is Pseudomonas, a gram-negative rod with a beta-lactamase. Usually, anaerobic coverage is not needed. The SIRPseudomonas.  The AUA Best Practice Policy recommends a first or second generation cephalosporin, or clindamycin, or gentamycin and metronidazole.

The patient may have some degree of renal failure-related metabolic imbalances that should be sought out and potentially corrected prior to initiating the PCN procedure to decrease the risk of complications.  Hyperkalemia or metabolic acidosis may induce arrhythmias. In this situation, it may be judicious to review an ECG. If no arrhythmia or symptoms/signs of hyperkalemia (usually nonspecific weakness, fatigue, and dyspnea; sometimes palpitations or chest pain) are present, then emergent treatment for hyperkalemia is not "needed" but should still be considered if the serum value is above 5.5 mEq/L. Due to the risk of sepsis/septic shock during the procedure, there should be a low threshold to request that an expert on the management of hypotension (such as an anesthesiologist) be present or immediately available.

When punctures are poorly placed, there is a greater risk of complications. This may impede the success of future interventions. Therefore, a cautious approach should be taken without too much guarantee of where needle placement will be attempted until imaging confirms the anatomic layout and what options for a planned puncture route are available and ideal. CT may be needed for treatment planning purposes in cases of aberrant anatomy, such as a horseshoe kidney or scoliosis causing the kidney to lie deeper than usual within the abdomen.

Ultrasound may be used in isolation to confirm that the colon is not in the line of puncture and to determine the degree of hydronephrosis. About 5% of patients will demonstrate a retrorenal colon when placed prone.