**Insulin-Mediated Stimulation**

Insulin-regulated GLUT4 translocation can occur by two signaling pathways.  One pathway involves lipid kinase phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). Insulin binds to the insulin receptor found on the target cell surface, causing the receptor to undergo a conformational change which activates its tyrosine-kinase domain intracellularly.  Insulin receptor substrates (IRS) and c-Cbl (a proto-oncoprotein) are then phosphorylated. In muscle and adipose cells, IRS-1 and IRS-2 are the most important substrates. These substrates are located near the plasma membrane and recruit effector molecules to the area, such as PI3K which has been shown to take part in GLUT4 translocation to the plasma membrane.

The other pathway involves proto-oncoprotein c-Cbl.  Insulin stimulates a dimeric complex of c-Cbl and c-Cbl associated protein (CAP) to move into lipid rafts on the cell surface.  Phosphorylation of c-Cbl recruits to the lipid rafts an adaptor protein complex (CrkII) and an exchange factor (C3G) for GTPase TC10.  TC10 specifically localizes to lipid rafts. Thus, activation of TC10 by C3G is an insulin-dependent process which subsequently translocated GLUT4.  If this pathway gets inhibited, inhibition will likewise occur for insulin-stimulated GLUT4 translocation in adipocytes.

**Non-Insulin Mediated Stimulation**

Physical activity stimulates GLUT4 translocation to the plasma membrane in skeletal muscle.  This stimulation occurs via a mechanism independent from PI3K, which is necessary for the insulin-stimulated pathway.  Skeletal muscle contraction activates 5’-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) which is believed to translocate exercise-responsive GLUT4-containing vesicles to the cell surface to mediate glucose transport; this occurs to meet the increased energy demands of skeletal muscle during exercise.