Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are diuretic drugs with a wide variety of FDA-approved applications and have more recently been demonstrated to be beneficial for several other off-label clinical uses.

**FDA-Approved Indications**

- Elevated intraocular pressure (angle-closure and open-angle glaucoma)

- Pseudotumor cerebri

- Edema due to congestive heart failure

- Centrenchephalic epilepsies

- Altitude sickness prophylaxis

**Examples of Non-FDA-Approved Indications**

- Sleep apnea

- Cerebrospinal fluid leak

- Reversal of metabolic alkalosis in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

- Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy

In the kidneys, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs) result in the inhibition of bicarbonate uptake by the proximal tubule, resulting in the alkalization of urine. In the eyes, CAIs are classically used in the management of glaucoma due to their ability to reduce the secretion of aqueous humor, thereby lowering the intraocular pressure. Furthermore, CAIs are used for chronic open-angle glaucoma and acute angle-closure glaucoma before surgery.

The adverse effects of CAIs that researchers and patients have reported include fatigue, vomiting, nausea, and abdominal pain. Stevens-Johnson syndrome is a rare side effect.

CAIs may be used topically, orally, or through the intravenous route. The use of these drugs requires caution and routine monitoring in patients with decreased kidney or liver function. The dose ranges are different for glaucoma, altitude sickness, and diuresis, depending on the route of drug administration.