Clinicians should obtain a comprehensive history should when evaluating patients presenting with acute or chronic shoulder pain.  SLAP tears may present in a relatively nonspecific fashion and association with other shoulder pathologies.  Clinicians should inquire regarding certain history elements that may help differentiate SLAP tears from other shoulder injuries.

Pertinent elements in history taking to best elucidate the nature of a potential SLAP tear (or other associated shoulder injuries) include:

- Acute onset of “deep” shoulder pain

- Mechanical symptoms: popping, locking, catching with various movements and activity

- History of any sudden, jerking force to the shoulder with an associated onset of pain

- History of or current episodes of shoulder instability

- History of or current sport-specific participation

- Including the level of competition (e.g., professional, collegiate, recreational)
- Common SLAP-provoking sports include but are not limited to:

- Overhead sports (volleyball, baseball pitchers, javelin, swimming)


- History or current manual/physical laborer occupations

Characteristics of LHBT-associated pathologies have been previously described and may include any combination of the following:

- Atraumatic, insidious onset of anterior shoulder pain

- Symptom exacerbation with overhead activities

- Pain radiating down the anterior arm from the shoulder

- Clicking or audible popping reported in the setting of proximal biceps instability

- Pain at rest, pain at night

Additionally, a thorough history includes a detailed account of the patient’s occupational history and current status of employment, hand dominance, history of injury/trauma to the shoulder(s) and/or neck, and any relevant surgical history.

**Physical Examination Pearls**

**C-spine/Neck Exam**

Co-existing cervical radiculopathy should be ruled out in any situation where a neck and/or shoulder pathology is a consideration. Observation of neck posturing, muscular symmetry, palpable tenderness, and active/passive ROM should undergo evaluation. Special tests that are helpful in this regard include the Spurling maneuver, myelopathic testing, reflex testing, and a comprehensive neurovascular exam.

**Shoulder Exam**

Examiners should observe and compare bilateral shoulder girdles for any notable asymmetry, scapular posturing, muscle bulk comparison, or any atrophic changes. The skin should be observed for the presence of any previous surgical incisions, lacerations, scars, erythema, or induration.

Chronic instability patients will almost always exhibit at least a mild degree of asymmetry. The deltoid muscle often demonstrates atrophy in chronic dislocators. The findings can be rather subtle, especially in obese patients.

In the setting of chronic anterior instability, the clinician may appreciate a palpable anterior fullness. Upon observation, the posterior shoulder (when viewed from the patient's side) will be relatively flat relative to the anterior fullness. Chronic anterior and posterior instability patients may also exhibit corresponding posterior and anterior acromial prominences, respectively.

Scapulothoracic motion and scapular winging should also be evaluated during active and passive motion.

Following the observational component of the physical examination, the active and passive ROM are both documented; this may be limited in the setting of initial follow-up in the clinic after an acute instability event or the setting of any complex instability case, especially in the setting of glenoid bone loss.

In the setting of chronic anterior instability, the clinician should attempt to assess the current status of the axillary nerve, although chronic dislocators often exhibit normal deltoid function and internal and external rotator strength. Specific testing of the supraspinatus muscle can be difficult when passive ROM is limited. Any evidence of significant muscular weakness may hint at an underlying associated neurologic deficit.

A detailed sensory examination should take place in all acute and chronic instability patients.  In addition to axillary nerve function, motor function of the elbow, wrist, and hand should undergo an assessment to rule out the possibility of a brachial plexus injury associated with the dislocation. Distal pulses should be assessed at the wrist as well.

In older patients and the setting of suspected concomitant shoulder pathologies (e.g., rotator cuff injuries or biceps tendon pathology), specialized testing for these pathologies also merits consideration.

**Provocative Examination Testing/Maneuver:**

The available evidence of level I and II studies in the recent literature suggests that a combination of specific tests such as the Speed’s and uppercut test is recommended for the clinical detection of biceps tendon lesions.  Recent studies have reported on the diagnostic accuracy of specific tests concerning diagnosing SLAP tears:

**Speed’s Test:**

- Sensitivity: 32%

- Specificity: 75%

- A positive test consists of pain elicited in the bicipital groove when the patient attempts to forward elevate the shoulder against examiner resistance; the elbow is slightly flexed, and the forearm is supinated.

**Uppercut Test:**

- Sensitivity: 73%

- Specificity: 78%

- The involved shoulder is positioned at neutral, the elbow is flexed to 90 degrees, the forearm is supinated, and the patient makes a fist.  The examiner instructs the patient to perform a boxing “uppercut” punch while placing their hand over the patient’s fist to resist the upward motion. A positive test is a pain or a painful pop over the anterior shoulder near the bicipital groove region.

**Yergason’s Test:**

- Sensitivity: 43%

- Specificity: 79%

- The arm is stabilized against the patient’s trunk, and the elbow flexed to 90 degrees with the forearm pronated. The examiner manually resists supination while the patient also externally rotated the arm against resistance. A positive test is noted if the patient reports pain over the bicipital groove and/or subluxation of the LHB tendon.

**Bear-Hug Test:**

- Sensitivity: 79%

- Specificity: 60%

- The patient places their hand on the contralateral (normal) shoulder in a “self-hug” position. The palm is on the anterior aspect of the contralateral shoulder, with the elbow flexed to 90 degrees. The examiner applies a perpendicular external rotational force to try and lift the patient’s handoff of the shoulder.  A positive test results when the patient cannot hold the hand against the shoulder as the examiner applies an external rotation force

**Belly Press Test:**

- Sensitivity: 31%

- Specificity: 85%

- The examiner has the patient’s arm at 90 degrees of elbow flexion, and IR testing is performed by the patient pressing the palm of his/her hand against the belly, bringing the elbow in front of the plane of the trunk. The examiner initially supports the elbow, and a positive test occurs if the elbow does not maintain this position upon the examiner removing the supportive force.

**O’Brien/Active Compression Test:**

- Sensitivity: 38%

- Specificity: 61%

- The patient is standing, and the arm of interest is positioned at 90 degrees of forward flexion, 10 degrees of adduction, and internally rotated so the thumb points toward the floor. The examiner places his or her hand over the patient’s elbow while instructing the patient to resist the examiner’s downward force applied to the arm. This maneuver is repeated with the patient’s arm now rotated, so the palm faces the ceiling. A positive test is denoted by pain located at the joint line during the initial maneuver (thumb down/internal rotation) in conjunction with reported improvement or elimination of the pain during the subsequent maneuver (palm up/external rotation)

**Anterior Slide Test:**

- Sensitivity: 10%

- Specificity: 82%

- The patient stands with his or her hand of the involved arm placed on the ipsilateral hip with the thumb pointing posteriorly. The examiner places one hand on the joint line of the shoulder and the other hand on the elbow. The examiner then applies an axial load in an anterosuperior direction from the elbow to the shoulder. A positive test includes pain or a painful click on the anterior or posterior joint line.

**Supine Resistance Test:**

- Sensitivity: 80%

- Specificity: 69%

- The patient lies supine on the exam table with his or her arms resting in full elevation with the forearm and hand supported by the table. The palm is facing upward.  The examiner then applies a downward resistive force just distal to the elbow while asking the patient to perform a throwing motion.  The test registers positive only if it elicits pain deep inside the shoulder joint or at the shoulder's dorsal aspect along the joint line during the resisted movement. Performance of the test on the nonaffected shoulder should not elicit any pain.

**Mayo Shear Test (also known as the Modified O’Driscoll Test or the Modified Dynamic Labral Shear Test:**

- Sensitivity: 80%

- The patient stands with his or her involved arm flexed 90 degrees at the elbow and abducts the shoulder in the scapular plane to above 120 degrees. The examiner then applies terminal external rotation until resistance is appreciated. Next, the examiner applies a shear force through the shoulder joint by maintaining external rotation and horizontal abduction and lowering the arm from 120 to 60 degrees abduction. A positive test includes a reproduction of the pain and/or a painful click or catch in the joint line along the posterior joint line between 120 and 90 degrees of abduction