Patisiran is the first-ever RNA interference drug consisting of short, double-stranded interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) encapsulated in a lipid nanoparticle and targeted to inhibit hepatic synthesis of transthyretin, both the wild-type and mutant.

Patisiran is indicated for treating polyneuropathy associated with hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis (hATTR) in adults. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the United States of America approved this therapeutic usage in August 2018.

- Patisiran therapy induced a global clinical stabilization in cases of hATTR amyloidosis, along with mild to moderate improvements in some patients, even in advanced disease. According to the analysis of the Neuropathy Impairment Score (NIS), Neuropathy Impairment Score-lower limbs (NIS-LL), Norfolk QoL-Diabetic Neuropathy questionnaire (QoL-DN), and polyneuropathy disability (PND) score variability, the latent period of 6 months may exist before the clinical benefits of treatment become evident.

- Patisiran reduced serum TTR and stabilized or improved neurological function and quality of life in patients with hATTR who are currently on or have a history of prior therapy with tetramer stabilizer.

Patisiran is also used to treat following medical conditions without utility approval from the FDA.

- Restrictive cardiomyopathy of hATTR amyloidosis.
            In a prespecified subgroup of patients with heart involvement at baseline, patisiran improved cardiac parameters compared with placebo at month 18 in this clinical trial. It reduced the mean thickness of the left ventricular wall, global longitudinal strain (GLS), N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), and adverse cardiac outcomes, indicating that patisiran may stop or reverse the progression of manifestations of cardiac involvement in hATTR.
            Patisiran is associated with reductions in extracellular volume measured by cardiac magnetic resonance in patients with hATTR-CA. This finding indicates regression of cardiac amyloid burden.

- Wild type of ATTR (ATTRwt) amyloidosis.