# Continuing Education Activity

Mucinous carcinoma of the breast is a relatively rare subtype of breast cancer accounting for about 2% of all breast carcinomas. According to the latest WHO classification of tumors of the breast, mucinous carcinoma is classified as a special type of breast cancer. This activity describes the pathophysiology, etiology, and presentation of mucinous breast cancer and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the pathophysiology of mucinous breast cancer.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with mucinous breast cancer.
- Summarize the treatment options for mucinous breast cancer.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by mucinous breast cancer.

# Introduction

Mucinous carcinoma of the breast is a relatively rare subtype of breast cancer, accounting for about 2% of all breast carcinomas

- The pure type mucinous carcinoma.

- The mixed type mucinous carcinoma.

The pure type consists exclusively of tumor tissue with extracellular mucin production in over 90% of the tumor, while the mixed form also contains an infiltrating ductal epithelial component without mucin

# Etiology

The origin of mucinous breast cancer is multifactorial and involves diet, reproductive factors and hormones.

# Epidemiology

Mucinous breast carcinoma prevails in postmenopausal women with a median age of 70 years

# Pathophysiology

Transcriptomic studies have demonstrated that mucinous tumors are of luminal A molecular subtype

# Histopathology

**Macroscopic findings:**

Gross examination of mucinous carcinoma of the breast shows a glistening gelatinous lesion with pushing margins and a soft consistency that is readily recognizable. The tumors range in size from less than 1 cm to more than 20 cm (mean = 3 cm).

**Microscopic findings:**

Histologically, mucinous carcinoma is characterized by nests of cells floating in lakes of mucin partitioned by delicate fibrous septae containing capillary blood vessels. The cell clusters are variable in shape and size with an occasional tubular arrangement. Nuclear atypia is generally low in classic mucinous carcinoma, but in rare cases, atypia and mitoses may prevail

**Immunohistochemistry:**

Typically, mucinous carcinoma is positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors

# History and Physical

Mucinous carcinoma usually grows slowly and can reach a large size at the time of diagnosis. This can be explained by the fact that the mucinous content of the tumor does not feel firm or solid upon examination

# Evaluation

**Mammography:**

On mammography, circumscribed and lobulated breast lesions are common findings for a mucinous carcinoma. A circumscribed margin would favor the diagnosis of a pure mucinous carcinoma

**Ultrasonography:**

On ultrasonography, mucinous carcinoma is usually a complex mass with cystic and solid components microlobulation, vascularity, and distal enhancement. The histologic subtype of mucinous carcinoma can be predicted based on the echogenicity. Isoechoic masses are found in pure mucinous carcinoma, whereas hypoechoic masses are found in mixed mucinous carcinoma

**Magnetic resonance imaging:**

On an MRI, mucinous carcinoma has a lobular shape, rim or heterogeneous enhancement, a persistent pattern on the time-intensity curve, and homogeneous strongly high signal intensity on T2-weighted images

**Tissue biopsy:**

Tissue biopsy is mandatory in the evaluation of mucinous breast carcinoma. Tissue specimens can be obtained by core biopsy, fine needle aspiration cytology, and incisional or excisional biopsy.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of mucinous breast carcinoma is based on surgery associated with post-operative hormone therapy in hormone-responsive (ER/PR) tumors.

A recent study recommended axillary staging by sentinel lymph node biopsy and administration of adjuvant radiotherapy and hormone therapy after breast-conservation for mucinous carcinoma

Since most mucinous carcinomas are negative for the protein HER2/neu, they are not treated with trastuzumab. Trastuzumab is approved for both the treatment of advanced breast cancer and as adjuvant therapy for early-stage HER2- positive tumors

Some authors have stated that adjuvant chemotherapy can be omitted in cases with favorable risk factors

# Differential Diagnosis

**Histological differential diagnosis:**

Mucocele-like-lesion

Metastatic mucinous carcinoma

**Radiological differential diagnosis:**

Myxomatous fibroadenoma

# Treatment Planning

The following factors may impact treatment decisions:

Tumor biology: Since mucinous carcinoma is more prevalent in the older population, hence estrogen(ER) and progesterone receptors(PR) are expressed more often than in younger women. Similarly, there are lower rates of HER-2 overexpression. This impacts the selection of appropriate therapy.

General health status: Higher prevalence of comorbidity, frailty, and cognitive decline in elderly patients are considered limiting factors when selecting treatment.

Functional status: This refers to the ability to perform routine daily tasks. Presence of functional limitation is independently associated with worse life expectancy and hence determines the overall survival of the patients. Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (GCA) can be utilized to evaluate elderly patients to optimize mucinous cancer treatment.

# Staging

Staging of mucinous breast carcinoma is determined clinically by physical examination and imaging studies. The stage is determined pathologically by histological examination of the tumor and lymph nodes after surgery. The TNM classification system is used to classify mucinous breast carcinoma based on:

- Primary tumor size (T)

- Regional lymph nodes status (N)

- Distant metastasis (M)

The system that is most recently used is that of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (8th edition).

# Prognosis

Mucinous carcinoma has a favorable prognosis and infrequent lymphatic metastasis compared to invasive ductal carcinoma. Axillary lymph node metastases occur in 12%-14% of the cases

# Complications

Complications of breast mucinous carcinoma include:

- Axillary lymph node metastases

- Late distant metastases

- Recurrence after surgical excision

# Consultations

Surgical oncology

Oncology

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is important for women at age 40 and over to talk to a doctor, discuss the benefits and drawbacks of breast cancer screening and decide when to get screening. Women 40 to 74 years or some older healthy women may be offered a screening test with the mammogram. Some women who are at high risk (BRCA gene or first-degree relatives with breast cancer) may need to begin screening at a younger age.

9 out of 10 women with an abnormal mammogram turn out not to have breast cancer.

Many experts suggest a screening mammogram every 2 years.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Diagnosis of mucinous breast carcinoma needs an interprofessional approach involving a team that consists of a surgical oncologist, an oncologist, a pathologist, and a radiologist. Treatment involves a surgeon, specialty care nurses, pharmacists, and oncologists. Pharmacists review drug regimens and check for drug-drug interactions. Specialty care nurses are involved and should assist the clinical team in patient education, monitor treatment, and provided feedback to the team. After treatment of mucinous breast carcinoma, long-term follow up is necessary to detect local and distant relapse. [Level 5]