The clinical groups defined in Table 1 describe the various etiologies of PH. This section will delve into more etiological details of the various subgroups.

Genetic mutations are associated with various types of PH, including idiopathic PAH (IPAH), heritable PAH (HPAH), and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) associated with PAH. The patients with HPAH have an inheritable genetic mutation, while patients with IPAH have a genetic predisposition and the mutations are sporadic, and these groups are clinically indistinguishable.****The various mutations associated with IPAH/HPAH are BMPR2 (most common), SMAD1, SMAD 9, KCNK3, CAV1, and SOX17, while those associated with HHT are ALK1, ENG, and SMAD4.

The drugs/toxins that have been studied to definitely cause PAH to include aminorex, fenfluramine, dexfenfluramine, benfluorex, methamphetamines, dasatinib, and toxic rapeseed oil. Some drugs/toxins can possibly cause PAH, including cocaine, phenylpropanolamine, L-tryptophan, St. John's wort, amphetamines, interferon -α and -β, alkylating agents, bosutinib, direct-acting antivirals against hepatitis C, leflunomide, and indirubin.****Various connective tissue diseases (CTD) are known to cause PAH, including systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, Raynaud's disease, and mixed connective tissue disease. Among these, systemic sclerosis is the most notorious for causing PAH.

Pulmonary hypertension associated with congenital heart disease (PH-CHD) is classified into CHD that causes Eisenmenger syndrome, PAH associated with prevalent systemic-to-pulmonary shunts, PAH with small/coincidental defects, and PAH after defect correction.

Hypoventilation syndromes in group 3 comprise conditions causing sleep-disordered breathing, while hypoxia without hypoventilation is seen at high altitudes. In patients with Group 4, apart from chronic thromboembolic disease, the other causes include sarcoma, other malignant tumors such as renal carcinoma, uterine carcinoma, testicular germ cell tumors, as well as nonmalignant tumors such as leiomyoma, arteritis without connective tissue disease, congenital pulmonary artery stenoses and hydatidosis that can cause obstructions in the pulmonary artery leading to PH.

In group 5, the hematological disorders causing PH include chronic hemolytic anemia and myeloproliferative disorders. The systemic diseases that can cause PH include pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis, neurofibromatosis type 1, and sarcoidosis. Glycogen storage diseases and Gaucher disease are metabolic disorders that can cause PH.