If the patient can provide history, there are several important pieces of information to obtain. These include time of ingestion, amount ingested, as well as formulation. The later is important as it may affect the rate of absorption. It is also critical to determine if there were any other substances ingested as this may complicate treatment and increase mortality. Finally, determine whether this was accidental or intentional. This information should be corroborated by family, friends, or EMS personnel.

In an acute salicylate overdose, the onset of symptoms will occur within 3 to 8 hours. The severity of symptoms is dependent on the amount ingested. For mild ingestions (salicylate levels 40 to 80 mg/dL) nausea, vomiting, and generalized abdominal pain are common. Tachypnea is usually present. Headaches and dizziness may also occur. The classic finding of tinnitus may also be present. However, this can occur at lower, non-toxic levels.

Patients with moderate salicylate toxicity (80 to 100 mg/dL) will experience more severe neurological symptoms. These can include confusion, slurred speech, and hallucinations. Tachypnea is more pronounced and is accompanied by tachycardia and orthostatic hypotension. Expect these symptoms 6 to 18 hours after ingestion.

Salicylate levels greater than 100 mg/dL are considered severe toxicity and occur 12 to 24 hours after ingestion. Damage to the basement membranes will cause cerebral and pulmonary edema. Patients may become obtunded and develop seizures. Hypoventilation may replace hyperventilation, which is concerning for impending respiratory failure. Endotracheal intubation, while not ideal for the metabolic disorders, may be necessary for airway protection. Hypotension due to acidosis and hypovolemia is possible. Cardiac dysrhythmias may occur. Sinus tachycardia is the most common. Cardiac arrest may also occur with asystole being the most common rhythm.

Patients suffering from chronic salicylate toxicity will experience similar symptoms as acute toxicity but at lower levels. Pediatric patients will progress from mild symptoms to severe symptoms more quickly than adults.