Both vaccines promote active immunization against the serotypes of the conjugate and capsular polysaccharides contained in the formulation of the vaccine. Immunity develops approximately 2 to 3 weeks after vaccination and lasts five years. However, in children and the elderly, re-immunization may be necessary sooner.

**PCV13**

This vaccine formulation demonstrates improved antibody response compared to the pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine because it contains purified capsular polysaccharides of pneumococcal serotypes conjugated to a carrier protein. PCV 13 actively immunizes against invasive disease caused by S. pneumoniae capsular serotypes 1, 3, 4, 5, 6B, 6A, 7F, 9V, 14, 18C, 19A, 19F, and 23F. All of the serotypes are individually conjugated to a CRM197 protein.

**PCV15**

PCV15 contains polysaccharide serotypes 22F and 33F in addition to the PCV13 serotypes, conjugated to genetically detoxified diphtheria toxin. The randomized controlled trial in adults ≥50 years demonstrated that PCV15 met the noninferiority criteria compared with PCV13 for the 13 shared serotypes. PCV15 also had statistically significant responses for serotype three and PCV15-unique serotypes 22F and 33F. Another randomized controlled trial included healthy infants aged 42 to 90 days to assess the interchangeable use of PCV13 and PCV15. IgG geometric mean concentration for the 13 shared serotypes estimated was similar to those in children immunized with PCV13. In PCV-naive or partially vaccinated in the age group 7 months–17 years who received catch-up PCV doses, PCV15 elicited IgG concentrations similar to PCV13 for the 13 shared serotypes. PCV15 elicited higher IgG geometric mean concentration for 6 of 13 shared serotypes and the two unique serotypes in children with sickle cell disease. Additionally, among children with HIV infection, PCV15 produced higher IgG concentrations for two unique serotypes and 8 of 13 shared serotypes compared with PCV13.

**PCV20**

PCV20 contains serotypes 8, 10A, 11A, 12F, 15B, 22F, and 33F, in addition to PCV13, conjugated to detoxified diphtheria toxin. PCV20 produced a strong immune response to all 20 vaccine serotypes in adults 18–49 years. PCV20 provides enhanced protection which is evident based on an opsonophagocytic activity assay.

**PPSV 23**

This vaccine formulation is the first pneumococcal vaccine formulated from a capsular polysaccharide. PPSV 23 contains 23 capsular polysaccharide types of S. pneumoniae, representing at least 85% to 90% of pneumococcal disease isolates in the United States. It has shown a 50% to 80% efficacy in preventing invasive pneumococcal disease in adults. S. Pneumoniae serotypes are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6B, 7F, 8, 9V, 9N, 10A, 11A, 12F, 14, 15B, 17F, 18C, 19A, 19F, 20, 22F, 23F, and 33F.