Establishing the epidemiology of aggression or behavioral disturbances can be challenging as it differs by age group, general reasons for aggression, confounding interactions, environmental factors, as well as also severity that cannot be objectively and uniformly measured. The most researched places where aggression occurs are long-term care facilities, where professionals can monitor a patient’s day-to-day behavioral changes. Hence, these facilities are ideal for research because confounding factors can be minimized. Agitation and aggressive behaviors are reported in 33% of community-dwelling patients with dementia and 80% of institutionalized patients with dementia. The younger age group (16 to 19 years) experienced more aggression than the older age group (20 to 26 years). Research indicates a range in prevalence for challenging behaviors, such as self-injury and aggression, of 10% to 20% of all people with intellectual disability. The probability of violent behavior among patients with mental disorders is greater than the probability in the general population. Historically, the consensus was that mental disorders led to aggression and violence. However, modern epidemiological studies have shown that mental disorders have a higher relative risk of aggression and violence, but they are not the sole reason for aggression. A study from Sweden showed that 1 out of 20 patients who have mental disease commit violent crimes including assaults. These findings have been replicated globally in various studies. A Finnish study found that patients with schizophrenia and reported alcohol use were about 25 times more likely (95% CI, 6.1-97.5) to commit violent crimes than mentally healthy patients. Aggression is a global problem that transcends cultures, races, and environments.