Diagnosis of pars planitis is based on clinical findings. The presence of more vitreous cells than anterior chamber cells, vitreous snowballs, and the presence of pars plana exudates suggest pars planitis. There may be peripheral vascular sheathing and/or cystoid macular edema/ epiretinal membrane.

Clinical evaluation includes the measurement of visual acuity, intraocular pressure, and slit lamp examination. All patient with pars planitis should be evaluated with a thorough peripheral retinal examination with scleral depression. Chest x-ray or CECT (contrast-enhanced computed tomography) scan of the chest may be done to evaluate for the presence of sarcoidosis and tuberculosis. Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level may be checked. This may be elevated in patients with sarcoidosis.

Other investigations may include complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) or rapid plasma reagin test, Mantoux,  and serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

In cases with extensive vitritis, infective causes including toxoplasmosis, acute retinal necrosis, and endophthalmitis must be ruled out before starting steroid therapy.

In very elderly patients with vitritis/vitreous haze and no cystoid macular edema, primary intraocular lymphoma should be ruled out.

Fluorescein angiography will show the extent of vasculitis and show areas of retinal nonperfusion and neovascularization. Optical coherence tomography will show the presence of macular edema, epiretinal membrane, and vitreoretinal traction.

In occasional cases with severe vitreal infiltration, when posterior uveitis, retinitis, endophthalmitis, or tumors are difficult to exclude, a diagnostic vitrectomy may be performed.