Management of cholestatic jaundice widely depends upon underlying etiology and type of cholestasis. Usually, the mainstay of obstructive cholestasis is biliary decompression

**Biliary Decompression**

- In common bile duct stones, endoscopic sphincterotomy with or without stent placement can relieve the obstruction. Similarly, in benign CBD strictures, stricture dilation and stent placement can relieve the obstruction.

- In malignant obstruction, depending upon the stage of disease and the operative candidacy of the patient, surgical resection of the obstructive lesion is preferred. If complete resection is not possible, surgical hepaticojejunostomy and the Roux-en-Y bypass is an option. If a patient is not a surgical candidate, either palliative CBD stent is placed endoscopically (usually metal stent). If endoscopic stent placement is not successful, a percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography tube can be placed for biliary decompression. Antibiotics are considered in pre and post biliary decompression phase to reduce the risk of sepsis.

**Medical Management**

**Pruritus
**

In cases of obstructive physiology, pruritus is relieved within 24 to 48 hours of biliary decompression. For other cases. The following medications can be attempted for symptomatic control.

Cholestyramine: Should be taken with breakfast. Pruritus is the least in the morning as pruritus factor is stored in gallbladder overnight during the morning. The dose can be repeated after breakfast depending upon response. Required dose can vary from 4 gm daily to 12 gm maximum dose daily. Patients should be kept on the minimal required dose to avoid side effects such as nausea and oily stool. Fat-soluble vitamins should be supplemented.

Ursodeoxycholic acid can be used in doses of 13 to 15 mg/kg per day to reduce itching in patients with cholestasis due to PBC and possibly in drug-associated cholestasis. Use is not studied in other causes of cholestasis.

Antihistamine medications can be used especially at night mostly for sedative effect.

Phenobarbitone can be used to relieve itching resistant to other modes of therapy.

Naloxone is an opioid antagonist is currently experimental has shown to relieve itching due to cholestasis in a randomized control trial.

Non-pharmacological treatment options include bright light therapy (based on the circadian pattern of pruritus associated with cholestasis) and plasmapheresis.

Surgical resection of greater than 15% of terminal ileum to prevent enterohepatic circulation (bile salt reabsorption) can be effective in intractable pruritus.

Finally, in cases of PBC/PSC and other causes leading to end-stage liver disease, liver transplantation can cure intractable pruritus.