Roughly half of all symptomatic renal calculi are potentially preventable if patients were properly diagnosed and treated for their underlying chemical stone-promoting risk factors.

There may be no other body of chemistry tests in any branch of medical practice that is potentially as useful and so often indicated, yet infrequently utilized, as the 24-hour urine test for nephrolithiasis prophylaxis. In a large series of almost 29,000 high-risk stone formers, only 7.4% of patients underwent 24-hour urine testing within six months of their kidney stone. Nephrolithiasis patients were three times more likely to do 24-hour urine testing if they were treated by a nephrologist or urologist compared to a primary care physician. Repeat testing within six months of the initial 24-hour urine test, which is highly recommended to verify treatment efficacy and compliance, was only 16%.

There are multiple reasons for this. Like all 24-hour urine collection tests, doing the collection itself is often considered tedious by patients as it drastically limits their activities on the day of the specimen collection. Portions of the urinary chemistry are sometimes sent to different reference laboratories, often leading to unacceptable delays and incomplete results that cannot be easily interpreted. The most critical results are often buried amid paragraphs of obligatory boilerplate, making it almost impossible to identify the most critical results. Even worse, results are often presented as 24-hour totals that are either "high or low" or "normal or abnormal" without regard for concentration, pH, or what "optimal" levels of these chemistries would be because providing such information is not readily available or legally required.

Once the critical data is available, analysis and treatment selection still need to be done. Evaluation and interpretation of the laboratory results are often erroneously perceived as overly complex and complicated. There are many different ways the various chemistry reference laboratories hide the data or otherwise make it confusing. Even for experienced experts, finding and clarifying critical data can be challenging.

The purpose of this review is to simplify the analysis and evaluation of 24-hour urine collections and treatment selection, so local practitioners will be more comfortable using and interpreting this important test for their nephrolithiasis patients.