**BI is most often diagnosed pertaining to the following midsagittal craniovertebral parameters:**

- Chamberlain's line-running from the posterior aspect of the hard palate and the posterior margin of the foramen magnum

- McGregor's line-running from the posterior margin of the hard palate to the lowest aspect of the squama occipitalis (as the posterior edge of the foramen magnum could not always be visualized)

- McRae's line – connotes the anteroposterior line at the foramen magnum

The criteria for diagnosis are the tip of the dens lying >5 mm above Chamberlain's Line, >7 mm above McGregor's Line, or McRae's line.

**Based on Atlantodens interval (ADI):**

- Type 1- when ADI > 3 mm in adults or ADI > 5 mm in children or

- Type 2- when ADI ≤ 3 mm in adults or ADI ≤ 5 mm in children.

**Recently, BI has been divided into:**

- Group A BI- the tip of the odontoid process is above the Chamberlain line, McRae line, and Wackenheim's clival line.

- Group B BI- the odontoid process and clivus remained anatomically aligned, and the tip of the odontoid process is above Chamberlain's line but below McRae's and Wackenheim's lines.

**A few of the essential radiological parameters utilized during the management of patients with BI include:**

- Clivus length and basal angle play a role in the pathophysiology of BI and CM.

- The odontoid tip either intersects the minimum perpendicular distance from the odontoid tip to the palate-internal occipital protuberance (P-IOP) line or is < 9 mm below the P-IOP line (in Goel group A and B BI, respectively).

- Clivus slope (CS) is the angle between the Wackenheim line and the horizontal line. A reduction in the CS affects the postoperative PRO-JOA score of BI patients.

- The foramen magnum angle (FMA) between Chamberlain's line and McGregor's line, which characterizes the tilt of the FM, is almost 22 degrees in BI (versus six degrees in normal cohorts) due to clivus hypogenesis.

- Clivus line violation (CLV) is the most widely used indicator in the diagnosis of BI, with a value of CLV ≥ 3 mm currently defining BI.

- Basilar invagination usually shows a decrease in clivus axis angle (CAA), which could give rise to progressive neural compression.

- The clivopalatal angle (CPA) is the angle between the Wackenheim line and the tangent line of the hard palate plane and can be applied intraoperatively for correcting sagittal alignment.

- The distance of the odontoid apex to Chamberlain's line (DOCL) and Boogaard's angle (BOA) ≥ 136 degrees has been observed to have the highest diagnostic accuracy for type B BI.

- The minimum perpendicular distance from the odontoid tip to the palate-internal occipital protuberance (P-IOP) has the advantage of diagnosing both types of BI while comparing to Boogards's angle. This is not affected by the position of the head.

- Postoperative Boogaard's angle (BoA) was the most important predictor of BI prognosis.

- Cervicomedullary angle (CMA) in normal patients ranges from 139.0 to 175.5 degrees, with an average of 158.5 degrees. The CMA is considered an effective index to assess the grade of anterior spinal cord compression.

- The clivus axial angle (CXA) was divided by the Chamberlain line into clivus tilt (CT) and axial tilt (AT). The difference between actual AT and its ideal value (about 94 degrees) is the optimal target of CXA correction to decompress neural elements ventrally and recover better subaxial cervical lordosis.

Dynamic CT imaging help assess CVJ instability.

Preoperative CT angiography (CTA) is highly recommended to identify any anomalous variations such as "kissing" carotids, high riding vertebral, and an anomalous right vertebral artery (VA) to minimize the risk of intraoperative injury.

Multi-positional MRI is reliable imaging to evaluate the level of cord compression, T2 signal changes, Chiari malformation, and syringomyelia.