**Adult Dosing**

Natalizumab is administered via intravenous infusions every 28 days at a TOUCH Prescribing Program approved site. The recommended dose is 300 mg/15 mL (20 mg/mL); however, this dose can be modified at the treating physician's discretion. The infusion takes 1 hour, and the patient is then monitored closely by staff for one more hour for any significant side effects. Natalizumab should not be given as an intravenous bolus or push. The drug should be administered within 8 hours of preparation.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic/Renal Impairment**

Pharmacokinetic parameters of natalizumab in patients with hepatic or renal impairment have not been studied.

**Pediatric Considerations**

Clinical studies of natalizumab did not include pediatric patients under 18 years to determine whether they are safe and effective in treating patients with multiple sclerosis or Crohn's disease. Hence it is not indicated for use in these patients.

**Geriatric Considerations**

Safety and effectiveness in patients with multiple sclerosis or Crohn's disease have not been established as clinical trials had insufficient patients from this age group.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

There are inadequate data on the risk of major congenital disabilities, miscarriage, or other adverse maternal outcomes associated with the administration of natalizumab in pregnant women. In post-marketing surveillance, adverse fetal outcomes of neonatal thrombocytopenia, sometimes associated with anemia, have been reported. Monitor complete blood count in neonates with maternal exposure to natalizumab in utero.

**Lactation/Breastfeeding Considerations**

Natalizumab is excreted in human breast milk. However, there is no data on the adverse effects of this exposure on maternal milk production and effects on the breastfed infant. Therefore, the developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered, along with the mother's clinical requirement for natalizumab and potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from natalizumab and the underlying maternal condition.