COPD is a chronic disease that results in the loss of lung function and, ultimately, the development of life-threatening complications if left untreated. Tiotropium has numerous benefits as maintenance therapy in patients with COPD, and it is crucial that physicians and pharmacists carefully educate patients about their medication adherence and compliance with chronic therapy in addition to describing the adverse side effects of tiotropium. Patient education should include teaching patients the difference between maintenance and rescue inhaler therapies. As tiotropium is a maintenance therapy for COPD and asthma, patients must understand that tiotropium offers no rescue benefits in an acute exacerbation of COPD or bronchospasm. Physicians, pharmacists, nursing staff, and other providers should correctly demonstrate the assembling and priming of a tiotropium inhaler to patients as this may be challenging to patients who have never used an inhaler device before. A provider's ability to teach and demonstrate to a patient the proper use of the inhaler device plays a critical role in medication efficacy.

While smoking remains among the leading causes of COPD in the United States, clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists should assess for cigarette smoking during the treatment of COPD. Healthcare providers should encourage smoking cessation, which may decrease the mortality and risk of complications in patients with COPD. Tiotropium therapy is not described to have interactions with cigarette smoking, although it is well established that smoking may alter the metabolism of medications in the liver.

When the clinician decides to use tiotropium, they should consult with a pharmacist regarding dosing, potential drug interactions, and possible alternatives. Nursing should also be involved, as they will have the opportunity to follow up with the patient and check for treatment efficacy and adverse reactions. Respiratory therapists may also be on the case and report their findings to the rest of the team as treatment progresses. As described above, tiotropium therapy requires a collaborative interprofessional effort between physicians, nurses, and pharmacists to ensure patient compliance and optimal therapeutic outcomes. [Level 5]