A thorough history and physical examination must be obtained along with a family history. Laboratory evaluation should include urinalysis (UA), urine microscopy, and renal function panel. Individuals with Alport syndrome may develop symptoms of hematuria, proteinuria, edema, hypertension, progressive decline in renal functions, and eventual ESRD. Over time, the symptoms worsen, and the patients experience worsening proteinuria, hypertension, a decline in GFR, and the development of ESRD. The time for the development of ESRD is around 16 to 35 years of age. They can also present with gross hematuria following an upper respiratory tract infection.

During late childhood, people with Alport syndrome frequently develop bilateral sensorineural hearing loss caused by abnormalities of type 4 collagen in the inner ear.

Multiple ocular findings can be seen in patients with Alport syndrome. Affected individuals may have a cone-shaped lens (anterior lenticonus), leading to abnormal refraction and decreased visual acuity. Other abnormalities include subcapsular cataracts, abnormal pigmentary changes in the retina with yellow or white flecks (dot-and-fleck retinopathy), posterior polymorphous dystrophy, and corneal erosions.

The following are the features in the history and examination, system-wise:

**Renal**

- Gross or microscopic hematuria is the commonest and earliest sign of Alport syndrome.

- Proteinuria is generally absent in childhood but ultimately develops in males with XLAS and male and female patients with ARAS.

- Incidence and severity increase with age and the extent of kidney failure.

- Hypertension develops by the second decade of life.

- Edema and nephrotic syndrome are observed in 30 to 40% of young patients with Alport syndrome; however, they are uncommon in early childhood.

- With the onset of kidney insufficiency, chronic anemia and osteodystrophy may manifest.

**Hearing**

- Sensorineural hearing loss is a characteristic feature observed commonly, but not universally, in Alport syndrome. Hearing loss is never congenital. Bilateral, high-frequency sensorineural deafness usually begins in late childhood or early adolescence, before the onset of kidney failure. Audiometry is an important tool to diagnose hearing loss at the beginning of the disease.

- As hearing loss progresses, patients require hearing aids.

- Hearing loss is always associated with renal involvement.

- Approximately 50% of male patients with XLAS have sensorineural hearing impairment by the age of 25 years, and around 90% are deaf by 40 years.

**Ocular**

- Anterior lenticonus, occurring in around 25% of patients with XLAS, is a characteristic feature of Alport syndrome. In this condition, the lens conically protrudes into the anterior chamber due to a thin basement membrane of the lens capsule.

- Anterior lenticonus is generally not present at birth and is manifested by a slow worsening of vision, needing patients to change the prescription of their glasses frequently.

- Anterior lenticonus is diagnosed by slit lamp examination.

- Ultrastructure assessment of the anterior lens capsule with the help of electron microscopy confirms Alport syndrome.

- Dot-and-fleck retinopathy is the commonest ocular manifestation of Alport syndrome, occurring in around 85% of males with XLAS. Rarely seen in childhood, it typically appears at the onset of kidney failure. It is usually asymptomatic. Numerous white and yellow dots and flecks occur around the macula in this condition. There is foveal sparing, but peripheries can get involved. Typically, dot-and-fleck retinopathy will not fluoresce with angiography.

- Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy is rare in Alport syndrome. Mostly, patients are asymptomatic, but some may develop gradually progressive visual impairment. A rare feature of Alport syndrome, it manifests as clear vesicles on the endothelial surface of the cornea. It is generally bilateral but can be unilateral.

- The mutation in the COL4A5 gene rarely causes severe temporal macular thinning, a feature associated with XLAS.

- Giant macular holes have been reported in Alport syndrome case reports. The very large dimensions of macular holes were suggestive of a bad prognosis regarding the closure of the hole.

**Leiomyomatosis**

- Diffuse leiomyomatosis of the tracheobronchial tree and esophagus has been observed in some families with Alport syndrome.