# Continuing Education Activity

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is one of the less known drug-resistant bacteria that can cause challenging infections. This activity reviews the epidemiology of this organism as well as the risk factors of developing these infections. It also illustrates the pathophysiology and virulence factors of this pathogen and its relation with the clinical picture. It describes the modern evaluation and up-to-date treatment for the infections caused by this organism, as well as their estimated prognosis. Further, it highlights the role of the interprofessional team in case management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the risk factors for developing Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections.
- Describe the epidemiology and statistical data of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections.
- Outline the evaluation of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection cases and the challenges encountered.
- Summarize the recommended treatment by interprofessional team and prevention modalities for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections.

# Introduction

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is a gram-negative bacillus, initially called Bacterium bookeri, when it was first identified in 1943 from a specimen of human pleural fluid.Pseudomonas maltophilia in 1961, then reassigned to the gammaproteobacteria class as Xanthomonas maltophilia in 1983, and eventually classified as a Stenotrophomonas in 199.

S. maltophilia can be considered a “newly emerging pathogen of concern” that is being isolated more frequently.

# Etiology

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, a non-fermenting gram-negative rod, is the third most common after Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter and similar to Achromobacter xylosoxidans and Burkholderia cepacia.

Risk factors for this infection include chronic respiratory diseases, especially cystic fibrosis, hematologic malignancy, chemotherapy-induced neutropenia, organ transplant patients, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, hemodialysis patients, and neonates.

These empiric broad-spectrum antimicrobials usually do not cover this particular pathogen, especially carbapenems, although no specific predominance was identified with them over other antimicrobials.

# Epidemiology

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia prevalent.

More importantly, it can be found in multiple healthcare settings, such as hospital tap water faucets, sinks, shower outlets, air-cooling systems, ice-making and soda fountain machines, disinfectant solutions, intravenous fluids, catheters, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) containing blood collection tubes, blood gas analyzers, dialysis machines, intra-aortic balloon pumps, nebulizers, oxygen humidifiers, breathing circuits, scopes, dental equipment, lens care systems, and the hands of healthcare workers.

Most Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections are, in fact, nosocomial, and many outbreaks have been reported within the previous years in hospitals and intensive care units.

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is estimated to be the most common carbapenem-resistant gram-negative bacterial cause of bloodstream infections in US hospitals, causing about 1% of nosocomial bacteremia cases.

# Pathophysiology

Although previously thought to have limited virulence, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia has shown to possess different powerful virulence factors that are believed to be present in all environmental isolates without any specific evolutionary branching, similar to Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

The first noteworthy virulence factor is its ability to form a biofilm, which was demonstrated around 1996.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia to firmly adhere to both animate surfaces such as the respiratory epithelial tissue and inanimate surfaces such as ventilation tubes and circuits.

Often, the biofilms are polymicrobial and contain other organisms that benefit from the same advantages. The spgM gene was recognized to promote high biofilm production by isolates, along with several other genes.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia in biofilms was also shown to tolerate a wide range of pH, nutrient scarcity, and exposure to free radicals.

Second, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is typically intrinsically resistant to multiple and broad-spectrum antibiotic agents.

Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance is mediated through the target site modification genes sul1 and dfrA through class 1 integrons, as well as sul2 gene through insertion sequence common region elements.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia can both acquire and transfer antibiotic and heavy metal resistance mechanisms with other pathogens if they co-exist, such as the transfer of the beta-lactamases to previously susceptible Pseudomonas isolates.

Third, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia utilizes different virulence exoenzymes, such as elastase, gelatinase, hyaluronidase, proteases, lipases, DNase, RNase, and mucinase, for tissue invasion and escaping the host immunity.

Fourth, in chronic infections, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is capable of forming small-colony variants, which are slowly growing and sometimes challenging to detect.

# History and Physical

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections usually occur as a nosocomial infection, though community-acquired infections have also been reported.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is that its clinical manifestations are non-specific and almost cannot be distinguished from other infections. As mentioned above, it is, therefore, essential to identify the most vulnerable population to such infection, most importantly the immunocompromised population.

It is crucial to differentiate between non-invasive colonization from non-sterile samples and an actual infection that warrants treatment, mainly by the clinical judgment on the symptoms, signs, laboratory, and radiographic evidence of infection.

The most common isolates were reported from respiratory infections, namely pneumonia cases, whether sputum or bronchioalveolar lavage cultures, at 55% of the total infections.

The second most common form of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections is bacteremia, at 33% of the infections.Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, and Enterococcus faecalis.

There have been less commonly reported cases of other sites of infection, such as skin and soft tissue infections, at 7.8% of the total infections, most notably wound infections, metastatic cellulitis, and ecthyma gangrenosum.

# Evaluation

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia easily grows on standard culture media, either as a single isolate or mixed with other culture growths like Pseudomonas aeruginosa.Pseudomonas in having opaque flat surfaces with uneven borders. Selective media were shown to be better in isolating Stenotrophomonas maltophilia from non-sterile samples and usually contain imipenem, vancomycin, amphotericin-B, and mannitol/bromothymol blue as an indicator.

For in vitro laboratory identification, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is a strict aerobe that is usually oxidase negative, though it was shown that up to 20% could show positive oxidase activity.Burkholderia cepacia-complex, Achromobacter xylosoxidans, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Bordetella bronchiseptica an identification challenge.

Another diagnostic challenge involves antibiotic susceptibility testing due to difficulties in setting standard minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) breakpoints for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia through different methods.

Nucleic-acid amplification testing (NAAT) and species-specific 23S rRNA-directed polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques are also well used for identification successfully with almost 100% sensitivity and specificity when available.

Chest x-rays may reveal lobar or lobular infiltrates in pneumonia cases, either unilateral or bilateral, with uncommon pleural effusions or cavitary lesions on rare occasions.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment with specific antibiotics is required when evidence for a true Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection is established or in critically sick patients with a Stenotrophomonas maltophilia growth until further data are available. Treatment recommendations mostly come from in vitro studies, retrospective studies, non-randomized clinical trials, and expert opinions.

The first-line treatment is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, which has been the recommended empiric single agent against Stenotrophomonas maltophilia for many years.in vitro data suggesting bacteriostatic activity against Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is recommended at high doses at 15 mg/kg or more of the trimethoprim component, as used for severe Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia.

One recent study from Mexico showed an 80% resistance rate to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole in a combination of environmental and clinical isolates from Mexico.

Alternatives treatments are the bacteriocidal fluoroquinolones, with up to 80-90% susceptibility rates, because of their specific biofilm active properties and their high concentration in the lungs.

For second-line treatments, minocycline and tigecycline have been reported to have good effectiveness against many isolates at around 80% to 100% susceptibility rate even for isolates resistant to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections

Resistance to many of these antimicrobials and the co-existence of multiple resistances together are being reported at higher rates in the literature, which creates the need for new agents and regimens to be utilized.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia.

Eravacycline, omadacycline, and delafloxacin have demonstrated good in-vitro activity as well for their respective infection indications.Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia in recent reports. Combinations of antimicrobials have been studied with good synergistic promising results, including trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole/ciprofloxacin, ceftazidime/levofloxacin, ticarcillin-clavulanate/trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ticarcillin-clavulanate/aztreonam, tigecycline/colistin, colistin/rifampicin, ceftazidime/minocycline, levofloxacin/erythromycin, and tigecycline/fosfomycin.

Since some isolates showed resistance to all known tested antimicrobials, new treatment approaches and modalities are currently being studied, such as aerosolized antimicrobials (colistin and levofloxacin), bacteriophage therapy, efflux pump inhibitors, quorum sensing interference (quorum quenching), antimicrobial peptides like the cathelicidin-derived ones, silver or selenium nanoparticles, cationic compounds, plant oils, green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate, and using Bdellovivrio exovorus as a bacterial predator.

The typical duration of antimicrobial courses for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia pneumonia is usually 7 days, which can be extended to 10 to 14 days in immunosuppressed patients. Bacteremia cases, on the other hand, are generally treated for 14 days total.

Source control is essential in certain cases for successful treatment, such as central venous catheter removal, infected metal hardware retrieval, wounds debridement, conjunctival autografting, and collections drainage.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Other Stenotrophomonas species typically do not cause infections in humans.

- Other gram-negative non-fermenters like Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, Achromobacter xylosoxidans, and Burkholderia cepacia-complex, can be misidentified as, co-exist with, or be responsible for similar infections to Stenotrophomonas maltophilia.

- Other more common organisms should be considered first with each infection according to the clinical picture.

# Prognosis

There have been controversial data about the high mortality associations with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. The crude mortality rate is estimated to be around 14% to 69% of cases.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections was up to 37.5%.

It was also shown that colonization with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia in patients undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants was associated with significantly higher non-relapse mortality, mainly secondary to severe infections.

# Complications

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia outbreaks can occur in hospitals and critical care units.

Infections with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia have been associated with worsening lung functions in cystic fibrosis patients.

Bacteremia cases can be complicated by disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) and purpura fulminans in severe cases.

The aforementioned complications, morbidities, and mortalities, and economic burden highlight the importance of infection prevention.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is an intrinsically multidrug-resistant bacteria that usually infects patients with weak immunity. It is often uneasy about treating, given the limited options of antibiotics that can work against it. Always seek your physician’s help to answer any questions about this infection since information about it is not readily available to the public. Patients should mention to their provider if they have allergies to the antibiotic co-trimoxazole since it is usually involved in the treatment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

All interprofessional healthcare team members need to have good communication regarding the treatment plan for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. This includes the clinicians (including mid-level practitioners), residents, infectious diseases consultants, nurses, pharmacists, and the infection prevention team. By coordinating treatment efforts and sharing information about the case, patient outcomes will be improved with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]

Antibiotic stewardship programs are also critical in preventing and treating Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infections by limiting the unnecessary use of broad-spectrum empiric antimicrobials to the minimum.

Strict infection prevention measures are also to be implemented and stressed to all team members, including hand hygiene, central venous line insertion precautions, appropriate disposal of potentially contaminated solutions, and proper handling and disinfection of medical equipment.

Environmental sampling, especially in outbreak situations, is important to identify potential sources. Maintenance of the water supplies, water filtration, and copper-silver ionization for plumbing systems disinfection is recommended to limit the transmission.