According to the NCSBN, public health, welfare, and safety of the public are protected by nursing regulation, which is found in the NPA.

**Definitions**

The NPA is the law for governing nursing practice in each state and is used for guidance to action. Therefore, the NPA has terms and phrases clearly defined for the state boards of nursing to use for enforcement. There are terms that are established for understanding among legislators and citizens.[Russel KA] For example, the California Board of Registered Nursing defines “Nurse Practitioner” as an individual with a registered nurse license that has advanced nursing education, has acquired additional educational preparation and skills, meets the certification requirements to manage health-illness needs.

**Authority of the BON**

The BON has the authority and power to regulate nursing practice utilizing the language stipulated in the NPA. It is also the responsibility of the BON to protect the US citizens’ health, safety, and welfare against substandard nursing care. Memberships in the BON are generally appointed by the governor or senators with the recommendations from various professional organizations within the state or territory.[Russel KA] The BON members may include nurses, doctors, attorneys, and public members. The BON office may include nurses, attorneys, and administrative staff, who have investigative duties, and are not members of the BON. The BON’s duties generally include:

- Making, amending and enforcing regulations

- Setting standards in nursing education

- Setting licensure fees

- Ensuring criminal background check

- Providing license to applicants

- Ensuring nurses are updated with continuing education

- Collecting and analyzing nursing workforce data

- Carrying out disciplinary processes

**Educational Program Standards**

Nursing regulation requires agencies, such as hospitals, health clinics, and nursing schools, to work together to ensure patient safety and education of nurses is accomplished, which serves the best interests of the principle of public protection. Standards on prelicensure nursing education and clinical learning experiences are defined in the NPA and used for accreditation purposes to evaluate the nursing educational programs. Language may include curriculum specifics, faculty qualifications, and data collection of success in the nursing board examination.

**Standards and Scope of Nursing Practice**

Nursing regulation through NPA is a state-initiated effort. The regulations are to provide standardization for laws regulating the nursing practice. NPAs emphasizes the accountability of all nurses for not only providing but improving safe client care. NPA provides nursing practice standards and a code of conduct for the continued privilege to practice nursing. Clear definitions of nursing scope of practice are detailed in the NPA and aligned with the nursing process of developing a plan of care for patient advocacy. Furthermore, the scope of practice is inclusive of safe nursing practice appropriate for the level of training and orientation.

**Types of Licenses and Titles**

The NPA exists to regulate and protect the public from practitioners who are a risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens within its state board jurisdiction. This protection principle is accomplished by assessing competence at initial licensure and throughout the career of the nurse. Licensure requirements are set at initial licensure as well as for licensure renewal. Licenses and titles are defined and protected by the NPA for usage in the public. They are privileged and granted by the BON after meeting the requirements of graduating from accredited nursing educational programs, passing professional board examinations, background checks, and paying applicable fees.

**Grounds for Disciplinary Action**

Within the NPA, the boards set standards to which they hold practitioners accountable for providing safe client care. These standards are based on professional, ethical, and legal standards for nursing. The NPA also ensures that any practitioner who has a complaint brought against their practice has the right to due process. Due process ensures the rights of the nurse are maintained throughout the discipline process.

When a patient/family sues a nurse for substandard care (malpractice), there are elements that must be proved in a court of law: Duty (the nurse had a duty to the patient), breach of duty (the nurse breached that duty), harm or injury (some type of harm or injury must be demonstrated), and causation (that the harm or injury was caused by the nurse as a result of a failure to follow standards of care).

The BON receives complaints regarding substandard care from a variety of sources (patients, healthcare professionals, including other nurses, and healthcare agencies). These complaints are investigated to determine if a nurse did provide care below the standard set by the NPA or other standards of care, such as in professional organizations or in the community. For the BON investigations, the actual injury does not need to be determined. Only that the nurse violated the standard of care. The BON determinations against the nurse for violating the standard of care result in disciplinary action (called stipulations against the license), which can include fines, supervised practice, mandatory remedial education, or suspending/revoking of license.

**Nurse Licensure Compact**

The NPA also includes laws and rules relating to the Nurse Licensure Compact.