Conscious sedation often requires an interprofessional approach to achieve the best outcome for the patient. It is less expensive than general anesthesia, which is very costly as it requires a hospital setting, specialist nurses and theatre staff, etc. In some countries, such as the United Kingdom, it is against the law to perform general anesthesia within a dental practice setting. Therefore, providing treatment under sedation in an outpatient setting can reduce the financial burden on healthcare organizations. Anesthesia or dentists trained in advanced techniques can provide poly-pharmaceutical sedation, allowing the treating dentist to focus on the required procedure.

The dentist can prescribe oral anxiolytics at their initial consultation appointment for the patient to collect from a local pharmacy and take on the day of their procedure. A pharmacist may therefore be involved in the patient’s journey and ensure that they are given the correct and safe dose. Dental practitioners must thoroughly understand the proper dosing regimens, interactions, indications, and contraindications of the drugs prescribed.

Sedation-trained nurses not only support the dentist by assisting with the required equipment, but they can also monitor the patient throughout the treatment and raise concerns where necessary. Following treatment, nurses can also recover the patient in a separate area, allowing the clinic to be utilized more efficiently as the dental practitioner can proceed to the next patient. All team members must be sedation trained, correctly indemnified, and competent to carry out treatment under sedation. A logbook detailing each treatment should be recorded for patient safety reasons and as a resource for audits to improve current practice.