Chronic pain is a significant condition affecting millions of people and is an important public health concern with considerable morbidity and mortality associated with opiate drug diversion and misuse. Thus chronic pain is best managed with an interprofessional approach. Managing chronic pain requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a primary care physician, a nursing team, a pharmacist, and pain medicine specialists. Without proper management, the patient's quality of life can have a deleterious impact. The evaluation and treatment of such patients are paramount, but health professionals must work as a team to avoid drug diversion and misuse.

Chronic pain correlates with several severe complications, including severe depression and suicide attempts, and ideation. The lifetime prevalence for chronic pain patients attempting suicide attempts was shown to be between 5% and 14%; suicidal ideation was approximately 20%.

- Evaluation of a patient with acute pain by the primary care provider to prevent the progression of chronic pain is the recommended first step.

- Conservative management of chronic pain should commence when symptoms are mild or moderate, including physical therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and pharmacological management.

- A pharmacist or other expert knowledgeable in the medications frequently utilized to treat chronic pain should evaluate the medication regimen to include medication reconciliation to preclude any drug-drug interactions and alert the healthcare team regarding any concerns.

- The patient should regularly follow up with a primary care provider and pain specialists to assess and effectively treat the patient's pain.

- Clinicians must address comorbid psychiatric disorders. This action may require the involvement of a psychiatrist, depending on the severity of the patient's symptoms.

- If symptoms worsen on follow-up or if there is a concerning escalation of pharmacological therapy, such as with opioids, a referral to a pain medicine specialist merits consideration.

- If the patient has exhausted various pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatment options, interventional procedures can be a consideration.

- If the patient expresses concern for suicidal ideation or plan at any time, an emergent psychiatric team should evaluate the patient immediately.

- Patients who have developed opioid dependence secondary to pharmacological therapy should be offered treatment, possibly referral for addiction treatment or detoxification if indicated. The patient should be put on a medication weaning schedule or possibly medications for the treatment of opioid dependence.

- Based on CDC recommendations, patients on high-dose opioid medications or patients with risk factors for opioid overdose (e.g., obesity, sleep apnea, concurrent benzodiazepine use, etc.) should receive naloxone at home for the emergent treatment of an unintentional overdose.

The interprofessional team should openly discuss and communicate clearly about the management of each patient so that the patient receives optimal care delivery. This area is where nurses and pharmacists can play a crucial role by helping verify patient compliance with the treatment plan and monitoring for progress (or lack thereof) with the current treatment plan. Nurses and pharmacists can help monitor for adverse medication side effects and concerns regarding the diversion or misuse of opioids and communicate any areas of concern to the treating clinicians. Effective, open interprofessional communication is crucial in the optimal management of chronic pain and in minimizing the negative effects of chronic pain in the patient. [Level 5]