The general population has a relatively high incidence of radiographically identified spondylolysis. However, clinicians find the majority of these lesions in asymptomatic patients.

Symptomatic pars lesions appear to be a clinical problem in adolescents, especially athletes.

The most frequent complaint is low back pain, either localized or diffuse. Trunk hyperextension or rotation exercises usually exacerbate the pain and rest partially relieves it. It is usually located at the lower lumbar back. However, patients may complain about buttocks or radiating pain in one or both legs.

During the physical examination, patients tend to express a hyperlordotic posture. Tight hamstrings and knee contractures are common.

The Stork test or one-legged hyperextension maneuver is thought to be the only pathognomonic finding during examination. It involves asking the patient to stand on one leg and extend the low back. When properly done, the leg is straight, and the trunk tilted, resulting from the lumbosacral extension. Concurrent ipsilateral knee flexion may produce trunk tilt without low back extension, p[roducing lower test sensitivity. Pain indicates possible spondylolysis on the ipsilateral side.

If patients present an isolated spondylolysis, the neurological examination should be normal. The most frequent neurological symptoms are radicular pain, weakness, tingling, and numbness in the lower limbs. They are related to spondylolisthesis rather than spondylolysis. Sometimes patients complain about symptom exacerbation when performing activities that involve low back extension. As a result, patients will express a kyphotic lumbar posture to relieve nerve roots by lumbar flexion and foraminal widening. If radicular pain is present, the L5 nerve root is the most commonly affected, and the straight leg raise test may be positive. Bowel and bladder symptoms or cauda equina syndrome are rare.