Nocturia is multifactorial but generally is caused by one of four main problems: nocturnal polyuria, global polyuria, bladder functional storage issues, and sleep disorders. A combination of these can also lead to nocturia. Primarily, hormonal issues cause nocturnal and global polyuria.

**Nocturnal Polyuria**

The most common cause of nocturia, reportedly found in up to 88% of patients, is nocturnal polyuria, although there are many causes and contributing factors. According to the International Continence Society, nocturnal polyuria is defined as a nighttime urinary production that is greater than 20% of the total 24-hour urine volume in younger adults or more than 33% in older individuals.

Nocturnal polyuria as a cause of nocturia is more prevalent in older patients, while in younger patients, a decreased nocturnal bladder capacity is the more common etiology. Caffeine and excessive oral fluid intake in the evenings, as well as alcoholism, can contribute significantly to this disorder. It is also associated with congestive heart failure, obstructive sleep apnea, evening use of diuretics, peripheral edema, high dietary salt intake, and chronic venous insufficiency of the lower extremities.

Two hormones are involved in the determination of hourly urinary production:

Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is an antidiuretic hormone produced by the hypothalamus that is stored and released from the posterior pituitary gland (the hormone is manufactured by the magnocellular neurosecretory neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and the supraoptic nucleus). It is released when plasma osmolality increases (hypernatremia) and when a patient has low blood pressure. AVP binds to the V2 receptors in the collecting ducts and distal renal tubules which increases water permeability and absorption in these areas, ultimately resulting in decreased urine production. A disruption of nocturnal arginine vasopressin (AVP) levels, where nocturia patients have a reduction in nighttime AVP levels, is a common etiology for nocturnal polyuria. AVP increases the reabsorption of free water returned to the circulation from the filtrate in the renal collecting tubules, which results in reduced urine volume but higher urinary concentration. AVP also constricts arterioles, which increases peripheral vascular resistance and raises systolic blood pressure. AVP production is normally increased during sleep as part of the normal circadian rhythm cycle. When this surge is diminished or missing, increased nocturnal polyuria and nocturia will result. This normal diurnal variation tends to diminish or disappear in older individuals. Parkinson's disease can also cause nocturnal polyuria through its effect on AVP. Other causes of decreased nocturnal AVP secretion include AVP receptor mutations, intrinsic renal disease, electrolyte abnormalities, congestive heart failure, sleep apnea, drug usage (lithium, diuretics, tetracyclines), and venous insufficiency with peripheral edema of the lower extremities.

Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is a diuretic hormone made by cardiac muscle cells in the atria. It increases renal sodium excretion, which acts as a diuretic because extra water is also excreted. The muscle cells in the atria have volume receptors that respond to increased fluid and stretching of the atrial walls by releasing ANP, which happens in congestive heart failure and uncontrolled hypertension. The goal of atrial ANP secretion is to reduce blood pressure and total blood volume through enhanced renal excretion of sodium and water. ANP has virtually the opposite effect of aldosterone, which increases renal sodium and water retention. ANP excretes sodium and water. Increased secretion of ANP also occurs in patients with hypoxia such as in obstructive sleep apnea, which would then lead to nocturnal natriuresis and increased nocturia. This effect occurs from increased airway resistance and negative intrathoracic pressure resulting in myocardial stretching and ANP production. Obstructive sleep apnea sufferers have been shown to have increased renal sodium and water excretion that is induced by elevated plasma ANP levels. The ANP level can be reduced in patients with obstructive sleep apnea by the use of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP).

Specific effects on the kidney from ANP are as follows:

- Relaxation of the glomerular afferent arterioles while constricting the efferent. This raises glomerular filtration fluid pressure, which raises the glomerular filtration rate and contributes to increased diuresis

- Increased blood flow through the vasa recta, which reduces the reabsorption of tubular fluid

- ANP decreases sodium reabsorption in the collecting duct and distal convoluted tubules

- Inhibition of renin secretion (which reduces aldosterone production) and decreased renal sympathetic tone

- ANP is increased during congestive heart failure, uncontrolled hypertension, and sleep apnea.

**Global Polyuria**

Global polyuria is another cause of nocturia. It is defined as continuous urinary overproduction throughout the day and typically results in urinary output of more than 40 mL/kg per 24 hours (which is typically 2800 mL for a 70 kg individual). It has also been defined as a daily urinary volume of 3000 mL or more. The urinary overproduction is not just confined to sleeping periods like nocturnal polyuria. Global polyuria is always associated with an increased fluid intake which may be caused by polydipsia (iatrogenic, psychogenic, or dipsogenic), hypercalcemia, drug effects, primary polydipsia, diabetes mellitus, or diabetes insipidus. It has also been associated with renal insufficiency and lack of estrogen (in women).

Low levels of AVP cause central diabetes insipidus, while in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, the etiology is a failure of the kidneys to respond to appropriate levels of AVP. Diagnosing diabetes insipidus can be made by the overnight water deprivation test during which patients are asked to stop fluid intake for a defined period, usually 8 to 12 hours, before bed. The first-morning urine after such forced dehydration would normally result in highly-concentrated urine. If this is not found, then diabetes insipidus can be diagnosed. Central diabetes insipidus can be treated with synthetic AVP (desmopressin).

**Bladder Storage Problems**

Patients with nocturia who do not appear to have polyuria are likely to have either a bladder storage problem (reduced bladder capacity, detrusor overactivity) or a sleep disorder.

Bladder storage problems contributing to nocturia are most often associated with multiple, frequent voidings with small urinary volumes. About 50% of patients who have daytime urinary urgency will also have clinically significant nocturia.

**Sleep Disorders**

Insomnia, sleep apnea, and other sleep disturbances can certainly contribute to or even cause nocturia. Sleep disorders should be suspected if patients are unable to not return to sleep quickly after an episode of nocturia or complain of morning fatigue. In patients with insomnia, their nocturia is usually a manifestation of their sleep disturbance, and nocturnal urinary frequency is an incidental side effect rather than a cause.

Nocturia will occur in about 50% of patients with obstructive sleep apnea, which causes nocturnal polyuria due to its effect on ANP. Sleep apnea causes hypoxemia which increases pulmonary artery vasoconstriction. The elevated pulmonary vascular resistance from this vasoconstriction increases right atrial pressure, which induces ANP production resulting in increased nocturnal urine production or nocturnal polyuria. This occurs so commonly that it has been suggested that obstructive sleep apnea should be considered a possible diagnosis in all patients with nocturia, especially younger male patients younger than 50 years of age.

Often, patients with a primary sleep disorder will fail to recognize the true reason for their awakening as being a sleep disturbance. They will identify only the need to void as the reason for their waking when studies have proven that sleep-related disorders (severe snoring, apnea, or restless leg syndrome) immediately preceded the awakening 80% of the time, and only 13% of patients with nocturia will have an initial sleep period of more than 2 to 3 hours.

All patients with significant nocturia and fatigue should be screened for obstructive sleep apnea.

**Other Causes and Contributing Factors**

Peripheral edema can contribute to nocturnal polyuria. When a patient with significant lower extremity edema lies down, much of the extra fluid is returned to the vascular system, where the kidneys can then excrete it. This would result in increased urine production shortly after the patient assumes a recumbent or supine position. This effect can be minimized by having the patient elevate their lower extremities sometime before going to bed, as well as the judicious use and timing of diuretics. Similarly, heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, venous insufficiency, high sodium intake, and even just long-term standing still may also cause retention of excess fluid in the lower extremities, which are mobilized once the patient assumes recumbency resulting in increased urine production shortly after the patient lies down.

The use of compression stockings during the daytime, especially in the afternoon and evenings, can also help minimize tissue fluid sequestration in the lower extremities before bedtime.

Drinking large amounts of fluids shortly before going to bed and ingesting caffeine or alcohol late in the day and before bed is likely to contribute to nocturia as well.

Other causes of nocturnal polyuria and nocturia include diseases such as congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, obesity, hypertension, excessive nighttime fluid ingestion, and liver failure. Depression, the use of antidepressants, and a lack of physical activity are also associated with nocturia in both men and women. It is unclear if treatment of depression will reduce the incidence of nocturia in this group of patients.

Parkinson's disease can cause nocturnal polyuria through its effect on reducing sympathetic tone, which results in a solute (sodium) based diuresis.

Nocturia is associated with a normal pregnancy. No specific medical treatment is required as the nocturia will resolve once the pregnancy is over. Only behavioral and lifestyle therapies are recommended during pregnancy.