The 2 main functions of the penis are intercourse and urination. For intercourse, the penis must be erect. Erection occurs via parasympathetic innervation which allows engorgement of the corporal bodies. The bulbospongiosus and ischiocavernosus muscle compress the veins to prevent them from draining blood from the corpora cavernosa. The erectile tissue of the cavernosum becomes firm and enlarged when the erection occurs. The emission phase is due to the sympathetic response and occurs when semen exits the vas deferens to the ejaculatory ducts where fluid from the seminal glands are added. They then continue onto the prostatic urethra where the prostatic fluid is added. The ejaculation phase is due to the sympathetic response and is when semen exits from the urethra through the external urethral orifice. After ejaculation, the penis becomes flaccid again due to the sympathetic stimulation and constriction of the coiled helicine arteries and relaxation of the bulbospongiosus and ischiocavernosus muscles allowing blood to drain from the cavernous spaces.

The other function of the penis is to drain urine from the body. Urine starts draining from the bladder into the bladder neck where the internal urethral sphincter will relax to allow urine to pass via involuntary control of the parasympathetic system. Urine will then pass into the prostatic urethra and the membranous urethra. The external sphincter will relax to allow urine to pass from the membranous urethra into the spongy penile urethra, then into the navicular fossa and out of the urethra through the external urethral orifice.