**Sweating and its Regulation by the Autonomic Nervous System**

- Stimulation of the anterior hypothalamus, a preoptic area in the brain by excess heat causes sweating.

- The sweat glands are innervated by cholinergic nerve fibers that secrete acetylcholine that runs in the sympathetic nerves along with the adrenergic fibers.

- Sweat glands can also be stimulated by norepinephrine or epinephrine, which is important during periods of intense physical activity (work or exercises).

**Mechanism of Sweat Secretion**

- The sweat gland consists of two parts: the duct that passes through the skin and reabsorbs salt and water, and the deep subdermal coiled gland that secretes the sweat.

- Sweat gland secretes a fluid called the precursor secretion; the concentrations of constituents in the fluid are then modified in the duct.

**Precursor Secretion**

- Cholinergic sympathetic nerve fibers stimulate the secretion.

- The composition of the precursor secretion is similar to the plasma, except that it does not contain plasma proteins.

- The concentration of sodium is about 142 mEq/L, and that of chloride is about 104 mEq/L.

**Reabsorption**

- When sweat glands undergo weak stimulation, the precursor fluid passes through the duct slowly; and the concentration sodium and chloride ions fall to as low as five mEq/L.

- Reabsorption of sodium and chloride reduces the osmotic pressure of the sweat fluid and lead to reabsorption of water, whereas other constituents such as urea, lactic acid, and potassium become concentrated in the sweat.

- When the sweat glands are strongly stimulated, a large amount of precursor fluid forms and the duct reabsorbs only about half the sodium chloride secreted (resulting in 50 to 60 mEq/L sodium and chloride ions).

- Strongly stimulated sweat flows through the glandular tubules so rapidly that little of the water is reabsorbed. In these conditions, the other dissolved constituents of sweat (urea, lactic acid, and potassium) are only moderately increased in concentration compared to plasma.

**Hypothalamic Stimulation of Shivering**

- The primary motor center for shivering is in the dorsomedial portion of the posterior hypothalamus.

- Shivering is normally inhibited by signals from the heat center in the anterior hypothalamic-preoptic area but is excited by cold signals from the spinal cord and skin.

**Sympathetic "Chemical" Excitation of Heat Produc­tion**

- An increase in circulating epinephrine and norepinephrine in the blood rapidly increase the rate of cellular metabolism

- This effect is called chemical thermogenesis, or no shivering thermogenesis

- No shivering thermogenesis results from the ability of norepinephrine and epinephrine to "uncouple oxidative phosphorylation."