Some practitioners choose to administer a tocolytic, usually terbutaline 0.25 mg subcutaneously, 15 to 30 minutes before the procedure, if are no contraindications. Data does not support either calcium channel blockers or nitroglycerin for tocolysis in this situation.

The patient is lying supine, with a sideways tilt with a wedge to keep pressure off the aorta and vena cava. If the fetal presentation is breech, then the breech is lifted out of the pelvis with one hand, and the other hand is used to apply pressure to the back of the fetal head to attempt a forward roll. If a forward roll is unsuccessful, then a backward roll can be attempted. If the fetus is in either a transverse or oblique presentation, similar manipulation of the fetus is used to attempt to move the fetal head to the pelvis, noting a shorter distance to move than if the fetus is in a breech presentation.

Intermittent use of ultrasonography during the procedure can be used to document fetal heartbeat and current presentation. The procedure should be abandoned if there is significant fetal bradycardia, discomfort to the patient, or if the procedure is not completed easily. Afterward, the patient should be monitored for at least 30 minutes, with fetal heart rate tracing and anti-D immune globulin given if indicated. Immediate induction is not recommended to minimize reversion, although this could be considered after 39 weeks of gestation. If ECV is unsuccessful, additional attempts can be made at the same admission or in one or more days following the initial procedure.