Patients with uncomplicated iron deficiency without comorbidities should receive treatment with oral iron therapy. Oral iron is readily available, inexpensive, effective, safe, and convenient. Some of the available formulations include ferrous sulfate, ferrous fumarate, and ferrous gluconate. High molecular weight dextran has been withdrawn due to a high frequency of serious anaphylactic reactions.

Gastrointestinal (GI) side effects occur in up to 70% of the patients taking oral iron, leading to noncompliance with treatment. GI symptoms can be minimized by the use of chelated forms of iron. Enteric-coated tablets lead to poor absorption and are not viable options.

Intravenous iron is available in many forms, such as ferric carboxymaltose, ferric gluconate, ferric/iron sucrose, ferumoxytol, and low-molecular-weight iron dextran. Response to intravenous iron merits observation to establish the need for further supplementation six to eight weeks after initial iron replacement.

There is a low risk of allergic reactions with all IV iron formulations. Premedication with antihistamines does not prevent infusion reactions and should not be given. Patients with a history of asthma or drug allergies should receive steroids before infusion.

In pregnancy, oral iron is given as a supplement during the first trimester as the safety of IV iron in the first trimester remains unestablished. Generally, oral iron is given to pregnant women if they can tolerate it. Exceptions include women with severe anemia, women with Inflammatory Bowel Disease, and those who have undergone bariatric surgery. In these patients, IV iron is preferable. All IV forms have equal efficacy and safety except for some formulations of ferric gluconate, which utilize benzyl alcohol as a preservative and should be avoided because of the possibility of harm to the fetus.