One cannot practice medicine, learn about medicine, or conduct medical research without attention to high ethical standards. The four core principles of autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence and respect for human rights are cornerstones of medical practice. The practice of medicine does not deal ion black and white, binary decisions. Every decision we make comes with potentially unintended consequences. For example, in the Emergency Department, every decision to prioritize one patient implies a deprioritization of the other patients in the ED. In academic medicine, especially, the education of clinicians inherently puts some degree of risk onto the patient. This risk must be acknowledged and then minimized as much as possible.

Medical educators must teach students and residents to consider the whole patient, not just a collection of parts or disease processes. This applies to all caregivers in the health profession. Additionally, race, gender, socioeconomic class, and other differences should not limit access to medical education or optimal health.

The rigorous demands of clinical medicine also involve a tradeoff with the health of the providers themselves. Physicians who do not take care of their own mental and physical health cannot act as models for their patients. This self-care to ensure clinical competency represents an ethical obligation of all of us in clinical medicine.

Any research in clinical medicine inherently involves the clinical care of real patients. Research goals can never supersede the ethical care of patients. IRBs provide oversight, but each member of research teams must prioritize the ethical treatment of patients in the clinical setting. Of course, informed consent and shared decision-making extend far beyond the realm of research studies. Each patient interaction depends on trust, honesty, and consideration of the patient's welfare and his or her autonomy.

Like any other clinician, clinicians in academic medicine must always act in the patient's best interests while attending to their own health and well-being. Academic physicians have the added responsibility of teaching the importance of these principles and behaviors to the next generation of clinical providers.