**Ataxia**

Symmetric gait ataxia in a young patient is usually the presenting symptom.

Patients adopt a wide-based gait with constant shifting to maintain balance. Attempts to correct imbalances usually result in wild or uncontrolled movements. Patients may have a steppage gait characterized by the uneven and irregular striking of the floor by the feet' soles due to the loss of sensation. As the disease progresses, the ataxia ascends to affect the trunk and arms. Titubation while sitting and standing is also noted and may also involve the trunk. As the ataxia progresses to involve the arms, the patients develop action and intention tremors and even display choreiform movements. They may also have facial and buccal tremors. Eventually, patients will lose mobility, requiring ambulatory aids such as a walker, then a wheelchair, before ultimately becoming bedridden.

**Other Symptoms**

Constitutional symptoms include easy fatiguability, weakness, and daytime sleepiness. Dysarthria occurs due to cerebellar involvement. Slurred, slow speech takes place that will eventually become incomprehensible. Dysphagia arises as the muscles responsible for swallowing weaken. Dysphagia, combined with incoordination of speech and swallowing, can lead to choking incidents. Vision loss is caused by the loss of the optic tract fibers. Neuropsychological testing reveals impairment in executive functioning and temporoparietal dysfunction. This is most likely a result of the interruption of cerebrocerebellar circuits. A family history of FA will also be pivotal in the diagnosis.

**Musculoskeletal Exam**

- Progressive limb and gait ataxia develops typically in adolescence

- Truncal ataxia

- Motor weakness

- Loss of muscle tone

- Muscular atrophy

- Foot deformities such as high plantar arch, foot inversion, hammertoes

- Pes cavus

- Kyphoscoliosis

**Neurological Exam**

- Hyporeflexia or areflexia

- Extensor plantar responses

- Flexor spasms

- Sensory neuropathy

- Loss of two-point discrimination

- Loss of proprioception and vibration

- Loss of pain and temperature sensation

- Dysarthria

- Dysmetria

- Urinary urgency or incontinence

- Loss of visual acuity

- Horizontal nystagmus, particularly with lateral gaze

- Abnormal extraocular movements such as square-wave jerks, saccadic pursuit, and poor fixation

- Abnormal visual evoked potentials with reduced amplitude and delayed latency

- Impaired vestibulo-ocular reflexes

- Deafness

- Vertigo

**Psychological Exam**

- Mild executive dysfunction

- Emotional lability

**Cardiovascular Exam**

- Peripheral cyanosis

- Cardiomegaly

- Tachycardia

- Atrial fibrillation

- Systolic ejection murmurs and additional heart sounds