The SAFE strategy recommended by WHO encompasses surgery for trichiasis, antibiotics, facial hygiene, and environmental improvement.

- Antibiotics****should be administered to the patient as well as to all the family members.
- A single dose of azithromycin (20 mg/kg up to 1g) is the treatment of choice.
- Erythromycin 500 mg twice daily for 14 days or doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 10 days may be considered (use tetracyclines with caution in pregnancy/breastfeeding/children).
- 1% tetracycline ointment may be used topically. However, it is less effective than oral treatment.

- Facial cleanliness is important.

- Environmental improvement,****for example, proper sanitation, access to clean drinking water, and control of flies, etc.

- Surgery may be required for relieving entropion and trichiasis and maintaining complete lid closure.

**Management of Trichiasis and Cicatricial Entropion**

Trachoma is the most common infectious cause of blindness worldwide. Conjunctival scarring with ensuing trichiasis and entropion result in corneal scarring and eventual blindness. The proper management of trichiasis and cicatricial entropion in trachoma is vital to prevent visual disability.

Treatment of Lashes:****There is a movement to teach simple procedures to ancillary medical team members in areas where this disease is endemic so that early intervention may be instituted and corneal injury and scarring prevented.

- Simple epilation

- Destruction of eyelash follicles

- Radiofrequency ablation of follicles
- Cryotherapy to lash roots
- Electrocautery
- Laser (argon, etc.) treatment of lash roots
- Irradiation (infrequently used now)

- Surgical excision of roots of eyelashes

**Surgical Repair of Trichiasis and Entropion**

- Tarsal rotation with bilamellar tarsal rotation or anterior lamellar tarsal rotation

- Tarsal repositioning with tarsal advancement with or without tarsal rotation

- Posterior lamellar lengthening with the advancement of the posterior lamella with or without an interpositional mucous membrane or tarsal graft

- Surgery to the anterior lamellar and eyelid margin:

- anterior lamellar repositioning 
- eyelid margin split and eversion
- anterior tarsal wedge resection (or grooving) and eversion

- Tarsectomy