Normal gait results from effective coordination of the following neural components: basal ganglia brainstem system, regulated muscle tone, and functional processing of sensory information such as vision, hearing, and proprioception. The risk of falling is increased in the elderly because (1) these functions decline with age (2) the probability of accumulating medical issues increases with age, and (3) associated medications are often increased as well. With aging usually comes a wide-based gait, along with a decrease in gait velocity, step length, and lower limb strength. A fall most often results from interactions between these long-term predisposing factors and short-term predisposing environmental factors such as an adverse drug reaction, acute illness, or a trip on an irregular surface.

Risk factors for falls in order of evidence strength include a history of falls, impairment in balance, reduced muscle strength, visual problems, polypharmacy (defined as taking over four medications) or psychoactive drugs, gait difficulty, depression, orthostasis or dizziness, functional limits, age over 80 years, female sex, incontinence, cognitive difficulties, arthritis, diabetes, and pain.

Fall risk escalates as the number of risk factors increases. The 1-year risk of falling doubles for every added risk factor. It starts at 8% with no risk factors and increases by up to 78% with four risk factors. Medications related to falls include antihypertensives, neuroleptics and antipsychotics, sedatives and hypnotics, antidepressants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and benzodiazepines.