The choroid plexus may be involved in various pathologies that are groupable into two main categories; high volume states of CSF and low volume states of CSF.

**High CSF states**

High volume states of CSF are the result of either excessive production or more commonly decreased absorption by the arachnoid granulations. Choroid plexus tumors are very rare tumors which may cause excessive CSF production; these include choroid plexus papillomas and choroid plexus carcinomas. More commonly, excessive CSF state is the result of impairment of CSF reabsorption by the arachnoid granulations commonly seen in meningeal inflammatory conditions including infectious meningitis, carcinomatous meningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage. All such cases result in a condition known as communicating hydrocephalus in which there is an abnormal accumulation of CSF within all the ventricular system; this results in dilatation of the ventricles and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure which include a headache, nausea, vomiting, and occasionally double vision. Hydrocephalus may also occur due to obstruction of CSF flow within the ventricular system called obstructive or non-communicating hydrocephalus. The sites of obstruction most frequently occur at the narrow cerebral aqueduct. It may also happen anywhere within the ventricular system or the outflow from the fourth ventricle into the subarachnoid space such as the foramen of Monro, the third ventricle by a colloid cyst or at the foramina of Luschka or Magendie.

**Low CSF states**

Low volume states of CSF are most commonly due to CSF leak but may also be due to damage to the ependymal cells of the ventricles. Causes of CSF leaks include a lumbar puncture, spontaneous rupture of cystic dilatations of the arachnoid membrane lining spinal nerve roots, post-craniotomy, or severe motor vehicle accident. In such trauma-related cases, the patient may experience rhinorrhea or otorrhea of clear fluid (CSF). In states of low CSF, a patient may experience an orthostatic headache due to intracranial hypotension that is usually self-limiting unless it is due to leakage.