- Spinocerebellar ataxia types 1, 2, 3, or pure cerebellar ataxia – an autosomal dominant disease characterized by early-onset ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, hearing loss, sensory axonal neuropathy, epilepsy, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, facial and limb dystonias, sensorimotor polyneuropathy, cerebellar atrophy, and cognitive impairment. It is distinguished from FA by imaging revealing characteristic clinical features of cerebellar atrophy.

- Dentatorubro-pallidoluysian atrophy – characterized by myoclonus, epilepsy, choreoathetosis, behavioral changes, intellectual disability, and ataxia. It is distinguished from FA by behavioral, psychiatric, and intellectual symptoms.

- Demyelinating peripheral neuropathy or chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy – an autoimmune disorder characterized by symmetric weakness of proximal and distal muscles and sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. It is distinguished from FA by evidence of inflammation on lumbar puncture.

- Roussy-Levy variant of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease – an autosomal dominant disease characterized by areflexia and ataxia. It is distinguished from FA by dysmyelination (instead of axonal neuropathy) and inheritance pattern.

- Cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss syndrome – a disorder caused by single mutation E818K of the ATP1A3 gene on chromosome 19q13.

- Episodic ataxia – distinguished from FA by history.

- Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay – an autosomal recessive disease caused by a mutation on the SACS gene characterized by a triad of early spasticity, cerebellar ataxia, and sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. It is distinguished from FA by the brain MRI, showing the involvement of the pons.

- Abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-Kornzweig disease) – an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutation of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene characterized by impaired fat absorption, low cholesterol/triglyceride levels, absent serum beta lipoprotein, retinal degeneration, peripheral neuropathy, and ataxia. It is distinguished from FA by abnormal lipid levels and neurologic improvement with fat-soluble vitamin supplementation.

- Drug-induced ataxia - distinguished from FA by history and resolution of symptoms with removal of the offending agent.

- Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency – an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutation of the alpha-tocopherol transfer protein gene, characterized by slowly progressive gait ataxia with neuropathy and retinitis pigmentosa. It is distinguished from FA by low vitamin E levels and neurologic improvement with vitamin E supplementation.

- Ataxia-telangiectasia – an autosomal recessive disease caused by a mutation on the ATM gene characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, abnormal eye movements, other neurologic abnormalities, immune deficiency, and oculocutaneous telangiectasias. Complications include pulmonary disease, increased risk of malignancy, radiation sensitivity, and diabetes mellitus. It is distinguished from FA by elevated alpha-fetoprotein.

- Refsum disease – an autosomal recessive disease caused by a mutation on the PHYH gene characterized by elevated phytanic acid levels, retinitis pigmentosa, ichthyosis, sensorimotor polyneuropathy, cerebellar ataxia, and sensorineural hearing loss. It is distinguished from FA by elevated phytanic acid levels and improvement with dietary restriction.