Evidence supports treating obesity and comorbidities to achieve weight loss, prevent further weight gain, and improve complications of obesity. Guidelines do not recommend "watchful waiting." Clinicians must document the presence of obesity and carefully explain to caregivers the importance of treating obesity while avoiding stigmatizing the child. Asking permission to discuss the BMI and weight is helpful. Avoiding labels such as "obese child" and using words that are perceived as neutral such as "unhealthy weight" or "gaining too much weight for age or height," are helpful. The focus should be on the child's health. [American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity 2023]

Behavioral change forms the cornerstone in the management of pediatric obesity. Family-based interventions are aimed at decreasing BMI. These include limiting the number of sweetened beverages and fast food servings, eating more fruits and vegetables, and increasing the time spent being physically active. Clinicians should make clear recommendations about healthy foods and appropriate portions and encourage an active lifestyle with daily exercise. Merely saying "eat less and exercise more" is too simplistic. Families are encouraged to plan their meals, considering children's preferences and the nutrient value of foods to ensure a balanced diet.

Evidence does not support any one specific diet for weight loss. Approaches like the "traffic light diet plan" can help families make healthy changes according to their cultural beliefs and ethnicity.

Creating a healthy food environment at home includes incorporating nutritious food choices for meals and snacks and avoiding TV watching while eating. Children model the adults in the home, and positive family changes can prevent and treat obesity.

The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans recommend 60 minutes or more of moderate-to-vigorous exercise for children aged 6 to 17 years, and children aged 3 to 5 years should be physically active throughout the day.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends screen time of less than one hour per day for children aged 2 to 5 years and 2 hours per day for older children. For children younger than two years, the AAP recommends no screen time except for video chats with friends and family. Children who engage in more hours of screen time are less likely to be physically active.

Primary care clinicians, with limited resources and time, often find it challenging to provide the intensive behavior and lifestyle treatment recommended for patients with obesity. A structured weight management plan often includes motivational interviewing and a referral to a registered dietitian or nutrition specialist. The next step is a comprehensive multidisciplinary intervention with increased intensity and frequency of the behavior change component. This usually consists of an interprofessional team who provides up to 22 sessions over 3-12 months. Finally, some patients may benefit from tertiary care intervention for nutrition and exercise advice, behavior counseling, pharmacologic therapy, and consideration of bariatric surgery.

No evidence supports weight loss medication as therapy alone, but it is recommended as an adjunct when intensive behavior interventions alone have failed. Many drugs used in adults are not FDA-approved for children, and further studies are ongoing.

Orlistat is an FDA-approved drug for children aged 12 years and older with obesity. It is a pancreatic lipase inhibitor that promotes mild to moderate weight loss by blocking fat absorption. Adverse effects, including flatulence, fecal urgency, and steatorrhea, limit its usefulness. The dose is 120 mg orally three times daily.

Metformin is approved for children aged ten years and older to treat T2DM. It has not been approved for weight loss, although studies show a mild to modest weight reduction. It is also used to treat PCOS. It causes decreased hepatic glucose production, decreased gut glucose absorption, and increased insulin sensitivity. The dose begins at 500 mg orally, daily or twice daily, and can be increased to a maximum of 2500 mg per day.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP1s) decrease hunger by slowing gastric emptying and affecting central nervous system targets. Liraglutide, injected daily, is FDA-approved for children aged 12 or older with obesity. Exenatide, injected weekly, is approved for children aged 10-17 to treat T2DM. Adverse effects include nausea and vomiting.

Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) agonists, such as setmelanotide, are FDA approved for children aged six and older with rare genetic conditions such as proopiomelanocortin and leptin deficiency. It is injected daily to decrease appetite. Adverse effects include nausea and injection site reactions.

Phentermine and topiramate extended-release capsules are approved for weight loss in adults. Recent data show significant weight loss in teens and improved lipid profiles. However, the medication is not currently FDA-approved for children. Topiramate suppresses appetite but can cause cognitive slowing and is a known teratogen, so it must be prescribed cautiously for older teens.

Lisdexamfetamine is a stimulant sometimes used "off-label" in adults with obesity. It is approved for binge eating disorder treatment in adults but only for ADHD in pediatric patients. It may be helpful when a teen requires treatment for combined ADHD and obesity.

Weight loss surgery can be a safe and effective procedure for pediatric patients with severe obesity. Candidates include those whose BMI is greater than or equal to 35 kg/m^2 or 120% of the 95th percentile for age and gender, whichever is lower. The American Pediatric Surgical Association recommends surgical management for adolescents with near-complete skeletal maturity at risk for medical complications of obesity after a failure of intensive behavioral interventions in a multidisciplinary weight management program lasting at least six months.

Bariatric and metabolic surgeries include laparoscopic vertical sleeve gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric band procedures are only approved for patients aged 18 or older and have worse long-term success and higher complication rates. Patients should be referred to comprehensive surgical centers experienced in working with youth and their families. Like adults, pediatric bariatric patients can reduce their BMI and improve or resolve many obesity-related comorbid conditions, including hypertension, T2DM, dyslipidemia, and weight-related quality of life. Post-operative complications are usually minor, including nausea and dehydration, but up to a quarter of patients may require additional procedures in the following five years. Patients must undergo close follow-up and long-term monitoring for micronutrient deficiencies and malabsorption, and vitamin and mineral supplements may be required. [American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity 2023]

Before bariatric and metabolic surgery, patients and their families are carefully evaluated and educated about the surgical risks and benefits so they can make informed decisions. The family must understand there are required lifestyle modifications following bariatric procedures and that surgery is not a "quick fix." The interprofessional surgical team will also perform a comprehensive physiologic and psychosocial assessment to determine if the patient is a suitable surgical candidate.