At least one incident of increased blood pressure occurs in about 3%-45% of adult patients during their attendance in the emergency department. The basic principle in establishing the essential emergency department care of hypertensive patients is the occurrence of end-organ dysfunction.

The foremost goal of the emergency provider is to establish which patients with acutely raised blood pressure are exhibiting clinical evidence of end-organ damage and need immediate intravenous treatment.

The treatment for hypertensive urgency is to ensure better long-term blood pressure control.

Severe elevation in the blood pressure of pregnant women should be managed immediately to prevent end-organ damage.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Optimal pharmacotherapy is reliant upon the particular organ at risk, as stated below. In patients presenting with hypertensive crises, antihypertensive medication has been observed to be effective in acutely reducing blood pressure.

Sodium nitroprusside is a commonly prescribed medication. It is short-acting and can be titrated minute to minute as per the response. However, patients should have constant monitoring in HDU/ICU.

Labetalol, an alpha- and beta-blocker, has been shown to be very beneficial in managing a hypertensive crisis. It is particularly preferred in acute dissection and end-stage renal disease. Doses as 10 to 20 mg boluses may be administered, or they may be given as an IV infusion at 1 mg/min until the desired blood pressure is achieved.

Fenoldopam is a peripheral dopamine receptor agonist, and it is given as an IV dose of 0.1 µg/kg/min to be titrated every 15 minutes.

Clevidipine is a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker administered intravenously for rapid and precise blood pressure reduction. Initial IV infusion of clevidipine is commenced at 1 to 2 mg/hour to be titrated according to the response.