# Continuing Education Activity

When chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) are both present in the same patient, the condition is called an "overlap syndrome" (OS). Overlap syndrome, as the name implies, refers to patients presenting simultaneously with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and is associated with a poor prognosis and a higher burden of disease than either condition alone. The consequences of OS are increased morbidity and mortality when not adequately addressed. This activity aims to review the current literature to provide a concise understanding of OS development, diagnosis, and management. This article also explores the interprofessional relationship required when caring for patients with OS.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of overlap syndrome.
- Summarize the management of overlap syndrome.
- Identify the clinical findings consistent with overlap syndrome.
- Explain complications of overlap syndrome.

# Introduction

Overlap syndrome, as the name implies, refers to patients presenting simultaneously with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and is associated with a poor prognosis and a higher burden of disease than either condition alone. David C. Flenley coined the term overlap syndrome in 1985.

Obstructive sleep apnea is a prevalent condition that affects approximately one billion people globally.

COPD is characterized by chronic respiratory symptoms and distal airflow limitation that is not fully reversible, with or without structural pulmonary abnormalities.

# Etiology

There is evidence of a bidirectional relationship between the two conditions, COPD and OSA.

Cigarette smoking is a common risk factor for the independent development of COPD and OSA. This accelerates the underlying disease process through oxidative stress and inflammatory mediator release, which can result in upper airway inflammation and increases the risk for obstructive sleep apnea.

Depending on which subtype is predominating in patients with COPD, there may be an increased or decreased risk of developing obstructive sleep apnea. For example, with the emphysema subtype of COPD, patients typically demonstrate hyperinflated lungs and lower body mass index (BMI) from the prominent dyspnea and increased work of breathing commonly seen in advanced stages of COPD. On the other hand, the chronic bronchitis phenotype is associated with increased BMI and a higher risk of developing OSA, mainly when adipose tissue is deposited around the neck.

# Epidemiology

Although COPD and sleep apnea are two of the most prevalent pulmonary diseases worldwide, there is heterogeneity in their prevalence of overlap syndrome of both COPD and OSA combined.

Currently, COPD is the third leading cause of death globally. In 2017 alone, 544.9 million people were estimated to be living with chronic respiratory disease, and 55% of these cases were attributed to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Obstructive sleep apnea represents a widespread respiratory disorder affecting sleep quality.

There continues to be emerging epidemiological data when evaluating COPD and OSA overlap syndrome prevalence. A systematic review analyzing the prevalence of overlap syndrome demonstrated a rate of about 1.0 to 3.6% in the general and hospital populations, a relatively uncommon presentation.

Based on a review of available literature on the prevalence of OS, there is significant variation in the rates of disease occurrence. This makes it difficult to calculate the true rate of overlap syndrome within populations of OSA and COPD patients. In patients with a primary diagnosis of COPD, overlap syndrome has been shown to range between 2.9 to 65.9%, and in patients with primarily OSA, the rates appear to fall between 7.6 to 55.7%.

Overlap syndrome is associated with increased rates of cardiovascular morbidity, worse quality of life, frequent episodes of COPD exacerbations, and higher medical costs than COPD or OSA alone. Bronchiectasis is seen more frequently in individuals with overlap syndrome and is associated with worse nocturnal oxygen desaturations and sleep time spent with SpO2 < 90% (T90), according to one research study.

Limitations to establishing concrete prevalence estimates include differing diagnostic criteria for COPD and OSA. Spirometry is the confirmatory diagnostic standard for COPD when forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) <0.7. The global initiative of chronic obstructive lung disease (GOLD) criterion is useful in staging disease severity and choosing therapy for patients with COPD. However, some studies used variations of this criterion that included FEV1/FVC <0.6, FEV1/FVC <0.65, and FEV1/FVC <0.75. Other research used a physician's diagnosis as the basis for COPD criteria.

The variability in the prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea is related to multiple factors, including different definitions of respiratory events, various diagnostic methods (i.e., polysomnography, home sleep apnea testing [HSAT], nocturnal oximetry), different AHI cut-offs (e.g., AHI > 5, 10, or 15 per hour) or the scoring criteria used.

Specifically, studies using the ≥3% oxygen desaturation criteria for scoring hypopnea reported a higher prevalence of overlap syndrome compared to studies that used ≥4% oxygen desaturation, leading to a higher prevalence of overlap syndrome.

# Pathophysiology

The Pathophysiology behind Overlap syndrome encompasses a combination of the individual effects seen in patients with either COPD or OSA. There is a severity scale for both COPD and OSA, and it is unknown at what point the combined disorders start to have clinical significance, either additively or synergistically.

**Obstructive sleep apnea:**The pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea involves multiple mechanistic pathways, including anatomical factors (e.g., collapsibility of the upper airway) and non-anatomical variables (upper airway muscle responses, respiratory-related arousability from sleep, and control of breathing).

(1) Anatomical factors:

- Typically, hypopneas and apneas occur during the transition from wakefulness to sleep and can also occur through all stages of sleep.

- Interaction between pharyngeal architecture and the inability of upper airway dilator muscles, notably the genioglossus, to maintain a patent airway during sleep.

- Decreased excitatory genioglossus negative-pressure reflex during sleep contributes to the development of OSA in patients with anatomically restricted upper airways.

- Repetitive respiratory events are associated with increased airway resistance and can lead to increased patient end-tidal CO2 (PETCO2) and alternating periods of hypoventilation and hyperventilation (as depicted in the figure below).

- In obesity, fat deposition surrounding the pharyngeal airway is likely to increase the airway's susceptibility to collapsing.

(2) Non-anatomical factors:

- Ventilatory control plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of obstructive sleep apnea.

- Altered ventilatory motor output affects upper airway patency via muscular dilator activity or caudal traction changes.

- Oxidative stress caused by breathing interruptions during sleep results in sporadic reductions in airflow to the lungs and significant variations in the partial pressure of oxygen between the proximal and distal airways.

**COPD:**is characterized by airflow obstruction that is minimally reversible and aberrant inflammatory responses in the lungs. The inflammatory condition involves the airways, lung parenchyma, and pulmonary vasculature. The COPD spectrum ranges from chronic bronchitis to emphysema.

(1) Mechanical factors: Due to peripheral airway obstruction, destruction of pulmonary connective tissue, or a combination of both that leads to changes in the mechanical properties of the respiratory system. These structural changes lead to a cascade of changes that can contribute to the morbidity and chronicity of the disease.

- The natural defensive reaction to inhaled toxins is exaggerated, resulting in tissue death, impairment of defense mechanisms that prevent such destruction, and disruption of healing mechanisms. Also seen are protease-antiprotease imbalances, which can lead to structural damage to the alveolar air sacs resulting in emphysematous changes.

- The inflammatory reaction and blockage of the airways induce a reduction in forced expiratory volume (FEV1), while tissue damage results in airflow obstruction and reduced gas exchange.

- Lung hyperinflation is commonly seen on radiographic imaging due to air trapping resulting from airway collapse while exhaling.

- Hyperinflation increases the anterior-posterior diameter of the lower rib cage while depressing and shortening the diaphragm, which makes contraction less mechanically advantageous.

- Chronic bronchitis subtype presents with increased airway resistance, particularly within the small airways, which results from mucous gland enlargement and mucociliary dysfunction resulting in excessive mucus production and reduced airways caliber. Fibrosis and smooth muscle hypertrophy may result from increased mucus production.

- Emphysema subtype exhibits loss of elastic recoil resulting in diminished expiratory flow rates, air trapping, and airway collapsing mediated by complex inflammatory response including neutrophils, macrophages, CD8 T-cells, and other inflammatory mediators resulting in enzymatic damage of the lung parenchyma.

- Skeletal muscle myopathy from long-term corticosteroid usage, systemic inflammatory response with oxidative damage, and persistent hypoxemia.

- Increased airway resistance during both inspiration and expiration.

(2) Ventilatory factors: Ventilatory control is not significantly affected in individuals with mild COPD. However, altered ventilatory motor output is usually seen in progressive COPD, where several changes occur to gas exchange and respiratory function during wake and sleep.

- A reduced ventilatory drive leads to a significant decrease in tidal volume producing a compensatory response of prolonging inspiratory time, which leads to a reduction in expiratory time, and worsening hyperinflation.

- In the chronic bronchitis subtype of COPD, profound transitory nocturnal hypoxemia is typical during REM sleep; these patients often have hypoxemia and CO2 retention when awake and breathing.

- The increased airway resistance during inspiration and expiration leads to additional effort to maintain normal ventilation, seen physically as an increased respiratory frequency or work of breathing.

- The increased work of breathing in individuals with advanced COPD leads to more oxygen extraction from the blood and more carbon dioxide production.

- The hypercapnic ventilatory response (change in minute ventilation for a given change in arterial carbon dioxide slope of VE/PCO2) is reduced in most patients with COPD due to the increased mechanical load.

- The effect of oxygen on hypercapnia in individuals with COPD has been debated for many years. Several mechanisms, such as reduced ventilatory responses, VQ mismatch, and the Haldane effect, play a role.

**Overlap Syndrome:**When discussing overlap syndrome, the link between OSA and COPD is reciprocal, with a worsening of one disease process causing a worsening of the other. However, it is uncertain at what severity these combined disorders begin to have additive or synergistic clinical significance.

Overlap syndrome results in nocturnal oxygen desaturations (NOD) which is more profound than in COPD or OSA alone. Previous studies have defined NOD as ≥30% of the recording time (time in bed) with a transcutaneous SaO2 < 88% or 90%.

Three mechanisms are the main contributors to NOD, which lead to disrupted sleep and worsening clinical outcomes in these patients. These mechanisms include: alveolar hypoventilation, decreased ventilation-perfusion matching, and decreased end-expiratory volume (ERV).

The main culprit as a result of the mechanisms listed above is hypoxia, which causes the release of systemic inflammatory mediators such as C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), nuclear factor-kappa beta (NF-κB), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) in these patients.

As a result of these processes, which promote hypoxia and NOD, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are released. These free radical oxidants contribute to endothelial dysfunction and accelerated atherosclerosis, which contributes to the clinical presentations, particularly the increased risk for cardiovascular events associated with increased mortality and pulmonary hypertension risk.

The exact mechanism for developing OSA in patients with COPD is still contested. Studies have proposed protective mechanisms for developing OSA in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. These include larger end-expiratory lung volumes (EELV), which favor tracheal traction reducing airway resistance and stabilizing the upper airway, also contributing to reducing the loop gain.

Conversely, an increased loop gain promotes recurrent apneas, and the higher the loop gain, the more unstable the respiratory control system is.

Other plausible mechanisms related to inflammatory airway swelling with increased sputum production increase upper airway resistance and predispose to snoring and obstructive sleep apnea. In addition, the expiratory snoring and flow limitation has been shown to predict the presence of airflow obstruction on spirometry.

Patients with overlap syndrome have higher sympathetic activity and reduced parasympathetic activity measured by sympathetic and parasympathetic modulation of heart rate, compared to patients with OSA or COPD alone. In addition, research suggests that individuals with overlap syndrome have increased arterial stiffness, more so than patients with OSA alone, suggesting another underlying mechanism for cardiac disease.

# History and Physical

The clinical characteristics specific to overlap syndrome often coexist with the common presentations of COPD and OSA. For example, COPD commonly presents with sputum production, shortness of breath, cough, wheezing, forgetfulness, confusion, and trouble sleeping, likely related to sleep-disordered breathing. Obstructive sleep apnea commonly presents with daytime sleepiness, loud snoring, gasping for air, choking, and the patient's sleeping partner often observes snoring, which may progress to apneic episodes.

In addition to the common symptoms of the individual diseases, COPD and OSA, overlap syndrome exhibits increased hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and pulmonary hypertension, as previously discussed. Consequently, morning headaches resulting from hypercapnia, cyanosis resulting from hypoxemia, and peripheral edema resulting from cor pulmonale are expected to be particularly prevalent in individuals with overlap syndrome.

# Evaluation

**Diagnosis**

- The gold standard for detecting sleep disturbances in overlap syndrome is polysomnography. Current recommendations by the American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society state that individuals with mild COPD and clinical evidence of pulmonary hypertension should be evaluated with overnight testing for possible obstructive sleep apnea.

- In one study, the presence of expiratory snoring using integrated flow and snore signal predicted the presence of an obstructive ventilatory defect on a pulmonary function test defined by FEV1/FVC <0.7.

**Pulmonary Function Testing**

- Overlap syndrome patients may have a predilection for more severe lung hyperinflation, quantified by a reduced IC/TLC ratio. It has been suggested that the IC/TLC ratio may provide a better measure of lung disease severity than FEV1. This hyperinflation is suspected of worsening sleep quality in overlap syndrome, possibly due to increased work of breathing while in the recumbent position; this mechanism is not well understood and requires further evaluation.

- The gold standard for diagnosing COPD is spirometry and is defined as a post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC ratio of <0.7, which can be further classified based on spirometry grade (SG) as mild obstruction (SG 1, FEV1 ≥ 60%), moderate obstruction (SG 2, FEV1 between 30 and 60%) and severe obstruction (SG 3, FEV1 < 30%).

- The severity of obstruction measured by the FEV1/FVC ratio corresponds with the likelihood of persistent hypoxemia.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

- There are no well-documented laboratory evaluations that are consistent with overlap syndrome. However, a single-center study evaluated the association between microalbuminuria in patients with overlap syndrome versus OSA alone. Microalbuminuria was more prevalent in patients with overlap syndrome. However, when adjusting for confounding variables such as diabetes mellitus and increased BMI, which are independent risk factors for microalbuminuria, it was discovered that overlap syndrome was not an independent risk factor for microalbuminuria.

- Overlap syndrome patients exhibit higher NOD (i.e., decreased mean peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) and longer sleep duration with SpO2 less than 90%).

- Laboratory testing is not routinely indicated for these patients and, if obtained, may demonstrate an increase in serum bicarbonate due to chronic hypercapnia, which can be associated which chronic stable COPD.

**Screening**

- In terms of screening tests, overnight oximetry can be useful in detecting nocturnal hypoxia during sleep. A cyclical (sawtooth) pattern may be seen on nocturnal oximetry and may suggest OSA in COPD patients; polysomnography investigations should confirm this.

- Overlap syndrome patients demonstrated higher COPD assessment test (CAT), Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS), Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), and STOP-Bang questionnaire (SBQ) scores than COPD patients without OSA.

- The Berlin Questionnaire identifies patients who are at increased risk of suffering from sleep apnea.

- Screening tests such as home sleep apnea testing (HSAT) have shown significant sensitivity in diagnosing obstructive sleep apnea in COPD. However, current recommendations discourage the use of HSAT in patients with severe chronic respiratory illness due to the following limitations:

- The inability of HSAT to detect hypoventilation as a cause of hypoxemia can result in inadequate oxygen treatment or inappropriate PAP prescription.

- HSAT is often used with auto-PAP treatment. This may be followed by an unwarranted rise in expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP), which may aggravate hyperinflation and worsen lung function in COPD.

- The oxygen desaturation index (ODI) is a frequently used screening tool for determining the severity of nocturnal hypoxemia. The ODI is the number of episodes of oxygen desaturation per hour of sleep, where oxygen desaturation is defined as a reduction in blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) to less than 3% below baseline. Increased ODI is related to the production of inflammatory markers and is superior to AHI in predicting cardiovascular risk.

**Radiographic**

- Lung hyperinflation is commonly seen on radiographic imaging due to air trapping resulting from airway collapse while exhaling. This results in the retention of carbon dioxide (CO2). Additional findings of chest imaging may include diaphragmatic flattening, an increase in anterior-posterior diameter, and bronchial wall thickening, which may be found in the chronic bronchitis COPD subtype.

# Treatment / Management

**Treatment of Nocturnal Oxygen Desaturation**

The most appropriate and well-established therapeutic option for COPD-OSA overlap is positive airway pressure (PAP). Studies have shown that patients with hypoxemia, COPD, and concomitant OSA treated with PAP have an increased survival rate than those who refuse PAP therapy.

Likewise, PAP therapy for patients with overlap syndrome was associated with fewer hospitalizations and emergency room visits from any cause, a lower rate of severe acute COPD exacerbations, and lower healthcare costs.

**OSA Predominant**

- Standard treatment is continuous PAP (CPAP) or auto-adjusting CPAP mode.

**COPD Predominant**

- When deciding on the type of PAP therapy for COPD-predominant overlap syndrome, it is essential to consider the phenotypic differences of COPD. The emphysematous type may have increased sleep-related hypoventilation due to anatomical changes resulting in the downward displacement of the diaphragm and accessory muscle paralysis during REM sleep. These patients have been shown to benefit from CPAP or EPAP to nullify patients' auto-PEEP. This therapy also supports ventilation and reduces muscle fatigue. Titrating the CPAP is crucial, and studies have shown that if the applied PEEP exceeds auto-PEEP, this can increase the expiratory load and thus dampen ventilation and worsen lung function.

- In the chronic bronchitic phenotype, BiPAP is more appropriate as it supports ventilation and has been shown to improve quality of life and dyspnea and reduce mortality and hospitalizations.

- Recent studies evaluate high-intensity NIV use, particularly in COPD patients with chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure. This strategy utilizes high IPAP settings and backup respiratory rate to achieve increased minute ventilation to normalize PaCO2. This strategy is currently under investigation.

- To summarize, the choice of PAP depends mainly on the phenotype predominating in overlap syndrome. For OSA, the standard choice is CPAP. With COPD, it depends on whether obesity or emphysema predominates. With the chronic bronchitis phenotype and increased BMI, BiPAP is the preferred choice. When emphysematous COPD with hypoventilation predominates, high-intensity NIV is still currently being evaluated and may be of benefit.

**Pharmacologic Therapies**

- Patients suffering from nocturnal hypoxemia have shown benefits with inhaled long-acting beta-agonist and anticholinergic treatment, with mean nocturnal oxygen saturation around 2% to 3% greater on each treatment compared to placebo alone, although neither medication affects sleep quality.

- Theophylline also reduces nocturnal hypoxemia and has been shown to benefit OSA by reducing the AHI. The proposed mechanism is stimulation of the central respiratory drive and may be more beneficial in central sleep apnea. Side effects limit the use of this medication.

- The efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) is still currently under debate. A study has shown improvement in AHI, nocturnal hypoxemia, daytime PaCO2, and improved lung function by decreasing inflammation. Unfortunately, other studies demonstrate that ICS may increase myopathy risk, leading to worsening upper airway collapsibility.

- Respiratory stimulants such as acetazolamide are not recommended in the setting of overlap syndrome. Their use has been shown to improve oxygenation; however, clinical benefit has not been demonstrated. Additionally, such medications' side effect profiles can potentially cause harm, such as worsening respiratory acidosis in severe COPD.

**Supplemental Oxygen**

- Supplemental nocturnal oxygen may be necessary when considerable NODs continue after the patient's medication regimen has been optimized, particularly in individuals with COPD. Supplemental oxygen does not appear to be related to an increased risk of hypercapnia in these patients.

- Supplemental oxygenation can improve nocturnal oxygenation. However, studies have demonstrated that nocturnal oxygen alone increases obstructive events. Earlier studies on nocturnal supplemental oxygen in apnea-prone COPD patients showed increased PVCs. Oxygen in this population should be used cautiously when the individual has known CAD or left ventricular dysfunction. Thus oxygen therapy alone is not recommended for the treatment of overlap syndrome.

- In the recent International Nocturnal Oxygen (INOX) trial, nocturnal supplemental oxygen did not reduce mortality or delay the progression of long-term oxygen therapy in COPD patients with nocturnal hypoxemia.

- Studies have suggested that the effects of nasal high-flow air on a nocturnal gas exchange may be superior to those of oxygen supplementation. It may also benefit OSA by providing a stimulating effect on breathing.

**Lifestyle Modifications**

- In both OSA and COPD, structured exercise programs and pulmonary rehabilitation have been demonstrated to improve AHI, daytime sleepiness, and overall sleep quality. Particularly in COPD patients, structured exercise regimens are intended to address skeletal muscle atrophy.

- Pulmonary rehab has been shown to improve mood index, dyspnea scores, and quality of life and reduce hospitalization frequency.

- Weight loss has well-documented benefits for patients with OSA and obesity. Conversely, cachexia is associated with increased mortality in patients with advanced COPD. There is a clear distinction between therapeutic goal-directed weight loss and cachexia as part of the pathologic process in the end stages of COPD. As stated above, COPD patients can benefit significantly from a structured exercise program such as pulmonary rehabilitation.

- All patients must be counseled on smoking cessation, and this will reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with overlap syndrome.

# Differential Diagnosis

COPD-OSA overlap syndrome may be similar in presentation to other overlapping respiratory diseases.  An example is an asthma-COPD overlap.  The COPD component will remain the same and can be further subdivided into phenotypic types.  Pulmonary function testing and symptomatology consistent with asthma will help differentiate these pathologies and the lack of OSA symptoms.

Regarding obstructive sleep apnea, there are several differentials to consider, including chronic insufficient sleep, dyspnea due to pulmonary edema, idiopathic hypersomnia, nocturnal panic attacks, nonobstructive alveolar hypoventilation, obesity-hypoventilation syndrome (Pickwickian syndrome), periodic limb movement disorder, and simple snoring.  Polysomnography and AHI are necessary to differentiate these other common presentations.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Currently, there exist multiple ongoing clinical trials to evaluate emerging treatment strategies for overlap syndrome in the various phenotypic subtypes. One study explores NIV's potential benefit on overlap syndrome (NCT03184714). Another randomized controlled trial examines whether early diagnosis and the initiation of PAP therapy in hospitalized patients will reduce 30-day readmission rates. Lastly, an ongoing intervention clinical trial to compare CPAP vs. BiPAP therapy in overlap syndrome is in progress. These trials will delineate the appropriate treatment for overlap syndrome patients and hopefully improve clinical outcomes.

# Prognosis

Overlap syndrome exhibits worsened clinical outcomes compared to individuals with COPD alone, including an increased risk for cardiovascular morbidity, hospitalization due to COPD exacerbations, and all-cause mortality.

# Complications

Worsening nocturnal oxygen desaturations result in increased mortality and morbidity primarily from increased cardiovascular risk, including increased risk for the development of pulmonary hypertension and new-onset atrial fibrillation, and are associated with a high incidence of acute exacerbations of COPD.

Those with overlap syndrome have objectively decreased quality of life (assessed by the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire) than those with COPD alone.

Complications resulting from improper treatment strategy can lead to decreased ventilation, worsening lung function, and poor adherence to therapy. For example, studies have shown that emphysema patients had decreased CPAP adherence rates compared to their phenotypic counterparts with obesity.

# Consultations

When there is a concern for overlap syndrome, patients should be referred to a pulmonologist/sleep medicine specialist. A patient can then undergo formal evaluation with polysomnography and pulmonary function testing. These tests will help delineate the diagnosis, provide titration of PAP therapy, and optimize pharmacologic therapy and supplemental oxygen as necessary.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Providing proper education about an overlap syndrome to each patient is crucial to strengthening the patient-physician relationship. This could be as simple as providing resources to help patients safely and realistically lose weight through a dietary plan or structured exercise regimen and pulmonary rehabilitation. Additionally, providing resources on properly caring for any CPAP or BiPAP device can ensure they are functioning correctly and avoid unnecessary complications.

When possible, having patients undergo polysomnography at a sleep lab versus a home sleep study has been shown to improve compliance, in part because the patient can receive education by a trained sleep lab technologist and sleep medicine physician so that the patient can better understand their equipment, how to use it, and what to do when it is not functioning properly.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Diagnosing, managing, and treating overlap syndrome can be a difficult task to undertake and would not be possible without the coordinated effort between clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and lab technicians, operating as an interprofessional healthcare team, as well as the patients themselves. A patient's first interaction with the healthcare team is often with the nursing staff. Patients will often express their reason for visiting with the nursing staff before the physician can see the patient. At this point, screening questionnaires, as mentioned above, are a crucial first step in evaluation. The physician can then analyze these questionnaires. Next, a primary care clinician may refer the patient to a specialist, such as a pulmonologist or sleep medicine clinician.

When further workup is necessary, for example, in a formal sleep study with polysomnography, there is coordination between physicians to set up the appropriate screening, lab technicians to run and maintain necessary equipment, and nursing staff to further help with patient care and coordinating appointments. Lab titrations of PAP therapy are critical to providing patients with treatment tailored to their specific needs based on the severity of the disease and anatomical variations between individuals.

Nursing care goes beyond their role in clinic visits or the inpatient setting. Home nursing care also provides an essential role, particularly in patients who may have difficulties performing activities of daily living on their own. Home visits from skilled nurses can help identify deficiencies in the patient's care, whether equipment malfunction, noncompliance, or misuse of therapies. In addition, the nursing staff is necessary when educating patients to help them understand how to use medications and medical devices appropriately.

Pharmacists play a vital role in the interdisciplinary team when pharmacological therapy is involved. They can provide patients with the necessary respiratory medications and are also available to help answer patients' questions regarding pharmacologic interventions when the physician or nursing staff is not immediately available. Each component of the interprofessional healthcare system is crucial to provide patients with the best care and education to improve each patient's quality of life and clinical outcomes. [Level 5]