The venous drainage of the heart consists of 3 separate systems. See figure 1. The first major system is the coronary sinus which receives approximately 60% of the total cardiac venous return from posterior myocardium via several tributaries and opens into the right atrium. The second system consists of the anterior cardiac veins, which also opens into the right atrium and drains most of the remaining 40%. There are many anastomotic connections between these 2 systems.

Lastly, the heart is also drained by a third minor system the thebesian veins, consisting of many small veins, venae cordis minimae, that drain directly into all chambers of the heart. Sometimes the thebesian vessels can drain up to 50% of the total cardiac venous return. Therefore, considering these anastomotic connections between the coronary sinus and the anterior cardiac veins, and the drainage capability of the thebesian veins, coronary sinus thrombosis would, at least theoretically, appear to be a relatively benign entity, but it is not.

"Corona" means crown in Latin. Since this vessel forms a partial crown like circle around the heart, it is aptly named "Coronary." The length and diameter of the coronary sinus are variable. The overall size is affected by several factors such as volume status of the body, preload from the venous return, preexisting history of heart disease or heart surgery, amount of atrial myocardial tissue contributing to the vessel wall.

The coronary sinus is formed by a collection of veins joined together to form a large bore vessel, the coronary sinus, that collects blood from the heart muscle

- Great cardiac vein

- Oblique vein of the left heart

- Posterior vein of the left ventricle

- Middle cardiac vein

- Small cardiac vein

The mechanism involving coronary sinus thrombosis has been suspected to be similar to thrombosis at other sites, for example, endothelial damage, hypercoagulability, and venous stasis, a triad, proposed by Virchow in 1856. Previously described cases of coronary sinus thrombosis had involved each of these factors.

The most common mechanism for triggering thrombosis is endothelial damage during invasive cardiac procedures. In cases of spontaneous thrombosis, it is perhaps the chronic stasis, as in atrial fibrillation or hypercoagulable state, as in malignancy.

Acute coronary sinus occlusion causes abrupt elevation of the transcapillary pressure which, in turn, causes increased myocardial perfusion pressure even in the presence of normal healthy coronary arteries. In addition, the venous and capillary engorgement may directly result in direct myocardial injury. Both mechanisms may lead to a transudative effusion

Chronic nonocclusive coronary sinus thrombosis may not increase coronary venous pressures to the same degree but is at risk of embolization, extension into the right atrium, and fragmentation which may also embolize to the pulmonary artery, or to the systemic circulation in the presence of an atrial septal defect. Chronic progressive occlusion has also been described to be well tolerated, probably due to an efficient collateral circulation between the coronary sinus, anterior cardiac and Thebesian venous systems. On rare occasions, it could be asymptomatic without any signs of overt ischemia.