The skin is primarily made up of three layers. The upper layer is the epidermis, the layer below the epidermis is the dermis, and the third and deepest layer is the subcutaneous tissue.

- The epidermis, the outermost layer of skin, provides a waterproof barrier and contributes to skin tone.

- The dermis, found beneath the epidermis, contains connective tissue, hair follicles, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and sweat glands.

- The deeper subcutaneous tissue (hypodermis) is made of fat and connective tissue.

The epidermis is further divided into five layers on thick skin like the palms and soles (stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, stratum lucidum, and stratum corneum, while in other places, the epidermis only has four layers, lacking the stratum lucidum).

The dermis is divided into two layers, the papillary dermis (the upper layer) and the reticular dermis (the lower layer).

The functions of the skin include:

- **Protection**against microorganisms, dehydration, ultraviolet light, and mechanical damage; the skin is the first physical barrier that the human body has against the external environment.

- **Sensation**of pain, temperature, touch, and deep pressure starts with the skin.

- **Mobility:**The skin allows smooth movement of the body.

- **Endocrine activity:**The skin initiates the biochemical processes involved in Vitamin D production, which is essential for calcium absorption and normal bone metabolism.

- **Exocrine**activity: This occurs by the release of water, urea, and ammonia. Skin secretes products like sebum, sweat, and pheromones and exerts important immunologic functions by secreting bioactive substances such as cytokines.

- **Immunity**development against pathogens.

- **Regulation of  Temperature.**Skin participates in thermal regulation by conserving or releasing heat and helps maintain the body’s water and homeostatic balance.