Risk factors for restenosis are classified based on patient features, lesion type, and procedural factors (Table 1). Biological factors associated with an increased risk of restenosis include diabetes mellitus and renal insufficiency. In a multivariate regression analysis, diabetes mellitus in itself increases the risk of BMS-ISR by 30% to 50%.

Biochemical factors such as elevated serum matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), the proteolytic enzymes that degrade the extracellular matrix (ECM), and facilitate the proliferation and migration of endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells, has been associated with a higher risk of ISR. Hematological indices, including neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio, platelet/lymphocyte ratio, red blood cell distribution width, mean platelet volume, and platelet distribution width, have been hypothesized in some studies to predict the occurrence of increased risk for DES-ISR.AGTR, GPX1, KAT2B, MMP12, FGB, and VDR genes as being associated with an increased risk of restenosis.

**Procedural risk factors**

The most known and preventable cause for ISR is stent under-expansion. Stent under-expansion can be due to stent under-sizing, low-pressure deployment, inadequate vessel preparation, or extensive vessel calcification leading to an under-expanded stent. However, under-sizing is not the only risk factor for ISR. Failure to stent from healthy segment to healthy segment, or geographic miss, is another common risk factor. Geographic miss appears as a characteristic “candy-wrapper” appearance at the edge of a stented segment. Additionally, stent fracture is another possible mechanical precipitant for ISR. Finally, the development and use of DES has led to the recognition of drug resistance and local hypersensitivity reactions as a potential cause of ISR and DES failure.