During surgical procedures, mechanical trauma (incision, clamping, or manipulation of the vessel) may disrupt the atherosclerotic plaques. During angiography or angioplasty, catheter manipulations disrupt the plaques, exposing the soft, cholesterol-laden core of the plaque to the arterial circulation. Anticoagulants or thrombolytic therapy prevent the formation of a protective thrombus overlying an ulcerated plaque or could initiate the disruption of a plaque by causing hemorrhage into it exposing them to the hemodynamic stress of circulating blood. Once in the circulation, cholesterol crystal emboli lodge in small arteries, 150 mm to 200 mm in diameter. These cause partial occlusion of the vessel and distal ischemia. This is followed by an inflammatory reaction, intimal proliferation, and intravascular fibrosis. The entire process results in the further obliteration of the lumen and more ischemic changes.

The exact mechanism underlying atheroembolic renal disease is not fully known. The local tissue necrosis and inflammatory response invoked by cholesterol crystals play a significant role. Furthermore, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and complement activation also contribute to the development of atheroembolic renal disease.

**Necroinflammation**

Cholesterol crystals cause tissue damage directly by mechanical obstruction leading to the obstruction of the vessels, tissue ischemia, and cell necrosis, which is referred to as “necroinflammation”.

Cholesterol crystals are appearing as an endogenous instigator of inflammation. Tschopp, Martinon, and colleagues reported that cholesterol crystals induce the activation of interleukin-1β in mononuclear phagocytes via the nucleotide-binding domain (NOD)-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome.

**Activation of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAAS)**

Blood pressure in patients with AERD is difficult to control, as it has been found to contribute to the activation of RAAS. Obstruction of the renal vasculature by cholesterol crystals reduces focal blood perfusion and induces the activation of RAAS, exerting detrimental effects through oxidative stress. This in turn leads to apoptosis, inflammation, and fibrosis.[

**Complement Activation**

Complement factors are associated with the inflammatory response secondary to atherosclerosis. Cholesterol crystals trigger both complement pathways, classical and alternative.