The lateral collateral ligament (LCL), also known as the fibular ligament serves as one of the key stabilizers of the knee joint. Originating on the lateral epicondyle of the femur and inserting on the fibular head, the lateral collateral ligament's primary purpose is to prevent excess varus stress and posterior-lateral rotation of the knee. Although the least frequent of all knee injuries, high suspicion is warranted for both lateral collateral ligament and posterior-lateral corner (PLC) injuries on all knee exams. The goal of this article is to review the anatomy, etiology, history and physical, diagnosis, and treatment of such injuries.

**Anatomy**

Origin and Insertion: Originating 1.4 mm proximal and 3.1 mm posterior to the lateral epicondyle of the femur, the LCL runs approximately 0.69 mm along the lateral portion of the knee. It inserts 28.4 mm distal to the fibular styloid tip, where it there inhabits nearly 38% of the fibular head.

Anatomic differences from the MCL: The LCL differs from the medial collateral ligament (MCL), in the fact that it is known to be more cord-like, rather than fan-like, and does not attach to a meniscus or joint capsule.

Nerve/Blood Supply: Nerve supply to the LCL stems from the common fibular nerve. Blood supply ultimately arises from the popliteal artery, primarily from branches of the superior and inferior lateral genicular arteries.

Surrounding Structures: Deep to the LCL, lays the popliteus tendon (PLT), which measures, on average, 55mm in length. Superficial to the LCL is the iliotibial band (ITB), which inserts along the anterolateral portion of the knee at Gerdy's tubercle.

**Biomechanics**

The LCL is the primary resistor of varus stress in all degrees of knee flexion, with the popliteus tendon, cruciate ligaments, iliotibial band, biceps tendon, and lateral gastrocnemius tendon assisting as secondary varus stabilizers.

The LCL and PLT make up the primary resistors of external tibial rotation of the knee in 0-30 degrees of knee flexion. As knee flexion increases past 60 degrees, studies show that the popliteofibular ligament (PFL) provides resistance to external tibial rotation.

Although not primary stabilizers, studies show that the LCL and posterior-lateral corner structures play a minor role in stabilizing anterior and posterior tibial translation when the cruciate ligaments are torn.