**Indices**

**Goldman Risk Index**

Based on the evidence that different patient-specific [e.g., older age, kidney disease, high American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) status] and surgery-specific (e.g., type of surgery, complexity) conditions are useful as predictors, several tools have been designed by combining and scoring these factors for assessing cardiac risk. The Goldman Risk Index (GRI), also known as the Cardiac Risk Index in Non-cardiac Surgery, was developed by Dr. Goldman in 1977. This tool evaluates patient demographics, comorbidities, current signs of heart failure, electrocardiographic signs, general medical conditions, and the type of operation type to assign an appropriate class that correlates with a specific postoperative risk for complications.

**Revised Cardiac Risk Index**

The Revised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI) was developed in 1999 by Lee et al. and also went by the name of the Lee Index. It evaluates six independent variables associated with increased cardiac risk. These clinical risk factors include high-risk surgery, ischaemic heart disease, a history of congestive cardiac failure, a history of cerebrovascular disease, insulin therapy for diabetes, and preoperative serum creatinine of more than 2 mg/dl (or over 177 micromol/L). Because validation studies have shown its effectiveness, it represents the most recommended tool for rapid perioperative risk assessment.

**Toward Other Indices**

The original Goldman index and derivates originated several years ago. Since the time of their development, there have been significant changes in the management of surgical patients. Diagnostic and therapeutic changes also affect anesthetic management. Furthermore, many controversies exist regarding RCRI reliability in all surgical settings and populations. Moreover, because the Lee index is a population-derived tool, it cannot be used to assign individual patient risk. It has been proposed to ameliorate the RCRI by including additional glomerular filtration rate cut points, the age factor, the history of peripheral vascular disease, functional capacity parameters, and surgical procedural category.

**Scoring**

**Goldman Risk Index Scoring**

The original GRI identifies a risk index class based on the presence or absence of nine preoperative criteria potentially associated with postoperative cardiac complications. These factors are:

- Age over 70 years (5 points)

- Myocardial infarction occurring within the last 6 months (10 points)

- Presence of heart failure signs (jugular vein distention, JVD, or ventricular gallop) (11 points)

- Significant aortic stenosis (3 points)

- Arrhythmia (other than sinus or premature atrial contractions) (7 points)

- The presence of 5 or more premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) per minute (7 points)

- Medical history or conditions including the presence of PO2 less than 60; PCO2 greater than 50; K below 3; HCO3 under 20; BUN over 50; serum creatinine greater than 3; elevated SGOT; chronic liver disease; or the state of being bedridden (3 points)

- Type of operation: emergency (4 points); intraperitoneal, intrathoracic, or aortic (3 points)

Subsequently, it assigns a class (a risk index) from I-IV, listed below.

- Class I (0 to 5 points): correlates with a 1.0% risk of cardiac complications during or around noncardiac surgery.

- Class II (6 to 12 points): correlates with a 7.0% risk of cardiac complications during or around noncardiac surgery.

- Class III (13 to 25 points): correlates with a 14% risk of cardiac complications during or around noncardiac surgery.

- Class IV (26 to 53 points): correlates with a 78% risk of cardiac complications during or around noncardiac surgery.

**Revised Cardiac Risk Index Scoring**

The RCRI score identifies a risk class based on the presence or absence of six factors (predictors) associated with preoperative cardiac complications.

These predictors are the type of surgery (intraperitoneal, intrathoracic, or supra-inguinal vascular), history of ischemic heart disease, history of congestive heart failure, history of cerebrovascular disease, diabetes requiring preoperative treatment with insulin, and a preoperative serum creatinine level over 2mg/dL (or greater than 177 micromol/L).

Subsequently, it assigns a class from I-IV listed below.

- Class I [0 predictores] correlates with a 0.4% 30-day risk of death, myocardial ischemia (MI), or cardiac arrest (CA).

- Class II [1 predictores] correlates with a 0.9% 30-day risk of death, MI, or CA.

- Class III [2 predictores] correlates with a 6.6% 30-day risk of death, MI, or CA.

- Class IV [greater than or equal to 3 predictors] correlates with a more than 11% 30-day risk of death, MI, or CA.

**Myocardial Infarction & Cardiac Arrest Calculator**

The MICA calculator combines age, functional status (partially dependent, totally dependent), ASA status, creatinine [normal, elevated (over 1.5 mg/dl or 133 mmol/L), unknown], and type of surgery. The newer NSQIP tool includes a set of 20 patient risk factors in addition to the type of surgery. Table 1 shows a comparison between RCRI and MICA indices.