ERAS pathways were first implemented at the start of the 21st century. For the past two decades, ERAS protocols have successfully improved perioperative mortality, morbidity, reduced length of hospital stay, decreased complications, and expedited recovery after major surgeries. This protocol is a multimodal approach that was instituted to enhance recovery postoperatively. These pathways are evidence-based guidelines applied at every stage of the perioperative period, including the preoperative, intraoperative, postoperative, and rehabilitation periods. ERAS protocols were initially implemented with colorectal surgeries and have since expanded to most major surgical procedures.

ERAS protocols have been shown to alter physiological and psychological responses to surgery. The basis of implementing ERAS pathways resides in the maintenance of patients' preoperative physiologic and psychologic response by reducing the stress response throughout the perioperative period.

Coordination is required between members of the perioperative period to ensure successful implementation of ERAS protocols, including the surgical team, anesthesia team, nursing staff, preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative personnel. The anesthesiologist is a key member of this team, optimizing the patient in the preoperative period, monitoring the patient in the intraoperative period to ensure hemodynamic stability, adequate depth of anesthesia, and analgesia, and ensuring optimal postoperative care. The anesthesiologist plays the most critical role in managing ERAS pathways, serving as the bridge between the preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative periods.