There are no effective medical treatments. If a varicocele is causing pain or discomfort, the use of analgesics and scrotal support can be used initially. When a varicocele is treated surgically, it is usually an outpatient procedure. The most common approaches are retroperitoneal abdominal laparoscopic, infra-inguinal, sub-inguinal below the groin, or intrascrotal. Regardless of approach, avoidance of the vas deferens and the testicular artery during surgery is mandatory.

Percutaneous embolization can also be done, usually by interventional radiology. This involves passing a catheter from the femoral vein, up the vena cava, laterally into the left renal vein, and then inferiorly into the spermatic vein. An 89% success rate with this technique has been reported.

Microsurgical techniques allow for the identification of small anastomosing vessels that might otherwise be missed. It also permits better identification of the testicular artery thereby minimizing its inadvertent injury.

Some pediatric urologists prefer a retroperitoneal, laparoscopic approach which allows for control of the spermatic vein very near its insertion into a left renal vein. However, this technique has a relatively high recurrence rate (15%).

Complications include hematoma, hydrocele, infection, scrotal tissue injury, and arterial injury to the testis that may result in loss of the testicle.

It is unclear in the literature which of the procedures improves male fertility more.

Couples with infertility as a result of nonobstructive azoospermia and a varicocele may benefit from microsurgical testicular sperm extraction and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI).

The indications to remove a varicocele include relief of pain, reducing testicular atrophy, and infertility. Candidates for repair meet the following conditions:

- Infertility in males, normal fertility in females (although female infertility factors are not a contraindication for varicocele surgery in the male)

- Palpable varicocele

- Abnormal semen parameters ("stress pattern")

- Pain related to the varicocele

- In adolescents when associated with failure of testicular development and growth

If bilateral varicoceles are found, both are repaired at the time of surgery.  If there is a clinically significant left varicocele but only a subclinical right varicocele, there is evidence that repairing both may ultimately be beneficial in producing a pregnancy.

Following surgery, approximately 70% have improved semen parameters, and 40% to 60% have improved conception rates. This improvement in semen quality will typically become noticeable at approximately 3 to 4 months after surgery and become final at 6 months.

Meta-analyses have indicated that the expected improvement in sperm count from varicocele repair is 9.71 to 12.32 × 10 ml while motility improves 10.86% and morphology 9.69%.  Surgery for infertility is not recommended for subclinical varicoceles by the majority of experts as this will not typically affect fertility or sperm parameters.

Alternate venous drainage from the testicle includes the cremasteric veins and the deferential vein.

Recently, the use of intraoperative indocyanine green angiography has been reported to help identify the testicular artery during microsurgical dissection for varicoceles. The indocyanine green dye is given intravenously during the procedure. This causes arterial vessels to demonstrate an infrared fluorescence which facilitates their identification thereby preventing inadvertent arterial injuries.