Myasthenia gravis, similar to other autoimmune disorders, occurs in genetically susceptible individuals and has no specific cure. Current treatment regimens aim to reduce the level of inflammation and improve the patient's symptoms. It requires sound professional coordination between members of the interprofessional team; this includes the primary care doctor, pharmacist, nurse, physiotherapist, and a neurologist for better patient-centered management and outcome.

The primary care doctor should educate the patient about the precipitating events that could trigger an attack, the treatment modalities available, and the long term complications. The patient should be allowed to choose among the available treatment strategies. The long term treatment of myasthenia gravis requires that the patient be advised about the importance of medication compliance. The family members may be included in the care of the patient once consent is obtained.

The pharmacist educates the patient about drugs that can precipitate an attack, risk of possible drug interactions, and the importance of reaching out to the medical team before taking any newly prescribed medications.

The nurses encourage the patients to follow preventive measures like handwashing, smoking cessation, and age-appropriate vaccinations. These can prevent infections that could trigger a myasthenic attack. In cases where the patient is admitted for a myasthenic crisis, proper coordination between the critical care specialist, nurse practitioner, and the chest physiotherapist ensures a speedy recovery with minimal complications. Awareness about the risk of relapse and the association of myasthenia gravis with other autoimmune disorders reiterates the importance of a regular followup.