Obtaining a complete history and performing a good physical exam is very important when trying to find the underlying cause of secondary hypertension. Development of hypertension in extremes of age accelerated end-organ dysfunction due to hypertension, resistant hypertension, and sudden rise in blood pressure in hypertensive individuals, who are stable on drug therapy, are classical features of secondary hypertension.

- Snoring, obesity and daytime sleepiness could be indicative of obstructive sleep apnea.

- History of renal insufficiency, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, and edema may warrant further evaluation of chronic kidney disease (renal parenchymal disease).

- History of recurrent urinary tract infections, kidney stones, acute/chronic abdominal/flank pain, hematuria, and progressive renal failure may point towards autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (renal parenchymal disease).

- Worsening renal function with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) and a systolic/ diastolic abdominal bruit point towards the reno-vascular disease.

- Episodic hypertension, headache, and palpitation, associated with acute stress, in a perioperative setting, could be the signs of pheochromocytoma or paragangliomas.

- Decreased or delayed femoral pulses, radio femoral delay, and differences in the blood pressure in the arms are seen in the coarctation of the aorta and vasculitic causes of secondary hypertension.

- Weight gain, fatigue, weakness, hirsutism, amenorrhea, moon facies, dorsal hump, purple striae, and truncal obesity present in Cushing syndrome/disease.

- Fatigue, weight loss, hair loss, diastolic hypertension, and muscle weakness are seen in hypothyroidism.

- Heat intolerance, weight loss, palpitations, systolic hypertension, exophthalmos, tremor, and tachycardia will occur in hyperthyroidism.

- Kidney stones, osteoporosis, depression, lethargy, and muscle weakness present in hyperparathyroidism.

- Headaches, fatigue, visual problems, enlargement of the hands, feet, and tongue are features of acromegaly.

- Heartburn, Raynaud phenomenon, and nail pitting on the exam may be suggestive of scleroderma.