Exudative retinal detachment is multifactorial in origin, so the management approach is individualized depending on the type, severity, and stage of presentation of the disease. Exudative retinal detachment is mainly managed on the medical lines; surgical intervention is rarely indicated if all measures to improve the exudation medically fail.

Inflammatory Diseases like Vogt Koyanagi Harada syndrome and posterior scleritis should be treated with intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy at 1 g/day for 3-5 days, followed by a shift to oral steroids according to weight.

Along with corticosteroids, immunosuppressive agents such as methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine A, mycophenolate mofetil, and alkylating agents have been used successfully to treat VKH.

The American Uveitis Society and the International Uveitis Study Group, thus, have recommended immunosuppressive agents as mandatory in treating VKH to prevent recurrences; however, appropriate initial treatment of the disease. While high-dose corticosteroids also affect recurrences, as outlined above, so care must be taken to balance the initial treatment with the need for immunosuppressive agents later on.

Oral nonsteroidal can be effective with various appropriate regimens, such as ibuprofen 600 to 800 mg 4 times daily, piroxicam 20 mg daily, and Naproxen 375 mg twice daily, to name a few. In cases unresponsive to oral NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), high-dose systemic corticosteroids are often used, with typical doses of 1 mg/kg/day or approximately 60 mg of prednisone daily.

These are tapered slowly over several weeks, carefully considering potential side effects such as weight gain, mood instability, blood-sugar abnormalities, etc. If the patient continues to demonstrate active disease or is unable to tolerate corticosteroids, prompt corticosteroid-sparing immunosuppression is often warranted. Anti-metabolites such as methotrexate and mycophenolate mofetil are employed, often to their maximal doses of 25 mg/week of methotrexate or 1,500 mg twice daily of mycophenolate.

Malignant hypertensive retinopathy should be managed with the control of blood pressure and the cause of systemic hypertension.

Management options for CSCR include observation, laser, PDT (photodynamic therapy), and anti-VEGF (anti-vascular endothelial growth factor) agents. The RPE leakage sites, as seen on angiography, can be treated with laser photocoagulation. Such therapy seals the leakage point and hastens the resolution of subretinal fluid**.**

CSCR with a subfoveal leak, juxtafoveal leak, multiple leaks, and chronic cases with diffuse decompensation of RPE are better managed with PDT**.******Anti-VEGF therapy has been proposed to reduce choroidal hyperpermeability. They upregulate the tight junctions between endothelial cells and the reduction of vascular fenestrations.

Surgical intervention is considered the last resort for exudative retinal detachment due to various causes once all efforts to manage the disease medically fail.

- Scleral buckling with external drainage of the subretinal fluid with the laser of the nonperfused retina

- Pars plana vitrectomy with internal drainage of the subretinal fluid with laser delimitation of the nonperfused retina with or without endotamponade with expansile gases or silicone oil

Management of Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) depends on the stage of presentation:

- Stage I FEVR - Observation

- Stage II FEVR - Laser photocoagulation of the areas with abnormal vessels and ischemia (avascular zone)is recommended.

- Advanced stage - In cases of retinal detachment, a surgical approach is required. Scleral buckling and/or vitrectomy, along with lasering of the avascular zone, is recommended.

- Screening of the family members is advisable.

- A Dexa scan should be done to assess bone mineral density in FEVR patients with LRP5 mutation.

- The use of anti-VEGF is still a matter of debate at present. According to a study by Tagami M. et al., regression of neovascularization was noted after one intravitreal bevacizumab injection.

- A study by Henry CR et al. showed favorable results when intravitreal bevacizumab was used along with laser or surgical treatment.

- There are chances of worsening of tractional forces leading to the tractional retinal detachment on treatment with anti-VEGF injections, so proper guidelines are still awaited for the usage of anti-VEGF as an adjunct to laser or surgical therapy.

Treatment of Coats disease also depends on the stage of the disease.

- Mild cases without exudation can be observed.

- Direct laser photocoagulation of the telangiectatic vessels is useful in mild to moderate cases of exudation.

- Laser therapy will not be effective in cases of massive subretinal exudation and exudative retinal detachment. In such cases, cryotherapy with a double freeze-thaw technique is done over the diseased retina.

- Anti-VEGF medications and intravitreal corticosteroids can be used as adjunctive therapy before laser or surgical management, and they also help to reduce macular edema associated with exudation.

- Advanced stages of Coats disease have a very poor visual prognosis. Treatment in advanced stages is aimed at avoiding a painful blind eye and enucleation. Scleral buckling with external drainage or pars plana vitrectomy with or without endotamponade could be attempted to save the eye.

- Neovascular glaucoma could be treated with transscleral diode laser photocoagulation.

- Endstage painful blind eye should be enucleated if all measures to save the eye fail.

Exudative retinal detachment due to wound leak or hypotony after ocular surgery responds satisfactorily with timely wound suturing and anti-inflammatory agents coverage.

Radiation therapy is commonly used in the management of malignant uveal melanoma.

Choroidal hemangioma could be treated with various treatment options, including laser photocoagulation, low-dose external beam radiation, proton beam irradiation, gamma knife radiosurgery, radiotherapy, cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy with verteporfin, transpupillary thermotherapy, oral beta-blockers, or intravitreal anti-VEGF.

Infectious causes leading to exudative retinal detachment should be treated with appropriate antibiotics.

Pregnancy-induced hypertension can cause marked loss of visual acuity, but these changes are mostly reversible in the postpartum period.

Secondary exudative retinal detachment in systemic hematologic and vascular etiologies like disseminated intravascular coagulation, malignant hypertension, Goodpasture syndrome, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, post organ transplantation, renal failure, SLE, Wegener's granulomatosis can resolve once the primary disease is controlled and treated.

Exudative retinal detachment in hepatitis C patients treated with interferon-a and ribavirin improves with cessation of drugs and initiation of corticosteroid treatment.