The initial microvascular injury may be caused indirectly by upstream vascular occlusion or directly from a traumatic crush injury. Either mechanism results in varying degrees of endothelial insult. The initial ischemia triggers hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) that stimulate vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) release, associated with the enhanced permeability of capillaries and arterioles. Neutrophil aggregation and adhesion to sensitized endothelial cells result in further cellular permeability and the relaxation of the cell to cell junctions (diapedesis). The increased permeability leads to a greater diffusion of fluid across the tissues (edema) and extracellular extravasation of leukocytes. This leukocyte activation is part of the inflammatory response, concentrating and utilizing reactive oxygen species for the phagocytic process of killing bacteria. Ischemic hypoxia drives the affected tissue into anaerobic metabolism, resulting in adenosine 5´ triphosphate depletion and decreased intracellular pH with lactic acid accumulation.

Further ischemic injury may occur at the cellular level when calcium ion efflux occurs from inactivated adenosine triphosphatases, accompanied by the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, further impairing adenosine 5' triphosphate production. Other biochemical events occur that don’t directly relate to tissue injury, but when fueled by the reintroduction of oxygen when circulation is restored, trigger a cascade event of elements that exacerbates further injury and sometimes full end-organ failure in downstream flow.

Following reperfusion, the endothelial cells in their activated state produce more reactive oxygen species but less nitric oxide, a highly effective regulator of vascular tone, leukocyte adhesion, and platelet aggregation. The mechanisms leading to reperfusion injury are complex and still not fully understood but are likely related to a combination of factors, including:

- The rapid reintroduction of oxygen increases reactive oxygen species such as the potent superoxide anion and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), and reactive nitric oxide species (RNOS), overwhelming the already depleted source of antioxidant catalases.

- Intracellular calcium overload with the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore leads to mitochondrial swelling and apoptosis.

- Endothelial dysfunction with a pronounced inflammatory reaction occurs.