ICHD-3 has proposed the following diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of hemicrania continua:

- Unilateral headache fulfilling criteria 2-4

- Present for greater than 3 months, with exacerbations of moderate or greater intensity

- Either or both of the following:

- At least one of the following symptoms or signs, ipsilateral to the headache:
- 
- Conjunctival injection and/or lacrimation
- Nasal congestion and/or rhinorrhoea
- Eyelid edema
- Forehead and facial sweating
- Miosis and/or ptosis

- A sense of restlessness or agitation, or aggravation of the pain by movement

- Responds absolutely to therapeutic doses of indomethacin

- Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis.

The ICHD-3 diagnostic criterion focuses on three key features; (1) unilateral continuous pain for greater than 3 months, (2) presence of either ipsilateral cranial autonomic symptoms or agitation during exacerbations, (3) a complete response to indomethacin, which is one of the pathognomonic features of HC. A complete response to indomethacin is usually noted within two hours of indomethacin injection. The headache reappears within 6 to 24 hours of stopping indomethacin. Since indomethacin provides a dramatic relief, an indomethacin trial is proposed by a few authors in all chronic unilateral headaches.

Secondary conditions that may mimic HC include posttraumatic headache, post-craniotomy headache, intracranial space-occupying lesion, post-stroke headache, internal carotid artery (ICA) dissection or aneurysm, idiopathic intracranial hypertension, venous malformation, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, analgesic rebound headache, paraneoplastic, sinus pathologies, dental lesions, and temporomandibular joint pathologies.

Secondary causes of HC should be excluded by clinical features and appropriate investigations. A history of recent trauma should be elucidated from all patients. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain is recommended in all patients presenting with HC-like headaches. An angiography (MRA, CTA, or digital subtraction angiography) of the head and neck should be advised if a vascular pathology (e.g., ICA dissection or aneurysm) is suspected. The clinical features suggesting a vascular pathology include the short-term duration of symptoms, frequent exacerbations, neck pain, neck tenderness, focal neurological symptoms, Horner syndrome, or a history of trauma.