A good history and physical examination are the keys to diagnosis. It is also essential to take a history from the family and caregivers as some patients may lack insight into their disease. It is vital to characterize onset and early symptoms to differentiate from other types of dementia. It is important to obtain a good assessment of functional abilities like basic and individual activities of daily living.

A complete physical examination with a detailed neurological exam and mental status examination is needed to evaluate the disease stage and rule out other conditions. Comprehensive clinical assessment can provide reasonable diagnostic accuracy in most patients. A detailed neurological examination is essential to rule out other conditions. In Alzheimer's disease, the neurological exam is usually normal. The physical exam is normal except for anosmia. Anosmia is also found in patients with Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and TBI with or without dementia, but not in those with VCI or depression. In the advanced stages of Alzheimer's disease, patients do not have lateralized signs. They eventually become mute, fail to respond to verbal requests, remain confined to bed, and frequently slip into a persistent vegetative state. A mental status examination should assess concentration, attention, recent and remote memory, language, visuospatial functioning, praxis, and executive functioning.

Brief standard examinations like the mini-mental status examination are less sensitive and specific, although they can be used for screening.

All follow-up visits should include a full mental status examination to evaluate disease progression and the development of neuropsychiatric symptoms.