Mitochondrial beta-oxidation can be used to supply acetyl CoA to two separate pathways, depending on which tissue oxidation occurs. In skeletal and cardiac muscle, mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation leads to substrate production for the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, in the form of acetyl CoA, and provides ATP for the myocytes. However, in hepatocytes, fatty acid oxidation provides acetyl CoA for ketone body synthesis during prolonged fasting conditions, in which glycogen stores have been depleted. Mitochondrial beta-oxidation yields 4 ATP equivalents per round of oxidation, in the form of one FAD(2H) molecule and one NADH molecule, as well as one acetyl CoA molecule.

Beta oxidation requires specific enzymes to carry out the metabolism of fatty acids. For saturated fatty acids, such as palmitate (16:0) and stearate (18:0), a base set of enzymes catalyze the reactions to yield the above molecules. Additional enzymes may be required if the fatty acids to be oxidized are not saturated and, thus, contain double bonds, such as oleate (18:1). Differences in the molecular structure of fatty acids that require additional enzymes for metabolism, whether they are destined for beta-oxidation or not, will be discussed in the section headed “Molecular.”

Peroxisomal beta-oxidation is specialized in that it metabolizes very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), which are composed of 24-26 carbon units. Processing of these molecules proceeds in a similar fashion to mitochondrial beta-oxidation; however, some enzymatic steps differ and are discussed below.

Alpha oxidation of fatty acids occurs in the peroxisome as well; this metabolic pathway exists to degrade by-products of chlorophyll, a component of green vegetables in the diet. Phytanic acid is the primary molecule that requires the enzymes dedicated to alpha-oxidation. It derives from chlorophyll within ingested plant matter.

As previously mentioned, omega-oxidation, the third and final fatty acid oxidation pathway, occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum. This pathway exists to process large, water-insoluble fatty acids that would otherwise be toxic to the cell in higher concentrations.

Further details and mechanisms of these accessory pathways/enzymes to beta-oxidation is discussed below under the heading “Molecular.”