Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome can be challenging to diagnose for a variety of factors. One matter is, by virtue of its name and potential etiology, certain patients may be hesitant to offer historical clues (e.g., illicit drug use) to clinicians, which may complicate the clinician’s ability to rule in or rule out specific diagnoses. Another barrier to diagnosis includes the close resemblance of CHS to other pathologies, such as cyclical vomiting syndrome (CVS), also known as abdominal migraine due to such patients often having concurrent migraine-like symptoms, besides the fact that occasionally cannabis is used to treat CVS.

By nature of history, a necessary aspect in the diagnosis of cannabis hyperemesis syndrome is the use of cannabis, which happens to be the most used regulated substance in the world. Between 3 and 5% of the world's population has used cannabis at least once, with the majority of usages having been for non-prescribed purposes. Age is a significant correlation of cannabis smoking, and different countries vary in terms of age of the earliest use of cannabis. Approximately fifty percent of people in the United States have their first use of marijuana around the age of 20 years old. In the United States, there is male to female parity during adolescent years for the age of first marijuana usage. The ethnicity of cannabis users has changed from the 20th into the 21st century, with peoples identified as Hispanics representing a majority of cannabis users while in the modern era, non-Hispanic Whites make up the majority.