In head and neck melanoma, all suspicious lesions start with a biopsy with a method that will give a definitive diagnosis and depth of invasion. A shave biopsy should never be used for the evaluation of melanoma. Depth is needed in the evaluation of melanoma; therefore, an excisional biopsy should be performed with 2 mm margins.

**Biopsy Techniques**

Sometimes lymphoscintigraphy, sentinel lymph node mapping, is utilized in the evaluation of malignant melanoma. This may lead to one using different biopsy techniques. However, excisional biopsy is the most commonly used method. If lymphoscintigraphy is planned, an excisional biopsy may disrupt lymphatic drainage, whereas an incisional/punch will not.

Excisional biopsy: This is an acceptable method with small lesions and used with 1mm to 2mm margins.  If pathological examination results in malignant melanoma, then wide excision is necessary.

Incisional/punch biopsy: Through the thickest portion of the tumor. This allows for depth to be examined, does not disrupt lymphatic drainage, does not disrupt the borders. Often controversial, depending on the source.

**Baseline Laboratory**

- Complete blood count (CBC)

- Complete chemistry panel including total protein, albumin, liver transaminases, lactate dehydrogenase)

- Note lactate dehydrogenase has been used in staging workup for melanoma of the head and neck.

**Radiological Imaging**

**Chest X-ray**

- Chest x-ray is usually the only imaging obtained in a melanoma workup unless physical examination or laboratory results raise concern or suspicion for distant metastases.

**CT with Intravenous (IV) Contrast**

- CT of the head and neck with intravenous contrast is used to evaluate local disease.

**Metastatic Work-Up**

Metastatic workup should be considered in patients that have melanomas greater than 4 mm, ulceration, satellite lesions, or any recurrent lesion.

Metastatic workup is required for patients with regional disease (any patient with laboratory and clinical exam)

- CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis with IV contrast

- MRI of the brain

- PET CT has been shown to be highly sensitive