# Continuing Education Activity

A corneal ulcer is a defect in the surface epithelium of the cornea that involves the underlying stroma. It is common in contact lens wearers and presents as eye pain, blurry vision, and photophobia. This activity illustrates the evaluation and management of corneal ulcer and explains the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of corneal ulcer.
- Identify the patient history of corneal ulcer.
- Outline the use of a slit lamp examination in the evaluation of corneal ulcer.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team members to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by corneal ulcers.

# Introduction

A corneal ulcer, a defect of the corneal epithelium involving the underlying stroma, is a potentially vision-threatening ocular emergency.

# Etiology

Bacterial: The most common etiology of corneal ulcers is infectious, with bacterial pathogens responsible for a majority of the cases.Staphylococcus aureus, coag negative staphylococcus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus fusarium species are the most commonly implicated in polymicrobial keratitis with trauma being the most common inciting factor.

Viral: HSV is a common cause of viral keratitis as well as the most common cause of unilateral infectious corneal blindness in the developed world.

Fungal: Fungal etiologies account for only 5 to 10% of all corneal infections. They are more common in warmer, humid parts of the country and are most often precipitated by trauma to the cornea with subsequent exposure to plant or vegetable material.Aspergillus, Fusarium, Scedosporium apiospermum, phaeohyphpmycetes, Candida albicans, and other Candida species.

Protozoan: Acanthamoeba is a free-living protozoan found in freshwater and in soil that can cause keratitis and corneal ulcers primarily in contact lens wearers.

Autoimmune disease: While most corneal ulcers are infectious it is important to be able to recognize noninfectious causes of corneal ulcers as well. Peripheral ulcerative keratitis (PUK) is a form of noninfectious keratitis found in association with many systemic diseases. After anterior uveitis, PUK is the second most common ocular complication of autoimmune disorders.

# Epidemiology

Keratitis, the precursor to corneal ulceration, is responsible for approximately one million clinic and emergency department visits a year in the United States.

# History and Physical

The history should include questions about risk factors for corneal ulcers such as contact lens use (the type of lens, storage habits, hygiene, history of prolonged use, swimming or showering in lenses), prior ocular surgery, recent ocular trauma, personal history or exposure to herpes, work exposures, and use of immunosuppressant medications. Other important points in the history include the quality and severity of pain, the rapidity of onset, and the presence or absence of any photophobia or blurry vision. Patient’s past medical history should be explored as diseases such as diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis, and other collagen vascular diseases can predispose patients to develop corneal ulcers.

The physical exam should include testing of visual acuity, intraocular pressures (if no concern for globe rupture or perforated ulcer), and pupillary response. The eyelids and conjunctiva should be examined for any injection, swelling, or discharge as well as for the presence of ciliary flush. A thorough slit lamp examination should be performed to determine the size, location, and shape of the lesion or lesions. Seidel's test can is useful if there is any concern for rupture.

# Evaluation

The patient with a bacterial corneal ulcer will often present with rapid onset of pain, photophobia, and conjunctival injection, and a variable degree of vision loss. On slit lamp exam these ulcers appear as clearly defined infiltrates with stromal inflammation and edema.

The patient with HSV keratitis or corneal ulcer will usually present similarly to the patient with bacterial keratitis. They will often have foreign body sensation, photophobia, conjunctival injection, and blurred vision. Slit lamp exam will classically reveal dendritic lesions with fluorescein uptake.

Fungal infections tend to have a more indolent course and often do not have the impressive conjunctival injection seen with bacterial infections. On slit lamp exam fungal lesions appear as gray-white feathery dry appearing lesions with irregular margins. Ulcers due to yeast appear as superficial, white, raised colonies with clearly defined borders.

The patient presenting with Acanthamoeba keratitis will classically present with pain out of proportion to physical exam findings. Severe photophobia is also common. The exam may reveal diffuse punctate epithelial lesions, dendritic-like lesions, or ring-shaped infiltrates.

Patients presenting with peripheral ulcerative keratitis (PUK) due to an underlying autoimmune disease may already carry a diagnosis or the corneal ulcer may be the first manifestation of the disease.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of bacterial keratitis and corneal ulcers consists first of topical antibiotics, most commonly with fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin or ofloxacin.

Treatment for HSV includes topical antivirals and adjuvant topical steroids. In the US the most common topical antiviral is trifluridine while in Europe topical acyclovir is the first line. (Level II) Other options include ganciclovir which also treats VZV and CMV keratitis. Oral acyclovir or valacyclovir are additional options. Oral valganciclovir is the treatment of choice for CMV stromal keratitis, but the patient requires close monitoring while on this medication due to significant side effects such as aplastic anemia.

Fungal ulcers tend to have worse outcomes than bacterial as there are far fewer treatment options. Currently, the primary treatment is natamycin, a topical polyene, first introduced in the 1960s. (Level II) Amphotericin B 0.3% to 0.5% is an alternative, but toxicity limits use. A newer generation triazole called voriconazole recently was found to be inferior to natamycin in the Mycotic Ulcer Treatment Trail (MUTT I).

Treatment of Acanthamoeba keratitis and corneal ulcers generally involves epithelial debridement and 3 to 4 months of antiamoebic therapy.

Treatment of peripheral ulcerative keratitis associated with autoimmune and collagen vascular diseases should be treated with systemic immunosuppressants and cytotoxic agents and requires co-management by both a rheumatologist and ophthalmologist.

An ophthalmologist should see all patients presenting with corneal ulcers within 12 to 24 hours. Emergent ophthalmologic consultation should be considered for a culture of the ulcer to guide antibiotic selection for suspected bacterial ulcers.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for the patient presenting with red, painful eye includes corneal abrasions, nonulcerative keratitis, foreign body, iritis, acute angle-closure glaucoma, chemical burns, episcleritis, scleritis, and anterior uveitis.

# Prognosis

Prognosis depends on the etiology, size, and location of the ulcer as well as the response to treatment.

# Complications

Complications of untreated or inadequately treated corneal ulcers include corneal scarring, vascularization, or perforation, glaucoma, irregular astigmatism, cataracts, endophthalmitis, and vision loss.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most significant risk factor for corneal ulcers is contact lens use. Therefore, patient education about proper use is one of the most important aspects of prevention of these ulcers.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Corneal ulcers are a vision-threatening ocular emergency. It is imperative that health care providers across specialties work together so that these patients may have the best possible outcome and avoid the many potential complications. The patient will often first present in a clinic or emergency department setting and so primary care, and emergency health care professionals must be able to rapidly identify this disease and communicate effectively with their ophthalmology colleagues. Pharmacists should be consulted to help with antimicrobial selection or, in the case of peripheral ulcerative keratitis, immunosuppressants. Nurses are essential for successful treatment plans and patient education.