Reed-Sternberg cells are classically associated with Hodgkin lymphoma. However, large, atypical cells may have morphologic and immunophenotypic features resembling these cells and may pose a diagnostic challenge. Reed Sternberg-like (RS-like) cells may form neoplastic sheets, but they can also present as scattered cells. In this section, diagnostic challenges, as well as strategies that can be used to differentiate Reed-Sternberg cells from RS-like cells, will be discussed.

Reed-Sternberg-like cells found in low-grade B cell lymphomas are visible in follicular lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma or marginal zone lymphoma. In chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL), RS-like cells present amongst neoplastic cells. They resemble the immunophenotype of B cells and may also show CD20 and CD30 expression, while typically being negative for CD15. In rare cases, the RS-like cells show CD15 and CD30 expression, which makes them almost identical to Reed-Sternberg cells seen in classical Hodgkin disease. RS-like cells in CLL/SLL also show EBV positivity, which is under study as playing a role in the pathogenesis of Reed-Sternberg cells. In non-Hodgkin lymphomas, follicular lymphomas have stomal fibrosis prominently in retroperitoneal or perinephric locations. Follicular lymphoma contains neoplastic lymphoid infiltrate with small centrocytes with long nuclei, scattered centroblasts, and nucleoli. Classical Hodgkin lymphoma is associated with fibrosis as well, but the inflammatory infiltrate is made up of eosinophils, plasma cells, histiocytes, and small lymphocytes.

In follicular lymphomas, RS-like cells can present within or between neoplastic follicles. The RS-like cells have also been found to have indistinguishable immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangements to neoplastic centroblasts and centrocytes; this suggests a common origin for the cells. Reed-Sternberg-like cells in follicular lymphoma may express CD10, and this can be used to differentiate them from Reed-Sternberg cells. Reed-Sternberg-like cells may also be counted mistakingly as centroblasts, so it is essential to have adequately sized samples and use strict morphologic guidelines to arrive at the accurate diagnosis.

B-cell lineage RS-like cells are seen in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas and rarely in peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Reed-Sternberg-like cells express CD20, CD30, and at times, CD15. The RS-like cells are also associated with EBV infection. Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas are diagnosable by increased vasculature. Peripheral T cell lymphomas that contain RS-like cells are very difficult to differentiate from classical Hodgkin lymphoma because of the presence of mixed inflammatory infiltrate. However, it is crucial to assess for expression of CD20, PAX-5, CD10, and BCL-6. Absence of PAX-5 presents a strong argument against the diagnosis of classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Also, if there is a morphologically and immunophenotypically abnormal lymphocytic infiltrate, this is not characteristic of classical Hodgkin lymphoma.