The most common presenting symptoms for adrenal myelolipomas are as follows:

1. Abdominal pain--22.5%

2. Hypochondrial pain--13.9%

3. Flank pain--13.9%

4. Abdominal mass--5.2%

Rarely, dyspnea, back pain, fever, weight loss, and virilization can be the presenting symptoms of adrenal myelolipomas.

Four recognizable clinicopathologic patterns of adrenal myelolipomas are as follows:

**Isolated Adrenal Myelolipoma**

Myelolipomas occurring in an otherwise normal adrenal gland are the most common pattern of presentation. They are asymptomatic and are incidentally identified during the imaging investigation performed for some other reason.

**Adrenal Myelolipoma with Acute Hemorrhage**

Retroperitoneal hemorrhage is the most common complication occurring in adrenal myelolipoma. Isolated larger lesions (typically over 4 cm in size) and those predominantly composed of fat (greater than 50%) have a greater propensity for a hemorrhagic event.

**Extra-adrenal Myelolipoma**

Myelolipomas occurring outside the adrenal gland is most commonly found in the retroperitoneum, where presacral or perirenal location is reported as the most common. Patients usually have no endocrine disorder or acute hemorrhage.

**Adrenal Myelolipoma with Associated Adrenal Disease**

Less commonly, patients with adrenal myelolipoma tend to have an endocrine disorder: hypercortisolism (Cushing syndrome), congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and primary hyperaldosteronism have been reported in patients with symptomatic adrenal myelolipomas.