**Hepatitis A**

Hepatitis A has been associated with gestational complications, including premature contractions, placental separation, premature rupture of membranes, and vaginal bleeding. These have been reported in a study evaluating the impact of acute hepatitis A on pregnancy.

Fetal ascites and meconium peritonitis, which is a rare occurrence, have been reported.

**Hepatitis B**

The adverse effect of the Hepatitis B virus on pregnancy is rare in patients with acute or chronic HBV infection.

There is increased maternal and perinatal death associated with the Hepatitis B virus infection during pregnancy. Placenta abruption, preterm birth, gestational hypertension, and fetal growth restriction have been associated with chronic HBV during pregnancy.

Chronic HBV in pregnancy increases the risk of progression to cirrhosis.

**Hepatitis C**

Fetal growth restriction, brachial plexus injury, fetal distress, cephalohematoma, neonatal seizures, and intraventricular hemorrhage are gestational complications observed in HCV-infected pregnant women.

**Hepatitis D**

Chronic hepatitis D is associated with a high risk of severe chronic liver disease in pregnant women.

**Hepatitis E**

Obstetric complications reported in studies include premature rupture of membranes, antepartum and postpartum hemorrhage, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), intrauterine fetal deaths, spontaneous abortions, stillbirths, and complications of fulminant hepatitis.

Fetal complications from Hepatitis E virus include preterm and low birth weights.