Factor V deficiency can be either inherited or acquired.

**Inherited Factor V Deficiency**

- Inheritance is autosomal recessive.

- Mutations at the F5 gene (1q23) can be inherited in a homozygous or heterozygous pattern.

- Heterozygous carriers are usually asymptomatic, whereas homozygotes and compound heterozygotes can present with a broad array of signs and symptoms ranging from minimal to severe bleeding.

- Factor V deficiency is classified into Type 1 and Type 2 deficiency. Type 1 is quantitative (factor V activity and antigen levels are reduced), whereas Type 2 is qualitative (factor V is dysfunctional, leading to decreased coagulant activity while factor V antigen can be low to normal).

- One hundred ninety mutations have been identified, with the majority being missense and nonsense mutations. These are followed by small deletions, splicing mutations, and, less commonly, small and large insertions, large deletions, and complex rearrangements.

- Symptoms usually present before the age of 6 years.

- Rarely can be co-inherited with Factor VIII deficiency.

**Acquired Factor V Deficiency**

- Less common than the inherited form.

- It occurs secondary due to factor V inhibitor production.

- Risk factors include surgery involving bovine thrombin, antibiotics (particularly the beta-lactam group), malignancies, infections, liver disease, and autoimmune disorders.

- Bleeding episodes can be difficult to predict since symptoms do not always correlate with factor V inhibitor levels, duration inhibitor has been present, aPTT and PT prolongation, or factor V activity.