The gold standard treatment for acquired aural atresia is surgical repair. However, management during the early stages is controversial. Some otologists recommend antibiotic/anti-inflammatory treatment, while others argue that delayed surgical intervention results in the progression of medial canal fibrosis. Extremely close clinical follow-up is essential, regardless.

Intervention for congenital forms is driven by the laterality of the condition, the hearing status, the cosmetic desires, and the feasibility of hearing restoration. Bilateral aural atresia will present with failed audiological testing and require early bone conduction hearing aids. However, recent studies have shown that unilateral aural atresia may have some bearing on academic performance; thus, the decision to place a hearing aid is controversial. This is complicated by financial constraints; in locations where such hearing aids are widely available, the answer is clear: they maximize the patient's hearing status and should be obtained as early as possible. The auditory benefits are clear, but it is very situation-dependent in locations where these hearing aids must be privately-purchased, as the costs to the family of such a hearing aid must outweigh the potential benefits for the child.

In the setting of microtia-atresia, the timing of canal atresia repair must be coordinated with pinna reconstruction. There are no definite guidelines, and hearing restoration trumps cosmesis. Many surgeons will therefore advocate for canal atresia repair before pinna reconstruction/creation, while others will advocate for a bone-conduction hearing aid until the child is old enough to undergo multi-staged atresia and pinna repair.

In unilateral cases, there are many factors that need to be considered, including the child's speech, language, and academic development, level of maturity, and hearing ability in the contralateral ear. With a normal hearing contralateral ear, some will delay surgery until the patient is of adolescent age and can partake in the decision for surgery, which includes atresiaplasty versus bone-anchored hearing aids (BAHA). Surgically there are different types of atresiaplasty. Lateral atresia is often repaired with a meatoplasty, and a more medial atresia will be repaired with a canalplasty. The decision to undergo surgical repair atresiaplasty is based on the Jahrsdoerfer grading scale, which assigns points for the presence of various anatomical features.

Higher scores are related to better audiometric outcomes. Some studies have shown that patients with a score of 7/10 or greater had up to a 90% chance of achieving near-normal hearing with atresia surgery, whereas patients with a score of 6/10 or less had a 40% chance of attaining near-normal hearing with atresia surgery.