Society has a strong ethical and financial obligation to reduce abusive head trauma as the preventable damage to children is significant. The long-term financial costs to society are extensive.

- The annual medical cost related to abusive head trauma in the United States is over $70 million.

- Victims of abusive head trauma require long-term education, occupational, physical, occupational, and speech-language therapies.

- Some victims may require lifetime nursing home care.

- Perpetrators are usually remorseful, and expensive incarceration ruins their lives.

Prevention of abusive head trauma focuses on reducing child abuse, maltreatment, and increasing education. This includes public service announcements, pamphlets, and brochures. Education is also focused on family resource centers and home visit programs, particularly in high-risk homes, e.g., young parents living in poverty. These programs can include mental and social services. Before discharge from the hospital, new parents should be instructed in the danger of shaking a child. Healthcare providers in pediatric offices and the emergency department must be trained and educated to identify parents at high risk of infant abuse. Parents need to be taught coping skills to deal with crying and the danger of shaking a baby with an undeveloped brain.

Abusive head trauma is a preventable problem and a major societal challenge. Two national health initiatives are described below.

The Period of PURPLE Crying program is focused on education concerning normal infant behaviors, such as crying, that can frustrate caregivers. PURPLE stands for Peak (crying peaks at about 2 months, then decreases), Unpredictable, Resistant (to any soothing), Painlike (look on face), Long (bouts of crying), and Evening (most common time of crying).

The National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome targets new and future parents. The organization attempts to increase skills and confidence as parents.

Healthcare providers can impact the incidence of abusive head trauma by educating caretakers on the dangers of shaking an infant. Prevention should be stressed in all encounters with families. Abusive head trauma syndrome education materials are available through several organizations such as the American Academy of Pediatrics, the National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome, and Prevent Child Abuse America.

Prevention is the key; all providers of health care must work together to educate the public. Incessant crying is the major trigger of abusive head trauma. Recognition and education of high-risk caregivers will lower the incidence of pediatric abusive head trauma.