The determination of optimal serum biomarkers for manganese toxicity has proven difficult. Given that Mn is primarily removed via biliary mechanisms, urinary levels are significantly low at baseline and do not reliably correlate with serum toxic levels.

Promising biomarker capability was illustrated by measuring serum levels of both Mn and Fe together. Neil et al. utilized the ratio of Mn to Fe in both plasma (pMIR) and erythrocytes (eMIR) with respect to airborne exposure to Mn.

Bone is a natural Mn sink, thus making it an ideal organ to study the effects of exposure to the natural metal. Liu et al. developed a novel testing system to quantify the Mn content in bone, called neutron activation analysis. They were able to reliably quantify Mn concentrations in the bones of hands, suggesting the viability of future studies with this methodology.

In the context of recent or on-going exposure, MRI has also proven to be clinically useful alongside novel bone scanning. Mn, as described previously, preferentially accumulates within basal ganglia structures. The globus pallidus can be specifically analyzed by calculating T1-weighted signals and comparing it to frontal cortical white matter, creating what the authors called the pallidal index. Mn exposure can then be related to the degree of signal intensity as quantified by an increased pallidal index.

Notably, these studies did not correlate with biological outcomes, as none of the analyzed population displayed clinical effects of manganism. These same researchers also studied the use of spectroscopy enhanced magnetic resonance studies. This technology allows the quantification of molecule concentrations in any portion of the brain. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy illustrated increased levels of GABA in the thalamus and basal ganglia of patients.

The latest research presented at the 2016 conference on Mn neurotoxicity described new methodologies of identification of manganism, including the use of fMRI, PET scans, and new methods of using blood Mn and ferritin levels to detect globus pallidus accumulation of toxic metal concentrations.

In summary, diagnosis requires a high clinical suspicion alongside recognition of the risk factors placing patients at risk for manganism. Ideal evaluation for the determination of Mn toxicity includes a team-based approach, based on early recognition and outpatient referral to neurology for definitive care. Early consultation with a clinical toxicologist may aid in the identification of the etiology for the patient's symptoms. Usage of MRI or serum-based studies should be done at the request of specialists familiar with toxicity and the latest research.