Although it is not the first-line agent in the treatment of open-angle glaucoma, topical betaxolol is a valuable topical medication in the field of ophthalmology. It would be advantageous for all interprofessional healthcare team members to be knowledgeable regarding the indications, contraindications, adverse effects, and how to monitor the responses to the drug. This would ensure patient safety and maximize the efficiency of the treatment plan for the patient.

Any deviations from the norm should be reported to the ophthalmologist to change the treatment regimen if necessary. A pharmacist serves as the bridge between the ophthalmologist and the primary care clinician caring for the patient. The pharmacist can recommend medical reconciliation that can help ensure the safe treatment of a patient's ocular hypertension or open-angle glaucoma without affecting the treatment of a patient's other potential comorbidities. The pharmacist can also help educate nurses, clinician assistants, and clinicians who do not specialize in the field of ophthalmology on the specifics of administration, dosage, and potential adverse effects. An emergency room clinician should understand that betaxolol is a beta-blocker and should be able to assess for beta-blocker-related side effects, toxicity, and how to manage it.  The primary care clinician should be aware of the patient's use of topical betaxolol and consider its potential side effects.

Although betaxolol is usually a tolerable and safe medication, it still has contraindications, adverse effects, and the potential for lethal toxicity. It is essential that every person on the interprofessional healthcare team knows their role and collaborates as a unit to maximize the safety and effectiveness of the treatment. [Level 5]