No totally effective medical treatment is available for either the prevention or treatment of central retinal vein occlusion. In patients with central retinal vein occlusion, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is elevated; this leads to swelling as well as new vessels (neovascularization) that are prone to bleeding. Often treatment involves intravitreal injections of an anti-VEGF drug to reduce the new blood vessel growth and swelling. The following medical treatments have been advocated with varying success:

- Aspirin

- Anti-inflammatory agents

- Isovolemic hemodilution

- Plasmapheresis

- Systemic anticoagulation

- Fibrinolytic agents

- Systemic corticosteroids

- Intravitreal injection of alteplase

- Intravitreal injection of ranibizumab

- Intravitreal injection of triamcinolone

- Intravitreal injection of bevacizumab

- Intravitreal injection of aflibercept

- Dexamethasone intravitreal implant

Surgical interventions include laser photocoagulation, chorioretinal venous anastomosis, radial optic neurotomy, and vitrectomy.

There are specific surgical and laser approaches have been found to potentially improve visual acuity in patients with central retinal vein occlusion. Pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) can be done when central retinal vein occlusions have an associated vitreous hemorrhage. PPV may be used to clear the hemorrhage from the visual axis and allows for better visualization of the retina. A PPV may also ablate neovascularization that can cause neovascular glaucoma in the anterior segment. Laser pan-retinal photocoagulation (PRP) can be done to treat neovascularization, with the goal of devitalizing some of the retinal tissue to prevent further neovascularization and treat iris neovascularization. There is no evidence at this time supporting prophylactic PRP without neovascularization.