The treatment for craniopharyngiomas is challenging because of their location, invasiveness, and proximity to adjacent neurovascular structures. Multiple modalities can be implemented in the management of craniopharyngioma, including surgery, radiotherapy, and intracystic therapy. The choice of treatment, surgery type, and extent should be individualized for each patient. The patient's age, underlying medical co-morbidities, tumor location, type and invasiveness, and ultimately neurosurgeon experience should be considered while deciding the treatment strategy. There is no consensus on the best treatment regimen.

**Preoperative Management**

Hormonal deficiency, specifically secondary adrenal insufficiency, and hypothyroidism should be treated with glucocorticoid and thyroid hormone replacement before surgery. Glucocorticoid replacement is done with either hydrocortisone 20 to 30 mg in 2 to 3 divided doses or prednisone 5 to 10 mg in a single or divided dose. Levothyroxine is the best way to replace thyroid hormone deficiency.

A temporary or permanent shunt may be needed to drain cerebrospinal fluid for treatment of hydrocephalus.

**Surgery**

Surgical intervention is indicated to confirm the diagnosis, tumors causing neurologic deficits, pituitary dysfunction, and hydrocephalus. The most common surgical approaches are endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal (EET) or transcranial, depending on the location of craniopharyngioma. Extension of resection is a matter of debate. Gross total resection has been associated with an increased incidence of post-surgical deficits, with no change in the recurrence rates.

Several grading systems have been developed based on the location of craniopharyngioma and its relation to surrounding structures to help decide on the best modality for surgery. Kassam et al. had a classification system based on the infundibulum to strategize the surgical approach. Type I tumors are pre-infundibular, which are sub chiasmatic tumors displacing the optic chiasm superiorly and posteriorly. Type II tumors are trans-infundibular, which can extend into the third ventricle. Type III is retro-infundibular which can either extend superiorly into the third ventricle or inferiorly into the pontine cisterns. Type IV tumors are primarily located in the third ventricles. ETT can be done in all types except type IV. The isolated third ventral tumors are better approached with craniotomy and transcallosal, transcortical, or trans-ventricular approaches. ETT should be avoided in very large tumors, mostly solid with calcification and vascular invasiveness.

**Postsurgical Care**

There should be close neurologic monitoring of patients after surgery for cerebrospinal fluid(CSF) leaks.

Hormonal deficiency management is crucial after surgery. Stress dose steroids may be needed in patients in immediate postoperative care depending on the type of surgery and presurgical hormonal evaluation. Careful hormonal monitoring by checking postoperative morning cortisol levels can decide the duration of glucocorticoid treatment. Monitoring sodium and urine osmolarity are important to monitor the development of diabetes insipidus. Thyroid hormone should be assessed in 1 to 2 weeks after surgery. The sex hormone and GH can be assessed at 3 months postoperatively. The anterior pituitary hormone replacement varies on a case-to-case basis.

**Radiotherapy**

Radiation treatment is used in patients with residual disease or to prevent recurrences. Radiation therapy includes conventional external radiotherapy, proton beam therapy, stereotactic radiotherapy, radiosurgery, and brachytherapy. The goal of radiotherapy is to decrease tumor burden while protecting essential neural structures. Specific Gy doses have been designated for every radiation modality. Multiple reports have suggested decreased mortality with slightly reduced morbidity following radiation therapy. Despite this, radiation therapy has not been proven to reduce the recurrence rate. Therefore, it continues to be an adjuvant modality to neurosurgical intervention.

**Intracystic Therapy**

Intracystic therapy is primarily used for purely cystic craniopharyngioma. Toxic substances like radioactive isotopes, bleomycin, interferon-alpha are used in intracystic therapy to produce tumor fibrosis and sclerosis. This method has been reported to produce significant cyst shrinkage, but there is limited data on its use and support. A disadvantage of this option is that severe neurotoxicity can occur in some cases due to cystic leakage of the sclerosing substance.