St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) is an herbal medication that consists of anthraquinones, which have displayed anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer effects. It has also been used as an antidepressant. It derives from a flowering plant found in Europe and Asia. It is common in the form of a tablet, capsule, tea, or liquid extract used to treat a handful of medical conditions, which include but are not limited to the following:

- Depression: The definition of depression is the loss of interest or pleasure in doing things that you used to for over a two-week period. Depression can be minor or major. St. John's wort has been shown to treat major depression in a manner superior to that of a placebo antidepressant. Patients suffering from depression should discuss the usage of St. John's Wort with their health provider.

- Emotional and Behavioral complications in children: Attention issues, anxiety, different physical problems, sleep disturbances, depression, and other emotional and behavioral complications are all things children and young adults must address. A study done with children who were observed to have prolonged emotional or attention problems and were prone to nervous and depressed behavior received St. John's wort in a triad treatment plant extract along with valerian root and passionflower herb. At the end of the study, the extract improved the children's emotional and behavioral complications with the help of no other medications.

- Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Obsessive-compulsive disorder describes a neurological disorder that pertains to a person having excessive thought that leads to repetitive compulsions. It is a disorder that is difficult to treat. Research is in the beginning stages of how St. John's Wort may be useful in treating OCD; however, current clinical evidence is limited, and further research is necessary for efficacy. There is some promise for its effects on OCD, as its current mechanism of action is comparable to today's SSRI therapies.

- Premenstrual syndrome (PMS): PMS refers to a variety of symptoms that some women experience in the days before menstruation that including bloating, acne, breast swelling and tenderness, pain, irritability, and depression. Treatment of this syndrome often involves SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors). St. John's Wort has been used as an alternative over-the-counter treatment that may lessen PMS symptoms. More research is necessary regarding the efficacy of treatment.

- Psoriasis: In a double-blind placebo study, researchers tested the therapeutic effects of H. perforatum for mild to moderate psoriatic lesions. Researchers use topical Hypericum perforatum to treat plaque-type psoriasis, an inflammatory disorder, where tumor-necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα) is commonly found in psoriatic skin tissues. The study found that the anti-inflammatory capabilities of Hypericum perforatum ointment lowered cytokine content, including TNFα, in psoriatic lesions. The patients who used the St. John's Wort topical exhibited less erythema, thickness, and scaling compared to those who used the placebo.