**Why Is This Important To Clinical Practice?**

Despite our overall goal to uphold the ethical principles described in the Belmont Report, this is not always possible. Although physicians and other practitioners indeed provide medical care for patients, practitioners have many other roles; e.g. as a protector of hospital staff, as a guardian of public health, as a citizen, and as a humanist and spiritual being in his/her own right. Some situations arise in daily clinical practice that creates conflict between these roles and complicates the ethics of the day-to-day decision-making of medical practice. For example, imagine that you have diagnosed a patient with active tuberculosis, but he refuses treatment. In your role as a practitioner, you engage in a conversation with him about his declination of treatment and decide that the patient possesses the capacity to decline. You are therefore ethically bound to respect this patient's autonomy to make his own medical decisions but are also bound to protect and serve the health of the overall community concerning the risk of infectious contagion. How do you weigh these competing interests? What legal repercussions may you face if you prioritize one over the other?

Consider another case. You are caring for a young man brought in by police after he was found wandering on a road with no shoes. In the ED, he is agitated and combative with staff. You decide on clinical grounds that he will require a full workup including IV placement, labs, and imaging but he is adamantly screaming that he "wants to leave" and tries to strike any provider who comes near him. Can you place an IV against his will? Can you restrain or sedate him against his will?  Again, what steps do you need to take to ensure you are legally protected?

Recall that a tort is an act, or omission of an act, that results in injury or harm to an individual. Specifically concerning the illustration above, the common law tort of "assault" involves "an act or omission causing an individual to experience reasonable fear or apprehension of an immediate battery." Here battery is legally defined as "harmful or offensive contact". Does the placement of the IV constitute a battery? Likewise, the tort of "false imprisonment" involves an act/omission that results in an individual "being confined or bound in a defined space with no possibility of escape." Does the act of restraining and sedating the patient constitute false imprisonment?

The question then reduces to a query of how medical providers may protect both their patients and themselves amidst this swarm of conflicting ethical principles, disagreeing roles, and risk for legal action. The answer in part lies in a complete and thorough assessment of a patient’s capacity for medical decision-making. This assessment is the foundation on which medical providers may gain legal protection when acting against a patient's immediate wishes in the service of the well-being of the patient, the staff, or the overall public.

In the context of the case above, until a capacity assessment is completed, placing an IV against this patient's will constitutes the tort of battery. Placing him on a hold constitutes the tort of false imprisonment. Chemically or physically restraining him equates to the tort of battery and false imprisonment

**When To Access Capacity?**

Evaluation of decision-making capacity should be involved in every patient interaction. The depth of this evaluation may vary on a case-by-case basis, depending on 1) the acuity of the illness, 2) the patient's age and functional status, 3) the patient's or family's goals for care, 4) the clinical environment or 5) any number of other factors. Remember that an assessment of capacity is valid only within the time, place, and situation in which the evaluation took place

Some specific triggers to further investigate a patient’s decision-making capacity include

- Inability to voice a decision

- Blanket acceptance or refusal of care

- Absence of questions about the treatment being offered or provided

- Excessive or inconsistent reasons for refusing care

- New inability to perform activities of daily living

- Hyperactivity, disruptive behavior, or agitation

- Labile emotions or effect

- Hallucinations

- Clinical intoxication

The salient point for the reader is that some manner of assessment of a patient's medical-decision making skills should be part of every patient encounter, and should be scaled to the degree of illness severity and mental impairment. The initial capacity evaluation need not be more than a standard patient examination, e.g. a general appearance, level of consciousness, orientation to self/time/situation, observation of behavior and affect, and an effort to ascertain the patient's ability to understand and comprehend medical information. If there are concerning findings on this initial impression, a more thorough examination should be performed.

**How To Access Capacity?**

Recall that as defined above, capacity is a functional determination that an individual is or is not capable of making a medical decision within a given situation. This is relative to the baseline abilities of the patient, pertains only to the current situation, and takes into consideration the severity of the possible consequences

Because of legal issues regarding licensure, this assessment is not an appropriate job for nurses, nursing assistants, technicians, or other support staff. Often, psychiatrists are felt to be the experts of this assessment, and they can be involved in particularly complex situations that require expert opinion. However, these providers are not always readily available for an instant consultation. Therefore, and particularly in the emergency department setting, a rapid assessment of capacity may be immediately required due to the high acuity of physical or mental illness. Thus, any licensed physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner can and should be able to assess and determine capacity.

The foundation of this assessment is the mental status exam (MSE); one cannot determine capacity without this.

A thorough mental status exam should include evaluation of the following

1. Appearance and general behavior: Body habitus, grooming and hygiene, eye contact, distinguishing features, overall behavior

2. Motor activity: Posture, movements, facial expressions, psychomotor agitation or retardation

3. Speech: Quantity, rate, volume, fluency, and the ability for other’s to understand the language used

4. Mood: Defined as the individual's subjective experience of the patient's inner emotional state. Consider asking, "how would you describe your mood?"

5. Affect: Your objective observation of the behaviors suggesting the patient's inner emotional state

6. Thought process: Flow and form of thought

7. Thought content: Content of the patient’s thoughts, i.e. obsessions, delusions, phobias, suicidal or homicidal ideation

8. Perceptual disturbances: Hallucinations

9. Sensorium: Level of consciousness and stability of consciousness

10. Cognition: Attentiveness, ability to concentrate, short-term memory. This may be permanently or temporarily impaired by a medical condition such as dementia, delirium, intoxication, etc

11. Insight: The patient's understanding of his/her illness and required treatments.

12. Judgment: Patient's ability to recognize and comprehend the consequences of actions and decisions

A complete understanding of an individual's mental status or at least as complete as the patient's clinical condition will allow, is imperative for an accurate determination of their capacity to make medical decisions.  This exam provides the foundation on which to build an argument for or against a patient’s capacity.

In the medical environment, a patient proves capacity by demonstrating the following

- Understanding of information relevant to the decision in question

- Ability to weigh risks and benefits, and to assess alternative options

- Communicate clearly with medical providers about the decision in question, and verbalize the ultimate decision

- Consistency of logic and decision-making throughout the encounter

Consider again the case from above - the young man brought in agitated and combative after being found wandering in a road without shoes. Documentation of his mental status exam one might observe and document the following:

1. Appearance and general behavior: Disheveled appearing, malodorous, feet and lower legs are covered in dirt, appears agitated

2. Motor activity: Writhing in bed and trying to pull off pulse ox and monitor leads

3. Speech: Slurred and difficult to understand, yelling loudly, speech is pressured and rapid

4. Mood: “Let me out of here, I need to leave”

5. Affect: Expansive, hostile

6. Thought process: Tangential, jumps from topic-to-topic without linear process

7. Thought content: Obsessive about wanting to leave, appears to have an intense fear about someone "coming after him"

8. Perceptual disturbances: Appears internally stimulated

9. Sensorium: Heightened level of alertness, hyper-vigilant

10. Cognition: Poor attention, unable to participate in a linear conversation

11. Insight: Extremely poor - unable to relay understanding of his abnormal mental status

12. Judgment: Extremely poor - unable to communicate an understanding of the consequences of his desire to leave the ER before examination and testing

Based on this mental status exam, it would be reasonable and appropriate to determine that this patient does not have the capacity to make sound or logical medical decisions. Of the four criteria for capacity listed above, he has demonstrated none. A patient who lacks decision-making capacity can neither refuse nor consent to treatment