The therapeutic options and management of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) are stage-dependent. Therefore accurate staging is essential to effective management (see the section on staging).

Stage 1a: Tumors confined to the kidney should be treated with curative intent. Complete surgical resection of the tumor with nephron-sparing partial nephrectomy is recommended. The NCCN recommends that abdominal CT or MRI be performed within six months of surveillance initiation followed by abdominal CT, MRI, or ultrasound at least annually.

Stage 1b: Partial or radical nephrectomy has similar results. Follow-up consists of a baseline abdominal CT, MRI, or ultrasound 3-12 months after nephrectomy, followed annually for three years after partial nephrectomy and at the discretion of the surgeon after radical nephrectomy. Chest X-ray annually for three years.

Stage 2 and 3: Radical nephrectomy with a follow-up schedule has baseline abdominal CT, MRI, or ultrasound abdomen and chest CT after 3 to 6 months and then every 3-6 months for three years, followed by annually up to 5 years. Site-specific imaging as needed.

Stage 4: Systemic targeted molecular therapies have replaced immunotherapy (e.g., interferons-α) using tyrosine kinase inhibitors for a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-TKIs) (e.g., sunitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib, and axitinib) or rapamycin inhibitors for mammalian targets (e.g., temsirolimus and everolimus). Nephrectomy followed by immunotherapy improved survival in patients with metastatic RCC compared to immunotherapy or TKIs alone. Follow-up consists of pretreatment CT or MRI of chest, abdomen, and pelvis, followed by repeat imaging every 6 to 16 weeks, modified by clinical status.