**Lower Extremity DVT Assessment: Classic Method**

After the patient is positioned appropriately, a gel should be applied to the groin. The probe should be laid transversely at the inguinal ligament, identifying the common femoral artery and common femoral vein. The vein should be compressible at this site to assist in identification. Color mode and Doppler mode can also be used to differentiate between arterial and venous flow. Follow the vein distally, compressing every one centimeter. The greater saphenous vein will then come off of the common femoral vein, followed by the deep femoral vein. Follow the now superficial femoral vein by compressing every centimeter and then sliding down the leg. This repetitive sequence will occur until the SFV dives through the musculature in the mid to distal thigh, at which time it may no longer be compressible.

The popliteal vein will be assessed by placing the transducer transversely on the posterior knee. The popliteal vein can be identified in the proximal popliteal fossa with the knee flexed at 10 to 30 degrees. The patient may need to lay on their side or lay prone to assess the popliteal vein better. Another option is to have the patient sit on the side of the bed with the knee hanging off the bed far enough to place the transducer behind it. This allows for the maximal venous distension due to gravity. Once the popliteal vein is identified, it should be followed proximally until it is lateral to the artery instead of anatomically posterior to it. Once this point is identified, serial compressions every 1 cm should be performed, moving distally. The end point is after the trifurcation of the popliteal vein when the popliteal vein becomes smaller and more difficult to visualize, which may occur in the calf rather than the popliteal fossa.

When completed, the following views should be obtained.

- High CFV: pre/post compression images or compression video proximally and distally

- CFV at saphenous intake, Sapheno-femoral junction with compression

- CFV at common femoral artery (CFA) bifurcation with compression

- CFA below CFA bifurcation with compression

- SFV at deep femoral vein intake: longitudinal and transverse views - pre/post compression images or compression video proximally and distally

- SFV below deep femoral intake: longitudinal and transverse views - color and Doppler flow proximally and distally

- Popliteal vein: longitudinal and transverse views - pre/post compression images or compression video proximally and distally

- Popliteal vein: longitudinal and transverse views - color and Doppler flow proximally and distally

- Posterior tibial and peroneal veins: color Doppler

The vein failing to collapse at any point is strongly suggestive of thrombosis.

**Lower Extremity DVT Assessment: Two Point Technique**

Using the same technique as above to identify the common femoral vein and the popliteal vein, assess only these two sights. The common femoral vein needs to be assessed from the ischial ligament until it becomes the superficial femoral vein. The popliteal vein needs to be assessed in the same manner as above, starting from where it is parallel to the popliteal artery and following it until the trifurcation.

There has been further research on this method, indicating that the sensitivity would be increased by following the superficial femoral vein to the popliteal vein, making this similar to the classic technique, but limiting the assessment of superficial and calf veins.

**Upper Extremity DVT Assessment**

The starting point is the origination of the subclavian vein. The probe should be laid horizontally above the clavicle and at the base of the neck to assess this view, which will show the jugular vein and subclavian vein. Color flow through the subclavian vein needs to be identified. The vein should be scanned in both transverse and longitudinal views to ensure complete visualization.

The next view comes from the axilla, where the distal subclavian vein and complete axillary vein can be assessed. The probe should lie transverse to the vasculature from this point onward. These should be viewed in B mode and compressed to ensure complete collapsibility of the axillary and proximal brachial veins. Color flow should also be viewed of the distal subclavian vein and axillary vein.

The brachial veins should be followed by the length of the arm, compressing the brachial and basilic veins until the brachial veins bifurcate into the radial and ulnar veins.

With the patient sitting at the side of the bed, the length of the radial and ulnar veins should be scanned and compressed until the wrist is reached.

When completed, the upper extremity DVT series requires the following images to be considered complete.

- Subclavian Vein color flow: proximal and distal portions

- Axillary Vein color flow and pre/post compression images or compression video from subclavian vein to brachial vein

- Brachial vein: pre/post compression images or compression video proximally and distally

- Basilic vein: pre/post compression images or compression video proximally and distally

- Radial veins: pre/post compression images or compression video proximally and distally

- Ulnar veinsL pre/post compression images or compression video proximally and distally

The vein failing to collapse at any point is strongly suggestive of thrombosis.