**History**

- All previous immunizations and booster shots

- Any body piercings and when they were done

- Any history of hemodialysis

- Any prior exposure to bodily fluids and or treatment

- Complete medical history

- History of hepatitis B vaccination

- History of intravenous drug use

- Last tetanus shot

- Prior blood transfusion history

- Risk factors for HIV and viral hepatitis

- Sexual history

- Travel history outside the United States within the past 12 months

**Physical**

Most individuals with a needlestick injury do not have any obvious physical findings, except for a puncture wound. However, a baseline physical exam of the skin, heart, lung, liver, and lymphadenopathy should be done. This baseline examination should be made to assist in the diagnosis of any future infection.If the patient whose blood was involved in the needlestick injury is still in the hospital, then their blood work should be obtained to rule out the presence of HIV, HBV, and HCV. The injured healthcare worker should also have complete blood work, electrolytes, and baseline liver function studies. In addition, a serological profile of HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C should be obtained. A pregnancy test must be done on all women of childbearing age.

The vaccination status of a prior tetanus shot and hepatitis B must be obtained. If the patient has not had a tetanus shot within the past 10 years, a tetanus booster shot must be administered. There is no vaccine against hepatitis C. Once the initial workup is completed, the infectious disease expert should be consulted ASAP to determine the need for post-exposure prophylaxis.