In the United States, newborns are screened for CF as part of a standard newborn screening panel. Some cases of CF are discovered on prenatal ultrasound, which may demonstrate meconium peritonitis, bowel dilation, or absent gallbladder. Such findings often lead to prenatal CF carrier screening.

To diagnose CF, the following criteria must be met:

**Suspicion for Cystic Fibrosis
**

- Sibling with cystic fibrosis

- Positive newborn screen

- Clinical symptoms consistent with CF in 1 or more organ systems

- Chronic sinopulmonary disease

- Gastrointestinal or nutritional abnormalities

- Salt loss syndromes

- Obstructive azoospermia

**Evidence of CFTR Dysfunction**

- Elevated sweat chloride 2 than 60 mEq/L on two occasions

- Two disease-causing CFTR mutations

- Abnormal nasal potential difference

The diagnostic pathway starts with a sweat chloride test. If normal but still symptomatic, a repeat sweat chloride test is indicated. If the test is abnormal, DNA testing is indicated. If one or less CFTR mutations are found, expanded DNA analysis is indicated. However, the finding of 2 CF-related mutations confirms the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis.

The test for immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT), a pancreatic enzyme, increases sensitivity and specificity in screening newborns with meconium ileus for CF. IRT monitoring can be correlated with the severity of CF, and when it drops below detectable levels can indicate the need to start pancreatic enzyme replacement.

Additional diagnostics may be indicated depending on the presenting symptoms. A chest radiograph may help identify hyperinflation, bronchiectasis, abscesses, or atelectasis. Sinus radiography may demonstrate panopacification of the paranasal sinuses. Abdominal radiology may be helpful in neonates who present with meconium ileus. Bronchoalveolar lavage typically shows many neutrophils, and microbiology is commonly positive for Haemophilus influenza, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia, Escherichia coli, or Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Pulmonary function testing is a major tool for evaluating and monitoring disease state and progression in CF. Spirometry is the commonly used pulmonary function test. It measures the volume of air exhaled during a forceful and complete exhalation after a maximal inhalation. The total exhaled volume, known as the forced vital capacity (FVC), the volume exhaled in the first second, known as the forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and their ratio (FEV1/FVC) are the most critical variables reported. These values allow for interpretation of the status of the lung ventilation function. These values are compared to an expected normal for age, height, and gender to generate an expected normal value. The measured value is then calculated as a percent of normal where normal equals 100%. A normal or high FEV1 and/or a low FVC may indicate restrictive lung disease. A low FEV1 with a high FVC indicates obstructive lung disease with airway trapping. Cystic fibrosis can be expected to show air trapping patterns with low FEV1 values proportional to the severity of the disease.