Common contraindications for rhinoplasty include patients with an unstable mental state at the time of consult or surgery, patients with body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) or unrealistic expectations, obstructive sleep apnea, active cocaine users, and patients with comorbidities that contraindicate surgical procedures.

- **Body Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD)**: This psychiatric disorder is characterized by excessive preoccupation with an imagined or barely noticeable defect in appearance.

- **Obstructive Sleep Apnea**: This high prevalence disease is characterized by repeated episodes of airway obstructions during sleep. Patients with this condition have a higher risk of perioperative complications. Diagnosis can be suspected by the patient’s symptoms, although it can be asymptomatic. Screening questionnaires can be used, but with limited accuracy. The gold standard for diagnosis is polysomnography. Although it’s not an absolute contraindication, patients with this disease should be advised of the risks, and preoperative measures like the use of a continuous positive airway pressure device (CPAP) could be implemented in order to reduce complication rates.

- **Cocaine Abuse**: Patients who abuse cocaine constitute a special group of patients. Inhaled cocaine induces intense vasoconstriction and chronic mucosal inflammation due to numerous contaminating additives.

- **Tobacco Smoking**: Although it appears that tobacco smoking does not affect septoplasty outcomes, patients should be encouraged to quit prior to the procedure because of other harmful effects.

- **Bleeding Disorders**: Impaired coagulation may cause postoperative complications. Patients should be asked about a history of excessive bruising or bleeding, consumption of drugs, supplements, or vitamins that alter coagulation cascade, or history of thrombotic events in the past. Any drug, vitamins, or supplement that impairs coagulation might have to be suspended preoperatively.

As a general rule, patients that had a previous rhinoplasty and are unhappy with the results should wait at least one year before any evaluation on the definite result or secondary procedure can be performed.