**Training**

Training SPs often occurs at a local level. However, the Association of Standardized Patient Educators (ASPE) has published a document that outlines best practices. ASPE has outlined key values to ensure the physical and psychological safety of the SPs and the learners while providing the best possible learning: safe work environment, case development, program management, professional development, and feedback and assessment methods. A safe working environment, confidentiality, and respect for each other, and the learners ensure that psychological and physical safety are maintained. When training SPs for their role, every opportunity should be made for the SP to interact with the faculty in a rehearsal setting so that nothing is left to interpretation when interacting with the learner(s).  This process allows the SP the opportunity to ask questions about the case and demonstrate the necessary physical findings ahead of the live performance to ensure accuracy.

Some institutions request that SPs provide feedback to the learner, either written or verbal, and meetings should occur to review the associated instruments. The level of role portrayal requires weighing against the use of a feedback tool by an SP; when an SP is called upon to do too many things, the level of fidelity may suffer, causing the potential for a negative experience by the learner.

Facilities should also provide opportunities for reflection of performances and ongoing professional development and continuing education opportunities.