**Antibiotic Resistance**

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), antibiotic resistance because of overuse, inappropriate prescribing, and extensive agricultural use is one of the biggest public health challenges of our time.

In addition to ESBL-E and AmpC-E, other mechanisms of antibiotic resistance have been described to third-generation cephalosporins. For instance, PBP3 and PBP5 substitutions could be implicated in the processes of resistance adopted by Haemophilus parainfluenza.

On these premises, third-generation cephalosporins should be avoided as first-line antibiotic therapy in critically ill patients with the hospital or ventilator-acquired pneumonia caused by AmpC-producing strains. Streptococcus pneumoniae and Hemophilus influenzae need to be covered.

Empiric cefotaxime should be reserved for neonates with early-onset sepsis with a high likelihood of fulminant renal failure and or Gram-negative meningitis to minimize the risk of colonization with resistant Gram-negative bacilli.

Several strategies are being studied to combat antibiotic resistance. In addition to the possibility of developing new molecules, biotechnology offers an interesting perspective that can help design novel drug delivery methods. In particular, nanoparticles could be favorably adopted as a vehicle for antimicrobials. For example, chitosan is a natural polymer used to load various drugs that can provide prolonged release of ceftriaxone and other antibiotics.

**Other Issues**

Clinicians who prescribe oral cephalosporins in the outpatient setting are safe. At the same time, parenteral agents like ceftriaxone, which get infused intravenously, are always done under a hospital in-patient setting and are subject to active monitoring. It is crucial to monitor for signs of an anaphylactic reaction and allergic reactions such as itching, swelling, and hives. Coagulation profile should be evaluated in patients with a known risk of bleeding while on third-generation cephalosporins.