Overall goals include treating existing lesions to minimize pain and drainage, decreasing the frequency of recurrence, and preventing disease progression.

Since limited studies compare treatment regimens, most treatment algorithms are based on expert opinion and consensus.

In early uncomplicated diseases, topical antibiotics are the first-line treatment. Topical clindamycin has been the most effective.

Treatment for Hurley Stage II and resistant Hurley Stage I involves oral antibiotics. Antibiotics in the tetracycline family have been the most effective.

For Hurley stage III and resistant lower stages, tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors are indicated. Adalimumab is the only FDA-approved medication to treat HS.

Surgery is often needed at this stage and involves a wide excision to include the lesions, tracts, and scars of an entire affected area. A combination of medical treatment and surgical excision is often the preferred approach. Other therapeutic options may include localized laser and pulsed light therapy, which help to disrupt the inflammatory process.

Pain management is also critical. The pain of HS is both inflammatory and non-inflammatory. Sources of pain can include scarring (causing tensile pain), keloids, abscesses, open ulcerations, sinus tracts, frictional pain, lymphedema, anal fissures, and arthritis. Depending on disease severity and type of pain, topical agents (lidocaine and anti-inflammatories), systemic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, acetaminophen, atypical anticonvulsants, including gabapentin or pregabalin, and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors may be beneficial. Duloxetine is especially helpful if there is comorbid depression.

Regardless of the stage of the disease, treatment should include the management of comorbidities that contribute to the development of or worsening of the disease process. Individuals above ideal weight or who smoke have more severe disease progression, so counseling and help with weight loss and smoking cessation are important components of treatment.

Treatment also involves avoidance of skin trauma. Eliminating tight and synthetic clothing, avoiding harsh products or cleaning tools (loofahs, washcloths, brushes), and avoiding adhesive dressings can be beneficial. Soft dressings with clear petroleum jelly or non-occlusive dressings can be used to prevent further irritation to draining lesions.

A critically important but often overlooked aspect of treatment involves the psychosocial aspect of the disease. Quality of life is diminished in individuals with this condition because of the associated pain, drainage, odor, and sensitive affected areas. Patients may become socially isolated, have employment difficulties because of missed days of work when flares occur, and may have increased sexual or relationship dysfunction. Assurance that this condition is not contagious or the result of poor hygiene can be helpful. Counseling and support groups are often beneficial additions to treatment plans.