Theories applicable to HBSE include Micro, Mezzo, Macro Approaches; Biopsychosocial-Spiritual Approach; Systems Theory; Social-Ecological Model; and Ecological Systems Model. These theories and models facilitate an understanding of "Person-in-Environment." Many of these theories overlap in how they organize an understanding of individuals and associated contributors to their presentation. There are also differences between each theory regarding how each identifies and analyzes specific information. Here, the "Micro, Mezzo and Macro Approach," the "Biopsychosocial-Spiritual Approach," and the "Ecological Systems Model" are described to highlight similarities and differences.

**Micro, Mezzo, and Macro Approach**

"Micro, mezzo, and macro approach" refers to a three-level understanding of contributors to systems involving and surrounding the individual.

- Micro: Micro-level involves considerations for biological and psychological characteristics of the individual. These could include personality, mental and physical health or pathology, and education levels, as examples.

- Mezzo: Mezzo-level formulation takes into account the immediately surrounding networks and services of an individual. These can include the home and neighborhood environments, social networks (including friends, neighbors, and family), and available medical and social services.

- Macro: Macro-level contributors include the largest scale contributors that can impact an individual through the mezzo level, including economic and political changes and regulations as well as natural forces, such as earthquakes, tornados, and others.

**Biopsychosocial-spiritual Model**

The biopsychosocial model was first introduced in 1977 by George Engel to understand the multitude of factors that contribute to a person. It has been argued that the biopsychosocial model itself does not include existential factors, including spirituality or death. As such, the biopsychosocial-spiritual model was proposed to provide a more comprehensive view in this regard.

- Biological factors can be understood as any medical or biological contributors to the person's presentation. These include medical illnesses, genetics, neurobiology, physical attributes, diet, substances, and medications.

- Psychological contributors include temperament, personality, memory, attitudes, coping mechanisms, and beliefs.

- Social contributors include social support networks, culture, workplace, education, socioeconomic status, and relationships.

- Spiritual contributors include any aspects of belief for or against a spiritual or religious entity.

**Ecological Systems Model**

The Ecological Systems Model was originally described by Bronfenbrenner and described 5 system levels from smallest to largest, as they pertain to the individual.

- Microsystem is that which directly surrounds the individual and that the individual interacts with directly and most intimately. This can include home, work, school, and relationships within this system, including family, friends, and caregivers.

- Mesosystem describes the following level, where each specific microsystem interconnects with the other and indirectly impacts the individual. For example, the work system and associated demands may either positively or negatively influence the home system.

- Exosystem describes a system level in which the individual is affected but unable to effect change. These can include an individual's company going out of business and losing their job as a result.

- Macrosystem includes a higher level still, in which the cultural, political, and economic environment can be understood, all of which can affect the individual.

- Finally, the chronosystem describes dynamic and timing-dependent events, including how historical events might impact an individual's life.