# Continuing Education Activity

Sulfonylureas represent a class of medications utilized in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, administration, adverse effects, contraindications, monitoring, and toxicity of sulfonylureas. The importance of utilizing a multi-disciplinary approach to managing patients taking sulfonylureas will also be highlighted.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action of sulfonylureas. 
- Explain the potential adverse effects of sulfonylureas. 
- Review sulfonylurea overdoses and the treatment options available.
- Summarize the importance of utilizing an interprofessional team approach to caring for diabetic patients taking sulfonylureas.

# Indications

Sulfonylureas are the oldest class of oral antidiabetic medication dating back to the 1950s.

Sulfonylureas are comparable in efficacy and decrease the glycated hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c) by 1% to 1.25%.

Similar to sulfonylureas, meglitinides stimulate the pancreatic beta cells to secrete insulin.

# Mechanism of Action

Sulfonylureas bind to and inhibit the ATP-sensitive potassium channels (K) on the pancreatic beta cells. As a result, potassium efflux decreases, and the beta-cell membrane depolarizes. Membrane depolarization causes calcium channels to open, leading to calcium influx and increased intracellular calcium, which stimulates insulin secretion from the pancreatic beta cells.

The SUR1 is mostly present in the brain and on the beta cells in the pancreas. SUR2 is present in the cardiac muscle (as isoform SUR2A) and the smooth muscle (as isoform SUR2B). Sulfonylureas differ in their affinity to the SUR subtype receptors and their efficacy in closing the K channels. Unlike the other sulfonylureas, glimepiride has a lower affinity to the cardiac muscles and is not associated with cardiovascular safety concerns.

# Administration

Start sulfonylureas at a low dose and titrate up based on glycemic control.

Chlorpropamide is a long-acting sulfonylurea available as 100 mg and 250 mg oral tablets outside the United States.

Tolbutamide is a short-acting sulfonylurea available as a 500 mg oral tablet.

Glyburide is a long-acting sulfonylurea available as an immediate-release (IR) oral tablet.

Glipizide is available in an IR and an extended-release (ER) oral tablet.

Glimepiride is available as an IR oral tablet. Start glimepiride at 1 to 2 mg per day and a maximum daily dose of 8 mg.

Gliclazide is available as an IR oral tablet and a modified release (MR) oral tablet. Administer immediate release gliclazide two times daily, 30 minutes before a meal.

If a patient is fasting, reduce or hold the sulfonylurea dose and ensure self-monitoring of glucose levels.

# Adverse Effects

Sulfonylureas stimulate insulin secretion regardless of the serum glucose levels.

Weight gain is common with sulfonylureas.

Other common side effects include nausea, diarrhea, dizziness, and headache.

The University Group Diabetes Program (UGDP) trial showed an increased risk of mortality with tolbutamide.

Glimepiride is not associated with an increased cardiovascular risk.

The ADA guideline recommends metformin as a first-line agent for all patients with type 2 diabetes unless contraindicated.

# Contraindications

The Beers Criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults includes chlorpropamide and glyburide.

There is a debate whether hypersensitivity to sulfonamides is a contraindication to prescribing sulfonylureas.

Oral antidiabetic agents, including sulfonylureas, are not FDA-approved for use in pregnancy and lactation.

The ADA guideline recommends avoiding glyburide in patients with CKD.

# Monitoring

The ADA guideline recommends monitoring HbA1c levels at least quarterly after therapy change or if patients do not meet glycemic goals.

For patients with diabetes mellitus type 2 on insulin therapy, the ADA guideline recommends self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) to decrease the risk of hypoglycemia and manage hyperglycemia.

Monitor patients for hypoglycemia with sulfonylureas.

Monitor serum creatinine once a year or every 3 to 4 months in selected patients and adjust the sulfonylurea dose accordingly.

Instruct patients to perform self-glucose monitoring when they develop symptoms of hypoglycemia.

# Toxicity

Sulfonylureas have a narrow therapeutic index.

Educate patients that the hypoglycemia alert value is ≤ 70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L).

The “Rule of 15” or “15-15” rule applies to treatment with glucose. The patient should receive 15 grams of glucose, recheck blood glucose levels 15 minutes later, and repeat the process as needed until hypoglycemia resolves.

In hospitalized patients, intravenous (IV) dextrose is the first-line therapy for severe hypoglycemia from sulfonylureas.

Glucagon stimulates glucose production in the liver and is useful for patients who refuse or cannot take oral glucose.

Octreotide is a somatostatin analog that results in an effect opposite to that of sulfonylureas. By binding to the somatostatin-2 receptors on the pancreatic beta cells, octreotide inhibits calcium influx, thus blocking insulin secretion.

Monitor all patients for 12 hours after hypoglycemia treatment to recognize and treat recurrent episodes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Diabetes mellitus is a chronic condition that can negatively affect various organ systems.

Available data supports an interprofessional team approach in diabetes care. An interprofessional healthcare team model for diabetes care may include clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, diabetes educators, dietitians, and pharmacists. Providers from different professions complement each other to improve patient outcomes and decrease healthcare costs.

A clinician-pharmacist collaborative practice is beneficial to patients with diabetes.

Evidence supports implementing nurse champion models, including nurses, certified diabetes educators, and clinical mentors for diabetes care.

Dietitians serve as an invaluable resource for patients with diabetes. The evidence-based practice guideline by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics strongly supports dietitians in providing medical nutrition therapy to improve patient outcomes.

The healthcare team should follow a patient-centered approach and tailor diabetes therapy to the patient’s needs.

The healthcare team should realize that food insecurity might complicate diabetes. Patients who do not have access to nutritious, healthy food may experience hyperglycemia, and patients who are unable to obtain food may experience hypoglycemia.

As mentioned before, hypoglycemia is a common adverse effect associated with sulfonylureas. Severe hypoglycemia may lead to serious consequences, including seizure, coma, or death. To minimize the risk of hypoglycemic events, the healthcare team should identify patients at risk of hypoglycemia and consider less stringent HbA1c goals.

While newer and potentially safer alternatives are now available, sulfonylureas can be a useful adjunct in diabetes management, especially when the cost of therapy is an issue. Successful therapy requires a collaborative interprofessional effort to maximize the therapeutic efficacy of sulfonylureas while minimizing potential adverse events. [Level 5]