Kinkajou (Potos flavus) is an omnivorous rainforest mammal that lives in the tropical forests of Central and South America. It is considered related to raccoons despite its resemblance to primates. The current medical literature lacks specific guidelines for the medical management of Kinkajou bites and any subsequent soft tissue infections. The goal of this activity is to outline basic guidelines for primary healthcare providers in their approach toward managing patients with kinkajou bites that have either a high risk of soft tissue infection or present with soft tissue infections at the bite site. Animal bites, in general, account for 1% of the total emergency department (ED) visits, which are approximately 2 to 5 million ED patients annually. Ten percent of those patients presenting in the ED requires suturing, and only 1% to 2% need hospitalization for treatment with intravenous (IV) antibiotics or observation. Any animal bite, including kinkajou bites, warrants proper inspection to evaluate their capacity to become infectious. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of kinkajou bites and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing these injuries.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the most common locations of the kinkajou.
- Describe the evaluation of an animal bite wound.
- Outline the treatment of a kinkajou bite.
- Review the evaluation and treatment of kinkajou bites and highlight the role of the interprofessional team in managing these injuries.