**Pectus Excavatum**

Surgery is indicated in diverse clinic scenarios. These scenarios include protrusion cardiopulmonary impairment, psycho-social stress issues, and Haller index over3.25 with or without cardiopulmonary symptomatology.

**Pectus Carinatum**

Surgical repair is indicated in thoracic pain, respiratory symptoms, psycho-social issues, and non-operative techniques failure.

**Poland Syndrome**

Surgical repair is indicated in psycho-social, and chest wall and/or functionality impairment. Timing and surgical options depend on age, gender, and functionality impairment severity, As a general principle, surgery is recommended after puberty. Surgical correction goals are; chest wall symmetry improvement, anterior axillary fold creation, and hand reconstruction if indicated.

**Sternal Clefts**

The surgical repair depends on the cleft severity and other anomalies association. Follow-up with observation has been recommended in asymptomatic patients with minor defects. Partial and complete clefts surgical goals are; mediastinum structures protection, improve respiratory dynamics, and provide a normal growth thorax development. As a general rule, surgical correction must take place in the neonatal period. The surgical technique is to perform sternal bars dissection with careful perichondrium and pericardium separation to avoid phrenic nerve injury. In partial clefts, perform a complete cleft with a wedge osteotomy in the intact sternum has been recommended to grant symmetrical sternum sides re-approximation. At over three months, the patient's thoracic skeletal structures are more rigid; therefore, a surgical approximation may cause thoracic compartment syndrome to approach this scenario, costal cartilage sliding-plasty, autologous tissue bridges, and prosthetic material protection has been utilized.

**Ectopia Cordis**

Provide vital support to the newborn is global management. There is no better surgical approach for ectopia cordis if it is possible; however, a multi-stage procedure is the recommendation. The first stage is focussed on immediate omphalocele closure if indicated and temporally heart soft tissue covering. Second stage surgery focuses on heart reduction into the thoracic cavity, cardiac defects repair, and chest wall reconstruction.

**Jeunes Syndrome**

Treatment directs towards aggressive respiratory support. Surgery is indicated in severe respiratory distress (thoracic insufficiency syndrome) instauration, and this commonly occurs between 8 and 18 months of age. Providing chest wall diameter augment is the surgical goal.

**Jarcho-Levin syndrome**

Treatment focuses on aggressive respiratory support. In spondylothoracic dysostosis, surgical repair has no benefit due to the deformity being limited to the spine's posterior aspect. In spondylocostal dysostosis phenotype, VEPTR surgical repair has been performed to grant thoracic spine augment, thus permitting expansion of the thoracic volume to allow lung development. Surgery is the recommendation when scoliosis and respiratory distress begins to progress (6 months of age).