Extravasation - If extravasation is suspected, the infusion should stop immediately. Any obvious fluid collection should be aspirated, and the extremity elevated. The antidote, sodium thiosulfate, should be administered.

Secondary malignancy - Leukemia is the most common secondary malignancy after treatment with cisplatin, and this typically occurs many years after completion of treatment.

Tumor lysis syndrome can occur after treatment with many chemotherapeutic agents and manifest as hyperuricemia, alteration in hemodynamics, hyperkalemia, and azotemia. Uric acid-reducing treatments may be necessary.

**Common Side Effects**

- Mild nausea

- Vomiting

- Diarrhea

- Temporary hair loss

- Loss in the ability to taste food

- Hiccups

- Dry mouth

- Dark urine

- Decreased sweating

- Dry skin

- Dehydration

**Drug Interactions**

Caution is necessary when administering cisplatin with any of the following medications. Most drug interactions result in cumulative and dose-dependent hematologic, renal, and neurotoxic effects. Due to cumulative myelosuppression, cisplatin should also not be used concurrently with immunosuppressive medications.

- Alpha-lipoic acid

- Aminoglycosides

- Baricitinib

- BCG

- Chloramphenicol

- Clozapine

- Deferiprone

- Denosumab

- Dipyrone

- Echinacea

- Fosphenytoin

- Leflunomide

- Lenogristim

- Lipefilgrastim

- Natalizumab

- Nivolumab

- Ocrelizumab

- Palifermin

- Pidotimod

- Pimecrolimus

- Promazine

- Roflumilast

- Siponimod

- Sipuleleucel-T

- Tacrolimus

- Taxane derivatives

- Tertomotide

- Topotecan

- Trastuzumab

- Vaccinations

- Vinorelbine