**Synovial Fluid Analysis**

Monosodium urate crystal identification remains the gold standard for gout diagnosis. Gout flare is marked by the presence of MSU crystals in synovial fluid obtained from affected joints of bursas visualized by direct examination of a fluid sample using compensated polarized light microscopy. This technique may also identify uric acid crystals from previously affected tophaceous deposits and joints during the inter-critical period.

Under polarizing microscopy, synthetic fluid or tophus aspiration analysis reveals needle-shaped, negatively birefringent crystals.

**Laboratory Study**

The examination usually reveals elevations in the white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) during a gout flare-up. Still, these features are non-specific and do not confirm the diagnosis.

During an acute gout flare-up, serum urate level may be high, normal, or low. The physician should repeat the serum urate level in patients with an uncertain gout diagnosis after the resolution of the flare-up. Hyperuricemia is helpful in the clinical diagnosis of gout in symptomatic patients, but hyperuricemia alone does not definitively confirm the diagnosis. Asymptomatic hyperuricemia is not uncommon in the general population. Persistently low serum urate concentrations make the diagnosis of gout less likely.

Urinary fractional excretion of uric acid can be measured, especially in young populations with a non-specific cause of hyperuricemia. It will help differentiate between overproduction or under excretion of uric acid and can act as a guide for therapy.

**Imaging**

Although not routinely used, ultrasonography and dual-energy CT (DECT) can assist in diagnosing gout. Monosodium urate deposition will be apparent on ultrasound as a hyperechoic enhancement over the cartilage, also known as a double contour sign. DECT can identify urate due to the beam attenuation after exposure to two different X-ray spectra.