It is crucial to obtain a complete medical history of the patient. To properly diagnose premature ejaculation, the history should focus on any medical complaints or issues and his detailed sexual history.

No specific laboratory or radiographic tests are necessary to evaluate for premature ejaculation. Some tests, such as serum testosterone and prolactin, may be appropriate if there is concomitant erectile dysfunction or loss of libido, with a clinical picture suggesting possible hypogonadism. While low testosterone is increased in patients with premature ejaculation, treatment of hypogonadism does not help cure the ejaculatory problem.

Hyperthyroidism has been linked to premature ejaculation, so obtaining a thyroid-stimulating hormone level may be reasonable in selected patients with reasonable suspicion of excess thyroid hormone levels.

Penile biothesiometry (vibrational skin sensation threshold testing), nerve conduction studies, somatosensory nerve latency testing, and hormonal evaluations (testosterone, FSH, LH, prolactin, melatonin) are being done selectively by some specialists. None of these tests are necessary or currently recommended for routine clinical practice and should be considered investigational.

**Mental Health Evaluation**

As premature ejaculation is primarily a psychological disorder, it is important to include a psychological/psychosexual assessment as part of the overall evaluation. A consultation with a mental health professional experienced in male sexual dysfunction (psychiatrist, psychologist, or certified sex therapist)  should be made. Convincing a patient to see such a mental health professional for an evaluation can be challenging. Here are a few suggested talking points for discussion with the patient:

- Inform the patient that this is part of the usual routine for evaluating this problem.

- The consultation is just a simple assessment for an opinion.

- The request for the consultation is not a judgment; it's part of the usual routine workup for premature ejaculation.

- The evaluation is done by healthcare professionals who do this all the time.

- It's just like doing a blood test. We test the blood because we don't otherwise know the test results, good or bad. Same thing here.

- A mental health consultation report will help me offer you the best treatment with the best chance of a successful outcome. Isn't that what you said you wanted?

- If there are underlying psychological issues that need to be dealt with or are contributing to the problem, which is common, then identifying and treating them is the best way to achieve an optimal result; and maybe even a cure!

- Premature ejaculation is not a physical problem; everything works. It's a problem of control related to stress, anxiety, and nervousness. It's necessary to explore this to optimally deal with the problem.

- We rarely encounter individuals with this type of sexual disorder who are completely unaffected emotionally.

- Most men will demonstrate some negative emotional health effects such as extreme stress, anxiety, depression, loss of self-esteem, feelings of inadequacy, or something similar.

- Such issues cannot be dealt with and eliminated until they are identified and treated, which needs a mental health evaluation by an experienced professional.

Many potential psychological and emotional issues can account for premature ejaculation.

- A disconnect between the level of sexual excitement and sensory awareness/perception

- A feeling of worthlessness, self-loathing

- A need to manage control of the relationship through emotional and sexual means

- Conditioned response from early negative experiences

- Distorted thinking, such as overgeneralization, mental catastrophizing, etc.

- Excessive narcissism

- Fear of harm from vaginal penetration

- Lack of sensory awareness

- Obtaining pleasure from debasing or soiling women

- Power and control issues regarding the relationship

- Tendency to overgeneralization

- Unconscious hostile emotions toward women

Mental health professionals experienced in dealing with male sexual disorders recognize that these and other ideas or concepts from various schools of psychology may be involved.