Antimicrobial and immunomodulatory treatments, early diagnosis of infections, and aggressive treatment of complications of infections establish the basis of the treatment in X-linked CGD.

The entire patients with X-linked Hyper IgM syndrome are required to be treated with immunoglobulin replacement. Moreover, these patients are required to be assessed in terms of liver function at a frequency of 6 months and the existence of cryptosporidium and microsporidium is required to be investigated accordingly. The patients with infection identified with these organisms are required to be treated with azithromycin or nitazoxanide.

Treatment of XLP is trilateral as to be the treatment of acute disease symptoms, prevention from possible sequelae, and curative treatment. Anti-viral agents and immunoglobulin therapy are beneficial in the acute treatment of the disease. Another alternative treatment is ablative B-cell treatment with rituximab.

General precautions and protective approaches, intravenous immunoglobulin therapy, low dose IL-2 treatment are involved for the purpose of protection against infections in the treatment of WAS.

The definitive treatment of X-SCID is allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). Gene therapy is currently at the stage of clinical research. The formation of T, B, and NK engraftment is required to ensure complete immune functions with HCT. In the case of engraftment of only T-cell, the patients are required to be administered with IGRT due to abnormal B-cell function.

The basis of the treatment is comprised of immunoglobulin replacement therapy. Moreover, general protective precautions such as avoidance from infections and immunization by inactive vaccines are recommended accordingly. Immunoglobulin treatment reduces the incidence of infection and hospitalization rates. Immunoglobulin treatment further prevents the development of long-term pulmonary insufficiency and reduces the risk of a systemic enteroviral infection.

IPEX treatment or management is subdivided into acute and long-term treatment. The patients may present with serious dehydration or metabolic disorders due to infant-onset diabetes mellitus or diarrhea associated with enteropathy prior to or after the diagnosis. Also, the disease may flare up due to infections, vaccination, dietary changes, or other unknown triggers. Management of acute complications requires a multi-disciplinary endeavor. Long-term disease management includes dietary modifications and nutritional optimization for the purpose of avoiding intense immunosuppression and food allergens. HCT is the sole curative treatment of the disease. Although the disorder is recovered after the transplantation, endocrinopathies are persistent due to end-organ damage.