High-energy, blunt, non-penetrating trauma can result in a disruption in one or more layers of the common or cervical internal carotid artery wall. Direct, blunt trauma to the artery or excessive neck motion may produce intimal tears (varying from localized tears to diffuse intimal injury) exposing subendothelial collagen, resulting in platelet activation and thrombosis with a possible occlusion of the artery. An intimal defect can provide a pathway for blood to enter the layers of the artery wall, causing stenosis or occlusion of the artery. Disruption of the elastic laminae may lead to an expansion of the adventitia, resulting in traumatic aneurysm formation. Furthermore, the trauma-induced hypercoagulable state occurring early after carotid artery injury may result in intracranial ischemic strokes. Spasm of the carotid artery with occlusion has been commonly described as well.

**Anatomy**

The left and right common carotid arteries supply the head and neck structures with oxygenated blood. The left common carotid originates directly from the aortic arch in the thorax. Hence, it has two components: thoracic and cervical. The right common carotid originates in the neck (cervical portion) from the brachiocephalic trunk. Both arteries follow symmetrical courses, bifurcating into the external and internal carotid arteries each at the upper border of the thyroid cartilage at the level of the fourth cervical vertebra. The average diameter of the common carotids varies from 6.1 mm to 6.5 mm.