Several factors may influence the ESR. Females tend to have slightly increased ESRs compared to males.

The ESR is neither sensitive nor specific as a general screening test. Because an elevated ESR may occur in multiple clinical settings, it is meaningless as a stand-alone laboratory value. Furthermore, some patients with malignant lesions, serious infections, or significant inflammatory disorders may have normal ESR values.

- Anemia

- Arteritis

- Infections (including bone and joint)

- Kidney disease

- Low serum albumin

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

- Lymphoma, including lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma

- Multiple myeloma

- Polymyalgia rheumatica

- Red blood cell abnormalities

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Systemic vasculitis

- Thyroid disease

Any process that elevates fibrinogen levels (e.g., pregnancy, infection, diabetes mellitus, end-stage renal disease, heart disease, malignancy) may also elevate the ESR. An extremely high ESR value (>100 mm/hr) may indicate the presence of infection, multiple myeloma, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (Waldenström macroglobulinemia), giant cell (temporal) arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, or hypersensitivity vasculitis. One study reported that the average ESR was over 90 mm per hour in patients with temporal arteritis, with values over 30 mm per hour in 99% of the patients.

- An elevated ESR may be an important adjunct in detecting coronary artery disease.

- There may exist a relationship between the ESR in ischemic stroke and the amount of local brain injury, atherosclerosis, and short-term outcomes.

- Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell (temporal) arteritis are inflammatory conditions that usually occur in persons older than 50 years.

- In rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and osteoarthritis, ESR levels are frequently used to help make the diagnosis; the levels may be poorly correlated with the clinical aspects of disease intensity.

- Periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) is an adverse complication of total hip and knee arthroplasty. ESR has low sensitivity in a suspected PJI, ranging from 42% to 94%.

- An isolated ESR is of variable sensitivity and is not optimal to rule out septic arthritis. However, in combination with an inability to bear weight normally and increased temperature, the ESR may be a helpful test, especially when using a low ESR threshold (>15 mm/hr).

- An elevated ESR may be useful in the diagnosis and follow-up in patients with osteomyelitis. Optimal ESR cutoff levels for the diagnosis are variable.

- An elevated ESR is associated with metastasis and a worse prognosis in patients with cutaneous malignant melanoma.

- ESR may be used as an indicator of the presence of invasive bacterial infection in children.

Aside from factors that increase ESR, the healthcare team should consider the factors that decrease ESR. This is especially important because circumstances that decrease the ESR may coexist with diagnoses that increase the ESR result, leading to missed diagnoses. Factors that lower the ESR include an increased number of red blood cells (polycythemia), which causes an increase in blood viscosity.

Regular alcohol use is negatively associated with ESR. Alcohol drinkers of low, moderate, and high quantities of alcohol will show a lower ESR than abstainers and occasional drinkers. Regular physical exercise at moderate and high levels was associated with lower ESR rates than typically expected.

The test must be performed using blood drawn within two hours of testing. In standing blood, erythrocytes tend to become spherical, which impedes rouleaux formation. Anisocytosis and poikilocytosis also interfere with erythrocyte stacking, thus decreasing the ESR.

Certain medications (valproic acid, statins, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) may lower the ESR value.