IOP is an important concept, and understanding changes that may result during the perioperative experience is essential. A decrease in IOP can be achieved by most inhaled and intravenous anesthetics and other physiological changes like hypocarbia, hypothermia, and decreased mean arterial pressure. Increases in IOP can be achieved with certain drugs like succinylcholine and ketamine, as well as certain events such as Valsalva maneuvers and external pressure applied to the eye by the ophthalmologists. It is important to note that vomiting can increase IOP by approximately 30 to 40 mm Hg, so postoperative prophylaxis of nausea and vomiting should be given. When considering scopolamine for postoperative nausea and vomiting prophylaxis, it is important to remember that this can precipitate acute angle-closure glaucoma and should be avoided in susceptible patients.

Moreover, nitrous oxide should be avoided for 4 to 6 weeks if the patient underwent recent eye surgery that involved using an injected gas bubble of SF6 as nitrous oxide can enter and expand this gas bubble causing ischemia of the optic nerve. Many patients presenting for eye surgery may be taking topical eye medications. Some of these significant medications are echothiophate, phenylephrine, beta-blockers, and acetazolamide. All of these medications can be absorbed and can have systemic effects. Echothiphate may result in prolonged paralysis if succinylcholine is used for intubation. Topical beta-blockers and phenylephrine can have hemodynamic effects by influencing heart rate and blood pressure by acting on their corresponding receptors. A major clinical significance that may result is the oculocardiac reflex resulting in severe bradycardia, hypotension, and asystole. This can be aggravated by a light plane of anesthesia and physiological conditions that may arise under general anesthesia, including hypoxia and hypercarbia.