Complications related to intrathecal therapy include technical or biological (infections) factors or issues related to the drugs administered.

**Technical Complications**

- The inaccurate subarachnoid puncture could cause radicular or medullary lesions.

- The insertion of the catheter in the subarachnoid space may involve the risk of headache (post-dural puncture headache), epidural hemorrhage and hematoma, spinal cord compression, and/or neurological conditions such as paresis.

- Occlusion (fibrin sleeve formation), lesions, dislocations, or disconnection of the catheter: catheter lesions during the procedure as well as twisting or migration of the catheter, can cause changes in the pain relief effect. Catheter kinking and dislodgements can be minimized by adopting some precautions during the procedure. These include a mid-to-upper lumbar dural entry-level, a shallow-angle paramedian oblique insertion trajectory, and accurate catheter anchoring and tunneling techniques.

- Persistent pain at the catheter or pump implantation site.

- Seroma at the pump implantation site although it can be evacuated with a simple puncture.

- Allergic reaction or rejection against implanted materials.

- Pump displacement (e.g., overturning) and/or skin erosion locally can also occur.

Catheter granuloma. A special issue among complications concerns the catheter granuloma, also referred to as catheter-associated inflammatory mass. It is a noninfectious inflammatory mass around the tip of the catheter, which is formed after a long time of positioning. The complication is generally asymptomatic, although it involves a decrease in the therapeutic effect of the device. However, when it increases its volume, a spinal cord compression that mimics a spinal epidural hematoma may occur.

**Infections**

The risk of infection after implant ranges from 0.8% to 9%.

**Drug-related Side Effects**

Side effects related to the drug are mainly dose-related. In the case of morphine, these side effects include itching, nausea, vomiting, respiratory depression, urinary retention, and cognitive side effects. Signs and symptoms of baclofen overdose include drowsiness, lightheadedness, dizziness, drowsiness, respiratory depression, convulsions, rostral progression of hypotonia, loss of consciousness, which progresses to a coma. Abrupt withdrawal of baclofen can be life-threatening. The symptoms are high fever, altered mental status, the exaggerated rebound effect of spasticity, and muscle stiffness. A not-treated suspension can lead to rhabdomyolysis, multiple organ failure, and death.

**Clinical Evaluation**

Patients must be carefully monitored at each visit and checked for new neurological signs or symptoms, including progressive change of type, quantity, or intensity of pain or spasticity, especially despite the increase in dose, sensory changes such as numbness, tingling, and burning, hyperesthesia and/or hyperalgesia. Other local (catheter insertion site, tunnel, pocket) and general symptoms (e.g., fever) require investigation.

Symptoms that require immediate diagnosis and treatment include constipation, urinary retention, myelopathy, cauda equina syndrome symptoms (weakness, tingling, or numbness in the legs, saddle anesthesia, lower back and/or pelvic pain, bladder or bowel incontinence),****gait disturbances, or difficulty walking, paraparesis or paralysis, respiratory depression, hypotonia, confusion, and excessive sedation.

If an inflammatory mass is suspected (catheter granuloma), the recommended evaluation should include an analysis of the patient's medical history combined with a neurological evaluation and radiological diagnostic procedures.