Lesions of the skin or mucosa containing highly dense collections of pigmented chromophores, including hemoglobin, melanin, and deoxyhemoglobin, are generally demarcated from the surrounding tissues through stark color contrast. Such lesions lend themselves to treatment with medical lasers, as this color contrast facilitates the delivery of selective photothermolysis. Basic knowledge of common pigmented lesions will assist the provider in recognizing appropriate indications for medical laser use.

**Vascular Anomalies**– Vascular anomalies are a broad category of lesions and masses that often require management by several medical specialists, and with multimodality therapies. These are divided into vascular tumors and vascular malformations. Several vascular anomalies are pigmented, the most common of which will be discussed here as they pertain to laser treatment**.******It is essential for the treating professional to not only be able to differentiate between the different pigmented vascular anomalies, but also to have an understanding of several syndromes which may be encountered during the workup of a vascular lesion.

**Infantile Hemangiomas**– Infantile hemangiomas, also known as strawberry or cherry angiomas, are vascular tumors. They are the most common benign vascular tumors of childhood, affecting 4.5% of infants. They are more common in females than males, and approximately two-thirds of them are located in the head and neck. They appear as red or reddish-purple raised plaques on the skin, and display rapid endothelial cell turnover. Most infantile hemangiomas are superficial, but there are also deep infantile hemangiomas, which delve into the subcutaneous tissues, or compound hemangiomas, which have both superficial and deep components. Infantile hemangiomas can be focal, multifocal, segmental, or indeterminate. Specific subtypes of hemangiomas are more challenging to treat than others, depending on their extent and location.

Unlike vascular malformations, infantile hemangiomas do not grow and progress as patients grow and age. Instead, they begin as small, flat, hypopigmented, or red spots at birth, which shortly after that begin rapidly proliferating and growing. Hemangiomas reach their peak growth rate around six months of age, and then to enter a natural quiescent phase by one year of age.

Syndromes Associated with Hemangiomas - If a patient is encountered with a facial segmental hemangioma, a workup for cardiac abnormalities, posterior fossa and cerebral vascular anomalies, and ocular irregularities may be necessary to rule out PHACE syndrome.

**Capillary Malformations**– Also known as port-wine stains, capillary malformations are congenital lesions that are present at birth, at an equal distribution between males and females. They are the result of abnormal low-flow connections of dermal capillaries and appear red and lacy. While they are flat at first, they can become raised and nodular if left untreated, darkening to purple with age.****Like other vascular anomalies, capillary malformations are often present in the face and neck.

Syndromes Associated with Capillary Malformations - When they are located in the upper face, along with the distribution of V1, V2, or V3, they can be associated with Sturge-Weber syndrome. This is a sporadic disease that affects the vasculature of the eye and brain and can lead to seizures and developmental delay.

**Venous Malformations**– Venous malformations are the most common vascular malformation. They result from inappropriately connected, slow-flowing venous vessels, which dilate easily and tend to grow into the tissues where they are located. They commonly present in combination with lymphatic malformations. On physical examination, they are soft, compressible, and blue-tinged. Venous malformations are usually present at birth, although they are often small and not noticed in infancy. They have a special predilection for skin/ mucosa and muscle, with almost half of them are located in the head and neck. They can be present in isolation, as localized or diffuse lesions, or as part of a syndrome.****As venous malformations grow and become more extensive, they become difficult to treat with surgical excision subsequent cosmetic and functional loss afterward. It is, therefore, preferable to control them with conservative measures. Lasers can be such a treatment option.

Syndromes Associated with Venous Malformations - The most common syndrome associated with venous malformations is Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, which should be on the differential if a patient has concomitant capillary malformations, lymphatic malformations, and limb overgrowth.

**Arteriovenous Malformations**– Arteriovenous malformations are aggressive vascular malformations that can infiltrate and affect multiple tissues and organs. They are high-flow lesions that aberrantly connected arteries and veins, leading to shunting that is locally destructive. These lesions can become severely disfiguring as well as life-threatening if left untreated.

Syndromes Associated with Arteriovenous Malformations - Parkes Weber syndrome is similar to Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, in that capillary malformations and limb overgrowth are present, but the distinguishing factor is the presence arteriovenous malformations, rather than venous malformations.

**Pyogenic Granuloma**– Also known as lobular capillary hemangioma, a pyogenic granuloma is a benign, often rapidly growing, fibrovascular lesion associated with endothelial proliferation. Pyogenic granulomas often arise from the mucosal surfaces of the head and neck. Hormones frequently aggravate them during pregnancy, and in such cases, are called granuloma gravidarum. Pyogenic granulomas can cause problematic bleeding if left untreated.

**Tattoos**– Of the lesions discussed in this review, tattoos are the only ones not native to patient skin. Through various methods, tattoo pigment is placed in the dermis. There, dermal fibroblasts engulf the pigments and trap them in the superficial dermal layer. While many tattoos today are electively placed as forms of body art and personal expression, not all tattoos are strictly elective. There are incidents of traumatic tattooing from substances such as gunpowder or dust that can become accidentally embedded in the skin. Providers may also tattoo the skin for medical purposes, such as radiation therapy. Regardless, some patients seek the removal of their tattoos**.**

**Pigmented Nevi**– Benign nevi are melanin-rich, slow-growing, soft, pigmented growths of the skin, which can be congenital or acquired.