Managing filovirus disease typically focuses on prevention/detection and supportive care with other management strategies beginning to emerge.  There are very few randomized controlled trials on Ebola treatment.  With only one on specific anti-ebola therapy, ZMapp, which enrolled 72 patients and compared ZMapp, a monoclonal antibody, vs. standard care with resultant 22% vs. 37% mortality.  Another international multisite retrospective cohort study has looked at intravenous fluid therapy compared to oral hydration and found no statistical difference in 28-day survival among the studied 424 participants.

Studies have examined convalescent plasma with unclear results.  Two studies revealed decreased mortality rates with convalescent plasma (31% vs. 38% and 28% vs. 44%), but these studies had limitations including lack of randomization, lack of data on other interventions, and an unknown level of neutralizing antibodies in plasma. Their small sample sizes also limited these studies.

A non-randomized single-arm study with 99 patients studied favipiravir Patients tolerated it well with a reduction in mortality of 44% vs. 65%; however, this data is limited by small sample sizes, non-randomization, and lack of control for between-group treatments.

Interferon beta 1-a has been studied in a non-randomized single-arm study and found a reduction in 21-day mortality from 84% to 33%. Data limitations included small sample size and non-randomization.

Also, palliative care has been suggested as an essential element for the treatment of these diseases given their high fatality rate, lack of effective treatment, and the crisis nature of outbreaks.  Palliative services are critical to preventing and alleviating the suffering of patients in such a high fatality disease with significant additional psycho-social strain associated with outbreaks, infection, and symptom burden.

Other molecular studies have identified agents not specific to Ebola virus that may aid in treatment.  Ion channel inhibitors, such as amiodarone, have shown an affinity for preventing filovirus entry into cells in vitro, this inhibition is attainable at normal treatment doses for arrhythmia.  Also, amiodarone interferes with glycoprotein processing with resultant inhibition of the fusion of the viral envelope and the endosomal membrane.  However, these in vitro studies have not shown any clinical improvements in treatment during outbreaks.  Antiparasitic drugs, such as chloroquine, has been shown to have antiviral properties by inhibiting viral entry and reducing inflammation.  However, despite promising in vitro studies, human studies have not demonstrated the efficacy of antiparasitic drugs in the Ebola virus infection.  Psychoactive drugs, such as chlorpromazine and first-generation anti-histamines, also act by inhibiting viral internalization.  Selective estrogen receptor modulators also inhibit viral entry independent of estrogen receptors on target cells with the exact mechanism remaining unknown with two animal studies showing promise for protection from Ebola virus infection, one of which confirmed protection while the other obtained 50% protection rates.

During the 2014 to 2016 outbreak, two vaccines underwent phase II/III trials and showed promise with high efficacy and long term antibody responses for Ebola virus.  Marburgvirus, another filovirus, to this day does not have a vaccine.