Laboratory evaluation for FXIII deficiency starts after a thorough history and physical exam. The FXIII comes into play after fibrin has been generated. Hence, the traditional coagulation tests- prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), and international normalized ratio (INR), are all normal. The laboratory evaluations mainly involve clot solubility test, FXIII activity assay, FXIII antigen assay, inhibitor assay, and molecular diagnosis. Thromboelastography (TEG) is not standardized and varies amongst different institutions.

1. Clot solubility test: It is easy to perform, inexpensive, and does not require any specific instruments. The sensitivity of the test depends on the clotting agents (thrombin or Ca2+) and the solubilizing agents (2% acetic acid, 1% monochloroacetic acid, and 5 mol/L urea). Multiple conditions can yield a false-positive result:

- Hypofibrinogenemia or dysfibrinogenemia- especially if urea is used as a solubilizing agent. It must be ruled out with a thrombin time, reptilase time, fibrinogen assay, and fibrinogen activity.

- High pepsinogen- seen in gastric disorders. It can cause false-positive results if acetic acid is used.

The clot solubility test is fraught with several limitations. It is neither sensitive nor specific and highly underestimates FXIII deficiency. It cannot detect mild or moderate deficiencies. Heterozygous carriers may not be detected. It is not standardized amongst different laboratories; hence it is not used in developed countries. However, in developing countries, where alternative assays may not be present, this test is still widely popular due to its low cost. No standard guidelines exist on the use of the clot solubility test. An alternative strategy is to use two different assays with different clotting and solubilizing agents and run both the tests in parallel. If one of them is positive, then further investigations should be undertaken to evaluate FXIII deficiency.

2. Quantitative assays (Functional activity assays): If available, then these are first-line screening tests recommended.

- Ammonia release assay: Quick and efficient, this test reports FXIII activity by measuring the photometric absorbance at 340nm wavelength. The FXIII activity release ammonia, which is used to convert NADH or NADPH to NAD+ or NADP+. One caveat is that there is also an FXIII independent release of ammonia, which can lead to overestimation of FXIII activity and hence report falsely high levels. Therefore, a 'plasma blank' is supplied in the kit, which must be used to correct the falsely high FXIII activity.

- Amine incorporation assay: These tests use fluorescent, radiolabeled, or biotinylated amines covalently bound to a glutamine residue of the substrate are measured after unbound amines are released from the protein fraction. Although a more sensitive test than ammonia release assay, they are not standardized, lack validity, and are time-consuming.

- Isopeptide assay: This test is based on the isopeptidase activity of FXIII under certain conditions. Although this test does not cause overestimation of the FXIII levels, it can only detect the FXIII level up to 5%, making it less sensitive compared to other tests.

3. Immunological assays: This assay is used "after" FXIII deficiency is confirmed. It is useful to distinguish between FXIII subunit A, B, and FXIII-A2B2 complex. The assays cannot detect the rare forms of FXIII defect. For instance, the assay cannot detect the 'type II' defect, where although FXIII A subunit is present, it is not functionally active. Enzyme-linked immunoassays (ELISA) is the most widely used immunoassay. R-ELISA (Reanal-ker, Budapest, Hungary) is a one-step sandwich ELISA with excellent sensitivity. Electroimmunoassays and radioimmunoassays are used infrequently due to a lack of standardization and cumbersome procedure.

4. FXIII inhibitor assays: These are tested in a patient suspected of having antibodies. There are two types of antibodies.

- Neutralizing autoantibodies against FXIII subunit A- usually detected by mixing studies.

- Non-neutralizing inhibitors: ELISA assays are used to detect IgG or IgM antibodies.

5. Genetic analysis: These are done only in select countries and institutions where the tests are available. The A subunit gene is located on chromosome 6 and contains 15 exons and 14 introns. Missense mutations are more common. Nearly 150 mutations in the A-subunit have been reported so far.

Thromboelastography (TEG) is not standardized amongst different institutions. However, in vitro studies suggest that whole blood aggregometry can help in diagnosing FXIII deficiency.