Morbid obesity in women can have many implications. It can lead to irregular menstrual cycles and infertility. Also, morbidly obese women are at increased risk of developing many obstetric complications such as gestational diabetes, pregnancy-induced hypertension/preeclampsia, and anesthesia-associated complications. Large for gestational age fetuses are more common in morbidly obese women. Many clinical practice guidelines, including guidelines from the American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS), recommend avoiding pregnancy before, and at least 12-18 months after bariatric surgery. The main concern of pregnancy in the immediate early postoperative period after bariatric surgery is the developing fetus could be affected by rapid weight loss and potential micronutrient deficiencies. Rapid weight loss with resulting malnutrition can affect the mother as well.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends using nonoral hormonal contraception (e.g., levonorgestrel intrauterine system or implants) for women who undergo bariatric surgery and desire hormonal contraception. Barrier contraception is also helpful in the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases. The physiologic and anatomic changes of bariatric surgery may augment the risk of oral contraceptive failure. Oral contraceptive pills also increase the risk of thromboembolism in obese patients.

Preoperatively all patients should receive upper endoscopy. There is increasing evidence for the use of an “ultra-low” preoperative carbohydrate diet to shrink the liver allowing for better exposure and favorable outcomes.

The patient will be given preoperative antibiotics 30 minutes prior to incision as well as VTE prophylaxis.  The hair on the abdomen is removed with clippers in the preoperative area. The patient is placed on the operating table and secured in the supine position with the arms extended. After induction of anesthesia, an orogastric tube is positioned within the stomach.