**Polyenes**have no supporting evidence or indication at this time to support the utilization of therapeutic drug level monitoring (TDM) in patients treated with AMB-d, L-AMB, and ABLC.

**Azole**antifungals that are generally indicated for therapeutic drug concentration monitoring (TDM) all come from the triazole sub-class: itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole.

- Patients receiving **itraconazole**should receive TDM. Therapeutic drug concentrations are between 0.5 to 1 mcg/mL. Trough concentrations should be assessed after the first administration around the time of steady-state (approximately 5 to 7 days) and then re-assessed just before each consecutive dose. There is an increased likelihood of adverse reactions if concentrations are greater than 5 mcg/mL. Additionally, LFTs should undergo an assessment at baseline and be periodically evaluated in patients with hepatic impairment or treatment regimens lasting longer than one month.

- Therapeutic drug concentrations in **voriconazole**-containing regimens have a recommended trough between 1 to 1.5 mcg/mL; this requires assessment at the time to steady-state (variable, about 4 to 7 days) and before subsequent administrations. Toxic concentrations are concentrations greater than 5 mcg/mL, at which CNS toxicity tends to occur. Monitoring includes LFTs, creatinine, and electrolytes (including magnesium and calcium) at baseline and frequently after that (every one week for LFTs for four weeks, then every four weeks subsequently). Lipase should undergo assessment if a patient has a risk of pancreatitis. Finally, an ophthalmic exam is necessary for patients receiving voriconazole for greater than 28 days.

- **Posaconazole**has therapeutic drug concentrations of greater than 0.7 mcg/mL in prophylaxis and greater than 1.0 mcg/mL in salvage therapy. Trough serum concentration should get measured on day seven and before doses or following dose adjustments. Creatinine, electrolytes (including magnesium and calcium), and LFTs should be checked at baseline, then frequently during treatment.

- Monitoring parameters for **fluconazole**entail checking creatinine at baseline and monitoring LFTs.

- The use of **isavuconazonium sulfate**requires checking LFTs at baseline, then periodically during treatment.

- Monitoring of **ketoconazole**-containing regimens should include LFTs at baseline and during therapy, with ALT being checked weekly. The adrenal function requires monitoring if the patient is at risk of adrenal insufficiency.

**Terbinafine**has no supporting evidence to suggest that TDM is necessary for its utilization in prophylaxis, treatment, or toxicity. Monitoring creatinine and LFTs is, however, an indication at baseline. Immunodeficient patients receiving terbinafine for greater than six weeks should have a CBC checked.

**Griseofulvin**does not currently have supporting evidence for TDM, but laboratory monitoring includes BUN, creatinine, CBC, and LFTs.

Patients on **echinocandin**therapy should be regularly monitored for hepatotoxicity via hepatic aminotransferases (AST, ALT), with the additional consideration of alkaline phosphatase. There is currently no supporting evidence for TDM. Micafungin regimens should include BUN and creatinine in routine laboratory monitoring.

Patients receiving **flucytosine**-containing combination therapy require TDM. Patients should have serum concentration measured 2 to 4 hours after each dose; the trough concentration should be between 20 to 40 mcg/L (some sources state 50 to 100 mcg/mL). Toxic concentrations occur when serum drug concentrations exceed 100 mcg/mL. Other indications for TDM in flucytosine therapy include when a drug with a known drug interaction is started or stopped, when adherence for oral therapy is uncertain, or when manifestations of toxicity occur.