**Electrode Placement**

**Recording Electrodes**

- Depending on the type of electrode, the recording electrode is placed on the corneal surface, on the bulbar conjunctiva adjacent to the inferior limbus of the cornea, or on the skin of the lower eyelids.

- Artificial tears or other non-irritating ionic conductive solution is used to protect the corneal surface.

- Topical anesthesia is applied to minimize ocular surface discomfort with corneal contact electrodes.

- The electrode is connected to the positive terminal of the recording system.

**Reference Electrodes**

- Connect to the negative input of the recording system

**Ground Electrodes**

- Placed on the earlobe, mastoid, or forehead and connected to the ground input of the recording system

**Patient Preparation**

Per the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) guidelines:

- Electrically isolated recording environment

- Maximal pupil dilation

- Minimum 20-minutes of dark adaptation before performing dark-adapted ERGs

- Minimum 10-minutes of light adaptation before performing light-adapted ERGs

- Present stronger flashes after low strength flashes to avoid partial light adaptation from bright light

- Insert corneal contact electrodes or adjust the recording electrode under dim red light after dark adaptation. Avoid strong red light. Allow an additional 5-minutes of dark adaptation following corneal electrode placement

- Minimum 30-minutes of recovery time in normal room lighting is required for patients exposed to strong light stimuli from alternative imaging techniques (i.e., fundus photography or fluorescein angiography)

- Instruct patients to fixate on a target within the stimulator while minimizing eye movement. Patients who are unable to see the fixation point may be advised to look straight ahead while maintaining a steady gaze.