# Continuing Education Activity

Congenital femoral deficiency is a rare anomaly of the lower limbs, including a spectrum of disorders. Examination of the facies, spine, and whole of the lower limbs becomes imperative in such children to rule out other associated conditions. The prognosis varies with the severity of the disease, with a good prognosis in the less severe types. The treatment options include surgical intervention in the majority of the cases with various types of reconstruction surgeries described. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of congenital femoral deficiency and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of congenital femoral deficiency.
- Outline the common presentation and other associations in a patient with congenital femoral deficiency.
- Identify the various radiological investigations required for the management of congenital femoral deficiency.
- Explain the various treatment options for patients with congenital femoral deficiency and the anticipated complications.

# Introduction

Congenital femoral deficiency (CFD) incorporates a broad spectrum of deficiency, discrepancy, and deformity, ranging from the congenital short femur to one of the most severe Proximal focal femoral deficiencies. Such patients usually lack stability and mobility at the hip joint and are associated with malorientation of the joint along with soft tissue contractures. In addition, the growth of the affected limb occurs at an inhibited rate which varies with the severity of the underlying condition.

Congenital femoral deficiency patient usually presents with coxa vara proximally and femoral valgus distally. In addition, congenital femoral deficiency is usually associated with other skeletal abnormalities such as fibular hemimelia, which is its most common association. Other conditions include caudal regression syndrome, caudal dysplasia, deficiency of cruciate ligament, and lumbosacral spine deformities.

# Etiology

The exact etiology of congenital femoral deficiency is still unknown. However, multiple theories have been postulated, including cellular nutritional disturbance at the time of cell division, local vascular damage to mesenchymal tissue, and intrauterine compression of the thigh at the time of femoral diaphysis ossification.

# Epidemiology

Congenital femoral deficiency has an incidence of 1.1 to 2.0 per 100,000 live births and seems to be relatively more common in a female child with a male-to-female ratio of 1 to 2.

# Pathophysiology

A complex cascade of growth factors manages fetal development and growth of our lower extremities expressed successively at various checkpoints during the phase of development. In the process of limb bud formation, mesenchymal cells play a pivotal role in integrating the positional information received from the three axes (proximal-distal axis, anteroposterior axis, and dorsal-ventral axis).

The process of embryogenesis usually happens between 4 to 8 weeks post-fertilization, and it has been noticed that the majority of congenital anomalies had occurred during this time of interval only. Congenital femoral deficiency represents a dysplastic phenomenon that involves a broad spectrum of femoral involvement ranging from the short hypoplastic femur to the complete absence of proximal femur. This dysplasia leads to abnormal gait, impaired childhood growth, psychosocial, behavioral changes, and cosmetic implications.

# History and Physical

The facies, upper extremities, and spine are examined, looking for abnormal appearance or multiple congenital anomalies, indicating a genetic syndrome. Most of the children who were born with unilateral congenital femoral deficiency usually have no family history. Even though a clinician should enquire about the family history, any associated known congenital abnormalities, exposure to drugs, radiation, or any infectious disease during the early antenatal period.

A genetic consultation should be obtained if any syndromic association is found. Nowadays, many cases of congenital femoral deficiency can be identified during ultrasonography in routine antenatal check-ups by measuring the femur lengths. The predicted limb length discrepancy can be estimated using the multiplier method at birth and even at maturity in such scenarios.

While examining the child, clinicians should not only focus on the lower limbs as an area of interest; instead, they should examine the child as a whole starting from the facies and try to find out any possible associated bony deformities. In addition, a detailed examination of the hip, knee, and ankle should be done to assess the range of motion and contractures around respective joints. For example, characteristic findings in the hip examination include increased external rotation/external rotation deformity, flexion deformity, and limited abduction at the hip, along with the shortening of the femur.

# Evaluation

Initial radiographs should be taken to evaluate congenital femoral deficiency, which includes a full-length standing anteroposterior (AP) view with the patella facing forward and the long lateral film. While assessing an infant or in scenarios where the child is unable to stand, pull-down supine long anteroposterior and lateral radiographs should be obtained, which include the pelvis along with both lower extremities. Both lower limbs are “pulled down” to ensure maximum extension over the knees.

An anteroposterior radiograph helps assess the overall ossific anatomy of lower extremities, classifying the type of congenital femoral deficiency, measurement of femoral and tibial length, and ruling out acetabular dysplasia using acetabular index and center edge angle. A lateral radiograph helps assess the fixed flexion deformity of the knee.

Other imaging studies which have some proven role include magnetic reso­nance imaging (MRI), hip arthrography, and computed tomography scan (CT).

MRI helps assess the integrity of the proximal femur, and it can help differentiate pseudoarthrosis from an intact cartilaginous femoral neck. It can also help evaluate the knee joint for any associated ligament deficiency.

Hip arthrography is performed under general anesthesia, and it helps differentiate the delayed ossification of the femoral head from pseudoarthrosis. After injecting the dye, manipulation of the lower extremity is performed to visualize the proximal femur. If the femoral head and proximal femur move together, it represents the presence of a cartilaginous connection in between, and hence it can be classified as type 1b. It is also helpful in differentiating between Paley types 2a and 2b. The femoral head is present in both types, but the differentiating feature is the fusion of the femoral head with the acetabulum. If a dye can be injected within joint space, it can be classified as type 2a; otherwise, type 2b.

CT scan comes in handy in older children when the ossification of the acetabulum and proximal femur is completed. In addition, 3-D CT reconstruction has a role in comparing the dysplastic acetabulum with the normal side.

# Treatment / Management

**Nonoperative**

It includes prostheses, orthoses, and shoe lifts to treat limb length discrepancy. If a child is younger than six years, they can be followed biannually; however, an annual assessment can be done using a limb length radiograph if a child is older than six years.

**Operative**

Patients diagnosed as type 1a, 1b, 2a, and 2b of congenital femoral deficiency can be successfully managed with lengthening reconstruction surgery compared to prosthetic reconstruction surgery. However, in some patients with hip and knee deformities, before considering such a procedure, they should undergo some preparatory procedures to prevent the compli­cations associated with it.

**Type 1 Congenital Femoral Deficiency**

It is the most reconstructable type among all. In such cases, before opting for the lengthening procedure, hip stability should be assessed radiographically, which can be evaluated using the center edge angle. If the acetabular index is less than 30 degrees and the center-edge angle is less than 20 degrees, then a Dega osteotomy procedure should be performed before lengthening.

In scenarios where the neck-shaft angle is less than 120 degrees, then correction of coxa vara becomes the priority before going for a lengthening procedure. The superhip procedure should be considered in cases where coxa vara and hip dysplasia are present. The osteotomies, including pelvic and femoral, should be performed at least twelve months prior to the first lengthening. After a successful superhip procedure followed by femoral neck ossification, it can be reclassified from type1b to type1a.

**Type 2 Congenital Femoral Deficiency**

If the head of the femur is mobile, it can be reattached to the existing part of the femur using a superhip two procedure where the greater trochanter is reconstructed in the femoral neck.

- The femoral head can be separate from the acetabulum, which converts it to type 2a then the superhip two procedure can be performed.

- The femoral head can be enucleated from the acetabulum, and then a superhip three procedure can be performed, which is a form of trochanteric arthroplasty.

- Initially, a soft tissue release can be planned, followed by the lengthening of the femur; then, at the time of skeletal maturity, a pelvic support osteotomy can be performed.

**Type 3 Congenital Femoral Deficiency**

In such cases, the most reliable and predictable management option is prosthetic reconstruction surgery with either a Syme amputation or rotationplasty. Initially, the Van Nes rotationplasty was popularized by Torode, later modified by Brown, and then in 1997, Paley changed it further. For the management of type 3c, Paley-Winkelmann rotationplasty can be used.

# Differential Diagnosis

When a child presents with bilateral congenital femoral deficiency, we must consider two syndromic associations: the campomelic syndrome and femoral hypoplasia with unusual facies syndrome.

# Staging

Paley classification of congenital femoral deficiency

**Type 1: Intact Femur with Mobile Hip and Knee**

- 1a:- Normal ossification

- 1b:- Delayed ossification – Subtrochanteric type

- 1c:- Delayed ossification – Neck type

**Type 2: Mobile Pseudarthrosis with Mobile Knee**

- 2a:- Femoral head is mobile in the acetabulum

- 2b:- Femoral head is absent or stiff in the acetabulum

**Type 3: Diaphyseal Deficiency of Femur**

- 3a:- Knee motion more than 45 degrees

- 3b:- Knee motion less than 45 degrees

- 3c:- Complete absence of femur

**Type 4: Distal Deficiency of Femur (at the knee joint)**

# Prognosis

The prognosis of a patient with congenital femoral deficiency varies with the severity of the disease, whereas children with early-stage have better outcomes. However, with time child may develop an abnormal gait with cosmetic implications.

# Complications

The complications of congenital femoral deficiency include the associated bony deformities (fibular hemimelia, caudal regression syndrome, caudal dysplasia, deficiency of cruciate ligament, and lumbosacral spine deformities) along with soft tissue contractures at the knee, hip, and ankle.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patients suffering from congenital femoral deficiency should be promptly evaluated and managed at the appropriate time to prevent persistent gait abnormalities and the associated cosmetic, behavioral and psychosocial changes. After the surgical correction, including reconstruction and lengthening procedures, proper rehabilitation and physical therapy, including using appropriate orthoses, is paramount in getting the best functional outcomes for congenital femoral deficiency.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of congenital femoral deficiency begins with appropriate evaluation and rule out other associated anomalies. It requires a good and focused plain radiograph of the affected part. As such, the radiology technicians should be well-trained in getting the appropriate full-length views done so that whole of the lower extremity is evaluated. Also, consultation with a pediatrician should be promptly sought to assess associated anomalies. The role of physical therapy and rehabilitation cannot be undermined in getting the best functional outcomes after congenital femoral deficiency; hence physiotherapists should be informed about the rehab protocol after each case.