As is common with many disease entities that are rare and can present with minor to more severe symptoms, one must have a higher index of suspicion to make this diagnosis. Unfortunately, having a too high index of suspicion in search of this disease may lead to overtesting in a vast array of patients that ultimately do not have a carotid artery dissection. A good history and physical is essential. Neurologic deficits should prompt one to consider this diagnosis especially if the patient is young and there is recent trauma. Getting a good medical and family history may aid in the diagnosis. Recent trauma to the neck with anterior neck pain is a clue. Neck pain and tenderness may be present. A bruit over the carotid artery may be heard in some patients with this disease. An expanding hematoma may be present if trauma has occurred.

If a cervical dissection is suspected, many diagnostic modalities may confirm the diagnosis. The initial and least invasive screening tool is a carotid ultrasound. Its sensitivity is not as good as a computed tomogram (CT) angiogram, and it does not allow for imaging of the intracranial vessels. A CT angiogram is more commonly ordered these days as it can be done concurrently with a brain CT that is looking for an acute stroke or intracranial bleed. A flame sign is classic that is tapering of the carotid artery can be seen. Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography are reasonable alternatives if the patient has contraindications to a CT angiogram, but it is not as sensitive. Standard digital subtraction angiography was the most common means of making this diagnosis, but with the evolution of CT angiography, this imaging modality has become much less common from a diagnostic standpoint.