Since a majority of the cholesterol synthesis occurs at night in a fasting state, the recommendation is that statins with a shorter half-life (i.e., simvastatin, pravastatin, or fluvastatin) should be taken orally before bedtime to maximize its action

Statins are classified based on their intensity as follows

- **Low-intensity statins:**These include 20 to 40 mg fluvastatin, 20 mg lovastatin, 1 mg pitavastatin, 10 to 20 mg pravastatin, or 10 mg simvastatin. Low-intensity statins reduce LDL-C by less than 30%.

- **Moderate-intensity statins:**These include 10 to 20 mg atorvastatin, 80 mg fluvastatin, 40 mg lovastatin, 2 to 4 mg pitavastatin, 40 to 80 mg pravastatin, 5 to 10 mg rosuvastatin, or 20 to 40 mg simvastatin. Moderate-intensity statins reduce LDL-C by 30 to 50%.

- **High-intensity statins:**These include 40 to 80 mg atorvastatin or 20 to 40 mg rosuvastatin. High-intensity statins reduce LDL-C by greater than 50%.

Rosuvastatin is the most potent statin followed by atorvastatin. Statins also classify as lipophilic or hydrophilic. Lipophilic statins include simvastatin, lovastatin, and atorvastatin. Hydrophilic statins include pravastatin, fluvastatin, and rosuvastatin. Simvastatin 80 mg should not be a therapeutic choice in most patients.

Statins administration in specific patient population groups:

Elderly patients: In individuals older than 75 years of age, who have a clinically significant ASCV, the recommendation is to start them on moderate-intensity statins rather than high-intensity statins; this is because of increased side effects associated with high-intensity statins, and reduction in the efficacy of metabolic pathways in elderly individuals.

Renal impairment: atorvastatin, fluvastatin, pravastatin, or simvastatin are indicated in patients with chronic kidney disease since they do not undergo renal elimination, and hence, no dose adjustment is required.

Liver impairment: pravastatin and rosuvastatin can be used in patients with compensated liver disease since they are metabolized to a lesser extent by the liver in comparison to other statins. When initiating statins in patients with liver disease, patients must abstain from alcohol. The statins mentioned above should initiate at a low dose and liver enzymes, and LDL-C should get monitored within 1 to 3 months. If no significant change occurs in the level of aminotransferase, therapy does not achieve the LDL-C target, increase the dose of statins. Statins are contraindicated in patients with acute liver failure or decompensated cirrhosis.

**Drug Interactions**

Increase in plasma concentration of statins result from the following:

CYP3A4 inhibition: Statins that are metabolized by CYP450 3A4 isozyme include lovastatin, simvastatin, and atorvastatin.

- Macrolide antimicrobials: clarithromycin and azithromycin

- Immunosuppressants: immunosuppressive agents, including cyclosporine, or tacrolimus, are CYP3A4 inhibitors, and they also inhibit OATP1B1. All the statins are substrates of OATP1B1 transporter, and thus, using them along with immunosuppressive agents increases the plasma concentration of statins. Among the statins, pravastatin or fluvastatin are the recommended agents for use in combination with immunosuppressive agents.

- Protease inhibitors: protease inhibitors interact with statins metabolized by CYP3A4 and increase the risk of muscle toxicity. Fluvastatin or pravastatin is the statin of choice in patients taking protease inhibitors

- Grapefruit juice

- Azole antifungals: itraconazole, ketoconazole

Using statins in combination with gemfibrozil increases the risk of muscle toxicity, including rhabdomyolysis. Fenofibrate is preferred if there is a need to start statin-fibrate combination therapy. However, if gemfibrozil is the only available fibrate or fenofibrate is not tolerated, then gemfibrozil should be used in combination with low-dose atorvastatin, pitavastatin or rosuvastatin.

Calcium channel blockers: Using amlodipine, diltiazem, or verapamil in combination with simvastatin and lovastatin, increases the risk of toxicity due to statins

A decrease in plasma concentration of statins result from the following:

- CYP3A4 induction: When the statins that are metabolized by CYP3A4 are co-administered with CYP3A4 inducers (efavirenz, rifampin, phenytoin), it results in a decrease in plasma concentrations of statins and decreases their effectiveness.

- Bile acid sequestrants: The plasma concentration of statins decrease when used in combination with bile acid sequestrants such as colestipol

- Antacids: The plasma concentration of statins decrease when combined with antacids