CBC and peripheral blood smear: Evaluation of neutrophilia can be started by reviewing CBC with differential and confirming automated differential with a manual by reviewing peripheral blood smear. A peripheral blood smear review can also help differentiate causes of neutrophilia, as mentioned above in the histopathology section.

**Other Laboratory Studies**

Certain laboratory studies can help us distinguish primary versus reactive neutrophilia, such as

- Inflammatory markers, including ESR, CRP, LDH, ferritin

- Liver and renal function tests.

- Coagulation profile including APTT, PT/INR, fibrinogen, D dimer

- Blood culture, sputum culture, urine culture, wound culture, stool culture, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis (chemistry, histopathology, and culture).

- Clostridium difficile testing

**Special Tests**

Other tests that can help diagnose neutrophilia once CBC and peripheral blood smear have been reviewed are bone marrow biopsy, flow cytometry, and molecular/genetic testing.

- Bone marrow biopsy helps establish the diagnosis of various hematological and non-hematological malignancies invading bone marrow. The biopsy can be utilized to run morphological analysis, flow cytometry, and molecular testing.

- Flow cytometry can help diagnose various MPNs, such as CML, PV, and ET, by immunophenotyping peripheral blood.

- LAD can be diagnosed by molecular testing and or flow cytometry.

**Imaging**

Imaging that can help differentiate causes of neutrophilia include.

- Computed tomography (CT) of the head and neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis.

- Magnetic resonance imaging of the head and neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis if CT was inconclusive

- Positron emission test PET scan

- Chest Radiography

- Diagnostic ultrasonography