Idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage, though primarily a respiratory condition, involves an interprofessional team approach in its diagnosis and management, especially as it is a diagnosis made after the exclusion of a long list of other differential diagnoses. Many patients with IPH may initially present to their primary care clinicians with symptoms of anemia. Though not a primary differential of anemia, IPH should be suspected in those with iron-deficiency anemia who do not respond to iron supplementation. Primary care clinicians should be mindful of this and liaise early with pulmonologists for further investigations. The gastroenterologist should also be involved to exclude a gastro-intestinal source of bleeding. The rheumatologist's opinion should be sought to eliminate autoimmune diseases such as vasculitides as a possible cause for IPH. The endocrinologist may also be involved during long-term treatment with corticosteroids. The intensivists may be engaged during a hyper-acute presentation with respiratory failure. The nursing needs of the patient, especially during the acute stage, are high, and these patients may require individualized care tailored to meet their care needs. Chest physiotherapy may be needed in the immediate recovery stage and in those who develop pulmonary fibrosis as a complication. Patients with recurrence of symptoms or complications of long-term steroid use may require a prolonged follow-up period spanning years. Channels of communication should be kept open to facilitate a seamless and efficient exchange of information between the different members of the interprofessional team caring for these patients. Referrals should be made early to improve outcomes.