H.pylori-associated gastritis transmission is via the fecal-oral route. H. pylori possess several virulence factors which facilitate cell adhesion (e.g., BabA/B, sabA, OipA), cell damage and disruption of tight junctions (e.g., Ure A/B), and evasion from the immune response (e.g., LPS). In particular, the cytotoxin-associated gene a (CagA) is considered a potent inducer of inflammation and correlates with gastric cancer development.

Another factor influencing H. pylori's pathogenic effects is host factors—the host susceptible factors such as polymorphism in genes coding for tall receptors or specific cytokines. The infection with H. pylori triggers IL-8, which attracts neutrophils that release oxyradicals leading to cell damage. Lymphocyte infiltration is also present in H. pylori infection.

Chronic gastritis mostly results from H. pylori infection and appears either in a non-atrophic or atrophic form. These two forms are phenotypes of gastritis at different stages of the same life-long disease.

The progression from acute to chronic gastritis begins in childhood as a simple chronic superficial mononuclear inflammation of gastric mucosa which progress in years or decades to atrophic gastritis characterized by loss of normal mucosal glands in the antrum, corpus, fundus, or all.

Factors that determine progression to atrophic gastritis and sequelae, such as a peptic ulcer or gastric cancer, are not clearly understood and are unpredictable. However, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) have been identified in gastric tumors, and DNA from H. pylori, EBV, and PCR determined the presence of HCMV in biopsies from patients with gastric cancer complicating chronic gastritis.H. pylori in the development of gastric cancer in patients with chronic gastritis. They found no role for human papillomavirus (HPV) in gastric tumorigenesis.

NSAIDs cause gastritis through the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. Prostaglandins are responsible for maintaining the protective mechanisms of gastric mucosa from injuries caused by hydrochloric acid.

The pathogenesis of autoimmune gastritis focuses on two theories. According to the first theory, an immune response against superimposed H. pylori antigen gets triggered, antigen cross-reacting with antigens within the proton-pump protein or the intrinsic factor, leading to a cascade of cellular changes and causing damage to the parietal cells and stopping hydrochloric acid secretion and thus these cells gradually become atrophic and not functioning.

The second theory assumes that the autoimmune disorder develops irrespective of H. pylori infection, and it directs itself against the proteins of the proton pump. As per both theories, autoimmune gastritis results from a complex interaction between genetic susceptibility and environmental factors resulting in immunological dysregulation involving sensitized T lymphocytes and autoantibodies directed against parietal cells and the intrinsic factor.