Patient positioning is relatively straightforward for plain films and ultrasound. The patient should sit on a chair or stool next to the imaging table for radiographs and assume a comfortable position on a gurney or chair with the wrist supported on a pillow or tray for ultrasound evaluation. Patient comfort is paramount for maximum patient cooperation in remaining motionless for plain films and ergonomically accessible to the technologist for US imaging. Nuclear medicine positioning for dedicated wrist imaging is similar to plain film or ultrasound. The patient rests their hands on a gamma camera while sitting in a nearby chair.

Three standard plain film views are the typical protocol in most facilities, the posteroanterior (PA), PA oblique, and lateral. Dedicated scaphoid views should be requested if there is a history of snuffbox tenderness or fall on an outstretched hand

Additional supplemental views can be tailored to assess specific structures. Flexion, extension, and radial and ulnar deviation views can assess gross motion and decrease the superimposition of the carpals. The standard PA oblique view provides an additional evaluation of the distal scaphoid and radial styloid process, while an AP oblique view projects the pisiform without a significant overlap of the triquetrum.

Patient positioning for dedicated angiography, typically performed in a surgical suite, likely requires the least precision of the modalities. For these studies, the patient lies supine with the wrist next to, but not on, the torso.

The gantry and bore of CT and MRI equipment present some challenges when positioning a patient for wrist imaging. Ideally, the wrist is placed in the center of the imaging field without having additional anatomic structures nearby. For example, the patient's wrist and arm should not be imaged while resting naturally at the patient's side. This would place the abdomen/pelvis in the field of view, increasing radiation exposure in CT and creating an opportunity for artifacts in both CT and MRI. Getting a patient to comfortably lie on the examination table with their arm extended over the head can be difficult, painful, and sometimes impossible for obese patients, those in poor health, and anyone with incidental shoulder pathology (Figure 4).