As a group, the extrinsic muscles of the back move the upper extremities and neck. Each muscle is listed below with its specific motor function:

The trapezius muscle works in conjunction with other muscles to move the arm and maintain shoulder stability. When it works with the levator scapulae, it elevates the scapula. If it works with the serratus anterior, it rotates the scapula superiorly, allowing the arm to elevate above the head. Working with the rhomboids, it retracts the scapula to the midline of the back, stabilizing the shoulders as they move. It may also help move the head and neck back and laterally.

When the latissimus dorsi contracts, it works to adduct, extend, and medially rotate the humerus. With the arm raised above the head, it helps pull the torso up and forward. It is also active during forcible expiration, such as sneezing, coughing, or playing a musical instrument.

The levator scapulae muscle works to stabilize the movements of the scapula in conjunction with other muscles. When it works with pectoralis major, it rotates the scapula, depressing the shoulder. It acts with the trapezius to elevate the scapula.

The rhomboids (major and minor) work together to retract the scapula, moving it medially and superiorly to square the shoulders.

The posterior serratus muscles are accessory breathing muscles; the superior pair help with inspiration, causing expansion of the chest cavity, and the inferior pair help with forced expiration; however, definitive evidence to support this claim is lacking.