Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive tumor of adolescents and young adults, which constitutes 10% to 15% of all bone sarcomas.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are characterized by the presence of non-random chromosomal translocations producing fusion genes that encode aberrant transcription factors. The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is associated with 85% of tumors and leads to EWS-FLI-1 formation, whereas t(21;12)(22;12) and other less common translocations induced EWS-ERG fusion comprises the remaining 10% to 15% of cases.

The most common anatomical sites include the pelvis, axial skeleton, and femur; however, it may occur in almost any bone or soft tissue. Typically, patients present with pain and swelling over the site of involvement. Over the last 40 years, both local therapy and multiagent adjuvant chemotherapy have achieved considerable progress in the treatment of localized disease that improved 5–year survival rate from less than 20% to greater than 70% but the recurrence rate remains high. Although most present locally, subclinical metastatic disease is present in almost all. Approximately 25% of patients with initially localized disease ultimately relapse. No standard therapy exists for relapsed and refractory ES, with survival rates being less than 30% in those with isolated lung metastases and less than 20% in those with bone and bone marrow involvement. Given these considerations of toxicity and suboptimal survival from metastatic disease, there is an urgent unmet need to develop novel therapies for ES.