Glatiramer acetate is an immune-modulating medication currently used to treat relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) and clinically isolated syndrome (CIS).

Michael Sela, Ruth Arnon, and Dvora Teitelbaum at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, originally discovered the drug in the 1960s as they attempted to produce a synthetic antigen capable of inducing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis is the animal model of autoimmune inflammatory CNS disorders used by researchers to advance understanding of such neurological conditions. Surprisingly they noted that the copolymer they created, Cop-1, actually reduced the incidence of encephalitis and severity of histological lesions. After testing Cop-1 on various species and achieving similar results, clinical evaluation of human subjects began in 1977.

In 1995, Johnson et al. performed the first randomized, placebo-controlled trial of 20 mg glatiramer acetate daily in the United States. The initial positive results obtained on 50 patients with RRMS led to a Phase III clinical trial expansion encompassing 251 patients with RRMS. During the two years of therapy, those patients receiving glatiramer demonstrated a statistically significant decrease in the mean number of relapses compared to those in the placebo group (1.19 vs. 1.68, p=0.0007). In Canada and Europe, Comi et al. performed MRI evaluations on 239 RRMS patients. They looked at the reduction in the number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions over nine months to assess treatment efficacy with glatiramer vs. placebo. A statistically significant reduction in the number of lesions was noted amongst the glatiramer receiving patients over those on placebo (26 vs. 36.7, p=0.003). These results led to the Federal Drug Administration’s clearance of the glatiramer acetate for the treatment of RRMS in 1996.

In 2009, a randomized placebo-controlled trial of 20 mg daily glatiramer acetate was performed on 481 patients with CIS by Comi et al. This trial, deemed “PreCISE,” gave rise to a statistically significant (p=0.0005) result indicating a 45% reduction in the risk of developing complete demyelinating multiple sclerosis in those patients receiving glatiramer acetate. PreCISe also resulted in a 115% prolongation of time from CIS conversion to chronic demyelinating multiple sclerosis. These results prompted same-year FDA approval of glatiramer acetate in the treatment of CIS.