Besides its role in the pathogenesis of various neuropsychiatric conditions, the noradrenergic system has also been an important pharmacologic target as therapy for many of these conditions. Depression is perhaps the most well-known condition associated with treatment that targets the norepinephrine system. The monoaminergic hypothesis, which states that depression is likely due to absolute or relative deficiencies in serotonin and norepinephrine, has been the basis of pharmacologic research and treatment of depression. Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), and selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (NRIs) are a few classes of drugs that serve as a treatment of depression, anxiety disorders, and pain syndromes. They exert their effects by increasing the availability of norepinephrine in the synaptic cleft by either inhibiting reuptake of norepinephrine into presynaptic terminals via inhibition of norepinephrine transporters (SNRIs and NRIs) or preventing catabolism of norepinephrine via inhibition of the enzyme monoamine oxidase.

In the periphery, the norepinephrine transporters have also been a target for evaluation and management of neuroendocrine tumors including pheochromocytoma, neuroblastomas, and paragangliomas. Radiolabeled meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG), a synthetic guanethidine norepinephrine analog, has been used in SPECT imaging of neuroendocrine tumors and as a treatment option for advanced and refractory cases. NET-targeting MIBG therapy is still undergoing further evaluation and development in the hopes of improving therapeutic outcomes.