Cetirizine was FDA-approved in the United States as a prescription-only product in 1995, and later in 2007, it got approval as an over-the-counter medication. Derived from the first-generation antihistamine hydroxyzine, cetirizine does not cross the blood-brain barrier to the extent of its first-generation counterparts; as a result, cetirizine is an effective treatment of allergic rhinitis that simultaneously minimizes the possibility of adverse sedative effects. In addition, cetirizine is a second-generation antihistamine that effectively relieves sneezing, rhinorrhea, and watery eyes associated with seasonal allergies and allergic rhinitis due to allergens such as dust mites and molds. In addition, cetirizine is available as a prescription-only ophthalmic formulation to treat allergic conjunctivitis.

- Cetirizine is an FDA-approved medication for the relief and treatment of allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria.

- Cetirizine also effectively reduces hives' severity and pruritus in patients with idiopathic urticaria.

- Cetirizine is safe to treat perennial allergic rhinitis and urticaria in adults and children over the age of 6 months; it is indicated for treating seasonal allergies in adults and children two years and older.

- Cetirizine is also safe to use in the geriatric population.

- The ophthalmic formulation of cetirizine is FDA-approved to treat allergic conjunctivitis.

- Cetirizine is used as an adjunct to epinephrine (off-label) for the management of anaphylaxis. (The American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (AAAAI) and the American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (ACAAI) guidelines).

- Second-generation antihistamines like cetirizine are safe and effective treatment options in patients with chronic urticaria and are considered first-line agents by the AAAAI and ACAAI guidelines.