Castleman disease is easily confused with lymphoma or other solid tumors. Therefore, it is essential to properly diagnose the exact type of CD and distinguish it from other diseases by clinical history and laboratory diagnostic measures with additional imaging techniques for prompt treatment and management procedures. Even though CD was defined as a benign lymphoproliferative disease, the systemic forms are particularly associated with related neoplasms and autoimmune disorders like Kaposi sarcoma and Follicular dendritic cell (FDC) tumors.

The hyaline vascular CD can be strongly connected to FDC tumors, including dendritic cell sarcomas and neoplasms of the stroma. In addition, IL-6 release in CD may invoke molecular mimicry and epitope spreading, initiating a lichenoid interface dermatitis, leading to autoantibody production. Finally, it can be associated with a fatal autoimmune blistering disease called paraneoplastic pemphigus in patients with treatment-resistant erosive mucosal lesions.

POEMS syndrome is characterized by polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin changes and is a rare plasma cell disease with multisystem involvement. Around 30% of patients with POEMS disease also have multicentric CD, more precisely the HHV-8 positive variant. In addition, many findings of systemic CD-like ascites, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and polyneuropathy overlap POEMS syndrome.

The HHV-8 associated CD and Kaposi sarcoma are vascular lesions caused by the same viral agent, HHV-8. Therefore, they frequently appear alongside HIV as well.

Some IgG4-related diseases like sclerosing cholangitis, Kuttner tumor, retroperitoneal fibrosis, Mikulicz disease, autoimmune pancreatitis are associated with hypertrophy of lymph nodes, similar to that in multicentric CD. However, these two diseases can be differentiated based on laboratory findings, i.e., raised serum IgG4 levels and IgG4-positive plasma infiltrates in the IgG4-related diseases and IL-6 elevation in Castleman disease.