Lambl excrescences have to be differentiated from fibroelastomas, valvular vegetations, myxomas, cardiac thrombi, nonbacterial vegetations, other cardiac tumors, and metastases. All of these entities have a potential for embolization to a varying degree. Distinguishing between Lambl excrescences and vegetations or fibroelastomas can be quite challenging. Others are reasonably well-differentiated on echocardiogram.

Lambl excrescences are similar histopathologically to cardiac papillary fibroelastomas. The difference is that papillary fibroelastomas are larger, more gelatinous, usually found away from the line of valve closure, and covered by multiple layers of endothelial cells. Whereas, Lambl excrescences are smaller, located at the line of valve closure, and covered by a single endothelial layer. The growth of Lambl excrescences may be limited due to their exposed high-stress location. In contrast, fibroelastomas are usually found on the mechanically less pressured parts of valves and other parts of the endocardium. Thus, fibroelastomas are bulkier, can be attached to the valve through a stalk or pedestal, and their surfaces may contain multiple fingerlike projections. Because fibroelastomas are larger than Lambl excrescences, they are therefore more prone to embolization. It is generally recommended that fibroelastomas be surgically removed.

Endocarditis-related valvular vegetations are typically irregular masses that have a different echogenicity in relation to other cardiac structures. These vegetations can be adherent to valvular cusps at any site, are independent of valvular mobility, and can have other pathognomonic echo findings of infection such as abscesses and valvular dehiscence besides, a clinical history suggestive of infective endocarditis and valvular dysfunction.

Nonbacterial vegetations such as the Libman Sacks thrombotic vegetations again can be located on any part of the valvular cusp. These are somewhat rounded and nonpedunculated lesions that lack independent mobility.