The primary goal of a thorough history and physical is 2-fold in the setting of symptomatic hemangioma. A clinician must rule out more concerning etiologies and assessment of the patient’s health status in the setting of a planned intervention.

Patient’s can often present with back pain, and a history of a previous incidentally-noted hemangioma should not misdirect a clinician from thoroughly evaluating more concerning etiologies of back pain including, but not limited, to metastasis, infection, primary malignancies of the spinal cord, as well as osteoporotic compression fractures. History taking should include onset, exacerbating and relieving factors, the intensity of pain, quality of pain, and radiation that could suggest radiculopathy. Hemangiomas tend to present in the thoracic spine and can present with pain in one location. Complaints of multiple sites of pain should raise a clinician’s suspicion for metastatic lesions. More importantly, secondary symptoms play an important role, especially in the setting of suspected metastasis. A thorough history, including but not limited to, gastrointestinal and genitourinary review of systems questions should be elicited. Pain referred to the back from other areas of the body, a known history of cancer, history of trauma, history of osteoporosis, and pain that does not improve on lying down and resting should warrant further evaluation including, but not limited to, additional imaging.

Physical examination primarily involves a thorough back examination that includes a visual inspection of the overlying skin, assessing the curvature of the spine, and observing gait. The range of motion should also be tested including forward flexion, extension, lateral flexion, and rotation. The spine should be palpated specifically at the patient-indicated site of pain. Percussion should be performed to assess for costovertebral tenderness. Considering hemangiomas can erode into the spinal canal, assessing for radiculopathy is important in the physical examination of the spine. Special maneuvers to asses for radiculopathy should be performed including the straight leg raise test for the lower back and the Spurling maneuver in the setting of cervical radiculopathy. Reflexes should be tested, and sensation with close attention to the thoracic dermatomes should be performed. Finally, the physical examination should include evaluation of the gastrointestinal and genitourinary systems.