Fetal ultrasonography is an essential element in the evaluation of anomalies and fetal well-being throughout pregnancy. The increasing incidence of morbid obesity, hypertension, and gestational diabetes within the reproductive age group places this high-risk population at increased adverse fetal events such as stillbirth and fetal anomalies. In every trimester, there are specific maternal and fetal indications that require additional fetal screening and assessment.

Each fetal scan has been standardized to include the minimal imaging criteria and components required by the society guidelines of American College of Radiology (ACR), Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound (SRU), American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG), and American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM), in support by Society of Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM). Although the ultrasound components are standardized, the terminology for the ultrasounds often differs between societies and the Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) descriptions, leading to a long history of misunderstanding amongst clinicians and missed opportunities for fetal assessment.

The above-aforementioned societies agree on the classification of fetal ultrasounds as either standard, specialized, or limited examinations to try and mitigate the ongoing confusion. The standard, specialized, and limited ultrasound criteria can be applied to each trimester. Each examination has specific indications based on the trimester, which must be met before performing the exam.

The standard second-trimester scan, also known as a “level I,” is a simple fetal anatomic survey examination performed in low-risk pregnancies. The specialized second-trimester anatomy ultrasound, also known as “level II,” “detailed,” or “targeted” examination, is performed when abnormalities are suspected on the standard anatomy examination or in pregnancies at high risk for anatomic abnormalities. Other types of specialized examinations include a fetal echocardiogram, fetal doppler ultrasound, cervical length measurement, and biophysical profile. Finally, a limited ultrasound is performed to answer a specific clinical question in any trimester that may aid in the diagnosis and treatment. A limited ultrasound is usually performed in an acute setting when time is restricted or a follow-up to assess specific fetal components.

Fetal ultrasonography is a standard and routine modality performed in every pregnancy. However, the differences in approach, assessment protocols, timing, and frequency of the examinations are individualized based on the gestational age and clinical scenario. The goal of more frequent examinations in the high-risk population is to detect abnormalities in the early stage when further intervention may still be feasible. Traditionally, a comprehensive fetal anatomic survey has been performed in the mid-second trimester to assess anatomic anomalies. Owning to improvement and advancement in ultrasonography, abnormalities can now be detected in the late first trimester. Early identification of fetal anomalies allows the patient to pursue diagnostic testing, genetic counseling, and adequate time to make an informed decision.

Given the broad nature of this topic, the purpose of this article is to review the indications and protocols for a standard versus specialized or “detailed” fetal ultrasound by each trimester. By recognizing the indications and understanding the differences in the fetal components assessed, clinicians will be able to correctly identify the most optimal examination based on gestational age for each patient and improve clinical outcomes.