As discussed earlier, prompt evaluation of the orbit, globe, and associated structures is required. It is important to recognize that deeper lacerations are more likely to cause canalicular damage, and the type of object plays a role - glass tends to produce deeper lacerations, while a fist is more likely to cause injury due to shearing forces. Tetanus status should be clarified with the patient, and updated as needed. The identification/removal of foreign bodies and copious irrigation of the wound will work to reduce the risk of infection. CT, or less likely plain film, imaging may be indicated to assess for foreign bodies and underlying facial bone fractures. The source of the injury may indicate the need for additional prophylaxis, i.e., consideration of rabies immunoglobulin or antibiotic coverage in a dog, or cat, bites.

**Ophthalmologic consultation**should occur early in the course, as these specialists are likely to guide immediate and long-term therapies. While definitive management is likely to be required by ophthalmic, plastic, and reconstructive surgeons, an initial skin-layer repair may occur by an emergency department physician, but this should occur onlyafter discussion with a specialist. It is important to identify both pieces of the canaliculus, so that they may be appropriately anastomosed - this will decrease the risk of patient developing epiphora. An absorbable suture material (e.g., polyglactin, chromic gut) should be utilized for the repair of the canaliculus itself. Immediate surgical repair may not be required for monocanalicular lacerations, and delays up to 48-hours may be acceptable

**Surgical Repair**

Surgical repair is always indicated for lacerations involving both the superior and inferior canaliculi. The use of stents when repairing the canaliculi is likely to improve the cosmetic results and the overall prognosis.

- For repair of these lacerations, it is important to anesthetize, both with topical tetracaine (or another topical anesthetic) and with infiltration of lidocaine with epinephrine. When the patient is no longer able to sense sharp pain, irrigate the wound extensively. The patient should then be prepped and draped in a sterile fashion.

- For monocanalicular lacerations, a punctual dilator should be passed to enlarge the punctum. A stent may then be passed into the punctum and through the canaliculus. The stent should then be pulled flush with the punctum, and the distal portion pulled into the second portion of the canaliculus.

- For bicanalicular lacerations, a bicanalicular intubation set should be introduced into the punctum, advanced 2mm, then make a 90-degree turn, following the canaliculus for about 8mm. A guidewire is then passed through the nasal end of the lacerated canaliculus and passed into the lacrimal sac fossa. A stent is then placed along the guidewire - this step may require a rotation of the stent itself. This is then repeated for the opposite canaliculus. The stents are tied with a square knot.

- The remaining steps are a common pathway for both mono- and bicanalicular lacerations. Suturing of the stent into place should occur with 5-0 (or 7-0) polyglactin suture on a P-2 needle, utilizing a buried horizontal mattress suture. The eyelid margin, and skin-layer, should be closed using a 6-0 fast-absorbing gut.

- Antibiotic ointment should be applied to the wound. Monocanalicular stents are left in place for six weeks, while bicanalicular stents should be left in for up to 3 months.

- Depending on the mechanism of injury, antibiotic prophylaxis with 3 to 5 days of amoxicillin-clavulanate may be of benefit. The patient should be provided with an eye shield to wear at night. Patients should also be instructed to avoid rubbing the eye for at least two weeks after repair.