Stroke is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that over 795,000 patients suffer from an acute ischemic stroke (AIS) every year with at least 150,000 fatal cases. The annual cost of health care services, medicines, and missed days of work approximated $34 billion. However, AIS may at times not be treated in accordance with expert consensus guidelines, leading to worse functional outcomes. Stroke centers aim to standardize evidence-based guidelines in the inpatient setting and increase access to quality of care nationally.

**Thrombolytic Therapy in the Management of Acute Ischemic Strokes**

Stroke treatment has been an area of rapid development and progress over the past 2 to 3 decades, and recent studies continue to shape our management practices. Thrombolytic therapy with alteplase, an intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), was first approved in 1996 by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This treatment has been especially effective in treating strokes due to small vessel occlusions, but much less effective in treating strokes due to large vessel occlusions (LVO). Newer studies have compared standard dose of alteplase (0.9 mg/kg IV, 90 mg maximum as total dose; administer 10% of the total dose as an initial IV bolus over 1 minute and the remainder infused over 60 minutes) compared to a rapid infusion of tenecteplase 0.25 mg/kg. In several studies, it was shown that tenecteplase at 0.1 mg/kg and 0.25 mg/kg was non-superior (in neurological outcomes) to alteplase in a patient with acute ischemic stroke between 3-4.5 hours, however; there was a non-statistically significant trend in better neurological outcomes (e.g. 90-day modified ranking scale) in the tenecteplase compared to alteplase group in patients with large vessel occlusion.

**Embolectomy Therapies in Acute Ischemic Strokes**

LVO strokes are traditionally the most devastating in terms of morbidity and mortality. In the last 10-20 years, the advent of embolectomy or mechanical thrombectomy (MT) has yielded significant survival and functional benefit for LVO strokes

The newest 2018 guidelines from American Stroke Association (ASA) recommend IV tPA be administered to eligible patients as early as possible and within 3 hours of last known normal with an extended window of 4.5 hours for a selective group of patients. Mechanical thrombectomy is also recommended as early as possible to eligible patients with LVO within 6 to16 hours of last known normal. Mechanical thrombectomy is considered reasonable in select patients within 6 to 24 hours of last known normal.