An interprofessional team is the best design when administering inhaled anesthetics. A care team can consist of an anesthesiologist, certified registered nurse anesthetist, physician assistant, nurse practitioner, pharmacist, and other additional staff, including postoperative nurses and technicians. Volatile anesthetics are also used in veterinary medicine and administered by a veterinarian or a technician. Designating roles in this setting is essential. Having a devoted postoperative nurse who monitors vital signs is necessary as this is the primary means for monitoring a patient's safety and comfort. The pharmacy will play a role in storing and preparing these agents for administration and need to be aware of all medications the patient is taking. This type of interprofessional teamwork is crucial to achieving optimal results when using inhaled anesthesia. [Level 5]

The use of inhaled agents has also demonstrated benefits in the critical care setting, where they are often utilized in conjunction with intravenous anesthetics to provide optimal sedation for urgent procedural interventions. Their role outside of the operating room has increased as procedural suites outside the traditional operating room have also increased. Inhalational anesthetic agents have been used more in medically refractory epilepsy patients in neurointensive care units. These agents have also been used to treat status asthmaticus refractory to medical management. In this setting, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, critical care nurses, and ICU staff should have a fundamental knowledge of inhaled anesthetic agents. It is important to have essential care staff abreast of inhaled agents, and signs and symptoms of complications since this staff often see these patients in the postoperative anesthesia care unit or intensive care unit.