# Continuing Education Activity

Intramedullary spinal cord abscess (ISCA) is a rare central nervous system infection associated with high mortality and neurological morbidity. Though rare, prompt diagnosis and treatment of this condition are of paramount importance to preventing damage to the spinal cord that can lead to disabling neurological deficits and possibly death.ISCA should not be confused with a spinal epidural abscess which is far more common. Abscesses can be either primary (source of infection not identifiable) or secondary (the source is identifiable). Multiple abscesses occur in around 26% of cases. This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of spinal cord abscesses and explains the interprofessional team's role in managing those with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the common etiologies of intramedullary spinal cord abscesses.
- Review the steps for complete evaluation and workup for patients presenting with intramedullary spinal cord abscesses.
- Outline the appropriate treatment options for a case of intramedullary spinal cord abscess.
- Explain the significance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team when diagnosing and treating patients with intramedullary spinal cord abscesses.

# Introduction

First described by Hart in 1830, in the present era, an intramedullary spinal cord abscess (ISCA) is a very rare form of spinal cord abscess.

Their rarity may be accountable to the following factors:

- A relatively smaller volume and total surface area of the cord.

- An acute angle of origin of the corresponding spinal arteries.

- The protection is provided by the osseous vertebral canal and the meningeal layers, notably the pia mater.

Though rare, prompt diagnosis and treatment of this condition are of paramount importance to preventing damage to the spinal cord that can lead to disabling neurological deficits and possibly death.

# Etiology

Currently, almost 40% of ISCA are cryptogenic.

Congenital dermal sinus (CDS) is a common cause of ISMA among children, whereas hematogenous spread is the main pathogenesis among adults.

Hematogenous spread is the main pathogenesis among adults.

Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and coliform bacteria have been observed to be the most common microbiological causative organisms.

Multiple abscesses occur in around 26% of cases.

# Epidemiology

Since Hart initially described the diagnosis in 1830, there have been at least 137 cases of ISCA reported in the medical literature.

# Pathophysiology

To remain viable, the spinal cord requires the perfusion of its tissues with blood. When the pia mater is violated, or a patient acquires an infection in the bloodstream, the pathogen may penetrate the blood-cord barrier. As a part of the central nervous system, the blood-cord barrier is functionally equivalent to the blood-brain barrier, leaving a certain segment of the population - especially those who are immunocompromised or intravenous drug users - at risk of developing an infection of the spinal cord due to mechanisms similar to those that may cause a brain abscess.

Abscesses can be either primary (source of infection not identifiable) or secondary (the source is identifiable).

The pathogenesis postulated for ISCA include:

- Hematogenous dissemination and bacterial embolism from an extraspinal infection.

- Contiguous extension.

- Direct implantation (penetrating trauma, neurosurgical procedures-lumbar puncture, and intrathecal morphine pump).****

- Cryptogenic.

The watershed zone makes the dorsal cord and thoracic spine more prone to ISCA.

The fulminant neurological sequelae observed in ISCA are secondary to the mechanical-vascular insult of the spinal cord by the abscess and its resultant edema superimposed by the relatively compromised vascularity of the spinal cord.

Risk variables for the development of ISCA described in the literature include:

- Spinal dysraphism and CDS.

- Epidermoid cyst.

- Vertebral osteomyelitis discitis spondylodiscitis and epidural abscesses.

- Infective Endocarditis.

- Spinal infarction due to spinal artery embolism by bacterial embolism.

- Spinal artery occlusion.

- Spinal dural arteriovenous fistula (SDAVF) leads to chronic venous congestion disrupting the blood–spinal cord barrier.

- Right to left cardiac shunts such as Patent foramen ovale and right superior vena cava (RSVC) drain into the left atrium.

- Penetrating injury.

- Intravenous drug users.

- Prior history of neurosurgical trauma or surgery.

- Immunocompromised state.

**In a modern-era review of ISCA**

- 44% of ISCA was associated with anatomical abnormalities

- 24% of ISCA was from the contiguous spread

- 8% of ISCA was secondary to hematogenous dissemination and

- 64% of them were cryptogenic.

# History and Physical

The pattern of clinical presentation in ISCA can be categorized as follows:

- Acute (less than one week)

- Subacute (1 to 6 weeks), and ****

- Chronic (more than six weeks).

ISCA is more frequently observed among males, with a peak incidence in the first and third decades of life.

The characteristic triad in ISCA constitutes fever, pain, and neurological deficits.

ISCA mimics acute transverse myelitis in the acute stage. Chronic ISCA mirrors spinal cord tumors and chronic myelopathy.

Children often have rapid symptomatology.

Among children, the median age of presentation is three years.

The typical symptomatology among children with ISCA includes:

- Motor deficits (90%)

- Infection signs (86%)

- Sensory deficits (40%)

- Urinary dysfunction (44%) and

- Bowel dysfunction (18%).

Among 38 cases of pediatric IASC studied between 1875 and 2001, 45% were female.

Among 26 cases of ISCA reviewed between 1998 and 2007, the most common clinical characteristics were:

- Motor deficits

- Fever

- Pain, and

- Bladder dysfunction

Of these, 68.5% were males, with a median age of presentation at 32 years. Fever was the initial presentation in 43.4%.

In the most recent systematic review comprising 137 ISCA cases from 1949 to 2022, 50.03% were adult cases, and 78.5% were males. The median age at the presentation was 52 years.

The most common patterns of clinical presentations include:

- Motor impairment (99%)

- Sensory loss (87%)

- Pain(56%)

- Urinary involvement (50%)

# Evaluation

Elevation in the laboratory markers of inflammations (white blood cell counts, C-reactive protein concentration, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate) is observed in 54%.

Magnetic resonance imaging with contrast study is the gold standard radioimaging modality.

Diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted MRI is beneficial in differentiating ISCA from a tumor and other differentials.

'Drop sign' or precipitation is characteristically observed in an intramedullary tubercular abscess.

Indium-111 labeled WBC scintigraphy is very useful for evaluating patients with ISCA presenting as pyrexia of unknown origin.

# Treatment / Management

A prompt and timely surgical intervention followed by appropriate antibiotic therapy (minimum of 6-8 weeks) is the mainstay of management.

Fluorescein aids in localizing and planning surgical strategies.

Sometimes intraoperatively, instead of frank pus, solid inflammatory tissue, and antibioma may be encountered and has to be biopsied and safely excised.

A recent systematic review found that laminectomy and myelotomy were undertaken in 58.5% of cohorts, and stereotactic needle aspiration was performed in 62.8% of the same.

Prophylactic complete resection of CDS has been advised to prevent catastrophic complications in the future.****

Almost 25–40% of ISCA is sterile.

Skin commensals (S. epidermides, S. aureus), Enterobacteriaceae, and anaerobes are commonly involved in CDS.

Microbiological agents implicated in the causation of IMSA include:

- Staphylococcus (25%)

- Streptococcus

- Escherichia coli

- Proteus

- Listeria

- Schistosomiasis

- Bacteroides

- Pseudomonas

- Brucella

- Hemophilus

- Histoplasma

- Actinomyces

- Mycobacterium tuberculosis

- Fungal infections****

Early broad-spectrum empirical antibiotics effective against Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, enteric Gram-negative bacilli, and anaerobes should be promptly initiated.

A recent systematic review has shown antibiotics usage in only 87% of cohorts with 137 cases of ISCA.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Acute transverse myelitis

- Tuberculomas

- Hypervascular neoplasm (ependymoma, hemangioblastoma, astrocytoma)

- Metastatic lesions (renal cell carcinoma)

- Demyelinating lesions

- Resolving hematoma

- Cord infarction

- Neurocysticercosis

- Schistosomiasis

- Type I dural fistula

- Cavernous malformations

Decreased diffusivity within the cavity of ISCA on DWI and the rapidly progressive nature of the lesion is crucial in differentiating it from other clinical mimics.

# Prognosis

Neurological recovery in ISCA depends on the rapidity of diagnosis, promptness of surgical intervention, and the institution of appropriate antibiotics.

Among 38 cases of pediatric IASC studied between 1875 and 2001:

- Complete neurologic recovery in 18%

- Mild neurologic impairment in 39%

- Severe neurologic impairment in 11%

- Death in 21% of the cohorts was observed

In the latest systematic review of 137 cases:

- Recovery of 20%

- Residual deficits 17.1%

- Persistent deficits 40%, and

- Death in 14.2% of the cohorts was observed

Children with ICSA secondary to infected dermoid cysts have a chance of neurological improvement of less than 20%. The presence of fever and limb weakness has been observed to have high odds of poor clinical results.

Due to the advancement of medicine in the areas of antibiotics, radiology, and surgery, the mortality rate for ISCA has gone from 90% between 1840 and 1944 to 4-8% between 1998 and 2007.

# Complications

The neurological sequelae in the patients can result from:

- Mechanical compression.

- Septic thrombosis causing spinal cord infarction.

- Syrinx formation

The inadvertent rupture and dissemination of the abscess can lead to the following:

- Meningitis.

- Brain abscess.

- Meningoencephalitis.

- Sepsis.

- Mortality

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

The most significant variable governing the clinical outcomes in children with ISCA is the presence of paralysis which is seen in almost 60%.

Follow-up with clinical and MRI imaging within the first year of surgery is advocated to rule out recurrence, which is observed in almost 25% of cases.

# Consultations

Potential consultations may involve a neurologist, a neurosurgeon, a neuroradiologist, an infectious disease specialist, a neuropathologist, and a rehabilitation doctor.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients will need to understand the nature and severity of their condition and the treatment options based on the precise nature of their abscess. If the abscess is pressing on the spinal cord, they will need surgery and instruction on how to proceed post-laminectomy. If the abscess is causing neurological symptoms or cauda equina syndrome, they will need to understand the emergent nature of this condition and have emergent treatment. Post-surgical rehabilitation will require the patient to comply with all therapeutic activities. If surgery is unnecessary, they will be instructed regarding how to proceed with their antibiotic regimen. Spinal dermal sinus tracts should be operated on as soon as possible.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

ISCA is an enigmatic clinical entity with the tendency for multispectral patterns of presentations such as:

- Acutely mimicking transverse myelitis.

- Progressive dorsal pain with neurological deficits

- Insidious pattern, mimicking a spinal tumor or chronic myelopathy

An interprofessional team comprising a neurologist, a neurosurgeon, a neuroradiologist, an infectious disease specialist, a pathologist, and a rehabilitation specialist is essential for managing ISCA.

The prognosis is good, with prompt surgical treatment and antibiotics. However, the size, location of the abscess, and severity of the neurological deficits determine the eventual outcome. Despite advances in treatment, spinal cord abscess still carries a mortality of 4 to 8%, and most patients are left with some type of residual neurological deficit. Therefore intensive neuro-rehabilitation is invariably justified.