There are no evidence-based studies on the diagnosis or treatment of cecal volvulus. The condition is not so common in North America but since it carries a very high mortality, it is important that healthcare workers be aware of the disorder. An interprofessional team approach is recommended to ensure prompt diagnosis and treatment. Since most patients present to the emergency room, both the triage nurse and the emergency physician must know the importance of timely admission and referral to a general surgeon. Because most patients have numerous comorbidities, the initial management is best done in a critical care unit. The patient must be hydrated and cleared for surgery by the internist. Depending on patient age and comorbidity, the type of procedure will vary. Hence a gastroenterologist and a general surgeon must be in communication to offer the patient the best treatment available. Nurses in the ICU need to monitor the vitals, abdominal girth, and urine output prior to surgery. A colostomy nurse should see the patient in case the patient ends up having an ileostomy or a colostomy.

**Outcomes**

There are only small case series and isolated reports on outcomes of patients managed with cecal volvulus. For those who have delayed diagnosis, the outcomes are poor. Even those who undergo timely surgery have high morbidity as a consequence of their age. Laparoscopic surgery is preferred to open surgery but sometimes the urgency of the situation may not allow it. No matter how one approaches the patient, the family must be fully informed of the potential complications, including recurrence and a stoma.