Meralgia paresthetica is a typically benign and self-limited condition with frequent spontaneous remission. Treatment focuses on patient reassurance and ways to reduce pressure and irritation over the nerve and groin region. This includes patient education that the condition is benign, counseling the patient to avoid tight-fitting garments, and discussion of weight loss if obesity is a contributing factor. Icing the area may be helpful in reducing local nerve irritation and inflammation of acute symptoms.

Medications that may be helpful include NSAIDs, topical capsaicin, lidocaine, or tacrolimus for epidermal dysesthesia or cutaneous hypersensitivity.  Abdominal exercises may reduce pressure, but physical therapy is not a proven modality in treatment. Patients should be reexamined with a repeat neurologic exam if symptoms persist beyond 1 to 2 months with conservative treatments, at which point anticonvulsants such as gabapentin, phenytoin, or carbamazepine may be helpful for treating the patient’s neuropathic pain.

Anesthesiologist referral for a nerve block injection with a local anesthetic or glucocorticoid may also be considered.

Surgery is rare but may be considered in chronic refractory cases and is performed via either a surgical release procedure with decompression of the LFCN (which may include transposition of the LFCN approximately 2 cm medially away from ASIS) or via a nerve transection procedure. The nerve decompression procedure preserves sensory function but is generally less successful than the sectioning procedure, which results in permanent anesthesia and is reserved only for patients with intractable pain. Approximately 80% of patients reported symptomatic improvement in a retrospective series of 167 patients who had a surgical nerve release or transection.

Several case reports have also noted improvement of refractory cases with pulsed radiofrequency nerve ablation of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, electroacupuncture, and kinesiology taping.