Submandibular sialadenitis and sialadenosis are common causes of submandibular swelling. Patients with acute sialadenitis usually present in outpatient primary care or dental care and sometimes in an emergency care setting. The patient is generally evaluated by a primary care physician, nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, dentists, emergency medicine physicians. Chronic sialadenitis evaluation can involve interventional radiologists, otolaryngologists, rheumatologists, and internists.

Communication between the health care team is essential for proper treatment and management, especially in chronic sialadenitis and sialolithiasis. A multidisciplinary approach helps to find out the cause manage sialadenosis.

Open communication between different teams is essential. For example, during the management of chronic sialadenitis due to sialolith that fails, conservative management requires proper communication between the primary care physician, radiologist, and otolaryngologist are necessary. Patients should receive counsel regarding symptoms, oral hygiene, hydration, and warning signs suggesting the failure of conservative measures so that timely consultation and management can take place.

Patients with acute sialadenitis who do not require admission, follow-up three days from the first visit, and then one week later (with improvement)is recommended.

Patients with chronic sialadenitis/sialolithiasis and autoimmune sialadenitis or sialadenosis should be followed up regularly and in cases of acute exacerbations.