Tretinoin is a valuable medication in treating mild, moderate, and severe acne that can be used topically or systemically. Tretinoin is also used systemically in the management of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Tretinoin is a vitamin A derivate in the retinoids class of medications. This activity outlines and reviews the indications, actions, and contraindications of tretinoin as a valuable agent in treating acne vulgaris and APL management and therapy. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors such as off-label uses, including some indications of APL, pre-malignant and malignant skin conditions, and other common skin conditions such as psoriasis, dosing of both oral and topical treatment options, monitoring of both topical and oral tretinoin use (i.e., with emphasis on reliable contraception) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team and healthcare team in the treatment of mild, moderate, severe acne and acute promyelocytic leukemia and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the importance of monitoring for patients on tretinoin therapy, including target triglyceride and liver function concentrations.
- Summarize the risks associated with initiating tretinoin treatment along with key patient counseling points.
- Identify the most common adverse events associated with tretinoin treatment.
- Outline the importance of how collaboration and coordination among the interprofessional team can enhance patient care when dosing and monitoring tretinoin to improve patient outcomes for patients receiving topical (anti-acne and palliative for photoaging) and oral (antineoplastic) tretinoin.