The most feared complication for intravascular use is air embolism, which can result in stroke, myocardial infarction, paralysis, amputation, or death, although this risk across all patients when managed by experienced physicians is less than 1%.

A large amount of CO2 trapped in the pulmonary artery or right side of the heart (only of concern during venography) obstructs venous return resulting in bradycardia and hypotension. The patient suffering this phenomenon should be rotated into a left lateral decubitus position in an attempt to separate the CO2 into a gas layer floating "on top of" and no longer interfering with the flow of the liquid and solid components of blood.  Large gas bubbles full of CO2 can be allowed to remain "trapped" in the heart and/or a relatively reduced distribution of right pulmonary arterial tree.  Within a relatively short time depending on the size of the bubbles, the gas molecules will entirely dissolve into the bloodstream.

Some people experience side effects of paresthesia, tenesmus, or nausea. Normally, nausea is only encountered when high flow rates are used for angiography.

Abdominal pain during mesenteric arteriography usually can be handled by rotating the patient from side to side and massaging the abdomen.  However, persistent abdominal pain may signal the presence of a vapor lock. This phenomenon is when gas, which may also include endogenous nitrogen and oxygen, becomes trapped intraarterially due to having a diffusion constant the prevents the gas dissolving in blood while simultaneously having a high enough partial pressure relative to blood that no blood can be pumped through the gas into the capillaries. The result if not treated is mesenteric infarction. This event is reported most commonly in the scenario of a large amount of CO2 collecting in an abdominal aortic aneurysm sac and then migrating into a mesenteric branch. First-line treatment involves attempting to dislodge the gas bubble mechanically via massage, patient rotation, and/or catheter aspiration.

Additional management strategies for CO2 adverse events are discussed elsewhere.

There have been no reports of CO2 poisoning; CO2 poisoining from non-angiographic sources presents as hypotension and hypoventilation.