Alprazolam belongs to a class of psychoactive medications called benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines bind to the GABA-A receptor. This receptor is comprised of five subunits, e.g., alpha, beta, gamma, delta, epsilon, rho, etc. A common GABA-A receptor in the CNS is comprised of two alpha-1 subunits, two beta-2 subunits, and one gamma-2 subunit. The benzodiazepine binding site is between the alpha-1 and gamma-2 subunits. Studies in mice suggest that the alpha-1 subunit mediates sedation, amnesia, and ataxic effects of benzodiazepines, and alpha-2 and alpha-3 subunits mediate anxiolytic and muscle-relaxing effects of benzodiazepines. Also, research suggests that BNZ-1 receptors affect sedation and anti-anxiety, while the BNZ-2 affects muscle relaxation, anticonvulsant activity, memory, and motor coordination. Benzodiazepine binding sites appear to exhibit coupling with GABA-A receptors, enhancing the effects of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) by increasing GABA affinity at the GABA-A receptor. When bound to the GABA-A receptor, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA mediates the calming or inhibitory effects of alprazolam on the human nervous system.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption**

Alprazolam is rapidly absorbed after oral administration with a peak plasma concentration at 1 to 2 hours. The bioavailability of oral alprazolam averages 80 to 100%.

**Distribution**

Alprazolam is 80% bound to serum protein, mainly albumin.

**Metabolism**

Alprazolam is metabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) to 4-hydroxyalprazolam and alpha-hydroxyalprazolam metabolites.

**Excretion**

Alprazolam and its metabolites are filtered out by the kidneys and excreted in the urine. The mean plasma half-life of alprazolam is about 11.2 hours in healthy adults.