In 1929 a surgical resident named Werner Forssmann in Germany performed the first right heart catheterization on a human by inserting a 65 cm urethral catheter on himself through his left antecubital vein. He then advanced it into the right atrium and administered drugs directly into the right heart chambers. Before that, Reverend Stephen Hale, an English Vicar, performed equine venous cannulation in the 1700s. The physiologist Claude Bernard performed equine jugular venous and carotid artery cannulation using glass tubes in 1844 for temperature measurement of both ventricles. Even though it had been performed in animals in the past, this was the first time such a procedure had been performed on a human. This, in combination with X-ray, gave rise to the concept of catheterization procedures that use catheters placed via the arteries or veins to image, diagnose, and treat conditions without open surgery. Health practioners further developed right heart catheterization techniques and the catheters. Andre' Frederic Cournand and Dickinson W. Richards in New York. Their work paved the way for central and peripheral catheterization procedures as we know them today. For their contribution, the three physicians were awarded the Nobel prize in Medicine in 1956.

The right heart catheter was then used extensively to study cardiac and pulmonary hemodynamics in patients with chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease. The catheter was referred to as the pulmonary artery catheter, as mixed venous blood from the pulmonary artery was essential to measure cardiac output.

Dr. Swan added a balloon to the catheter tip of a standard pulmonary catheter, which allowed bedside placement via floatation and also provided an opportunity to measure pressure in the right atrium and the pulmonary arteries continuously. Dr. Ganz developed the idea of the thermistor at the tip, which allowed direct measurement of cardiac output using the thermodilution technique. Because of this catheter's widespread use thereafter, the pulmonary artery catheter became commonly known as the "Swan-Ganz" catheter.