Perhaps the most widely used guidelines for management of cancer in the United States are those created by the National Comprehensive Network (NCCN). The NCCN is a non-profit organization composed of selected hospitals, mostly university hospitals, that choose member physicians from multiple specialties to sit on panels that make national guidelines for cancer treatment.

According to the NCCN, determining whether or not TACE is indicated involves a process of elimination. On the one hand, TACE is not as effective as surgery (either transplant or partial hepatic resection) for curing HCC or metastatic disease and is not in and of itself considered to be a curative treatment. On the other hand, TACE is a more effective treatment than others on the spectrum of treatments that may be considered to be purely palliative. In a minority of situations, TACE either can change a patient's status from "incurable" to "curable" (by downsizing one or more tumors to qualify the patient for surgery) or provide complete permanent tumor necrosis. Thus, on the one hand, a candidate for TACE is someone who has such advanced tumor status and/or overall poor health so as not to be able to withstand surgery or to gain a survival benefit from it as a first line option. This same person, on the other hand, must be healthy enough to withstand the potential side effects and toxicity of TACE and to have good enough odds of gaining at least several months of additional survival at a reasonable quality of life. This process of elimination for discerning which treatment is the best first-line treatment for an individual patient is variable and often subjective, but guidelines do exist to allow for some objectivity.

When considering treatment options for HCC and metastatic disease to the liver, the NCCN relies on several sets of criteria or "scores." These include scores, such as the Child-Pugh-Turcotte score, which is often referred to only as Child-Pugh score, and the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) score, which is commonly referred to instead as the Model for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) score. The Child-Pugh score is a measure of liver function that depends on a patient's levels of creatinine, INR, total bilirubin, encephalopathy, and ascites. The UNOS score is a measure of liver and renal function. It depends on the creatinine, INR, total bilirubin. A modification of this score called the MELDNa score is currently utilized for organ allocation decision making by UNOS. The MELDNa score is a modification of the MELD score with incorporation of the serum sodium value. It needs to be kept in mind that most of the studies done to assess the safety and appropriate patient selection for chemoembolization is based on MELD score, and not the MELDNa score.

Additionally, the decision for or against transplant relies on tumor burden. The predominantly used set of criteria to define this are called the Milan criteria, which were established based on a study of 48 patients at the University of Milan.

The NCCN usually relies on the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system to create algorithms for the treatment of various cancers based on cancer staging. However, the AJCC staging system does not take into account liver function, which is a critical component in determining prognosis and potential survival benefit. Multiple other HCC staging systems based on patient cohorts with accumulated survival data have been proposed that estimate the survival of newly diagnosed patients with HCC based on the severity of their tumor burden, liver function, and/or other health factors. HCC has a variable, poorly understood natural history based on its underlying etiology, for example, secondary to hepatitis C versus hepatitis B versus alcohol-induced versus other, and based on its molecular markers. The tumor size and number affect prognosis but may not be as meaningful a predictor of prognosis as the previously mentioned factors. For example, persons in China are relatively more susceptible to developing HCC from hepatitis B, persons in Japan are relatively more susceptible to developing HCC from hepatitis C, and Caucasians are relatively more susceptible to developing HCC from alcohol-induced cirrhosis or steatohepatitis. Consistent with the previous statements, research studies of these different populations that have compared survival in patients with untreated HCC against survival in patients having undergone various treatments for HCC have found moderately different survival estimates. Thus, the prognosis for a person with HCC is best determined by using a study that has evaluated persons with the same set of circumstances. Since staging is designed to correlate with prognosis in order to help decide how aggressive to be with treatment recommendations for a given person, the tumor staging system that is used should ideally be based on patients who correspond most similarly to the patient at hand or at least most closely to the population at that particular hospital.

Available staging systems include but are not limited to the following:

- Okuda, 1985, Japan

- Cancer of the Liver Italian Program, 1998, Italy

- Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer, 1999, Spain

- Chinese University Prognostic Index, 2002, China

- Japan Integrated Staging, 2003, Japan

- American Joint Committee on Cancer, 2010 United States

A review of the differences, strengths, and weaknesses of these and other staging systems is provided by Kinoshita

The Child-Pugh and PST scoring systems and the BCLC treatment algorithm are presented in the graphics below.

In the BCLC, patients are divided into stages 0, A, B, C, and D from least to most severe condition. BCLC stage-B patients are an extremely heterogeneous group, ranging from having four subcentimeter tumors to having one tumor over 5 cm to having a liver to replaced with a tumor.

A **clinical algorithm based on the BCLC and EASL guidelines**

- The patient belongs to the Intermediate Stage (Stage B) with preserved liver function and ECOG-PS of zero

- HCC does not fall within resection or transplatation criteria

- In multinodular disease, if the patient has more than 3 nodules, or if any of the tumor size is greater than 3cm when there are greater than or equal to 2 nodules.

The NCCN recommends TACE as first-line treatment if:

- The patient's HCC tumor burden is non-resectable

- The patient's liver function is no worse than Child-Pugh B, and

- The patient's overall function is no worse than PS 2.

The following is a breakdown of patient factors that determine how TACE may be used based on the NCCN guidelines. All patients who are candidates for TACE below are either not a candidate for (ECOG PS greater than 0) or choose against hepatectomy/transplant, or Child-Pugh class A or B.

**Patient with HCC**

**TACE intends to keep the patient a candidate for transplant ("bridging" therapy).
**

-  No evidence of vascular invasion on imaging and

-  No evidence of extrahepatic spread on imaging and

-  ECOG PS remains 2 or less and

-  Patient meets Milan criteria

**TACE intends to downstage the tumor(s) so that the patient qualifies for a transplant.
**

- As above, but tumor burden is just outside of the Milan criteria

**Patient with Metastasis to the Liver**

**TACE intends to cure.**

- All liver and primary lesions are considered potentially curable by thermal/chemical ablation or by resection and

- The patient is willing to be treated as part of a clinical trial

**The intent of TACE is to downstage to enable resection.
**

- All metastatic lesions still qualify for eventual resection and

- Initial chemotherapy has failed and

- The patient is willing to be treated as part of a clinical trial.

**The intent of TACE is to palliate.
**

- At least one lesion does not affect quality for resection regardless of the outcome of TACE and

- Initial chemotherapy has failed and

- The hepatic tumor burden is predominant/is the main cause of symptoms and

- The patient understands that TACE may be of little to no benefit in terms of extending quality of life.