**Patient Guide to the Management of Nocturia**

The International Continence Society defines nocturia as "the need for an individual to wake up at night one or more times to void." Nocturia is typically found in more than 50% of all men and women older than 60 years of age. The prevalence increases with age such that the vast majority of individuals age 80 years and over will get up at least once every night to void. However, nocturia is not a "normal or inevitable" part of aging and can almost always be improved by utilizing a combination of behavioral therapies, medications, exercises, lifestyle adjustments, dietary modifications, procedures, and other therapeutic techniques.

Nocturia has significant effects on general health, vitality, and quality of life. Sleep disruption can result in daytime sleepiness, fatigue, mood changes, memory problems, and cognitive dysfunction with poor concentration and performance. Nocturia is often described as the single most bothersome of all lower urinary tract symptoms, and more than 25% of all falls at home occur at night in relation to toilet visits.

Four basic conditions lead to nocturia. These are:

- High 24-hour urine volume as in diabetes

- Nocturnal urine overproduction as in heart failure and hormone disorders

- Bladder storage dysfunction as in overactive bladder and prostate problems

- Sleep disorders such as sleep apnea

Patients with nocturia do not necessarily require treatment. Most of the time, evaluation and treatment of nocturia are recommended only when it is truly bothersome to the patient (usually three or more voids each night) or significantly interferes with the patient’s sleep. An important consideration is whether or not the patient is awakened by the need to void rather than waking up for some other reason.

The patient’s usual total sleep time is also important because the number of voiding sessions per night will vary according to how much time the patient sleeps.

Knowledge of the patient's voiding pattern and the total daily urine volume is helpful. This is determined by measuring each voided urine amount for 24 hours. This is called a voiding diary (a 1-day list of the time and amount in milliliters that is voided) and is very helpful in determining the nature of the underlying problem causing the nocturia.

It turns out that some people naturally make more urine per hour when they are asleep than when they are awake due to a hormonal imbalance, while others produce far more urine all day long than average, which is common in diabetics. The 24-hour voiding diary helps clinicians diagnose these problems without any costly or uncomfortable testing. For the general population, clinicians recommend sufficient fluid intake to maintain a urine output between 1,500 and 2,000 mL per day, which is slightly higher than the normal average.

**Managing Nocturia: The Key Points**

- For most typical patients with nocturia, limiting the fluid intake is recommended, starting right after dinner unless otherwise instructed by your physician.

- Avoid alcohol and especially caffeine. This is important, starting just after lunchtime.

- Reduce extra hours in bed. Excess hours in bed will make sleep shallower, leading to the worsening of the nocturia. Also, the longer one stays in bed, the more likely they are to need to use the bathroom.

- Engage in moderate daily exercise. This often consists of walking at least 20 minutes a day. The additional exercise will be more effective in helping with nocturia if done in the evening.

- After dinnertime, try to keep the legs and feet elevated. This helps any fluid collected in the legs to return to the heart and kidneys, where it is transformed into urine before bedtime. A small pillow placed under the knees can make this position more comfortable.  The legs and feet act like sponges and tend to hold onto excess body fluid. Raising the legs helps this extra fluid return to the general circulation and become urine. Otherwise, this happens after bedtime when patients usually want to avoid voidings.

- Using compression stockings can help reduce excess fluid accumulation in the legs that otherwise would increase urine production after bedtime causing extra trips to the bathroom.

- Change the timing of any water pill (diuretic) medications if it is okay with your physician. If one normally takes furosemide or hydrochlorothiazide each morning, nighttime voiding will change just by changing the time taking medication to mid-afternoon.  Diuretics like furosemide and hydrochlorothiazide typically work for around 6 to 8 hours. When they wear off, excess fluid slowly returns to the body and tissues. This process also takes about 6 to 8 hours. After that, there is no extra room for more fluid, so it is converted to urine at a faster rate. If a patient takes their diuretic early in the morning, the overnight period becomes the most likely time for this extra urine production to occur. Moving the diuretic dosing time to later in the day reduces overnight urine production and helps limit nocturia. Clinicians usually recommend that patients take their diuretic medications about 6 to 8 hours before their usual bedtime, which for most patients means taking them sometime in the mid-afternoon.

- In males with an enlarged prostate, have it treated. In many cases, standard medical or drug therapy for an enlarged prostate can cause a significant reduction in nocturia episodes. Nocturia is often the most persistent urinary symptom, often remaining even after prostate surgery, which suggests that prostate enlargement may not be the cause of nocturia at all in some patients.

- Women are more likely to have overactive bladders that will tend to respond to bladder relaxing medications and exercises. If post-menopausal, many women with nocturia will benefit from vaginal estrogen cream.

- Use a urinal or a bedside commode to make voiding at night more convenient.

- Make the bedroom as comfortable as possible for sleeping.  Eliminate as much noise and light as possible. Consider using earplugs or blindfolds if noise or light keeps you awake. Try to go to bed at the same time each day.  Maintain a comfortable room temperature which for most people is around 69 F.  Try to keep a little extra warmth in bed, such as by using a hot water bottle or turning up the setting on your electric blanket.

- Avoid watching television, looking at your smartphone, or using a computer shortly before bed. The light from these devices tends to send a "wake up" message to the brain, which makes falling asleep more difficult.

- There is evidence that the use of 1 to 2 mg of melatonin, a natural sleep aid available without a prescription, can help reduce nocturia when taken at bedtime.

- Do not spend more time in bed than you need. The longer you stay in bed, the greater the chance for another "nocturia" voiding episode.

- If no other cause or effective treatment is found for your nocturia, a sleep study to check for sleep disorders, like sleep apnea, may be recommended. If a sleep disorder is contributing to your nocturia, it is best to identify and treat it appropriately.

When simpler methods fail, consider medications. If a hormone problem is to blame, then medication to correct that specific condition may be useful. A clinical trial of an overactive bladder drug, prostate medication, sleeping pill, or an anti-diuretic hormone supplement can often be helpful when simpler measures are not adequate to control the nocturia.

Care needs to be taken when using antidiuretic medications in older patients. While effective in most patients with nocturia, they can cause a drop in serum sodium that is potentially dangerous, so most patients taking this type of medication should have their blood sodium levels checked within the first week of starting therapy and then periodically. Also, antidiuretics are not appropriate for patients with congestive heart failure, those taking diuretics like furosemide or hydrochlorothiazide, or anyone with chronic fluid overload conditions. Your physician will advise you if a trial of an anti-diuretic type of medication is safe and appropriate for you.

If there are still bothersome problems with nocturia even after utilizing all of these remedies, there are still treatment options available, such as botox injections into the bladder, posterior tibial nerve stimulation, or placement of a bladder pacemaker.

Nocturia is not a disease in itself. It is a common but abnormal condition that is caused by a variety of disorders. It can be eliminated or at least significantly improved relatively easily in most people just by using the simple evaluation and treatment measures described.