Oligohydramnios is defined as decreased amniotic fluid volume (AFV) for gestational age. The volume of amniotic fluid changes over gestation, increasing linearly until 34 to 36 weeks gestation, at which point the AFV levels off (approximately 400mL) and remains constant until term.

Amniotic fluid disorders should be included in the differential diagnosis whenever there is a discrepancy between the fundal height measurement and gestational age. Discrepancies should prompt an amniotic fluid assessment by ultrasound.

Transabdominal ultrasound evaluation of AFV includes the use of either the maximum vertical pocket (MVP) or the amniotic fluid index (AFI) depending on the institution. The sonographer systematically scans the abdomen and obtains an image that demonstrates the maximum vertical pocket - the deepest pocket of amniotic fluid that does not include fetal umbilical cord or body parts. The measurement should be made from the 12 o’clock position to the 6 o’clock position. The normal range for MVP is 2-8 cm: a pocket <2cm is considered oligohydramnios in both single and multifetal gestations

The use of the maximum vertical pocket tends to overly diagnose cases of polyhydramnios, while the use of the AFI tends to underdiagnose cases of oligohydramnios. With this in mind, some institutions opt to use the MVP in gestations with low AFV and use the AFI in cases of high AFV. The MVP should serve to evaluate oligohydramnios in multifetal pregnancies, as you will not be able to measure all four quadrants for each fetus.