The evaluation of a patient with ascites should start with a thorough history and physical examination. A detailed history should describe the presenting symptoms, and include the past medical history (for example, malignancy, liver or renal diseases and inquiry about any recent trauma), family history, surgical history, history of travel, and social history.

Patients with chylous ascites (CA) usually complain of painless, progressive abdominal distention that could extend over weeks to months. This is the most common symptom in up to 81% of the patients. Less common symptoms among patients with chylous ascites include pain or peritonitis in 11%, diarrhea, dysphagia (as reported in atraumatic causes due to goiter or para-esophageal hernia compressing the thoracic duct and leading to the formation of chylothorax and CA), peripheral edema, weight gain and shortness of breath, resulting from the increased abdominal pressure.

Physical examination reveals a distended abdomen that could be tense on palpation. Classic signs to detect ascites can also be seen, such as shifting dullness and a transmission thrill (fluid wave). Surgical scars seen by inspection could suggest a traumatic etiology. Enlarged lymph nodes can be seen. Other general exam findings seen in the setting of malignancy, renal, or liver disease should be evaluated. For example, patients with cirrhosis may have characteristic physical exam findings, like cachexia, jaundice, temporal wasting, palmar erythema, spider angiomas on the chest and abdomen, gynecomastia, decreased breath sounds and dullness on chest percussion in the setting of pleural effusion, tense abdomen in the setting of ascites, caput medusae, confusion and disorientation (hepatic encephalopathy) in decompensated disease.

Other physical exam findings can be related to specific syndromes like yellow-nail syndrome or Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome.