Therapeutic hypothermia is administered either by selective head cooling (SHC) or whole-body cooling (WBC).

- SHC needs a head cap that circulates cold water to decrease the core temperature of the neonate. The head and brain structures reach a cooler temperature than the body. The target temperature in SHC is 34 to 35 degrees C. Remove the cooling cap every 12 hours to look for irritative injury of the scalp due to the cap.

- WBC needs a special blanket placed that circulates water, which can be cooled or warmed. WBC achieves uniform cooling of the whole body. The target temperature in WBC is 33 to 34  degrees C.

Both cooling devices monitor the neonate's temperature with a probe and maintain the desired target temperature by altering circulating water temperature. Therapeutic hypothermia should last 72 hours, followed by rewarming at a rate of 0.5 degrees celsius /hour.

**Selective Head Cooling vs. Whole-body Cooling**

- WBC provides uniform cooling to all brain structures, including peripheral and central regions. SHC provides more cooling to the cortical region than to the central structures of the brain.

- WBC offers better or at least similar neuroprotection than SHC based on EEG and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings of treated infants after cooling.

- WBC and SHC have similar safety and effectiveness. Also, side effects are similar in both methods.

- WBC is preferred to head cooling in most centers in the United States due to administration ease.

- WBC also provides easier access to the scalp for EEG monitoring.

**Passive Cooling**

If the neonatal unit is not equipped with a cooling facility, consider passive cooling for eligible neonates. The effective measures to achieve passive cooling are turning off the warmer or incubator, removing clothes, and not covering the baby with a blanket. The team should monitor the temperature efficiently at least every fifteen to thirty minutes. Passive cooling can be an early adjunct to therapeutic hypothermia.