PWS is the most common vascular malformation, typically presenting as pink or red homogenous, variably sized macules and patches with geographic borders at birth, that persists throughout life. It is painless, does not bleed spontaneously, and is not warm to touch. In 70%-90% of cases, it affects the skin over the head and neck; however, it can be seen over the trunk or extremities and can rarely involve the mucosa.

PWS often occurs as an isolated vascular malformation; however, in an individual with other birth defects, it could be a part of a genetic syndrome. Some of these syndromes with a brief description of their hallmark clinical features are listed below.

**Sturge-Weber Syndrome (SWS)**

Sturge-weber syndrome is a neurocutaneous syndrome characterized by PWS, leptomeningeal angiomatosis, and/or eye involvement. The PWS is usually unilateral and along the distribution of the trigeminal nerve. However, occasionally it can be bilateral, extensive, and sometimes involving the trunk and the extremities. Children with SWS often develop seizures by the age of 2 years that can be associated with contralateral neurological deficits and learning difficulties. Imaging of the brain may show cerebral atrophy with gyriform calcifications, described as 'tram-track sign'. In the eye, choroid angioma can lead to complications like glaucoma, buphthalmos, and retinal detachment.

Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome (KTS)

KTS is a sporadic condition characterized by a combined capillary-lymphatic-venous malformation with bone and soft tissue hypertrophy. The lower limbs are the most common site involved. Persistence of the embryonic vein of the lateral thigh (vein of Servelle) and stenosis/hypoplasia/aplasia of the deep venous system predisposes the patients to localized intravascular coagulopathy and thromboembolism with subsequent risk of pulmonary arterial hypertension.

**CLOVES Syndrome**

CLOVES syndrome is characterized by congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi, and spinal/skeletal anomalies. Capillary, lymphatic, venous malformations, or combined malformations are often seen in these patients. In rare cases, spinal arteriovenous malformations have also been described. The lipomatous masses are usually present over the trunk, and vascular malformations are often present within or overlying these masses. There can be a focal or segmental overgrowth of the extremities with predominant fibroadipose components. Scoliosis, macrodactyly, and sandal-gap deformity are some of the skeletal anomalies seen. Associated neurological impairment and visceral anomalies have also been described in some cases.

**Proteus Syndrome**

Capillary, venous, or lymphatic malformation with progressive, severely deforming overgrowth of body parts, bony hypertrophy, dysregulated adipose tissue, and epidermal nevi are typically seen in Proteus syndrome. The hallmark feature of this syndrome is the cerebriform connective tissue thickening over soles and palms.

Diffuse capillary malformation with overgrowth (DCMO)

DCMO is a recently described clinical entity that falls in the spectrum of vascular anomalies with overgrowth. Patients can have a widespread reticulated capillary malformation affecting multiple contiguous sites, with a sharp midline demarcation, associated with non-progressive soft tissue and/or bony hypertrophy.

Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome (CM-AVM)

CM-AVM is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by RASA1 mutation. A few cases with EPHB4 mutation have also been described. It is a combined vascular malformation, characterized by the presence of multiple PWSs and arteriovenous malformation (AVM) or fistulas. Multiple PWSs that are multifocal, randomly distributed, pink-to-reddish brown colored, of variable size, with geographical margins, having a pale/white halo are seen in the affected individual, at birth, or later in life. AVM may be present in the skin, muscle, bone, spine, or brain in one-third of these patients. Depending on the site, they can have various symptoms or life-threatening complications. Pain, bleeding, congestive heart failure, and neurological symptoms are some of the complications seen in CM-AVM.

**Parkes-Weber Syndrome**

Parkes Weber syndrome is characterized by multiple arteriovenous fistulas with bone and soft tissue hypertrophy, usually affecting the extremities. A RASA1 mutation is seen in patients having associated PWS; hence, it is considered as a variant of CM-AVM.

Macrocephaly-capillary malformation syndrome (MCM)

MCM is characterized by megalencephaly, brain and body asymmetry, capillary malformations, digital anomalies, and brain malformations. Often PWS is seen on the central face, and patients can have seizures, developmental delay, and joint laxity.

**Phakomatosis Pigmentovascularis (PPV)**

PPV is characterized by the coexistence of extensive capillary malformation and pigmented nevi. Based on the type of pigmented nevi (nevus spilus, dermal melanocytosis, epidermal nevus) and capillary malformation, five types of PPVs have been described. Each type is further divided into two subtypes; subtype "a" denotes absence, and subtype "b" denotes the presence of extracutaneous findings. Patients can also have nevus anemicus and café-au-lait macules.

**CLAPO Syndrome**

Capillary malformation of the lower lip usually extending to the adjacent skin, lymphatic malformation of the tongue and neck, asymmetric partial overgrowth of the face and extremities are the constellation of symptoms seen in this syndrome.

PWS over the midline lumbosacral area could be a cutaneous marker of occult spinal dysraphism. Imaging studies are indicated when PWS is found in association with other cutaneous markers like a tuft of hair, hemangioma, lipoma, dermoid cyst, true/pseudo tail.

In 1949 Fegeler described skin lesions that were morphologically and histopathologically similar to PWS developing following trauma. This infrequently reported clinical entity, which shows a better response to pulsed dye laser, is called Fegeler syndrome or acquired PWS. The commonly reported trigger is trauma; other triggers that have been described are the use of drugs like isotretinoin, oral contraceptive pills, simvastatin, metformin, frostbite injury, herpes zoster infection, and obstruction of a peritoneovenous shunt.