For small, early-detected, and non-malignant vesicovaginal fistulas, conservative management can be pursued to help in spontaneous closure of the defect. Conservative management includes transurethral foley catheter placement for 2 to 8 weeks along with anticholinergic medication if needed for symptom control. If a simple vesicovaginal fistula is diagnosed later in pathogenesis, electrocoagulation of the mucosal layer followed by transurethral catheter placement for 2 to 4 weeks could help in closure of the defect.

If conservative management fails, surgical intervention should be considered. A successful surgical intervention requires an accurate diagnosis, appropriate timing, and properly executed basic surgical principles. The surgeon’s training and expertise, as well as the type and location of the fistula, will determine the method of repair.

The best chance of a successful vesicovaginal repair is at the first surgical attempt. Definitive surgical repair can be complex, requiring interposition grafts from abdominal or vaginal repair approaches. If feasible, the vaginal approach is preferred and has high success rates. Complex vesicovaginal fistulas (related to pelvic irradiation) or recurrent fistulas may require the interposition of highly-vascularized tissue for a chance at successful repair.

Postoperatively, the bladder should be continuously drained via a transurethral Foley catheter. When the vesicovaginal fistula involves the bladder neck, the catheter should be sutured in place and the balloon left deflated. Alternatively, a suprapubic catheter can be placed to avoid pressure from the inflated catheter balloon on the repair. The catheter should remain in place for two to three weeks following surgical repair. Cystography is often performed before catheter removal to determine the integrity of the repair. However, if this is not available, back-filling to the bladder to evaluate for vaginal leakage or an office cystoscopy are alternative options. Again, anticholinergics may be administered to manage catheter-associated irritative bladder symptoms. Prophylactic antibiotic coverage is not required while the indwelling catheter is in place. Pelvic rest for 6-8 weeks postoperatively is recommended.