A number of environmental as well as lifestyle risk factors are associated with the development of cancers. Different sites have different carcinogens and risk factors. Tobacco smoking, by far, seems to play a major role in most of them.

**Adenocarcinoma of Lung**

Smoking is a significant risk factor associated with lung cancer with more than 90 percent of cases related to it.

****Adenocarcinoma of Breast****

Breast cancer is the most common cancer diagnosis in the world and in the United States. Female gender, excess estrogen exposure states like nulliparity, late pregnancy, early menarche, late menopause, external estrogen exposure, alcohol are some of the risk factors for breast cancer.

**Adenocarcinoma of Prostate**

The most important risk factor for prostate adenocarcinoma is age. Patients clinically diagnosed with prostate cancer before age 40 is very rare.

**Adenocarcinoma of the Colon/Rectum**

Environmental and genetic factors increase the risk of colorectal cancer. Many hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes like the familial adenomatous polyposis, Lynch syndrome, and other non-Lynch syndromes like the biallelic MUTYH, BRCA1/2, PALB2, CDKN2A, TP53, FAP increases the risk of colorectal cancer.

**Adenocarcinoma of the Pancreas**

Environmental risk factors contributing to pancreatic adenocarcinoma include smoking, high fasting plasma glucose, high body mass index, western diet, coffee and alcohol consumption, prolonged use of aspirin.

the risk of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas

Other important risk factors include H. pylori in gastric adenocarcinoma