Generally, as with any patient seeking psychiatric care, start with a semistructured diagnostic interview. There is, unfortunately, no structured interview technique that has been validated for DSM-V. There are some that have been validated for TTM based on DSM-IV-TR criteria. These older structured interviews incorporate the National Institute of Mental Health Trichotillomania Severity Scale and the National Institute of Mental Health Trichotillomania Impairment Scale. Some more recent studies have attempted to use adapted scales that have shown positive interrater reliability in assessing for TTM.

The current DSM-V manual lists 5 criteria necessary for a diagnosis of TTM. The criteria are as follows:

- Criteria A: The patient must be removing hair from a body region. The hairs can be from a concentrated region or a diffuse area. There may be associated bald spots or thinning of the hair.

- Criteria B: The patient must have tried to stop or decrease hair removal.

- Criteria C: The removal must cause significant distress or impairment in at least one area of functioning.

- Criteria D: The hair pulling or loss cannot be caused by another medical condition (e.g., alopecia areata, tinea capitis).

- Criteria E: The hair pulling is not better explained by some other mental disorder and its symptoms.

Other symptoms that are also screened for in a structured interview would include those in other psychiatric disorders.

When patients visit a practitioner that is not a psychiatrist, as usual, a history and physical exam should be completed. There should be a high level of suspicion when discussing hair loss. Patients may deny that they are pulling the hair out. They may complain of other psychiatric disorders and their associated symptoms. They may have somatic gastrointestinal complaints, possibly due to trichobezoar. The patient’s history of hair loss can be varied, and there may be vague answers if they are trying to minimize this stigmatizing behavior.

The physical exam should assess the skin specifically looking at the areas of hair loss which can be obvious in some cases and barely visible in others. The hair can be missing from any area of the body that hair grows. The areas of hair loss will be noted to have hair of differing lengths and various stages of regrowth. There is often an identifiable geometric area of hair loss. Rash or other skin changes should be noted to the site as these can be associated with another diagnosis in the differential. To determine the potential for regrowth, clinicians will need to check for scarring of the skin at the follicles. If no scarring is present, then regrowth can occur.