Percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is among the highest complication-rate procedures performed by radiologists. Some standard practices suggested thresholds of up to 45% and 20% for pneumothorax rate and a chest tube insertion rate, respectively, before the trigger of a departmental review for creating a plan to lower the frequency of these complications.

The risks increased when PLLB is performed on persons who are obese, elderly, highly emphysematous, and/or are ASA category 4 patients (e.g., patients who are unable to walk up a flight of stairs). Pre-notification of consultant medical specialists (e.g., an interventional pulmonologist or respiratory therapist) to be available on call at the first sign of trouble is prudent in cases where patients have these risk factors.

Deaths can occur following PLLB, usually secondary to hemorrhage (rate of about 1%), air embolism (rate of less than 1%), cardiac event, or tension pneumothorax.

**Pneumothorax**

Pneumothorax is a common complication of PLLB (approximately 1 in 4 will develop it) and much less common to require a chest tube (between 0 to 15%).

- Long lesion depth (≥3 cm)

- Small lesion size (≤4 cm)

- Lesions without pleural contact

- Emphysema

- Use of large needle gauge (≥18G)

- Crossing fissures or bulla

- Multiple pleural punctures

- Limited operator's experience

Pain from pneumothorax is not a consistent phenomenon across patients. Patients often experience pleuritic chest pain with a new, even relatively small pneumothorax, although some patients are asymptomatic until a fairly impressive pneumothorax develops. The size of pneumothorax necessary to cause shortness of breath is highly variable and depends on the underlying condition of the lungs.

If a pneumothorax occurs before the completion of tissue retrieval, the lung may need to be reinflated as the next step. Even notwithstanding a patient's clinical deterioration, if the no-longer-fixed-in-position lung does not move predictably, it may be impossible to anticipate the target lesion's future position at the time of the next needle advancement. Also, the lung only may be able to be balloted, rather than punctured, by needle thrusts.

If air leakage is discovered during procedure follow-up, a minimum additional hour of puncture site-down positioning should be performed. Once imaging has shown that leakage has stopped, a period of upright positioning should be tried, followed either by discharge if no leakage occurs or repeating the cycle if leakage recurs. The cycle continues until the patient:

- Can be discharged or,

- Requires pleural drainage due to:

- Symptoms
- A pneumothorax exceeding about 30%
- A recurring pattern of leakage

Visual-only estimates of percent pneumothorax tend to be unreliable. The actual percent stenosis should be estimated using calipers and an evidence-based formula.

Aspiration only of a pneumothorax may prevent chest tube placement in at least some patients with a substantial pneumothorax. Small gauge catheters (as small as 4 French) can be used and inserted either via Seldinger or the trocar technique. Alternatively, a large gauge needle (e.g., a Hawkins-Akins needle, which is a non-sharp needle with a sharp trocar) can be used.

A pneumothorax can be evacuated most quickly via wall suction. Aspiration can also be used intentionally only to re-expand the lung temporarily (such as in the case of posterior-approach percutaneous lung lesion biopsy), thereby allowing for a catheter to be placed under less emergent conditions in a separate predetermined location for long-term use. Other studies suggested using a saline tract sealant to decrease the need for chest drain insertion.

While most pneumothoraxes occur immediately after PLLB, some occur after discharge, are delayed for up to two weeks, and require significantly more chest tube insertion.

Delayed pneumothorax is more common in patients with upper lobe location and multiple punctures of small lesions. It is recommended that patients with biopsy-related pneumothorax should avoid engaging in activities such as scuba diving or air travel for at least 24 hours following the biopsy (some earlier recommendations are for at least 72 hours post-biopsy).

**Hemoptysis and Pulmonary Hemorrhage**

Pulmonary hemorrhage is a common complication of PLLB, with an estimated rate of up to 60%.

Hemptoysis is more likely to occur if puncturing a pulmonary cavity or enlarged bronchus, which are both associated with bronchial artery hypertrophy. Unusually bloody specimens and the formation of ground-glass attenuation in the lung prognosis the possible development of clinically significant hemoptysis.

If these findings develop, then less aggressive biopsy manipulations are recommended. Oxygen should be applied. The patient can be placed biopsy side down to prevent blood from dripping through the bronchi into the other lung. Intubation, if necessary, should be performed with a dual-lumen tube. If these maneuvers do not work, then consultation should be obtained for bronchoscopic tamponade of the lobar bronchus. Other therapies to consider include bronchial artery embolization, pulmonary artery embolization, and surgery.

**Air Embolism**

Air embolism is very rare, affecting <1 % of PLLB. It may occur from inspiration by the patient when the trocar has been removed from a needle tip located in a pulmonary vein and/or 2) iatrogenic creation of a bronchovenous fistula. The patient may become unconscious, have signs of a stroke, or undergo a seizure; only one-third of these cases have significant morbidity or mortality.

The patient should be placed in the left lateral decubitus Trendelenburg position to prevent air from exiting the left atrium before dissolving. Oxygen should be given to facilitate the absorption of nitrogen in the bubbles.

Intubation and positive pressure ventilation may worsen venous air introduction in a bronchopleural fistula. Although most hospitals do not have decompression/hyperbaric chambers, this would be an appropriate time to use if one were available.