Regular surveillance and patient education strategies are necessary for the early recognition of neurological symptomatic adverse events.

Secondary preventive strategies aimed at mitigating the impact of these adverse effects on the patient's quality of life can be beneficial. Patient and caregiver education, lifestyle interventions, physical therapy, and occupational therapy approaches, along with avoiding risk factors that predispose to a neurological insult, can also improve outcomes.

Fluid deprivation, supplementation with 3% hypertonic saline, and use of loop diuretics are the recommendations for the management of SIADH.

Clinicians should avoid concomitant use of these drugs with azole antifungals is to be avoided due to the risk of neurotoxicity, which has been known to present with seizures.

Given the low incidence of febrile neutropenia, no recommendations exist for growth factor support along with ABVD chemotherapy in Hodgkin's lymphoma (during the first 3 or 4 cycles of ABVD chemotherapy.

Defibrotide is a viable treatment option in the management of hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

Flushing of the veins after injection is advisable to minimize inflammation. Extravasations of vinca alkaloids have shown an association with skin ulceration occurring up to after 24 hours after the administration of these agents, for which hyaluronidase and corticosteroids can provide viable treatment options. Urgent surgical consultation and immediate debridement are necessary for severe cases.

The development of liposomal formulations may allow for the administration of more than the single recommended of 2 mg.