The priority is the ABCs and appropriate treatment of the presenting complaints. However, once the patient is stabilized, emergency medical services personnel may identify problems associated with violence.

**Emergency Department and Office Care**

Interventions to consider include:

- Make sure a safe environment is provided.

- Diagnose physical injuries and other medical or surgical problems.

- Treat acute physical or life-threatening injuries.

- Identify possible sources of domestic violence.

- Establish domestic violence as a diagnosis.

- Reassure the patient that he is not at fault.

- Evaluate the emotional status and treat.

- Document the history, physical, and interventions.

- Determine the risks to the victim and assess safety options.

- Counsel the patient that violence may escalate.

- Determine if legal intervention is needed and report abuse when appropriate or mandated.

- Develop a follow-up plan.

- Offer shelter options, legal services, counseling, and facilitate such referral.

**Medical Record**

The medical record is often evidence used to convict an abuser. A poorly document chart may result in an abuser going free and assaulting again.

Charting should include detailed documentation of evaluation, treatment, and referrals.

- Describe the abusive event and current complaints using the patient's own words.

- Include the behavior of the patient in the record.

- Include health problems related to the abuse.

- Include the alleged perpetrator's name, relationship, and address.

- The physical exam should include a description of the patient's injuries including location, color, size, amount, and degree of age bruises and contusions.

- Document injuries with anatomical diagrams and photographs.

- Include the name of the patient, medical record number, date, and time of the photograph, and witnesses on the back of each photograph.

- Torn and damaged clothing should also be photographed.

- Document injuries not shown clearly by photographs with line drawings.

- With sexual assault, follow protocols for physical examination and evidence collection.

**Disposition**

If the patient does not want to go to a shelter, provide telephone numbers for domestic violence or crisis hotlines and support services for potential later use. Provide the patient with instructions but be mindful that written materials may pose a danger once the patient returns home.

- A referral should be made to primary care or another appropriate resource.

- Advise the patient to have a safety plan and provide examples.

**Remember**

- Forty percent of domestic violence victims never contact the police.

- Of female victims of domestic homicide, 44% had visited a hospital emergency department within 2 years of their murder.

- Health professionals provide an opportunity for victims of domestic violence to obtain help.