There is a fear of Ringer’s lactate causing hyperkalemia and worsening lactic acidosis.  To put it in perspective, Ringer’s lactate does include a concentration of potassium 4 mEq/L. Logically, giving a hyperkalemic patient additional potassium would worsen hyperkalemia; however, this is not the case. A patient's potassium volume of distribution is larger than the extracellular compartment and equilibrates between the intracellular and extracellular compartments. Therefore, giving a patient, even a patient with renal failure, 4 mEq/L of potassium is not an additive effect.

Ringer’s lactate is often avoided in septic patients secondary to the fear of worsening lactic acidosis. This is also untrue, as the content of Ringer’s lactate is sodium lactate, not lactic acid. Administration of Ringer’s lactate will cause an excess of lactate, which will be utilized by the body for energy. However, in today’s practicing culture, there tends to be an emphasis on blood lactate levels.

Ringer’s lactate also has a calcium concentration which prohibits its use as a diluent for blood transfusions. Some blood products use citrate as an anticoagulant and, when mixed with calcium, leads to the precipitation of calcium citrate, which may cause clotting and obstruction of the IV line. Patients can receive blood products and Ringer’s lactate simultaneously; however, not within the same line.

As with any IV fluid administration, there is a possibility of swelling and edema. At-risk patients are those with congestive heart failure, chronic kidney disease, liver cirrhosis, and hypoalbuminemia. These patients must be monitored during IV administration with serial physical exams to determine if they are becoming clinically hypervolemic.

Further adverse effects may include allergic reactions ranging from mild local redness and itching to generalized symptoms, local infection, redness, and even regional cellulitis, which can progress to systemic infection if not intervened. Many of these symptoms may be secondary to the actual intravenous site access rather than the contents of Ringer’s lactate itself. Allergic reactions are more common with adhesive dressings to secure IV access rather than the contents of Ringer’s lactate itself. IV infiltration is also a possibility, which can cause localized swelling, redness, and pain and ultimately is treated with conservative management and replacement of the IV access. Infection therapy can include local to systemic antibiotic therapy, depending on the severity.