Assuming normal embryologic development, the human kidney normally is positioned between the T12 and L3 vertebrae (right usually slightly lower than left). It normally is angled with its superior pole more dorsal and medial while its lower pole is more ventral and lateral.  The kidneys have their own sagittal plane (through the hilum) directed toward the body's sagittal plane. In other words, the kidneys are tilted backward 30 to 50 degrees from the body's coronal plane and tilted inward 30 to 50 degrees from the sagittal plane.

The right kidney is typically one or two centimeters lower or inferior to the left kidney.  When a patient is prone, both kidneys tend to move slightly superiorly.

PCN placement can potentially injure several surrounding organs and structures including the pleura, diaphragm, colon, spleen, and liver.  Of these, injuries to the pleura and diaphragm are the most common.  The pleura extend to the lower margin of the 12th rib along the paravertebral line.  Therefore, pleural injury is minimized when PCN placement is below the 12th rib.  Placement above the 12th rib will usually puncture the diaphragm.

The renal collecting system is comprised of 8 to 15 minor calyces that join to form major calyces that in turn usually form a single renal pelvis that empties into a single ureter. The arterial supply is typically a single renal artery that divides into an anterior and posterior branch. However, due to genetic or other embryologic reasons, a person's kidney or kidneys may have variations in one or all of the factors discussed above.

A fairly constant aspect of a kidney is a relatively hypovascular plane (described by multiple researchers but often referred to as Brodel's line after medical illustrator Max Brodel) in the watershed region between the anterior and posterior renal artery divisions. This hypovascular area usually is oriented 20 to 30 degrees posteriorly from the body's sagittal plane. Puncturing this area theoretically results in reduced bleeding risk compared to other areas of the kidney.

The kidney is usually found within the perirenal space, an anatomic compartment that is completely or nearly completely separated by fascia from all the other internal organs except for the adrenal gland. Access to the kidney involves navigating instruments into this perirenal retroperitoneal space and staying away from the pleura, subcostal arteries, and nearby retroperitoneal structures such as the duodenum and ascending (on the right) and descending (on the left) portions of the colon.