# Continuing Education Activity

Kratom (Mitragyna speciosa) is a plant indigenous to Southeast Asia, typically consumed by tea or powder, with physiologic effects similar to opioids, as well as stimulants. There is an increasing prevalence of kratom use, raising concern for possible dependence, addiction, and toxicity. Given the increasing popularity and the potential harm this substance could cause, it is essential to understand how it works, its physiologic side effects, and any possible treatment options for symptoms related to a toxic overdose. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management/prevention of kratom toxicity and also reviews the role of the interprofessional team with management.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the pathophysiology/toxicokinetics of kratom toxicity.
- Outline the signs, symptoms, and examination findings for patients with kratom toxicity.
- Describe management strategies for kratom toxicity.
- Review the interprofessional team approach to identifying and improving care for managing patients suffering from kratom toxicity.

# Indications

With the rise in patients taking naturalistic approaches to healthcare, it is crucial to be aware of kratom and the risks associated with its ingestion.Mitragyna speciosa) is a plant indigenous to southeastern Asia, typically consumed as tea or powder, with physiologic effects similar to opioids and stimulants. The use of kratom in southeastern Asia has been common for the past few centuries, but it is gaining popularity in the West.

Traditional use of kratom consisted of remedies for treating symptoms of opiate addiction and withdrawal. Also, it is popular among laborers in rural southeastern Asia for pain relief and fighting off fatigue.

The primary motivation for kratom use varies, but some patients with opioid dependence resort to other methods of self-medication, with kratom being an inexpensive alternative. The Drug Enforcement Administration does not recognize kratom as a controlled substance. Thus, it is not subject to the United States Controlled Substances Act, so there is little regulatory oversight regarding the substance's purity, potency, and safety.

# Mechanism of Action

Kratom has only four known pharmacologically active compounds.

The half-life of mitragynine has an estimated half-life of 3 hours.

One of the important differences between opioids and the alkaloids in kratom is that they are pharmacologically and structurally different. Like opioids, the alkaloids from kratom initiate G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) signaling; however, the major difference is that the kratom alkaloids don't initiate the beta-arrestin pathway.

# Administration

Given the current opioid epidemic, physicians are encouraged to avoid overprescribing opioids for pain management. However, patients who develop an opioid dependence may resort to alternatives, like kratom, as their opioid prescriptions become more difficult to obtain. Kratom has been used by some patients wishing to self-medicate for health conditions associated with chronic pain, where it has been seen as an inexpensive, legal option.

When ingested orally, there appears to be linear pharmacokinetics with biphasic elimination.

# Adverse Effects

Kratom and its metabolites can cause a variety of symptoms, including neurologic, metabolic, and psychological symptoms. A study by the National Poison Data system in 2019 found that the most common presenting symptoms after kratom ingestion included agitation, tachycardia, drowsiness, and confusion.

Multiple organ systems are at risk for potential injury due to kratom ingestion. Multiple case studies have found a range of toxicities and adverse events associated with kratom use, including hepatotoxicity, seizure and coma, lung injury, kidney injury, and cardiotoxicity.

# Contraindications

There is little information regarding absolute contraindications for kratom use; however, there is a risk of possible pharmacologic interactions for patients who ingest it. Mitragynine, a substrate of kratom, appears to inhibit glucuronidation by UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT).

Also, patients with liver, neurologic, pulmonary, renal, or cardiac disease should avoid this substance as there have been multiple case studies showing that kratom can potentially cause injury to these organ systems.

# Monitoring

As most patients who present after kratom ingestion will be first seen in the emergency department, it is best for healthcare providers to focus on the patient's airway, breathing, circulation, neurologic status, and initial resuscitation. As these patients can present with various symptoms, it is best to keep a broad differential. Labwork and imaging can vary based on the patient's presentation. If kratom toxicity is suspected or known, it is also important, and likely beneficial, for providers to consult their local poison control center early in managing patients to help guide monitoring, treatment, and patient disposition.

Monitoring and screening patients for suspected kratom ingestion can be complex, as it does not typically appear on routine drug screens. Presentation for kratom toxicity can differ as symptoms can vary based on the dose administered and whether the ingested kratom had been altered. The physiologic effects of kratom ingestion vary based on a dose-dependent manner, where stimulant-like effects are seen at lower doses, and opioid-like effects are seen at higher doses.

After kratom ingestion, a patient's presenting symptoms can help guide evaluation, work-up, and management. Multiple organ systems are at risk for potential injury after kratom ingestion. Multiple case studies have found a range of toxicities and issues due to kratom, including hepatotoxicity, seizure and coma, lung injury, kidney injury, and cardiotoxicity.

# Toxicity

As many patients with kratom toxicity will primarily be seen in the emergency department, performing a primary survey and assessing the patient's airway, breathing, and circulation is crucial. Developing a broad differential in these patients is imperative as initial presenting symptoms may vary based on the dose of kratom ingested. Also, screening for kratom misuse is primarily based on patient disclosure, as kratom is not detected on regular drug screens.

There are no formal, evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of kratom toxicity. Presentations for kratom toxicity can differ as symptoms vary based on the dose ingested and whether the substance has been altered. The physiologic effects of kratom ingestion vary dose-dependently, where stimulant-like effects are seen at lower doses, and opioid-like effects are seen at higher doses.

At higher doses, kratom toxicity can mimic an opioid toxidrome. While there are reversal agents, like naloxone, for opioid overdoses, the efficacy of reversal agents has not been well established with kratom toxicity. However, there are cases that have reported potential benefits, and some studies have recommended their use.N-acetylcysteine has been used, as in other cases of drug-induced hepatitis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Kratom ingestion and toxicity require an interprofessional approach. Depending on the severity of presenting symptoms, critical care, nursing, pharmacy, social work, and addiction services may be required. Nursing and pharmacy are essential for the initial resuscitation and delivery of medications. Pharmacists, in particular, need to be knowledgeable about the effects of this substance so they can inform patients and other interprofessional healthcare team members regarding kratom use. Critical care teams and psychiatry involvement is crucial for critically ill patients with possible co-ingestions and those with suicidal intent. Social work and addiction services are necessary for those motivated to control their drug addiction. Overall, kratom use, toxicity, and withdrawal require further research to develop definitive management practices.