Folinic acid (5-formyltetrahydrofolate ([R, S]5-CHOFH4)) is a naturally occurring, reduced form of folic acid commonly known in clinical practice as leucovorin. Often, clinicians use the terms folic acid and folinic acid interchangeably, but they are, in fact, not the same. Folic acid is a synthetic, oxidized, and water-soluble form of folate (vitamin B9) that is used therapeutically and does not exist in nature, whereas folinic acid exists naturally and is biologically active.

Folate supplementation indications include preventing several diseases, such as ulcerative colitis, neural tube defects, and cognitive dysfunction in the elderly.

There are several FDA and non-FDA-approved indications of folinic acid. It is most famously known for its use as an antidote for the toxic effects of methotrexate and its use in conjunction with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), both of which are FDA-approved indications.

Increased levels of folinic acid potentiate the cytotoxic effects of 5-FU in the cell.

As a derivative of folic acid, folinic acid is useful as an antidote to folic acid antagonists (i.e., methotrexate and pyrimethamine).

The intravenous formulation of folinic acid (leucovorin calcium) is also FDA-approved for use in adults and children (recommendation IIa, strength of evidence category B) to treat megaloblastic anemia in patients who have normal vitamin B12 levels and in whom oral therapy is not possible.

The list of non-FDA approved indications of folinic acid are far more extensive and include the following:

- Similar to its use in colorectal cancer, folinic acid has also been shown to potentiate the effects of 5-FU in the treatment of breast carcinoma. This regimen is currently non-FDA approved, partly because there is insufficient evidence that folinic acid can increase the therapeutic index of 5-FU in breast cancer and because many such clinical trials are presently ongoing.

- Regimens including folinic acid and 5-FU also have non-FDA-approved indications for the treatment of unresectable/advanced gallbladder and biliary tree carcinoma,

- Combination chemotherapy regimens that include folinic acid have been effective in various non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Methotrexate and rescue folinic acid, in conjunction with other chemotherapy agents (i.e., doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide), have shown a complete response rate of 84% in the treatment of diffuse large cell lymphoma.

- For patients who require prophylactic therapy for toxoplasmosis and who are unable to tolerate sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, folinic acid is the recommendation in combination with clindamycin and pyrimethamine as an alternative. Folinic acid, in conjunction with pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine, is another option.

- For patients requiring prophylactic treatment for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia and who cannot tolerate sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, an alternative treatment can be used that includes folinic acid in combination with pyrimethamine and dapsone, among other combinations.

- Serum plasma levels of homocysteine and folate derivatives have an inverse relationship.

- There is evidence that patients who have repeated exposures to nitrous oxide or require treatment with long-term nitrous oxide may benefit from folinic acid prophylaxis to prevent bone marrow suppression.