# Introduction

Natriuretic peptides (NP) are key proteins that improve and regulate circulation. They are essential proteins that act on blood vessels causing them to widen or dilate.

The b-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) was initially identified in porcine brain tissue in 1988 and was previously referred to as the “brain natriuretic peptide.” Later, researchers determined that the primary site of its release is cardiac ventricular cells, particularly in response to ventricular distention.

B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a member of a family of natriuretic peptides (NP) that include atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), C-type natriuretic peptide, D-type natriuretic peptide, and urodilatin.

A small amount of BNP is found in the cytoplasmic granules of myocytes. Upon stimulation for production and release, proBNP is cleaved by corin to equimolar amounts of the biologically active BNP hormone and the biologically inactive amino-terminal proBNP (NT-proBNP), which is also released into circulation as the unprocessed precursor protein.

The C-type natriuretic peptide is synthesized primarily in the central nervous system. It is also found in vascular endothelial cells and may play a role in the local regulation of vascular tone.NPPC, is not located on chromosome 1 but on chromosome 2. In normal human subjects, the mean CNP concentration is very low (1 fmol/mL).

The natriuretic peptide system consists of 3 receptors: natriuretic peptide receptor-A (NPR-A), natriuretic peptide receptor-B (NPR-B), and natriuretic peptide receptor-C (NPR-C).Npr2, is located on chromosome 4. The human NPR-C gene is located on chromosome 5p13–14 and contains 8 exons and 7 introns spanning more than 65 kilobases.

# Pathophysiology

BNP is a 32–amino acid peptide hormone with a molecular weight of 3472 daltons.

Following systemic secretion, the natriuretic peptides activate transmembrane guanylate cyclases on the surface endothelial cells, thereby increasing intracellular levels of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), leading to vasodilation. Other systemic effects include diuresis and natriuresis, resulting in lowered blood pressure.

Expression of the BNP gene is a feature of both atrial and ventricular myocytes. In the normal heart, the main site of BNP expression is in the atrial regions. Ventricular BNP gene expression increases drastically in cardiac diseases affecting the ventricles, such as heart failure (HF).

The estimated half-life of BNP is about 20 minutes, whereas NT-proBNP has a half-life of 120 min; this difference explains why NT-proBNP serum levels are approximately six times higher than BNP levels, even though both molecules are released in equimolar proportions.

BNP production in cardiomyocytes is significantly increased by inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1-beta, an effect that is markedly increased when fibroblasts are present; inflammatory cytokines directly stimulate BNP production in the heart independent of hemodynamics.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

The b-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is labile and must be collected into tubes containing EDTA and tested ideally within four hours of collection. Serum samples and citrated or heparinized plasma cannot be used. BNP can be stored for up to 24 hours at 2^oC to 8^oC for some assays.

# Testing Procedures

Both BNP and NT-proBNP levels can be tested through standard blood draws. There are also point-of-care BNP assays, which take approximately fifteen minutes for results and are often helpful in emergent settings.

Before introduction into clinical practice, BNP and NT-proBNP assays must be characterized with respect to the following pre-analytical and analytical issues:

**Pre-Analytical**

a. Effect of storage time and temperatureb. Influence of different anticoagulantsc. Influence of gel separator tubesd. Plastic blood collection tubes are necessary for BNP; for NT-proBNP, either glass or plastic is acceptable

**Analytical**

a. Identification of both antibody recognition epitopesb. Cross-reactivity characteristics with related natriuretic peptides, including NT-pro ANP, ANP, CNP, BNP, and glycosylated and nonglycosylated NTproBNP and proBNPc. Identification of interferences from heterophile antibodies, rheumatoid factors, and human antimouse antibodiesd. Description of calibration material used, how the material was defined, and the concentration value assignede. Clarification of dilution responses

# Interfering Factors

BNP and NT-proBNP levels may be affected by specific comorbidities, such as chronic renal failure, type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity, and acute coronary syndrome (ACS).

The body mass index (BMI) is another variable influencing the reference intervals for BNP and NT-proBNP. Patients with a BMI in the obese range have lower BNP and NT-proBNP concentrations than patients with a normal or underweight BMI. There have been several theories as to the mechanism for these observations.

All immunoassays for BNP and NT-proBNP are heterogeneous, using a separation step between bound and free antibodies; there are no problems with photometric interferents such as hemoglobin, bilirubin, or lipemia.

proBNP also exists in the blood of heart failure patients as an O-linked glycoprotein. There are seven potential glycosylation sites from the center of the molecule (from the non-BNP amino acid sequences).

The relative composition of blood with regard to the various BNP, NT-proBNP, proBNP, and glycosylated forms present in the blood of patients with heart failure is not known.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

BNP and NT-proBNP levels increase in patients with cardiac disease due to myocardial stress and volume overload.

Other situations in which natriuretic peptides are elevated include any disease that increases blood volume and thus wall stress, such as sepsis, anemia, renal dysfunction, Cushing syndrome, hyperaldosteronism, hypertension with left ventricular hypertrophy, and cirrhosis.

Circulating levels of natriuretic peptides increase after acute myocardial infarction; the extent of the increase is related to the size of the infarct.

A value of less than 100 pg/mL for BNP and less than 300 pg/mL for NT-proBNP makes the diagnosis of heart failure less likely in an acutely dyspneic patient.

# Clinical Significance

**Heart Failure**

The strongest indication for BNP measurement is distinguishing between cardiogenic and non-cardiogenic causes of dyspnea in an emergent setting. Dyspnea is a symptom in nearly all cases of HF exacerbation. However, it is not specific to HF and may result from other pathologic processes.

BNP can also be a useful prognostic marker in patients with known chronic heart failure; elevated levels are found in patients with higher New York Heart Association functional class scores and correlate with mortality, morbidity, and recurrent hospital admission.

**Acute Coronary Syndrome**

Left ventricular dysfunction due to cardiac remodeling is a significant cause of mortality following myocardial infarction (MI). BNP monitoring can help assess prognosis following MI because it becomes elevated in patients with post-MI left ventricular dysfunction with ejection fractions less than 40%.

**Limitations**

While BNP is a useful tool in assessing prognosis in patients with cardiac disease, it has not been well established that BNP-guided therapy offers improved outcomes compared to symptom-guided therapies.

**Relevance**

Heart failure is a significant and growing cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States; it is the leading cause of hospitalization in those aged 65 and older and is responsible for 10% of all healthcare expenditures.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. If necessary, laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance.

Westgard multi-rules are used to evaluate the quality control runs. If a run is declared out of control, investigate the system (instrument, standards, controls, etc.) to determine the cause of the problem. Do not perform any analysis until the problem has been resolved.

Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious. Exercise the usual precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines. Wear gloves, a lab coat, and safety glasses when handling human blood specimens. Place all plastic tips, sample cups, and gloves that come into contact with blood in a biohazard waste container.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

From clinicians on through nursing staff, pharmacists, and other ancillary staff, all healthcare practitioners should understand BNP values commensurate with their function in providing patient care. This is particularly true for those in emergent settings who may encounter patients in need of prompt intervention for cardiac-related events and conditions.