The clinical manifestations of Gitelman syndrome are highly variable and depend on age at presentation, the severity of symptoms, and biochemical abnormalities. Patients often are asymptomatic and noted to have hypokalemia on routine laboratory testing or may have nonspecific symptoms of fatigue and generalized malaise. Some patients may experience muscle cramps. Many patients have low blood pressure. Tetany and hypokalemic paralysis have been reported, the latter being more common in Asian populations. In addition to hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis and hypocalciuria are common. Hypomagnesemia can be seen in many but not in all cases. The biochemical findings are similar to an individual taking a thiazide diuretic.

GS generally presents in adolescents and adults but may also be found in children, even in the neonatal period.

- Salt craving (i.e., preference for salty food or a salted treat during childhood)

- Muscle weakness, fatigue, limited sports performance or endurance

- Episodes of fainting, cramps, tetany, paresthesia, carpopedal spasms

- Growth retardation, pubertal delay, short stature

- Thirst or abnormal drinking behavior

- Episodes of abdominal pain

- Dizziness, vertigo, polyuria, nocturia, joint pain, palpitations, and visual problems may be reported in adults.

Increased thirst and salt cravings were noted in three-fourths of patients. Many patients prefer pickle brine, salted cucumbers, oranges, and lemons. Some patients may have joint pains. Also, some cases of chondrocalcinosis and nephrocalcinosis have been reported.