**Neonatal Jaundice**

In most cases of mild neonatal jaundice, no treatment is necessary, and it resolves on its own within a few weeks. In cases of moderate or severe jaundice (TB over 15 mg/dL), phototherapy is a safe option. During phototherapy, the infant’s skin is exposed to light in the blue-green spectrum (460-490 nm) in a way that transforms bilirubin into lumirubin, a water-soluble isomer, and reduces its toxicity by increasing its elimination in both the urine and stool.

In some cases, infants carry antibodies from the mother that can result in the quick breakdown of neonatal red blood cells (due to differences in the blood type), intravenous transfusion of an immunoglobulin (IVIG) that can reduce the levels of antibodies may be the choice of treatment. In a rare instance of severe neonatal jaundice, when other treatments do not work, exchange transfusion of blood may be performed.

**Gilbert Syndrome**

The most crucial part for clinicians in the management and care of patients with Gilbert syndrome (GS) is to recognize that it is relatively benign with a good prognosis. The diagnosis of GS requires normal liver function tests, elevated bilirubin levels, and genetic testing to confirm the disorder further. Owing to the benign and inconsequential nature of this syndrome, the use of medications is not justified for its treatment. There exists an increased risk of side effects and toxicity from the use of certain drugs such as acetaminophen and irinotecan that are conjugated by the liver.

**Crigler-Najjar Type II Syndrome**

Patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II respond to phenobarbital therapy. Since CNS2 is milder, phenobarbital is effective in reducing plasma bilirubin levels in these patients by 25 %. In some cases, patients with severe hyperbilirubinemia may need phototherapy or exchange transfusions. However, often, patients affected with type II syndrome may not require any therapy but may need routine monitoring. The goal is to maintain TB below 15 mg/dL.

**Crigler-Najjar Type I Syndrome**

Unlike CNS2, patients with CNS1 do not respond to phenobarbital therapy due to the absence of the enzyme. Rapid treatment of kernicterus is needed to prevent devastating neurologic sequelae. The emergent treatment for bilirubin encephalopathy relies on repeated plasma exchange transfusions followed by long-term phototherapy.

Oral calcium phosphate may be a valuable adjuvant to phototherapy in Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome, by interrupting the enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin.

Plasmapheresis is also being employed to lower bilirubin levels in the blood rapidly.

In patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, orthotopic liver transplantation may be considered a definite form of therapy and should be performed before the onset of neurologic damage.

**Pharmacologic management**

Patients with Crigler-Najjar type II syndrome do not require any treatment and can be managed with phenobarbital. Also, for Gilbert syndrome, no medical therapy is needed, and phenobarbital has been effectively shown to decrease bilirubin production. The common medications used for the treatment of patients with Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome are phenobarbital, calcium (infusions), ursodeoxycholic acid, metalloporphyrins, chlorpromazine, and cholestyramine.

Phenobarbital increases both the conjugation and excretion of bilirubin by stimulating the gene for the UGT1A1 enzyme, which induces the production of conjugated bilirubin and thereby reduces the serum bilirubin levels by 25%. Ursodeoxycholic acid increases the flow of the bile, the elimination of bile into the gastrointestinal tract, thereby reducing the total serum bilirubin levels.

Metalloporphyrins like tin-mesoporphyrin (SnMp) inhibit the activity of the heme oxygenase enzyme, which is a rate-limiting step in the production of bilirubin from heme metabolism.