The fasciocutaneous radial forearm free flap is, in general, a very reliable flap with a very high success rate, which is why it is a workhorse flap. The modification to preserve the lateral intermuscular septum and the periosteal feeding vessels, as well as include a partial thickness segment of radial bone, does not significantly affect the success rate of the use of this flap.

As with all microvascular procedures, flap failure at the microvascular level is the most concerning complication. Surgeon experience, operative technique, and vessel geometry are important factors that contribute to success or failure. Flap failure can be arterial or venous in nature. Situations in which vessel geometry may lead to kinking, obstruction, or excessive tension should be avoided. Thoughtful flap inset is particularly important when mucosal incisions are being sealed to avoid the effects of a potential salivary fistula on the microvascular anastomosis. However, even in the setting of a smooth, well-scripted surgical procedure, there are many patient and patient care factors that can contribute to a failed free flap intraoperatively and/or postoperatively. Identifying those factors and avoiding them is key to reducing complications and length of hospitalization. Early recognition of flap failure may also salvage a compromised flap; otherwise, secondary or replacement reconstruction may be necessary. In a study by Mirzabeigi et al., they reviewed a series of 2260 microvascular flaps with a 3% take-back rate for delayed microvascular compromise, and had a 49% salvage rate.

Regarding the harvested radial bone graft, fracture, malunion, nonunion, insufficient bone, and bony resorption are also potential risks. Hardware complications, such as plate infection or extrusion, may occur as well. Other recipient site complications include delayed healing, wound breakdown, and poor cosmesis. Wound healing problems may necessitate secondary procedures or reconstructions.

At the donor site, the most devastating complication with any radial forearm free flap is ischemia to the hand, which is rare, fortunately. There are several preoperative and intraoperative tests to help avoid this complication. Injury to the superficial branch of the radial nerve can result in the development of painful neuromas in the forearm. The skin paddle site is often closed with a skin graft, which can be cosmetically displeasing to the patient. Full-thickness skin grafting or augmenting the wound bed with a synthetic dermal regeneration matrix prior to placing a split-thickness skin graft may decrease the likelihood of aesthetic dissatisfaction. Skin graft failure is another potential complication, which may occur as a result of hematoma, denuded tendons, poor wound healing, and/or infection. Delayed skin graft failure may present in conjunction with tendon exposure. Aggressive recruitment of tissue into the flap during harvest, particularly in preserving the perforators to the radius, may injure or denude the brachioradialis tendon or its paratenon, thereby increasing the risk of tendon exposure or injury.

Other complications more specific to the osteocutaneous radial forearm result from loss of radial bone strength, as well as from myotomies of the flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor pollicis longus, and pronator muscles. Biomechanical studies confirm significant loss of strength accompanies loss of radial bone thickness. The risk of pathologic fracture of the radius is higher after radial ostectomy. Prophylactic plating is recommended to reduce the risk of fracture. Plate infection and/or exposure is possible in the donor forearm but is fortunately quite rare.

Few studies compare complications of the OCRFFF to other osteocutaneous reconstructive options. A retrospective study of 168 patients looked at differences between the osteocutaneous radial forearm and the osteocutaneous fibular flap. The OCRFFF was more commonly used in older patients (63.7 versus 59 years of age). Flap failure rates were similar (~3-4%). In their series, the donor site complication rate was higher in the fibular free flap group (4.3%) versus the OCRFFF group (0%).