The history should include the underlying comorbidities, the timing of the development of the edema and anasarca, positional changes, whether it is unilateral or bilateral, and medication history. Chronic accumulation of more generalized edema is caused by the onset or exacerbation of systemic conditions such as congestive heart failure (CHF), renal disease, or hepatic disease. Dependent edema caused by venous insufficiency is more likely to improve with elevation and deteriorate with dependency. Edema associated with decreased plasma oncotic pressure (e.g., malabsorption, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome) does not change with dependency.

The physical examination can aid in establishing the diagnosis. The exam should be focused on identifying the pattern of edema – peripheral vs. pulmonary edema, pitting vs. non-pitting edema, and the presence of jugular venous distension. Below are the exam findings of common clinical conditions that can cause anasarca.

Patients with pulmonary edema complain primarily of dyspnea that can be worsened at rest and upon exertion as well as orthopnea, cough, and chest pain. Common physical examination findings can reveal pulmonary findings like crackles or rhonchi, cardiac findings indicating volume overload, or heart failure like an S3 gallop. Peripheral edema is usually detected by the presence of pitting after pressure is applied to the edematous region. Pitting reflects the movement of the excess interstitial water in response to pressure. It is usually seen in dependent areas like the lower extremities in ambulatory patients and over the sacrum in patients who are bed-bound. Scrotal edema can also be seen in males when the edema is more severe like cases of anasarca. Non-pitting edema more commonly suggests lymphatic obstruction or hypothyroidism. Acute onset of unexplained unilateral leg edema should raise the possibility of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Cirrhotic patients from any cause can develop ascites and then edema in the lower extremities because of an increase in venous pressure below the diseased liver. The presence of other signs of portal hypertension, such as distended abdominal wall veins and splenomegaly, also is suggestive of a primary hepatic disease.

The cause of edema and anasarca sometimes can be determined by noting changes in skin temperature, color, and texture. Acute DVT and cellulitis may produce increased warmth over the affected area. The deposition of hemosiderin or chronic venous insufficiency often causes the skin to have a brawny, reddish hue and commonly involves the medial malleolus. As venous insufficiency progresses, it can result in lipodermatosclerosis which is associated with marked sclerotic and hyperpigmented tissue and characterized by fibrosis and hemosiderin deposition that can lead to venous ulcers over the medial malleolus. The ulcers may progress to deep, weeping erosions. Myxedema from hypothyroidism presents with a generalized, dry, thick skin with nonpitting periorbital edema and yellow to orange skin discoloration over the knees, elbows, palms, and soles. Pretibial myxedema occurs in patients with thyroid disease and is characterized by bilateral, asymmetric, nonpitting, scaly thickening, and induration of the skin. These ulcers may be violaceous or slightly pigmented (yellow-brown) and often have an orange-peel appearance. The most frequent location of pretibial myxedema is over the lower legs, especially the pretibial areas or the dorsum of the foot.