The management of malignant lacrimal gland tumors has not been clearly established because of their rarity and poor prognosis. Yet, the established goals for treatment are local tumor control and prevention of both local recurrences and distant metastases.

The first step in all suspected malignancies is establishing a formal histological diagnosis, usually achieved via incisional biopsy. In some cases, small or easily accessible lesions can be excised entirely. Treatment can then be directed by tumor grading and staging. Historically the treatment of most lacrimal gland carcinomas has included orbital exenteration with or without bone removal and adjuvant high dose radiation 4 to 6 weeks after surgery.

Adenoid cystic carcinoma has had developments in treatment strategies, though there is still no widespread consensus. Treatment may involve a combination of tumor removal, radiation therapy, and orbital exenteration with varying survival rates.

More recently, intra-arterial cytoreductive chemotherapy (IACC) has been used successfully before orbital exenteration and radiation therapy and may be combined with globe-sparing surgery and adjuvant radiation therapy.

The treatment of carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma depends on the histologic grade and stage at presentation. An isolated, well-defined mass may be treated with excisional surgery alone without radiation. On the other hand, ill-defined lesions invading the tumor capsule or surrounding orbital tissue are often treated similar to ACC with excision, possible orbital exenteration, and adjuvant radiation therapy.

Adenocarcinoma NOS and the other malignant lesions are usually treated similarly to ACC with exenteration and radiation therapy. If only a microscopic tumor is present on histopathology, plaque radiation therapy can be considered a treatment option for any lacrimal gland malignancy.

The management of ocular adnexal lymphoma depends on the extent of systemic involvement. First, an incisional biopsy is necessary to establish the diagnosis and ascertain the subtype of lymphoma and its genetic characteristics. This is followed by a systemic workup by an oncologist, potentially including systemic imaging and/or a bone marrow biopsy. Unlike the other malignancies of the lacrimal gland, definitive treatment of lymphoma is not surgical. If the lymphoma is located in the orbit only, then external beam radiation therapy is the established initial treatment, except for DLBCL and mantle cell lymphoma, which are treated by chemotherapy.