Plain film radiographs are the backbone of medical imaging and should be the first consideration of any wrist pathology for several reasons. Not only do radiographs offer low-cost, non-invasive, and relatively quick results, but their relative familiarity across all medical professions also makes them a great initial choice for diagnosis after a thorough physical exam.

Plain radiographs offer less ionizing radiation dose than other forms of imaging, such as computed tomography and fluoroscopy. Another advantage is the portability of x-ray equipment. Portable x-ray machines and imaging cassettes allow technologists to acquire images without transporting a patient to another department within a facility, expediting the opportunity for diagnosis in the emergency department and trauma situations.

Despite the relative simplicity and high yield properties of plain radiographs, there are some disadvantages compared to other imaging modalities. First, exposure to ionizing radiation slightly increases the overall lifetime risk of developing certain cancers, and their usefulness must be judiciously weighed against this risk. Additionally, the risk of damage at the molecular DNA level is magnified in tissues with high rates of growth or replenishment. That makes it slightly riskier for pregnant patients, children, and procedures imaging gonadal tissues. Overall, the benefit must outweigh the risk to proceed. It should be noted that the radiation dose of most radiographic studies, especially in the setting of the appendicular skeletal structures, is relatively low, as is the lifetime risk.

Plain radiographs cannot delineate and fully characterize soft tissue structures. Soft tissue damage such as ligamentous and tendon derangement is not always readily apparent on plain radiographs. When these types of injuries are identified, it is by inference of radiographic findings as the ligaments and tendons are not visualized on radiographs. Additionally, the static images produced by routine x-ray equipment do not provide much functional evaluation of joint structures. Weight-bearing or stress imagines provide more information regarding the functional alignment of osseous structures as well as evaluation of the joint space.

Examples of appropriate uses of plain film radiographs for wrist pathology may include:

- Trauma, fracture identification

- Anatomic alignment (osseous coalitions, advanced scapholunate collapse, dislocations)

- Limited fracture characterization (displacement, the involvement of physis, simple vs. comminuted fractures)

- Fracture follow-up assessment (fracture line, bone remodeling)

- Relative bone density

- Bone lesion identification and classification (internal matrix, cortical destruction)

- Gross soft tissue evaluation (edema/swelling/radiopaque foreign objects, some tendon injuries such as the Achilles and patellar)

- Presence of and overall degree of degenerative change or arthritis