**External ear:**

The outer pinna funnels the sound into the external auditory canal.

**Middle ear:**

The tympanic membrane vibrates as a response to sound from the external auditory canal. These vibrations then transfer to the three ossicles, which then induce fluid vibrations of the cochlea of the inner ear.

**Inner ear:**

Perilymph fluid is what fills the bony labyrinth, while endolymph is present in the cochlear duct and the membranous labyrinth. Endolymph vibrations stimulate the auditory receptors within the cochlea and vestibule. The endolymph affects the function of the vestibule and the auditory aspects.

In regards to the auditory component of the inner ear, outer hair cells are three-quarters of the total number of sensory cells in the cochlea. Inner hair cells are associated with the displacement of the basilar membrane. These hair cells receive innervation from CN VIII. The inner hair cells are sensory only, while the outer hair cells are for mechanical feedback.

For the function of balance, the semicircular canals take precedent. The semicircular canals consist of the cristae within the ampullae and the maculae of the utricle and saccule. The utricle and saccule are the otolithic organs that are known for linear accelerations. The maculae and cristae have hair cells like the cochlea. In the maculae, the hair cells have otoconia in a gelatinous layer, so when the head moves, the otoliths change position leading to the excitement of hair cells. The semicircular ducts (besides the otolithic organs) are sensitive to head rotations. There is one horizontal and two vertical canals. While the head rotates, the endolymph moves in the ducts exciting the hair cells.