Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for over 3% of all malignancies and 90% of adult renal malignancies. It is the most lethal of all urologic cancers. The 5-year survival rate varies based on histologic type as does metastatic potential and favored site of metastasis with the lung being the most frequently involved in clear cell tumors and the liver in chromophobe tumors.

Tobacco use and obesity are the strongest risk factors, and about half of the RCC can be eliminated by controlling these two factors.

RCC is a group of closely related neoplasms; the subtypes can be separated on the basis of histologic findings, cytogenetic abnormalities, biologic behavior, and imaging appearances of the tumors. It is possible to differentiate the three main subtypes (clear cell, papillary, and chromophobe) based on characteristic radiologic appearances.

Histopathologically, RCC has a number of subtypes, and clear cell (70%), papillary (10%), and chromophobe (5%) are the most common.  Other RCC subtypes are rare and include carcinoma of the collecting ducts of Bellini (1%), renal medullary carcinoma, Xp11.2 translocation carcinoma, among others.

Cytogenetically familial and sporadic VHL gene alterations/mutations are seen in CCRCC with a loss of 3p25.3 locus. PRCC has chromosomal abnormalities of 3, 7, 12, 16, 17, and 20, c-MET mutations, and loss of the Y chromosome. Chromophobe RCC has a number of abnormalities that include loss of multiple chromosomes such as 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17, and 21.

Management and prognosis are dependent mainly on the staging of the tumor, supplemented by tumor grading and special characteristics like the degree of tumor invasion, the presence and extent of venous thromboembolic involvement, adrenal gland involvement, tumor grade, sarcomatoid features-if present, the lymphovascular invasion, and the extent of necrosis.

Tumors (< 7 cm) confined to one pole of the kidney are treated by partial nephrectomy, and kidney confined tumors can be treated by partial or radical nephrectomy. Targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) e.g., sunitinib, which is antiangiogenic, improves median progression-free survival. Novel immunotherapeutic agents (T-cell checkpoint inhibitors) show promise in improving outcomes in metastatic RCC.