A complete audiometric evaluation is the gold standard for evaluating a hearing loss and should be performed to evaluate someone with sensorineural hearing loss. In clinical practice, tuning fork tests, a quick and easy bedside investigation, are usually performed first alongside a pure tone audiogram (PTA) and tympanometry.

**Rinne and Weber Tests**

This is a bedside investigation performed using a 512Hz tuning fork and is useful when a clinician is trying to distinguish between a conductive and SNHL, though there must be at least a 20 dB difference between ears or between conduction and sensorineural thresholds for these tests to detect it.

The Weber test involves striking the tuning fork against your knee and then placing the tuning fork in the middle of the patient's forehead. The patient is then asked to identify which ear they can hear the sound loudest in. In a unilateral SNHL, the patient will hear the sound loudest in their normal or "good" ear, whereas if they had a conductive hearing loss, the sound would lateralize to their deaf or "worse" ear. If the SNHL is bilateral, then the sound will not lateralize to a particular ear.

The Rinne test is performed by first striking the tuning fork and then placing the tuning fork in two positions, firstly on the patient's mastoid process until it is no longer heard and then approximately 1cm away from the patient's external auditory meatus. The former is testing bone conduction and the latter air conduction. For a normal test, or Rinne positive result, the patient will report that the sound was still heard when the fork was held in front of their ear, i.e., air conduction is better than bone conduction, implying no conductive loss. If the test yields a Rinne negative result, the patient will report that the sound was not heard when the fork is held in front of their ear, i.e., bone conduction is better than air conduction, which implies a conductive hearing loss. In SNHL, the Rinne test should be positive when the affected ear is tested as there is no conduction loss.

**Pure Tone Audiogram**

Patients are often sent for an audiogram to evaluate their hearing in an outpatient clinic. This essentially tests both air and bone conduction pathways, and simplistically both air and bone conduction thresholds are plotted on a graph as a curve at increasing frequencies of sound up to 8000Hz. In SNHL, both air and bone conduction curves worsen, with no air-bone gap. The shape of the curve will differ depending on the underlying pathology. For example, in presbycusis, you will see a downward sloping high-frequency loss. Conversely, in a conductive hearing loss, the air conduction curve will worsen and shift downward, while the bone conduction curve remains the same. This difference between the two curves is the air-bone gap.

**Other Tests**

- **Tympanometry**: It is used to assess middle ear function and the tympanic membrane's mobility. This test is often used in clinical practice to evaluate if there is otitis media with effusion and eustachian tube dysfunction. The acoustic stapedial reflex can also be assessed. The lowest intensity of sound that triggers the reflex is the acoustic reflex threshold.

- **Otoacoustic emission**s are sounds recorded in the external auditory meatus and reflect the proper functioning of the OHCs. When OHCs are damaged, these sounds are absent.

- **Electrophysiological tests**: Auditory brainstem testing measures nervous system activity and can be affected by cerebellopontine angle tumors compressing the cochlear nerve and neural demyelination. It is also used to predict hearing thresholds in babies.

- **Speech audiometry**: This test is essential in assessing the impact of hearing loss on communication.

- Head **computed tomographic scans**, including thin temporal bone window and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are also carried out to evaluate for cochlear ossification, the presence of a cerebellopontine angle tumor, or active mastoiditis.

- **Laboratory tests**are typically not necessary. Still, there are exceptions, such as when considering an autoimmune cause of SNHL, in which tests such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, and anti-microsomal antibodies are requested.