**Height Assessment in Infants**

Height measurement in infants poses a problem, given their small size, limited control over their body, and inability to follow instructions. In infants, the attribute of height goes more commonly by the term “recumbent length” or “crown-heel length.” The recumbent length of an infant can be measured using a simple horizontal length scale (HLS), tape measure, anthropometric rod, or an infantometer. To measure the length of the infant, clothes, diapers, hair ornaments, and objects of similar nature require removal. The head gets placed against the headboard in the Frankfurt vertical plane with the body in the supine position. The infant is then positioned along the center of the device with the footboard against the soles of the feet. The length is noted to the nearest millimeter.

Surrogate measures to full-length measurement in infants offer certain advantages over conventional methods. They permit length estimation through formulae and are often more accurate than full-length measures. Additionally, they offer an insight into the differential growth of body segments as a function of age, sex, ethnicity, and pathological conditions. Alternative measures researched include arm span and ulnar length.

**Height Assessment in Children**

Height is measured in children (aged 3 or more) through the use of a stadiometer or an anthropometer rod. The preferred method outlined by the CDC is described below.

The stadiometer is mounted on the wall for this purpose, and the child is asked to remove any footwear and/or head ornaments before noting the measurement. With the buttocks, the shoulder blades, and the back of the head against the board, the head is oriented in the Frankfurt horizontal plane (FH plane), and the headpiece gets firmly placed on the head. The reading is noted to the nearest tenth of a centimeter. The head is in the Frankfort horizontal plane when the horizontal line from the ear canal to the lower border orbit is parallel to the floor. The line must also intersect the vertical backboard perpendicularly. The child should be asked to take a deep breath and stand as tall as possible. A deep breath straightens the spine and allows more accurate and consistent measurements.

An alternative to standing height measures in children is the sitting height, measured from the vertex (topmost point of the head) to the sitting surface after orienting the head in the Frankfurt horizontal plane.

**Height Assessment in Children with Skeletal Dysplasias**

Modifying the height assessment technique in children with known dysplasia is critical for adequate nutritional assessment of these children. Height assessment can also help screen for these disorders as well. A study comparing sitting height to standing height in the United States revealed that sitting height-to-standing height ratio assessment detected disproportionate short stature in children with skeletal dysplasia. They recommended standardized ancestry-specific reference charts with this measurement to screen for skeletal dysplasia in children.

The arm span is essential in patients suspected of having skeletal dysplasia. It is obtained by measuring the length of both arms (from the tip of one middle finger to the other) outstretched perpendicular to the body axis. This is best obtained with the infant lying against a flat surface. A mark is placed at the tip of the middle finger of each outstretched arm. The length is then measured after the child is moved. The arm span is equal to or greater than the height in children. Even in adults, it should never exceed the height by more than 10 cm. A decrease in the arm span is suggestive of shortening of the upper extremities and warrants evaluation for achondroplasia or other skeletal dysplasias that affect the long bones.

In patients with known spinal or skeletal deformities, alternative measurements to assess linear growth include upper arm length and knee height. Standard curves exist for these measurements and should be utilized in these patients.

In patients with idiopathic scoliosis, a diurnal variation of body height in children is noted, with a significant decrease in body height during the day. This is seen in both standing and sitting positions. A 2019 study reported a decrease of 0.7 cm (+/- 0.7) for standing position and sitting positions in these patients, with the greatest decrease in height occurring in late afternoon and evening times. The authors recommended recording the time of day when assessing height in these patients to ensure adequate comparisons over time.

**Height Assessment in Adults and the Elderly**

The most common method used for measuring height in the case of adults and the elderly is through the use of a stadiometer or an anthropometer. Regression equations for arm span, lower leg, foot length, shoeprint length, and recumbent length may also be used in the case of the elderly as indicators of stature when standing height cannot be measured. Radiological methods such as x-rays and CT of long bones have also been used to estimate stature in these patients.

**Height Assessment from Skeletal Remains**

Stature estimation from complete skeletal remains - Dwight (1894) piloted the method for stature estimation from complete skeletal remains. Using the complete skeleton involves summing up measurements of all the skeletal elements, followed by adding a correlation factor for soft skin and muscles. Fully (1956) individually measured the skull, the vertebral column from C2-S5, the femur and tibial length, and the height of the calcaneus and talus. He then summed up these measurements to obtain skeletal height. Adding a soft tissue correction factor can help estimate the living stature of the same individual.

Stature estimation from long bones and fragmentary skeletal remains- The former method requires the presence of the entire skeleton, which is not available in its entirety many times. In such situations, fragmentary skeletal remains are used. Research has shown cephalometric measurements to correlate with stature in the case of males and a correlation of craniometric measurements with stature in both males and females.

Early research on deriving regression equations using long bones was carried out by Karl Pearson (1899), Pan (1924), Nat (1931), and Trotter- Gleser (1958), while research on using fragments of long bones was done by Steele and Mckern (1969). Tibia and femur have proved to be the best indicators of stature in individuals after considering the error margin. The length of these individual bones may be measured using an osteometric board. One end of the bone to be measured is placed at the fixed end of the board, and the other end is held in place using a crosspiece. The reading on the corresponding scale gives the physiological length of the bone.