**Dimensional Analysis or Factor-Label Method**

First, one must organize these elements or units used to express size into fractions. This section examines the definition of a factor/element and its relationship to drug calculations. A relationship began on the fundamental principle that a factor is a unit of measurement or amount that is closely related; 10 mg/mL or 1 tablet/200 mg or 5 mcg/5 mL.

Second, clinicians must write these elements in such a way that they can get to the answer or unknown quantity (dose). Form an equation using a fraction to denote factors needed to multiply or cancel out. In the Dimensional Analysis Approach or Factor-Label Method, as it is also known, clinicians use factors to multiply and divide to get the answer. This method of drug calculation can be employed with other methods of calculation to determine if an answer is logical or makes sense.

Basic math or chemistry constructs a fraction with a numerator (top) number and a denominator (bottom) number. Factors (units of measurement) are placed in the primary locations in the fraction so that like units cancel out, and the desired units of measurement/factors remain. Placement of units or factors in the correct spot in the equation is critical for accurate results. One cannot have the same unit of measurement in both top or bottom numbers, numerators, or denominators, or they will never cancel out.

Any individual unit of measure, the amount you want to figure out, is placed over a denominator of one. The equation conceived at this point then grows into a solvable, single line of fractions, each multiplied across numerators and divided across the denominators. Ultimately, the birth of a desired dose or amount is the result.

An example, using an order placed by a provider for lorazepam 4 mg IV PUSH for CIWA score of 25 or higher, follow CAGE Protocol for subsequent dosages based on CIWA scoring.

- The supply is with 2 mg/mL vials in the automated dispensing unit. How many milliliters are needed to arrive at the ordered dose?

- The desired dose gets placed over 1. Remember, (x mL) = 4 mg/1 x 1 mL/2 mg x (4)(1)/2 x 4/2 x 2/1 = 2 mL, the clinician kept multiplying/dividing until they got the desired amount, 2 mL in this problem example.

- Notice, the fraction was set up with mg and mg strategically placed so like units could cancel each other out, making the equation easier to solve for the unit desired (milliliters). The answer seems plausible, so the work is done.

Zeros can be canceled out in the same way as like units. For example:

- 1000/500 x 10/5 = 2, the 2 zeros in 1000 and 2 zeros in 500 can be crossed out since like units in numerator and denominator, leaving 10/5, a much easier fraction to solve, and the answer makes sense.

Zeros have been addressed, and now, look at 1.

- If you multiply a number by a 1, then the number is unchanged. In contrast, if you multiply a number by zero, the number becomes zero.

- Examples listed below are as follows: 18 x 0 = 0 or 20 x 1 = 20.