As stated in the introduction, any problems that cause a disturbance in the pathway that leads to the perception of smell, whether mechanical or along the olfactory neural pathway can lead to anosmia.

**Inflammatory and Obstructive Disorders (50% to 70% of cases of anosmia)**

These are the most common causes of anosmia, and these include nasal and paranasal sinus disease (rhino-sinusitis, rhinitis, and nasal polyps). These disorders cause anosmia through inflammation of the mucosa as well as through direct obstruction.

**Head Trauma**

Head trauma is another common cause of anosmia as trauma to the head can cause damage to the nose or sinuses leading to a mechanical blockage and obstruction. Other ways an injury can cause anosmia is by trauma or destruction to the olfactory axons that are present at the cribriform plate, damage to the olfactory bulb, or direct injury to the olfactory areas of the cerebral cortex. The central (CNS) nervous system trauma leading to anosmia can be temporary or permanent depending on the area and extent of the injury. Olfactory neurons have regenerative capabilities that other CNS nerves in the body do not. This unique ability is the center of much current stem cell-related research.

**Aging and Neurodegenerative Processes**

These processes are associated with the loss of smell that can eventually result in anosmia. Normal aging is associated with decreased sensitivity to smell. As individuals age, they lose the number of cells in the olfactory bulb as well as the olfactory epithelium surface area which is important in sensing smell. Interestingly, there have been studies that associate the impairment of the ability to smell with neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and Lewy Body dementia. Studies linked low ability to perceive smell associated with increased risk of development of neurodegenerative diseases. The highest association is between anosmia and later development of alpha-synucleinopathy including Parkinson disease, diffuse Lewy body disease, and multisystem atrophy.

**Congenital Conditions**

Congenital conditions that are associated with anosmia include Kallmann syndrome and Turner syndrome.

**Infective Conditions**

Anosmia is said to be one of the early symptoms of COVID-19 infection.

**Other Traumatic or Obstructive Conditions**

Other causes of anosmia include toxic agents such as tobacco, drugs, and vapors that can cause olfactory dysfunction, post-viral olfactory dysfunction, facial traumas involving nasal or sinus deformity, neoplasms in nasal cavity or brain that prohibits the olfactory signal pathway, and subarachnoid hemorrhages. Olfactory groove meningioma can present with slowly worsening impaired olfaction.

Common conditions that can uncommonly cause a decreased sense of smell or anosmia include diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism.

Medications****can sometimes lead to olfactory defects as an unwanted side effect. These medications include beta-blockers, anti-thyroid drugs, dihydropyridine, ACE inhibitors, and intranasal zinc.