Evaluation of patients with PFD and POP concerns are initially directed toward their presenting complaints. As noted previously, the complaints and concerns often involve multiple systems requiring multidisciplinary care. Multiple forms of evaluation are available, but none are specifically diagnostic for PFD. Various tests are incorporated to augment the physician's clinical perception.

- **Urodynamics:**measures the functional aspects of the distal urinary tract to include urine storage and evacuation.

- **Cystoscopy:**visual inspection of the bladder and urethra.

- **Anorectal Manometry:**the measurement of anal canal pressures at rest and with squeezing and with attempted evacuation. Anal canal length can be measured. The neurologic function can be estimated by observing the rectoanal inhibitory reflex (RAIR) and sensation for evacuation with balloon insufflation.

- **Balloon expulsion:**timed evacuation of a filled 50cc balloon attached to a catheter.

- Electromyography (EMG): electrodes (needle or surface) measure external sphincter activity during contraction and relaxation.

- **Endoanal ultrasonography:**assess the structural integrity of the anal sphincter complex to exclude a traumatic defect contributing to fecal incontinence.

- **Defecography:**the patient's rectum is filled with contrast. Images are obtained while the patient performs efforts for maintaining continence and evacuation while sitting on a special potty chair. Defecography is the "Gold Standard" for assessing pelvic floor disease.

- **Dynamic MRI:**similar to defecography as the patient evacuates lubricating jelly that has been instilled into the rectum (no ionizing radiation; often non-physiologic defecation from a supine position).

- Additional tests are incorporated as indicated to evaluate for other sources of pelvic pain (colorectal, gynecologic, neurologic, orthopedic, and urologic).

- Endoscopy (anoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy)
- CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis
- MRI of the pelvis to evaluate structural anatomy
- Pelvic ultrasound to evaluate the uterus and adnexa