The initial management of a patient who was the victim of a shark attack usually begins in the pre-hospital setting. It is important to assess the scene for safety and to remove the patient from any area that is likely to cause further harm to the patient or to treating providers. Sometimes this means moving the patient away from the water on a beach shore. Like all traumatic injuries, the initial medical care should be directed at assessing and stabilizing the patient’s airway, breathing, and circulation, which can be performed in accordance with the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) Protocol. Hemorrhage control is a priority. Extremities are the most likely to be injured,

Isolated wounds can be treated in the emergency department or in an outpatient clinic. These wounds need to be cleaned thoroughly to prevent infection. With any wound caused by an animal bite, foreign objects can be retained in the tissue, and need to be identified for removal.

Thorough wound cleaning plays a crucial role in preventing wound infections. This can begin at the scene using tap water to irrigate the wound. Further irrigation should be performed in the emergency department or in the outpatient setting. Careful exploration to find foreign bodies is necessary. Devitalized tissue should undergo debridement and copious irrigation. Although most injuries are minor or superficial, some are more serious and will require surgical debridement and repair.

For minor wounds, there is no consensus regarding the decision for wound closure. The decision on whether or not to close a wound inflicted by a shark should weigh the risk of infection against the potential of poor cosmetic healing. Shared decision making with an informed reliable patient can be performed to help with making this decision. One documented case in the scientific literature involving a wound inflicted by the teeth of a shark utilized a loose wound closure at 24 hours after the injury in conjunction with prophylactic oral antibiotics and scheduled re-evaluations. There was no documented infection related to the wound following this treatment.

Prophylactic antibiotics should be given for all shark bites, even minor ones. The choice of antibiotics should cover for Vibrio species. Fluoroquinolones, third-generation cephalosporins, and doxycycline are highly active against V. vulnificus. Additionally, staphylococcus and streptococcus coverage should also be considered due to their prevalence in wound infections.Vibrio infections requiring hospitalization, one antibiotic regimen recommended by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is a combination regimen including a 7-14 day course of Doxycycline 100mg PO/IV BID and a third-generation cephalosporin (e.g., ceftazidime 1–2g IV/IM q8 hours).

When possible, antibiotic selection should be tailored based on wound or blood culture results.