Enteroviruses are ubiquitous, causing disease worldwide and year-round. The majority result in primarily pediatric disease, with risk factors, prevalence, and clinical presentation varying extensively according to each serotype.

**Non-rhinovirus Enterovirus Species**

Non-rhinovirus enteroviruses have varying patterns of occurrences based on serotype, with peak disease prevalence in the summer. In warmer climates, circulation is seen year-round, frequently with mixed enteroviral infections. Males are infected more frequently than females, at a rate of 1.5 to 2.5 to 1, and are more likely to have severe disease.

Transmission occurs host-to-host. While there is evidence of zoonotic transmission (both human-to-animal and animal-to-human), virus passage is largely human-to-human, via the fecal-oral or fecal-hand-oral route. Enteroviruses were reclassified to remove naming specific to host species after being isolated in non-human hosts.

Evidence of a polio-like disease dates back to 2 millennium BCE. Polio itself occurred sporadically and was poorly-defined until the improvement of hygienic living conditions allowed for the development of a virgin pool susceptible to serious illness, resulting in epidemics beginning in the 1800s, first in Europe and then in North America.

Worsening epidemics led to intense scrutiny and identification of the three serotypes of poliovirus (categorized within Enterovirus C (EV-C) today) and then, in 1954, the development of the poliovirus vaccine. Polioviruses continue to be the only viruses within the Enterovirus genus for which a vaccine is available and effective. The western hemisphere was free of paralytic poliomyelitis in 1991; however, it is still found in regions of Asia and Africa.

Coxsackieviruses and echoviruses remain major causes of aseptic meningitis globally, in both epidemic and endemic forms, based on the local environment.

Recent outbreaks of the non-rhinovirus enteroviral disease include a large outbreak of Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), which occurred in 2014. Over 1100 cases were confirmed, mostly causing respiratory symptoms ranging from cold-like symptoms to severe asthma exacerbations. This outbreak was also linked to an outbreak of acute flaccid paralysis, a disease characterized by lesions of the spinal cord gray matter, similar to poliomyelitis. The onset of this flaccid paralysis is acute, often asymmetric, and occurs following a respiratory prodrome in patients with a median age of 5 years. Both the initial decompensation and recovery from EV-D68 were more rapid than from the 2009 H1N1 influenza A. EV-D68 is considered unique in that it has many similarities to rhinoviruses.  Transmission occurs through aerosolization via large and small droplets.

**Rhinovirus Species**

Rhinoviruses result in billions of dollars of direct and indirect costs annually in the United States alone. They were discovered in the 1950s and today cause more than half of upper respiratory infections. Children constitute the major reservoir, experiencing 8 to 12 infections per year, compared with adults at 2 to 3 per year. Infections peak dually in the spring and fall, except for Rhinovirus C viruses, which peak in the winter. In contrast to non-rhinovirus enteroviruses, humans are the only known host.

Transmission of rhinoviruses occurs via direct inoculation of nasal mucosa or eye conjunctiva. In the latter situation, the virus is transported via the lacrimal duct to the nasal cavity, then to the nasopharynx. They can survive indoors up to days, at ambient temperature, and may live for hours on undisturbed skin. Like the respiratory enteroviruses, they may be transmitted through aerosolization. Nose blowing is associated with an increased incidence of rhinosinusitis; studies show this is related to intracavity pressure levels during nose blowing.

Healthcare-associated outbreaks, such as those in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs), pediatric intensive care units (PICUs), and long-term care facilities, have been described for enteroviruses.

Surveillance of enteroviruses tends to be passive, primarily as a result of the vast number of discrete serotypes that infect humans, but also as a result of the often mild disease caused by them. New models have been created utilizing already-present surveillance systems. These, in conjunction with more accurate PCR testing, have allowed the development of models that forecast disease patterns several years out with some accuracy, which may play an essential roll in vaccine development.

Vaccine development is limited by the limited cross-reactivity between the expansive numbers of enteroviruses, precluding the development of polyvalent vaccines. Further difficulties arise from uncertain waxing and waning of vaccine-derived immunity, as seen in the poliovirus vaccine.