The pathophysiology depends on the underlying cause of the nephritic syndrome. In nephritic syndrome, there is a structural disruption of the glomerular basement membrane. Glomerular filtration barrier (GFB) is formed by a meshwork of laminin, proteoglycans, and type IV collagen. It allows the filtration of water and small and medium-sized solutes. The three layers of the glomerular filtration barrier are the endothelium, glomerular basement membrane (GBM), and podocytes. The podocytes are part of the visceral layer of the bowman's capsule, a layer of cuboidal epithelial cells that transform and form cytoplasmic extensions that wrap around the basement membrane of the capillaries. It has a cell body, primary, and secondary foot processes.

- Direct damage to the endothelial cell layer

- Deposition of immune complex in subendothelial, subepithelial, and mesangial space

- Disruption of glomerular basement membrane by primary renal or secondary systemic diseases

- Damage to the podocytes' cellular layer

Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis occurs after sore throat or skin impetigo by nephritogenic strains of group A streptococcus. The antibodies are produced against nephritogenic antigens of group A streptococcus. The immune complex formed deposits in or around the glomerular basement membrane. It activates complement cascade resulting in the recruitment of immune cells like T cells, plasma cells, and macrophages. The coagulation cascade is also activated, resulting in micro thrombosis.

RPGN patients have a high prevalence of certain HLA alleles, e.g., HLA-DR 14 and HLA-DR 4, suggesting a genetic predisposition to autoimmunity.

Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) frequently follows upper respiratory tract infections. Group A streptococcus, parainfluenza virus, and parvovirus B19 are commonly implicated in its pathogenesis.

In pauci-immune glomerulonephritis, most patients have circulating anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) that produce a cytoplasmic (c-ANCA) or perinuclear (p-ANCA) staining pattern. There may be a component of systemic vasculitides such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis (earlier known as Wegener granulomatosis) or microscopic polyangiitis. In many cases, the vasculitis is limited to the kidneys (idiopathic), and about 90% of idiopathic patients have c-ANCAs (specific for the neutrophil granule protein proteinase-3) or p-ANCAs (anti-neutrophil myeloperoxidase) in the serum. The pathogenic potential of ANCA antibodies has been established recently with studies in mice where transferring antibodies against myeloperoxidase (the target antigen of most p-ANCAs) induces a form of RPGN.

The disruption of the glomerular filtration barrier in nephritic syndrome allows red blood cells, albumin, and large molecules to get filtered in the urine resulting in nephritic syndrome.