**National Comprehensive Cancer Network's 2020 Guidelines for Initial Evaluation of Osteosarcoma (Version 1.2020)**

- **Clinical****History and Physical Exam**(discussed above)

- **Laboratory Analysis of Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) and Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) Levels:**Biochemical markers such as serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and lactate dehydrogenases (LDH) are assessed in the initial workup because they provide evidence for diagnosis and prognosis. ALP levels will be high due to the increased osteoblastic activity associated with osteosarcoma. Extremely high levels have been linked to heavy tumor burden and are generally considered a poor prognostic indicator. It is important to evaluate the levels of the biomarkers later in the treatment process as well, as levels may decrease with success therapy or rise with residual disease or recurrence.

- **Diagnostic Imaging of Primary Tumor Site**
- **Radiographs**- although MRI is the gold standard for diagnostic imaging of osteosarcoma, radiographs are generally the first study obtained when a potential bone mass is identified on the physical exam.
- **Magnetic Resonance Imaging**- after identifying a suspicious lesion on a radiograph, MRI may be necessary for further characterization. MRI is an indispensable tool for defining the extent of a tumor inside and outside the bone. The entirety of the involved bone, as well as one joint above and one joint below the tumor, should be included in the study so that “skip” lesions are not missed. MRI can accurately and precisely delineate the degree of tumor in the adjacent soft tissues, joint involvement, whether or not the tumor crosses the physis, proximity to the nearest neurovascular bundle. Nearly every aspect of treatment is assessable with MRI, from pre-surgical assessment for limb-sparing resection to the degree of chemotherapy response in the form of tumor necrosis, shrinkage, and improved capsulation.
- T1 Weighted Images

- Non-ossified soft tissue component: intermediate signal intensity
- Osteoid components: low signal intensity
- Peritumoral edema: intermediate signal intensity
- Scattered foci of hemorrhage: variable signal intensity based on chronicity


- T2 Weighted Images

- Non-ossified soft tissue component: high signal intensity
- Osteoid components: low signal intensity
- Peritumoral edema: high signal intensity




- **Computed Tomography**- the role of CT is primarily to assist with biopsy planning and disease staging. CT may not significantly contribute to direct assessment of the tumor after radiography and MRI unless the osseous lesion in question is predominantly lytic. In the case of lytic lesions, small amounts of mineralized material may be unobservable on both plain film and MRI. CT of the chest, however, is the modality of choice for the evaluation of metastasis.

- **Nuclear Imaging**
- **Positron Emission Tomography**– PET is a nuclear medicine imaging modality that detects highly metabolic lesions. It is an essential tool that is useful for determining tumor extent and searching for subtle lesions after identifying a suspicious mass on initial diagnostic imaging. Later in the treatment process, PET is valuable for the detection of recurrence.
- **Radionuclide Bone Scan**- Technetium 99 methylenediphosphonate (Tc99 MDP) bone scan is an effective and readily available imaging modality for detecting bony metastasis. It is a less expensive but less specific alternative to PET imaging.

- **Follow up MRI or CT**(both with contrast) of sites of metastasis identified on PET or bone scan

- **Fertility Consultation**may be a consideration (chemotherapy and radiation therapy may affect fertility).

- 
**Biopsy of Osteosarcoma**

After the physical exam, laboratory analysis, and diagnostic imaging confirm the presence of a lesion consistent with osteosarcoma, a biopsy is necessary. The final surgical procedure must include resection of the biopsy tract, which should be tattooed for easy identification, to avoid recurrence due to potential seeding of this tract with cancer cells.  Ideally, the surgeon who undertakes the biopsy should be the same individual who completes the resection, so they are familiar with the path and extent of the biopsy. An open approach to biopsy was previously considered to be the best option owing to a high rate of accuracy. In recent years, however, research has determined that an open approach correlates with an increased risk of complications such as infection, improper wound healing, and seeding of the site by tumor cells, as previously discussed. As such, core biopsy has replaced the traditional open approach, particularly because of the reduced risk of contamination of the surgical bed with tumor cells but also due to lower cost and decreased recovery time. It is especially crucial for patients with perceived potential for limb-sparing procedures in which as much local tissue should be spared as safely possible. Core needle biopsy is achieved via a single deep stab with a needle through a trocar, which traverses a single tissue plane in a location that will be included in the final resection. Multiple cores are necessary from the representative region of the mass - the soft tissue portion in the periphery of the lesion. The necrotic central region will yield little viable tissue, and the “Codman triangle” region will yield only reactive bone. Importantly, recent studies have shown that fine-needle aspiration is not an efficacious approach to biopsy because it does not yield an adequate tissue sample for an accurate diagnosis. Following the biopsy, tissue samples should be analyzed by pathologists in fresh or frozen format for definitive diagnosis, grading, and histological subtyping, all of which will affect medical and surgical treatment strategy.