The latissimus dorsi is considered a muscle contributing to both thoracic and brachial (i.e., arm) motion. The muscle has attachments to the lower six vertebral spinous processes anterior to the attachment of the trapezius. Through direct attachment and the thoracolumbar fascia, the latissimus dorsi attaches to a variable number of the lumbar and sacral spinous processes (T6 to S5 levels) and the supraspinous ligament. Other muscle attachments include the posterior iliac crest, lower three to four ribs, where it interdigitates with the external oblique muscle, and the inferior angle of the scapula.

The muscle fibers are situated in various orientations, with the superior-most fibers almost horizontally oriented and the inferior fibers more vertically oriented on the thorax. As the muscle fibers extend toward the axilla, the fibers wind around the anterior aspect of the teres major muscle to insert as a flat tendon on the floor of the intertubercular sulcus. As the fibers coalesce to insert on the humerus, the fascicles twist around each other such that the most superior fibers to the midline insert on the lowest part of the sulcus and the lower fibers to the midline insert higher in the sulcus. The latissimus dorsi attachment on the intertubercular sulcus extends further superiorly than does the attachment of the teres major on the lateral lip of the sulcus.

Through the anterior attachment on the humerus, the latissimus dorsi acts with the teres major and pectoralis major muscles to adduct and medially rotate the humerus. The latissimus dorsi, along with the teres major, is active in the extension of the humerus. Extension and adduction are strongest when the motion is started from a position of partial flexion or abduction or a combination of the two motions. The muscle is active in moving the trunk anterior and superior when the upper extremities are fixed overhead, as in climbing or performing an activity such as a chin-up. Research has demonstrated that the latissimus dorsi is also active during deep inspiration and with forceful respiratory functions such as coughing and sneezing.