Once the association of a dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction with the hypertrophied ventricular segment is made, the severity of the LVOT obstruction is measured by calculation of gradients at rest and with provocation. In patients who do not have significant LVOT obstruction at rest, provocative measures should be performed. Provocative measures include Valsalva, post-PVC accentuation, isoproterenol administration, amyl nitrate inhalation, and exercise.

Accurate measurements of the severity of LVOT obstruction is of considerable significance while evaluating HCM patients, and this is usually adequately obtained using two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography and doppler imaging; however, further evaluation with cardiac MRI or invasive hemodynamic catheterization may be required. For patients undergoing cardiac catheterization, the most accurate method for the invasive assessment of LVOT obstruction is positioning a balloon-tipped catheter via the transseptal approach at the LV inflow and placing a pigtail catheter in the ascending aorta for simultaneous measurement of the gradient. More commonly, however, a dual lumen catheter is retrogradely inserted into the left ventricular apex from the aorta and simultaneous measurements performed.

During alcohol septal ablation, a conventional guide catheter is used to engage the left coronary artery, and guidewire used to facilitate the entry of an over the wire (OTW) balloon catheter into the targeted septal artery. Occlusion of the targeted septal artery is achieved with inflation of the OTW balloon, and the guidewire is withdrawn. Proper 1:1 balloon sizing is critical to prevent the reflux of ethanol into the distal left anterior descending artery. A left coronary artery angiogram should be performed to evaluate the complete occlusion of the septal artery with balloon inflation. Furthermore, confirmation of the proper septal artery target is performed using a transthoracic echocardiogram to localize the intended area of hypertrophied myocardium to treat while simultaneously injecting an ultrasound contrast agent through the OTW balloon.

After confirmation, 96% ethanol is infused slowly over 3 to 5 minutes, followed by a saline flush. It is recommended not to exceed 3mL of ethanol during this procedure. The balloon is left inflated for approximately 5 to 10 minutes following the ethanol/saline infusion to reduce the risk of alcohol extravasation. Following this process, repeat left coronary angiography is performed to confirm the ablation of the targeted septal artery and to confirm the patency of the left anterior descending artery and its branches. In patients without hemodynamically significant reductions in either resting or provoked left ventricular outflow tract gradient, an attempt should be made to target other septal arteries.

Alcohol septal ablation has been shown to provide a 55-75% reduction in the LVOT gradient with procedural success rates of 80%. LVOT gradients, resting and provoked, typically continue to show reduction over the next 3-6 months after ablation, which is attributed to basal septal and ventricular remodeling.