Caregivers may describe that just prior to symptom onset the child's arm was pulled upwards by the wrist or the child was swung around by the arms. Caregivers may not be aware of the incident that caused the injury and may report no known trauma. The onset of symptoms may also occur after a fall on an outstretched arm.

On physical exam, the child will often be nervous and may be supporting the affected arm in a protective manner with the opposite hand. The affected arm is often held in complete or almost complete extension and pronation.  The patient may refuse to move the arm and may become upset when it is examined, but generally, will not have pain unless the arm is manipulated. There may be tenderness at the radial head, and the patient will resist forearm pronation, supination, flexion, and extension.  Generally speaking, ecchymosis, erythema, edema, or signs of trauma are absent.  Circulation, sensation and motor ability will be intact distal to the elbow, though the child may not be cooperative with the exam.

It is not uncommon for the radial head subluxation to spontaneously reduce before being seen by a physician. In this case, the caregivers will report that the patient was refusing to move the arm and seemed very upset by any attempt of the parent to manipulate or touch the arm.  It can be very disconcerting to parents, especially when the child’s symptoms seem to miraculously disappear. In this case providing reassurance to the parents about the probable diagnosis after doing a proper physical exam is all that is required.