An evidence-based approach to injury management does not exist. Management is guided based on clinical experience, anecdotal evidence, and knowledge of the biological basis of tissue repair.****Proximal injuries are more common and manifest from strain to complete tear.

Grades I and II strains are generally managed nonoperatively with rest, ice packs, relative immobilization, and pain and inflammation management with NSAIDs and analgesics. This is followed by progressive stretching and strengthening.****NSAIDs are given for no more than 5 to 7 days, and glucocorticoids are not recommended.****Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and other growth factors do not have enough evidence to prove their use. None of these growth factors meet the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) set guidelines, mainly because of the IGF-1 content of such preparations.

For grade III, there is a belief to go for nonsurgical treatment for isolated single tendon avulsion injury with less than 2 cm of retraction. Literature review shows nonsurgical treatment for complete tendon rupture with retraction results in an unsatisfactory outcome, including the inability to resume active lifestyle/sports, chronic knee flexion weakness, mild hip extension weakness, sciatic neuralgia, pain with sitting down and deformity. Hence, for grade III injury, surgery is recommended. Acute repair is generally preferred vs. the delayed one due to the risk of scarring of the stump to the sciatic nerve. The ideal time for surgical repair is believed to be 4 to 6 weeks post-injury. There is no proven benefit of other modalities of treatment like the therapeutic ultrasound, therapeutic laser, electric stimulation, massage, and extracorporeal shock wave (ECSW) treatment.