Risk factors and age of presentation will help to distinguish acquired versus inherited forms of zinc deficiency. Acquired forms will present with risk factors of inadequate supply, regional and geographic risk factors, excess loss, or increased demand as described earlier. The inherited disease presents earlier in life.

Regardless of inherited or acquired deficiency, some signs and symptoms are similar, although cutaneous involvement may be milder in the acquired subset. Zinc deficiency was first recognized as a cause of nutritional dwarfism in the Middle East.

Multiple organ systems are affected by zinc deficiency. Its role within the reproductive system manifests clinically as hypogonadism and associated complications and oligospermia.

The cutaneous disease progresses over days and predominates on the periorificial location with angular cheilitis. Areas of friction such as elbows, knees, knuckles, malleolar areas, ankles, and the sacrum are often involved. Lesions are eczematous scaly plaques and maybe vesiculobullous or pustular. It is “scald-like” and may fissure and may show some pathergy with areas of friction developing similar lesions.

Inherited deficiency, as exemplified by acrodermatitis enteropathica, is a rare inherited form of zinc malabsorption and often becomes symptomatic 4 to 6 weeks after an infant has stopped breastfeeding. Clinical symptoms include irritability, withdrawn disposition, growth impairment, anorexia, night blindness, pica, and photophobia. Cutaneous involvement includes the periorificial, gluteal, perineal, acral predominant burn-like psoriasiform lesions. Nail dystrophy and paronychia occur, and alopecia may develop. Delayed wound healing, conjunctivitis, and increased susceptibility to infection may also be clues.