# Introduction

Hair follicles and their keratinized product, hair, are skin appendages present on nearly every part of the body. Areas of the body typically devoid of hair include the palmar and plantar surfaces, lips, and urogenital orifices. Sex hormones influence the distribution, texture, and color of hair. Hair follicles and hair are both multifunctional. Hair follicles generate hair and help to provide epithelial stem cells used for wound repair. Besides the cosmetic concerns of hair color, growth, and distribution, hair plays a vital role in thermoregulation, tactile sensation, and ultraviolet (UV) radiation protection. Diseases of hair follicles and hair are an important concern to the general population and have been an active topic of research in recent years.

# Structure

Skin appendages are derived from the downgrowth of the epidermis during human development. Every hair follicle present reflects an invagination of the epidermis during hair development. The hair follicle can be differentiated from the surrounding dermal connective tissue by the glassy basement membrane, a hair-specific basal lamina, also known as the dermal sheath.

There are three segments of hair follicles:

- Infundibulum

- Isthmus

- Inferior segment

The infundibulum is the portion from the invagination of the epidermis to the level of opening of the sebaceous gland. The infundibulum is part of the pilosebaceous unit where sebum is expressed. The isthmus extends deeper to the level of insertion of the arrector pili muscle. The arrector pili muscle has attachments to the hair follicle and adjacent dermis. The muscle will contract in cold temperatures, which causes the hair to orient vertically. Finally, the inferior segment forms the remainder of the deep hair follicle and expands to form the hair bulb. At the base of the bulb is the dermal papilla that provides vital blood supply to the growing hair follicle. The dermal papilla appears as an invagination of dermal connective tissue upward into the epidermis-derived hair follicle. The dermal sheath surrounding the dermal papilla contains progenitor cells that rejuvenate the dermal papilla and possess wound healing properties.

The internal root sheath surrounds the deep part of hair within the hair follicle. The internal root sheath also contains three layers not to be confused with the aforementioned layers of the hair follicle. The layers of the internal root sheath are as follows:

- Cuticle

- Huxley’s layer

- Henle’s layer

The cuticle, the innermost portion of the internal root sheath facing the hair shaft, contains a layer of squamous cells that overlap one another like shingles on a roof. The overlapping cells of the cuticle fill with keratin after losing their nuclei. The Huxley layer forms the middle plate. The Henle layer forms the outermost portion of the internal root sheath and contacts the outermost layer of the hair follicle, the external root sheath. Cells of the internal root sheath contribute keratin and trichohyalin granules to the growing hair shaft.

Histologically, the external root sheath can be described as the attachment site for the arrector pili muscle to the hair follicle. The external root sheath facilitates the pilosebaceous unit. Near the arrector pili, muscle attachment, and the origin of the sebaceous duct is an area known as the follicular bulge. The follicular bulge contains a conglomerate of undifferentiated epithelial cells that contribute to hair follicle growth. These same stem cells can migrate to areas of epidermal injury and take part in wound healing.

Keratinized cells from the hair follicle produce elongated filamentous structures known as hairs. As stated previously, melanocytes in the hair bulb produce melanin pigment that extends into the hair shaft. This melanin pigment is responsible for hair color. Histologically, hairs contain two or three layers:

- Medulla*

- Cortex

- Cuticle

The medulla is the innermost portion of the hair shaft but is found only in thicker hairs. The cortex contains cuboidal cells that differentiate into keratin-producing cells. The cuticle of the hair shaft juxtaposes the cuticle of the internal root sheath. Similar to the cortical layer, the cuticle layer contains squamous cells that derive from matrix progenitor cells in the growing hair follicle.

# Function

Human hair and hair follicles are multifunctional structures. Hair follicles manage more than just hair production. Hair follicles play a vital role in skin regeneration for wound repair secondary to the action of germ layer stem cells within the follicular bulge.

# Tissue Preparation

Hair follicles and hair can be identified on skin biopsy under light microscopy. Immediately after a skin biopsy, the tissue is immersed in fixative to preserve tissue structure. Formalin (37% formaldehyde aqueous solution) is the most common fixative used in tissue preparation. Paraffin is used as an embedding medium, allowing the tissue to be thinly sliced into sections using a microtome. Then, the tissue sections are placed on glass slides with an adhesive mounting medium. Finally, the tissue may be stained using standard hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining protocols.

# Microscopy, Light

Under light microscopy, hair follicles are easily distinguished from the surrounding dermis. However, careful inspection is required as not all hair follicles are oriented in the same direction within tissue samples. Hair-bearing tissue may reveal several longitudinal, oblique, and cross-sectional views of hair follicles. Associated structures such as muscle fibers of the arrector pili muscle and/or sebaceous glands of the pilosebaceous unit may be helpful in determining unknown structures as hair follicles. The base of the hair follicle includes the dermal papilla and the matrix cell layer. These layers are easily distinguished from one another upon H&E staining. The hair matrix cells are basophilic, which contrasts the pale and lightly eosinophilic areas of the dermal papilla. The dermal papilla, as mentioned, forms an invagination of dermis into the basophilic hair bulb. The hair follicle is encased by the dermal sheath, which appears as a fine eosinophilic line surrounding the basophilic hair follicle. Higher magnification will reveal the finite structures of the root sheath layer and hair shaft.

# Pathophysiology

Knowledge of hair follicle structure and the hair cycle is vital in the understanding of hair disorders.

Alopecia has many variants that are categorized as scarring and non-scarring.

Abnormal keratinization causing increased cohesiveness of keratinocytes within the pilosebaceous unit is implicated in both acne vulgaris and keratosis pilaris. Specifically, follicular hyperkeratinization leads to the obstruction of the pilosebaceous unit in acne vulgaris and of hair follicles in keratosis pilaris. Please note there are other important mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of acne vulgaris. Folliculitis is the inflammation of hair follicles usually secondary to bacterial or fungal infection. Hidradenitis suppurativa is another inflammatory condition involving occlusion of the hair follicle in apocrine-rich areas of the body (e.g., axilla, groin).

# Clinical Significance

Hair follicles and hair, with arrector pili muscle contraction, play an important role in body temperature regulation. Hair protects the skin from foreign objects and confers protection from UV radiation. Hair follicles provide a source of new epithelial stem cells to aid in skin wound repair. However, many patients will seek medical care for hair loss or excessive hair growth. Hair responds to sex hormones and serves as a marker for social and sexual communication (e.g., age and gender) and may clue clinicians into an underlying disease process in certain patients (e.g., polycystic ovarian syndrome or steroid-producing tumors). Autoimmune (e.g., alopecia areata), inflammatory (e.g., hidradenitis suppurativa), and infectious (e.g., folliculitis or tinea capitis) diseases involve hair structures causing significant patient morbidity. The various forms of alopecia, including scarring and non-scarring forms, are of great concern to the general population.