A normal human cornea is transparent and avascular. It provides structural support to the eye and acts as a barrier to infections. The average adult cornea is 12 mm horizontally by 11 mm vertically and 0.5 mm in thickness.

There are five distinct layers of the cornea starting from the outer surface: epithelium, Bowman membrane, stroma, Descemet membrane, and endothelium. In 2013, a 6th layer was reported, called Dua’s layer, situated between the stroma and Descemet membrane. About 80 to 85% of the cornea is the stroma which consists of Type I and V collagen fibers arranged in specific parallel patterns to maintain transparency. The endothelial layer is monocellular and responsible for the optical clarity of the cornea by keeping it dehydrated through a sodium-potassium pump.

The corneal layers have different responses when injured. Injury to the epithelial layer leads to the destruction of the cells and a subsequent defect in the layer. This defect will heal by migrating epithelial cells created at the limbus. About an hour after the injury, the epithelial wound healing starts.

An injury to the stroma heals with fibrotic deposition, which seals a wound but interferes with normal function. Excess fibrotic tissue repair causes increased scarring and contracture, limiting the optical clarity.

Endothelial cells do not regenerate, and therefore when injured, the cornea may become edematous and cloudy due to the loss of the sodium-potassium pump function of the cells.

The cornea is a highly innervated and sensitive tissue, which receives sensation from the nasociliary branch of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.