Bacterial sepsis is a life-threatening condition that arises when the body’s response to an infection injures its tissues and organs. Sepsis has recently been re-defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection.sipsi, i.e., “to make rotten.”

Despite the increased understanding of this complex disease process, mortality from sepsis remains the most common cause of death in the non-coronary intensive care unit.

**SIRS**

SIRS includes 2 or more of the following:

- Temperature greater than 38 C or less than 36 C

- Heart rate greater than 90 beats per minute

- Tachypnea greater than 20 breaths per minute or PaCO2 less than 32 mm Hg

- White blood cell (WBC) count greater than 12,000 per cubic millimeter or fewer than 4000 per cubic millimeter, or greater than 10% immature (band) forms

**Sepsis**

- SIRS as the result of an infection

**Severe Sepsis**

- Sepsis associated with organ dysfunction (1 or more), hypo-perfusion abnormality, or sepsis-induced hypotension

- Hypo-perfusion abnormalities may include but are not limited to lactic acidosis, oliguria, or acute change in mental status

**Septic Shock**

- Sepsis-induced hypotension despite adequate fluid resuscitation

**Multi-Organ Dysfunction Syndrome**

Multi-organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) is the presence of altered organ function in an acutely ill patient such that homeostasis cannot be maintained without intervention.

Sepsis-3 redefined sepsis as a life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection. It is important to note that not all patients that present with SIRS have an infection, as well not all patients who have an infection are septic. Sepsis is differentiated from infection by a dysregulated host response and the presence of end-organ dysfunction.

The Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) and its accompanying treatment bundle were developed with the intention of rapid identification and treatment of septic patients. In 2001, Rivers et al. showed the benefits of a specific protocol termed early goal-directed therapy (EGDT) versus standard therapy, with a resulting significant decrease in mortality.SEP-1. These measures have come under criticism primarily for the assumption that bundled and structured care is superior to individualized treatment guided by the bedside clinician.