**Breathing**

**Inhalation**

Nerve impulses are sent to muscles in the body, the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles being the most important for breathing. When these muscles contract, the lungs can expand due to increased intrathoracic space. This expansion leads to increased lung volume and a slight drop in intrapulmonary pressure. The decrease in pressure allows air to move from the outside world into the lungs (gases travel from an area of high pressure to low pressure).

**Exhalation**

Once the diaphragm and intercostal muscles have contracted, they will relax, causing the intrathoracic space to decrease slightly. This decrease causes the lung volume to become smaller, and as a result, the intrapulmonary pressure increases. As previously stated, gas travels from an area of high pressure to low pressure. The pressure increase has now made the outside world have a lower pressure in comparison (external atmospheric pressure does not change), and gas will flow out of the lungs and back into the environment.

**Pulmonary Innervation**

The pulmonary plexus and phrenic nerve are the main innervations of the lung. The pulmonary plexus is a combination of both parasympathetic (branches of the vagus nerve) and sympathetic nerves found at the lung root. The plexus has an extensive branching network that innervates both the pulmonary vasculature and smooth muscle. The phrenic nerve innervates parts of the visceral pleura, the diaphragm, and fibrous pericardium. It originates from the cervical nerve roots C3, C4, C5 and is essential not only for pulmonary innervation but the expansion and contraction of the thorax via diaphragm contraction and relaxation. Parasympathetic innervation results in smooth muscle contraction, leading to bronchiole constriction and pulmonary vessel dilation. With sympathetic innervation, the opposite is true. The smooth muscle will relax, bronchioles will dilate, and pulmonary vessels will constrict.