Implants must be placed in a sterile environment. Implants should be bathed in an antibiotic solution before completely exposing the implant from its packaging to minimize risks for the static attraction of foreign particulates before insertion. Saline implants should only be filled using closed systems where the saline is never exposed to the air to eliminate risks for contamination of the saline. This is accomplished using intravenous (IV) tubing from the source bag to the syringe to the fill tube.

If concerned about implant integrity, implant displacement exercises can usually determine if an implant is intact or not.  With both hands on the augmented breast, the pressure is placed on one hand to move the implant toward the other hand. With intact implants, the implant will displace the other hand, confirming that the implant is intact. With gel implants, if the breasts feel completely normal without any appreciation of the implant, the implant may be compromised. With saline implants, a rupture should be obvious with a smaller, more natural breast mound and no implant appreciated on the exam.

With silicone breast implants, this capsule can camouflage a breast implant rupture, as the silicone will remain trapped within the capsule and show no signs of change. This is called a silent rupture and the reason why the government recommends getting an MRI every two years to evaluate the integrity of the implant. This s not a mandate, and most patients do not follow this unless concerns or issues arise as it is often not covered.

Sometimes the fibrous tissue (capsule) becomes inflamed, resulting in pain, soreness, or swelling.  It can also cause changes in breast or shape, lumps in the affected breast, and hardening of the affected breast.