The presentation of patients with symptoms consistent with dyspepsia or peptic ulcer disease, and most specifically, duodenal ulcers, can vary highly depending on the degree of disease progression and time when a patient seeks treatment. Most patients with peptic ulcer disease, up to 70%, are asymptomatic. Overall, dyspepsia is the most common symptom for patients who do experience symptoms. As noted above, the degree of disease progression before the initial diagnosis can affect the symptoms with which a patient may present. The location of the disease can also be differentiated based on symptoms.

Patients who initially present with ulcer-related complications may present with symptoms suggestive of upper GI bleed, which may include melena, hematemesis, elevated BUN, anemia of varying degrees in severity with associated fatigue. Patients who present with more alarming symptoms such as anemia, melena, or hematemesis, which may represent perforation or bleeding, will likely require more invasive forms of evaluation. The history and age of the patient should also be taken into consideration when considering duodenal ulcers as part of the differential diagnosis, especially when patients present with more non-specific symptoms such as epigastric abdominal pain. Duodenal ulcers may occur in any age group. However, they are most commonly diagnosed in patients aged 20 to 45 and are more common in men than women. Most patients will have a history of presenting symptoms consistent with peptic ulcer disease (PUD) associated with a previous diagnosis of H. pylori and/or heavy NSAID use. Other elements of the history to consider include smoking history, daily aspirin use, and history of GI malignancy. On physical examination, patients may have epigastric abdominal tenderness, and if presenting with complications, they may demonstrate signs of anemia such as pale skin and positive fecal occult blood test.