For women taking phenobarbital as monotherapy, the drug correlates with congenital defects in exposed infants.

When given in IV anesthetics, barbiturates will produce a reduction in blood pressure and an increase in heart rate. Respiratory depression and apnea may occur.

Thiopental and thiamylal have been shown to release histamine, while methohexital and pentobarbital have minimal histamine release.

Extravasation of thiopental (a vesicant) may cause severe tissue necrosis. If extravasation occurs, treatment measures include hyaluronidase and phentolamine.

Barbiturates such as butalbital can lead to withdrawal symptoms, including seizures. The recommended risk mitigation strategy is to taper off barbituates gradually under supervision.

Hepatotoxicity: Barbiturates can cause allergic reactions and skin rashes associated with mild liver injury. Phenobarbital is predominantly linked with drug-induced liver injury. Phenobarbital-induced serious adverse drug reactions are DRESS (Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms), Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

**Drug-drug Interactions**

- Phenobarbital is known to be an inducer of the cytochrome enzyme system, specifically the CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C9, and 3A4/5 isozymes that will reduce the efficacy of warfarin, steroids, psychoactive drugs, and immunosuppressants.

- Phenobarbital will also lower the plasma concentrations of other antiepileptic drugs, such as lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, tiagabine, and valproate.

- Contraceptive failure can occur when systemic hormonal contraception drugs are administered with enzyme inducers like phenobarbital.

- Phenobarbital is a strong CYP3A4 inducer; avoid combination with hepatitis C drugs paritaprevir/ritonavir, ombitasvir, and dasabuvir.

- Primidone is also a CYP3A4 inducer; combination with apremilast should be avoided.

- Barbiturates combined with other CNS depressants like benzodiazepines and opioids can cause oversedation and severe respiratory depression.