The clinical presentation of glottic stenosis is variable and depends on the cause and the severity of the stenosis. The most common presentation of laryngeal obstruction is stridor. The level of the airway obstruction determines the nature of the abnormal breathing sounds. Upper airway obstruction results in mostly inspiratory stridor, while obstruction in the lower respiratory tract results in expiratory or biphasic stridor.

Congenital glottic stenosis presents with airway distress, a weak and husky cry, and occasionally, aphonia. Infants with severe airway distress require emergency intubation or tracheostomy soon after birth. Children with milder glottic stenosis can remain completely asymptomatic until they develop a respiratory infection. Airway edema and thick secretions can lead to increased work of breathing and upper airway obstruction symptoms. Finally, children with recurrent croup require investigation for upper airway stenosis, including at the level of the glottis.

Acquired glottic stenosis symptoms depend on the severity and location of the stenosis. Respiratory symptoms are the predominant symptoms in posterior glottic stenosis, while anterior glottic webs mainly present dysphonia. In general, patients may present with respiratory distress, episodes of apnea, dyspnea, or tachypnea. Other symptoms include hoarseness, alteration of voice, and aphonia. Dysphagia and aspiration may also be present.

History needs to concentrate on the assessment of dyspnoea and stridor, the onset and severity of the symptoms, as well as the aggravating and relieving factors. Also, the voice should be thoroughly assessed. Finally, history should focus on the etiology, including previous episodes of intubation, trauma, infectious and inflammatory processes, as well as comorbidities.