Complications after bone marrow transplant may be acute or chronic. Many factors can affect these adverse events, including age, baseline performance status, the source of stem cell transplant, and the type and intensity of the preparative regimen. Acute complications occur in the first 90 days, including myelosuppression with neutropenia, anemia, or thrombocytopenia; sinusoidal obstruction syndrome; mucositis; acute graft versus host disease; bacterial infections with gram-positive and gram-negative organisms; Herpesviridae infections; and fungal infection with Candida and Aspergillus. Chronic complications include chronic GVHD, infection with encapsulated bacteria, and reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus.

**Antimicrobial Prophylaxis**

Levofloxacin is usually given orally or intravenously and initiated on the first day post-transplant. It is continued until the absolute neutrophil count is more than 1000 cells/microL or until the discontinuation of prednisone in cases of GVHD.

Prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii (PCP) is warranted, given the immunosuppression following a hematopoietic stem cell transplant.

One unique syndrome encountered with cord stem cell transplant is cord colitis which involves diarrhea in recipients of cord blood and is believed to be secondary to Bradyrhizobium enterica, which usually responds to a course of metronidazole or levofloxacin.

**Sinusoidal Obstruction Syndrome (SOS)**

Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS), or veno-occlusive disease (VOD), results from chemotherapy during a preparative regimen and occurs within six weeks of HPSCT. This syndrome consists of tender hepatomegaly, jaundice due to hyperbilirubinemia, ascites, and weight gain due to fluid retention. The incidence is reported to be 13.6% in an analysis study assessing the existing literature on the incidence of the disease.

The diagnosis of SOS is clinical and is based on hyperbilirubinemia greater than 2 mg/dL in the presence of the aforementioned clinical findings. Treatment consists of ursodeoxycholic acid, which has been shown to significantly decrease the occurrence of SOS when given pre- and post-transplant.

**Idiopathic Pneumonia Syndrome (IPS)**

Idiopathic pneumonia syndrome usually occurs in the first 90 days post-transplant. The incidence is low and is related to the direct chemotoxicity of the preparative regimen. Treatment with steroids is standard, although no randomized controlled clinical trials have been done to support their efficacy. Recently, etanercept has been studied; adding soluble TNF-inhibitors to steroids has not shown added efficacy.

**Graft Rejection or Failure**

A loss of bone marrow function after reconstitution following infusion of hematopoietic stem cells or no gain of function after infusion is termed graft rejection or failure. The incidence of failure is highest when there is a high HLA disparity; this disparity is highest in cases of cord blood and haploidentical donors and lowest with autologous and matched donor siblings. Factors responsible for graft failure include but are not limited to functional residual host immune response to the donor cells, a low number of infused cells, in vitro damage during collection and cryopreservation, inadequate preparative regimen, and infections.

Chimerism refers to the presence of a cell population from a person in the blood of a different person. Evaluating for chimerism is an important step in ensuring engraftment and success of the transplantation. This evaluation is done by checking the expression of CD33, which indicates the presence of granulocytes, and CD3, which indicates the presence of T cells, and confirming that most of the cells present are from the donor. The importance of effective chimerism has been demonstrated in many studies that showed decreased relapse rates and increased survival in allogeneic transplantation.

**Graft Versus Host Disease (GVHD)**

Graft versus host disease (GVHD) is a reaction between T cells from the donor in an allogeneic transplant and the recipient's HLA polymorphic epitopes, leading to a constellation of symptoms and manifestations. GVHD may be acute or chronic; each is sub-categorized into classic and late-onset, classic, and chronic overlap.

Acute GVHD usually develops within three months. However, it can develop after three months and is then termed delayed acute GVHD. Prophylaxis is generally achieved with calcineurin inhibitors, methotrexate, and anti-thymocyte globulins. The severity of GVHD is estimated using the Glucksberg scale, which classifies acute GVHD from grade I to VI. Treatment with either high-dose prednisone or methylprednisolone is indicated in higher-grade disease.

Chronic GVHD occurs over three months after transplant and involves multiple organs, similar to collagen vascular diseases. Grading of chronic GVHD assesses the severity of the disease and has been developed by the National Institute of Health; grade determines the treatment modality and predicts survival

**Toxicity**

Chemotherapy and radiation of the preparative regimen and post-transplant immunosuppression can induce severe pancytopenia in the first week following infusion of hematopoietic stem cells, leading to life-threatening infection. This depends on the type and the dose of chemotherapy administered and factors related to the recipients. Chemotherapy causes the destruction of healthy, normal bone marrow products, including neutrophils, macrophages, monocytes, and lymphocytes. Also, chemotherapy-induced mucosal toxicity disrupts the barriers protecting against infectious agents, and the use of indwelling intravenous catheters provides another means for the entrance of infectious agents.

According to the guidelines, vaccination against the following agents is recommended: pneumococcus, tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, Haemophilus influenzae, meningococcus, polio, Hepatitis B virus, influenza, measles, mumps, and rubella.

Many risk-scoring tools exist for evaluating hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients to stratify risk so that proper preparation and treatment can be established to minimize the risks and toxicities before, during, and after transplantation. The most commonly utilized scoring tools in clinical practice are the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation risk score, the hematopoietic cell transplantation-comorbidity index/age, and the Armand disease risk index.