The fundus camera is equipped with two filters. An excitation filter (465 to 490 nm) allows only blue light to enter the eye to excite the fluorescein molecules of the dye. A barrier filter (520 to 530 nm) allows only the green light emitted by the dye to pass through.

**Normal FFA Phases**

- Choroidal phase: The dye takes 10 to 15 seconds to reach the retina after being injected into the arm. It first enters the posterior ciliary arteries, and thus choroidal filling is seen first. A few islands may show delayed filling in healthy individuals also. The cilioretinal artery, when present, fills in this phase because of its origin from short posterior ciliary arteries.

- Arterial phase: The dye enters the arteries usually 1 to 2 seconds after the choroidal phase.

- Arteriovenous: This is seen 1 to 2 seconds after the arterial phase. The dye flows into the precapillary arterioles, capillaries, and postcapillary venules. A laminar flow can be seen in this phase when the dye enters the large veins. The laminar flow is seen because the protein-bound fluorescein is pushed to the sides by the free-flowing plasma and red bleed cells, which flow in the center.

- Venous: This has three phases early, mid, and late depending on the filling of the dye. The early phase shows a laminar flow with complete venous filling in the mid-phase, followed by a reduced dye concentration in the arteries in the late phase. A peak phase of the angiogram is seen when the perifoveal capillary network is well-defined.

- Recirculation: After the venous phase, the dye concentration starts reducing in the vessels, with complete emptying at around 10 minutes. In this phase, staining of the optic disc, Bruch’s membrane, choroid, and sclera are seen.