Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease belongs to leukodystrophies, which present with overlapping clinical findings. Therefore, most of the leukodystrophies should be considered and ruled out prior to confirming the diagnosis of PMD. In general, all leukodystrophies present with a progressive neurological decline, including motor and cognitive. They can categorize into lysosomal abnormalities like metachromatic leukodystrophy, peroxisomal defects like adrenoleukodystrophy, mitochondrial disorders, and disorders of myelin synthesis like PMD and PMLD.

It is important to describe PMLD in detail, given the significant similarities with PMD. Initially thought to be PMD, PMLD is due to a mutation at the level of the GJC2 gene. It is an autosomal recessive disorder; hence, the individual can get affected regardless of sex. Moreover, though both PMD and PMLD exhibit hypomyelination on MRI, brainstem involvement, especially the pons, is seen more frequently in PMLD.

The milder side of the spectrum of PMD disorders includes SPG2, as discussed above. Therefore, the list of spastic paraplegias should be considered as differential diagnoses. According to a clinical review by Finsterer et al., there are 52 types of SPG. All SPGs present with spasticity and several other overlapping features. However, each has distinctive features; of note, SPG1 or MASA syndrome presents with mental retardation, hydrocephalus, and aphasia and is due to a mutation at the level of the L1CAM gene. SPG2, a subtype of PMD, is differentiated from other SPGs by molecular analysis that reveals a mutation at the PLP1 gene.