The nerves that are responsible for innervating muscle fibers are called motoneurons. A single motoneuron and the muscle fibers it innervates are collectively called a motor unit. The number of muscle fibers in a motor unit varies predictably with the function of the muscle. For example, the motor units responsible for the muscles of facial expression involve considerably fewer muscle fibers than the motor units responsible for the muscles involved in activities such as swimming.

Skeletal muscle contraction begins first at the neuromuscular junction, which is the synapse between a motoneuron and a muscle fiber. Propagation of action potentials to the motoneuron and subsequent depolarization results in the opening of voltage-gated calcium (Ca2+) channels of the presynaptic membrane. Inward Ca2+ flow causes the release of acetylcholine (ACh) at the neuromuscular junction, which diffuses to the postsynaptic membrane at the muscle fiber. The postsynaptic membrane of the muscle fiber is also known as the motor endplate. ACh binds to the nicotinic receptors located at the motor endplate, depolarizing it, which initiates the action potentials in the muscle fiber.

Excitation-contraction coupling refers to the mechanism that converts the action potentials mentioned above in the muscle fibers into muscle fiber contraction. The action potentials at the muscle cell membrane surrounding the myofibrils travel into the T-tubules, which are responsible for propagating the action potential from the surface to the interior of the muscle fiber. T-tubules contain dihydropyridine receptors that are adjacent to the terminal cisternae of the sarcoplasmic reticulum of the muscle fiber. When T-tubules become depolarized, their dihydropyridine receptors undergo a conformational change that mechanically interacts with the ryanodine receptors on the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This interaction opens the ryanodine receptors causing Ca2+ to release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The resulting increased intracellular Ca2+ attaches to troponin C of the troponin complex on the thin filaments. The interaction between Ca2+ and troponin C exhibits cooperativity, which means that each Ca2+ that binds troponin C increases the affinity of troponin C binding for the next Ca2+ molecule, up to a total of four Ca2+ ions per troponin C. As a result of Ca2+ binding, the troponin complex undergoes a conformational change causing displacement of tropomyosin from the myosin-binding sites on F-actin, which allows myosin of the thick filaments to bind.

The cross-bridge cycle, an event that occurs during excitation-contraction coupling, refers to the mechanism by which the thick and thin filaments slide past one another to generate a muscle contraction. At the beginning of the cycle, when myosin is tightly bound to actin, no adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is bound to myosin, a state known as rigor; this is a transient state in contracting muscle, whereas, in the absence of ATP, such as in death, this state is permanent and is called rigor mortis. Next, ATP binds to the myosin head, inducing a conformational change in myosin that decreases its affinity for actin. Consequently, myosin dissociates from actin and the myosin head becomes cocked toward the end of the sarcomere. The ATP bound to myosin becomes hydrolyzed to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and one inorganic phosphate molecule, which both remain linked to myosin. In its cocked position, myosin then binds to a new site on the actin, creating a power stroke that pulls the actin filaments. Each cross-bridge cycling event results in the myosin head progressing up the actin filament under the condition that Ca2+ remains bound to troponin C. Finally, ADP is released, and myosin returns to its original state of rigor where it is bound to actin in the absence of ATP.

After contraction, muscle relaxation occurs when Ca2+ reaccumulates in the sarcoplasmic reticulum via the active Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA) pump on the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane. This pump transports the intracellular Ca2+ into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which maintains low intracellular Ca2+ when the muscle is relaxed. Within the sarcoplasmic reticulum is a Ca2+ binding protein called calsequestrin, which serves to decrease free Ca2+ concentration to reduce the amount of work required by the SERCA pump. When intracellular Ca2+ concentration decreases, Ca2+ dissociates from troponin C, allowing tropomyosin to resume blocking the myosin-binding sites on F-actin.

The events of excitation-contraction coupling are always sequential and exhibit a temporal relationship. In other words, the muscle fiber action potential always precedes the increase in intracellular Ca2+, which always precedes muscle contraction. One single action potential leading to an increased intracellular Ca2+ from sarcoplasmic reticulum release produces a single muscle contraction known as a twitch. Because the action potential duration is shorter than the twitch duration, the muscle fiber may be activated again before muscle relaxation occurs. If an already active muscle fiber becomes stimulated again, there is insufficient time for the sarcoplasmic reticulum to reaccumulate Ca2+. Consequently, intracellular Ca2+ remains high, and the force of the second stimulus becomes an additive effect to the remainder of the first stimulus, resulting in additional force. This phenomenon of sustained contraction is called tetany.

The length-tension relationship in muscle illustrates the tensions, or forces, produced from the cross-bridge cycle as a result of changes in muscle fiber length. The tension is determined by altering the resting length of a muscle that has already undergone isometric contraction. This resting length, also known as preload, therefore, is from passive precontraction from isometric contraction. Passive tension refers to the tension that results simply from increasing the muscle length. As preload increases and the muscle is made longer, its tension further increases. Passive tension can be thought of as the tension produced in an elastic rubber band as it stretches further. Active tension is the tension developed from the cross-bridge cycle and is proportional to the actual number of cross-bridges. This tension is highest when there is an optimum overlap between myosin and actin, resulting in a maximal number of cross-bridges. When muscle length decreases, crowding of the filaments occurs, which reduces tension. Similarly, when muscle length increases, active tension becomes diminished because there is less overlap between myosin and actin, and by extension, fewer cross-bridges. The total tension is the tension resulting from muscle contracting at different preloads and is equal to the sum of active tension and passive tension.

The force-velocity relationship refers to the velocity of muscle shortening as a function of afterload, which is the force against which the muscle contracts. In this relationship, the afterload is a fixed variable, in contrast to the length-tension relationship, when the muscle length was the fixed variable. As afterload increases, shortening velocity decreases. Maximal velocity occurs when there is zero afterload on the muscle.

Concentric contraction refers to when the force of contraction exceeds the force of resistance, which results in muscle shortening and approximation of muscle origin and insertion. Eccentric contraction occurs when the force of contraction is less than the force of resistance. In other words, the force of resistance is greater than that of contraction, resulting in muscle lengthening and an increased distance between muscle origin and insertion.