Most unruptured cerebral aneurysms are identified incidentally when a patient gets neuroimaging for some other reason. However, high-risk individuals may be screened with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computerized tomographic angiography (CTA), or conventional angiography. In the case of suspected rupture causing SAH, the diagnosis is traditionally made with a non-contrast CT of the brain, with or without a lumbar puncture (LP). CT alone is considered very sensitive for SAH when the patient presents early, but sensitivity declines over time. Some studies suggest that CT is 100% sensitive if performed within 6 hours of the onset of symptoms but drops to 92% within 24 hours and 58% at day 5 (14 to 18).

If CT is negative and there is still clinical suspicion for SAH, then an LP should be performed. The classic findings on LP are an elevated opening pressure and an elevated red blood cell count that does not diminish from tube 1 to tube 4. The presence of xanthochromia, a pink or yellow tint of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) due to hemoglobin breakdown products, is highly suggestive of SAH. Xanthochromia can be identified by visual inspection or by using spectrophotometry and is considered more than 95% sensitive when performed at least 12 hours after onset of bleed.

Once the diagnosis of SAH is made, the source of bleeding should be identified. This can be done using CTA, MRA, or digital subtraction angiography (DSA). DSA consists of inserting a catheter into the arterial circulation and injecting contrast under fluoroscopy. This is considered the “gold standard” for the detection of aneurysmal SAH.