**Incidence and Prevalence**

It is most common in people of northern European descent, where prevalence ranges from 1.2 to 39.2 per 100,000 people and an incidence range of 0.4-2.6 per 100,000 people per year. A recent large population-based study from the UK suggests that, although the incidence of GSE increased over the period 1990 to 2011, the incidence of dermatitis herpetiformis fell from 1.8 per 100,000 to 0.8 per 100,000 person-years over the same period. Seemingly, patients with dermatitis herpetiformis seem to have lower age-adjusted mortality than expected, possibly as a result of the modifications required to their diet as a result of the disease.

**Age**

Onset is commonly in adult life, typically in the fourth decade, though cases have been reported in children and elderly people.

**Sex**

Multiple studies show that the disease is more common in men than women, with a male to female ratio of 1.5-2: 1.

**Ethnicity**

This is a disease of people of northern European descent and is most uncommon in Asian and African populations, though a few cases have been reported. The incidence and prevalence of the disease are similar in North American populations of European descent to those seen in northern Europe, suggesting that genetic factors are important in disease susceptibility. Asian patients with dermatitis herpetiformis tend to have a distinct fibrillar pattern of IgA deposition in the skin, and there is a very rare association with GSE.

**Associated Diseases**

The most common association of dermatitis herpetiformis is with GSE. However, the severity of GSE in individuals with dermatitis herpetiformis varies hugely and may be clinically silent or mild. Consequently, all patients with dermatitis herpetiformis should be reviewed by a gastroenterologist and investigated accordingly. There is an increased risk of small bowel lymphoma in patients with dermatitis herpetiformis. The disease is also associated with other autoimmune disorders, such as autoimmune thyroid disease, and all patients should be screened for this. Additionally, patients with dermatitis herpetiformis have an increased risk of type 1 diabetes, Addison disease, and vitiligo.