Nocardiosis is a challenge to diagnose due to its non-specific findings and imaging that can suggest many different diagnoses (see DDX section). The diagnosis of nocardiosis is established with a culture of the causative organism from the infection site. Common culture samples include sputum, skin biopsy, abscess aspirates, or a sample from bronchoalveolar lavage. It can take several days (3-5 days) to isolate Nocardia in culture. Blood cultures for Nocardemia should be drawn in instances of pulmonary or disseminated disease, although Nocardia bacteremia is very rare.

Imaging via computed tomography (CT) or chest radiograph is a valuable diagnostic tool, especially in evaluating pulmonary nocardiosis. However, findings vary significantly and can include irregular nodules (can be cavitary), diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, lung abscesses, or pleural effusion. Imaging findings help support a history and physical exam that may be concerning for nocardiosis.

All patients with nocardiosis (except those with mycetoma) should undergo brain CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). If the primary infection spreads, the CNS is the most common location (44% of the time).  If concerned for nocardial meningitis, a lumbar puncture should be performed, and CNS analysis conducted. Nocardial meningitis is rare but presents similar to other bacterial meningitis.

It is important to notify the laboratory when suspecting Nocardia as a possible infection. This will allow for gram staining and modified acid-fast staining helping to confirm diagnosis as soon as possible. This is especially important as it can take several days to culture Nocardia species. Similarly, this will help aid in initial treatment prior to obtaining antibiotic susceptibility patterns. The recent development of more rapid and precise PCR and 16S rDNA sequencing to identify Nocardia species may allow for faster diagnosis and treatment of nocardiosis.