Dowling et al. provided a detailed description of the histopathology of iris ectropion syndrome (congenital ectropion uveae or CEU) in the enucleated specimen from a patient with congenital ectropion uveae with iridotrabecular dysgenesis and loss of vision from secondary glaucoma.

The surface of the iris was endothelialized at the termination of the iris pigment epithelial ectropion but not covering the ectropion. There was hyperplasia of the pigmented epithelium of the iris.

Trabecular meshwork and Schelmm's canal are rudimentary in both syndromes. Arrested posterior migration of iris insertion and glassy smooth iris surface may also be seen in both. However, iris ectropion is usually nonprogressive, unlike Axenfeld Rieger syndrome, where a large amount of primordial endothelium, if present, may lead to continued contracture. This will result in corectopia and progressive iris holes. Ectropion uveae and smooth iris surface are usually not seen in congenital glaucoma.

Goniotomy may be curative in congenital glaucoma, unlike Axenfeld Rieger and iris ectropion syndrome. The iris may show new vessels and intrastromal hemorrhage on histopathological examination of eyes with congenital iris ectropion. It has been suggested that the primary cause of CEU may be related to a vascular insult resulting in an abnormality of the migration of neural crest cells. A similar defect in neural crest cell migration has been noted in mice embryos deficient in hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha leading to anomalous cardiac development and cardia bifida.