If a patient tests negative for HIV, it is important to assess if the test was possibly a false negative in the "window" period, after transmission but before the antigen or antibody is positive. If a very early infection is suspected (less than 2 weeks), an HIV RNA viral load test can be completed, or the patient can return for serial testing at 1 month and again at 3 months from the date of the possible exposure. Although most patients will develop a positive test by 3 weeks using the fourth-generation test, some patients will not have a positive test of up to 3 months after exposure. Therefore, every negative test result should be accompanied by an explanation of the window period and the possible scheduling of further testing appointments. If it has been longer than 3 months since the at-risk behavior, the test is read as a true negative.

Prevention and risk reduction methods should be a part of either scenario. If the patient is in the window period, they potentially have a very high viral load which allows for easy transmission to others. The provider should assess the transmission risk of the patient and offer methods of reducing HIV risk, such as not sharing needles, using condoms, and changing sexual practice. Every patient who has a negative HIV test also should be considered for PrEP. PrEP is the daily use of the medication emtricitabine/tenofovir to prevent HIV acquisition.

If the patient tests positive for HIV, it is important to deliver the results in a non-judgmental, safe, calm environment with plenty of time for providing counseling to the patient. The results should be given confidentially unless the patient requests someone to be present. Once the patient is notified of their positive result, allow time for the patient to react. Whether a surprise to the patient or not, the results may invoke possible fear, sadness, shame, anger, or shock. After allowing the patient time to react, it is important to offer basic education about HIV and how it is a chronic, manageable disease. It also is important to explain the difference between HIV and AIDS. Allow the patient to ask specific questions they may have about the disease process. When in doubt of an answer, admit it and connect the patient with a provider who is knowledgeable and caring. Explain that there are many auxiliary support systems for those living with HIV, and ask if the patient is willing to meet with a peer counselor or social worker. By the end of the visit, it is important to have an appointment set up with an HIV provider and possibly another HIV support organization.

It also is crucial during the results visit to assess the patient's emotional and physical safety. The news of being HIV positive can be overwhelming, even when expected. Be sure the patient has at least one friend or family member they can confide in and assess the patient's risk for domestic violence. Ask about a history of mental health disease, and determine if a therapist's or psychiatrist's assessment is needed. Screen the patient for suicidal or homicidal ideation.

Lastly, emphasize the need for risk reduction. Partners of the patient can be notified anonymously in most states. Ask if they would like to participate. Emphasize condom use, discontinuation of needle sharing, and safe sex practices. Explain that when initially infected, HIV viral load can be very high and easily transmitted to partners. Also, evaluate the patient's knowledge of HIV transmission and how HIV can and cannot be transmitted, especially with regards to casual contact, family members, and children.

Some major organizations are encouraging same-day treatment known as "test and treat." Although controversial, the rationale is that the earlier an individual infected with HIV begins treatment, the less likely they are to transmit HIV to others or develop complications. Treating on the same day that a positive HIV result is given should be considered depending on the type and capacity of the practice.