Placental abruption is a serious complication of pregnancy and is best managed by an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that include an obstetrician, radiologist, hematologist, obstetric nurse, and intensivist. The triage nurse should be aware of this condition and immediately admit and notify the emergency department physician. While the patient is being resuscitated, the obstetrician should be called ASAP. Immediate transfer to an ICU setting is highly recommended and blood should be crossed and typed in case needed. Placental abruption is a true obstetric emergency and requires collaboration between the anesthesiologist and a radiologist. Operating room nurses should be informed of the patient so that they have the room prepared. In case the fetus is premature, the neonatal ICU team should be notified. Only with a team approach can the morbidity and mortality of this disorder be lowered.

While the condition cannot be prevented, the patient must be encouraged to stop smoking to lower the risk. Another major risk factor is the abuse of cocaine, which must be curtailed. Some patients may benefit from drug counseling and or drug rehabilitation.

**Outcomes**

Placental abruption is a life-threatening disorder for both the mother and the fetus. If the bleeding is not arrested, then the lives of the mother and fetus are in jeopardy. If there is complete separation or near separation of the placenta, death is inevitable, unless an immediate cesarean section is performed. Fetal mortality rates of 1-40% have been reported, but this also depends on the age of the fetus and the extent of separation. Each year in the US, about 1 to 5% of maternal deaths are linked to placental abruption. Besides the hemorrhage, the other morbidity is related to blood transfusions, the prematurity of the fetus, hysterectomy, and cesarean section (which will make the need for future cesarean sections more likely). Recurrence rates of 3-10% are reported.