During fetal development, autonomic efferents arise within the ventral ventricular zone, an anterior region of the primordial spinal cord. The primordial cells migrate toward the ventral horn and temporarily coalesce with somatic efferents, forming a singular primordial motor column. Eventually, the autonomic efferents will separate from the somatic efferents and migrate dorsally. Once in the intermediate spinal cord, the cell bodies of the autonomic efferents increase their polarity and fix their orientation within the gray matter, thus establishing their permanent placement within the intermediolateral columns (IML).

The IML is located within the spinal cord gray matter from T1 to L2 with projections peripherally via sympathetic nerves, and the central nervous system. Collectively, the IML houses cell bodies of the preganglionic sympathetic efferents and is therefore responsible for sympathetic output to the viscera, including the lymphatics. The diagnostic utility of Chapman's points lies in the relatively distinct innervation of each viscus. Each structure transmits information to and from the central nervous system via a relatively homogenous segment of the spinal cord, resulting in somatic findings, such as the nodules of Chapman's points, within related dermatomal regions specific to the underlying dysfunctional viscus.

After exiting the IML, preganglionic sympathetic efferents enter the sympathetic chain ganglia that lie alongside the vertebral column and synapse. From here, postganglionic sympathetic efferents branch and run alongside the ribs with the intercostal neurovascular bundle. These sympathetic branches are responsible for the sympathetic innervation of the arteries, veins, and lymphatic tissue contained within the bundle, which lies between the anterior and posterior layers of the intercostal fascia.