Nursing interventions for the patient undergoing breast conservation therapy encompass the pre-operative period, immediate postoperative, and long-term monitoring and surveillance of the patient. The most important pre-operative action is to obtain arm measurements of the affected side; this provides the health care team with a baseline for lymphedema monitoring. Patients often fear lymphedema. Arm measurement is critical to providers but also reassures the patient that they receive close observation to ensure quick action if postoperative swelling does occur. This time also provides an opportunity to teach the patient a gentle range of motion exercises to prevent swelling.

Secondly, it is crucial to provide thorough education surrounding the operation. While surgeons do review the procedure and postoperative restrictions, many patients may be overwhelmed at that time. This stress may inhibit the patient, and their family, from thoroughly comprehending the information. A personal, one-on-one conversation can ensure the patient understands the operation. Reviewing the wire or wireless localization is necessary as many patients have a biopsy marker and may not understand why the area needs to be localized. The clinician should also review the purpose of sentinel lymph node biopsy should, as many patients misconstrue this, assuming cancer has spread to the lymph nodes.

In the immediate postoperative period, the nurse can address pain control. Education on the dosage of prescription and over the counter medication ensures patient safety. If a patient underwent oncoplastic surgery, she must understand that she must refrain from the use of ice on her breast for pain management, as this may compromise wound healing.

During the balance of the patient’s postoperative period, education remains essential. Patients are anxious and eager about the “next step.” This patient counsel provides time to review the cadence of treatment and the role of other specialties. The clinician should also take arm measurements should beginning at three months postoperatively through 5 years to monitor for signs of lymphedema.