Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction relies on the appropriate functioning and response of the pulmonary vasculature in the presence of diminished oxygen availability. Approximately 250 million alveoli are present within each lung. Each one is a functional unit that serves to deliver inhaled oxygen from the atmosphere to the blood and expulsion of carbon dioxide from the blood to the atmosphere. The alveoli interact with the pulmonary capillaries, allowing for gas exchange.

**Theories of the Vasoconstriction Reflex**

The vasoconstriction reflex is triggered in states of hypoxia. There are contrasting views as to the vascular structures that first detect hypoxia. The classical understanding suggests that decreased oxygen levels are initially detected within the pulmonary artery, whereas a new concept postulates that low oxygen levels are detected in the alveoli. This latter concept further suggests that gap junctions throughout the pulmonary endothelium transmit signals to the pulmonary arterioles, causing them to constrict.

**Original Understanding of the Vasoconstriction Reflex**

The original mechanism is thought to involve voltage-gated potassium and calcium channels. These channels are located in the smooth muscle cells of the pulmonary arteries and are very sensitive to low oxygen states. In addition to the critical roles of potassium and calcium in hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, there are indications that there could be other ion channels contributing to the mechanism. These ion channels are transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) and transient receptor potential canonical 6 (TRPC).