Hepatitis B virus is transmitted via percutaneous inoculation or through mucosal exposure with infectious bodily fluids. Oral-fecal transmission is possible but considerably rare. The incubation period of HBV infection is typically between 30 and 180 days, and while recovery is common in immunocompetent patients, a small percentage can progress to a chronic state, serologically defined as the presence of HBsAg for greater than six months. HBsAg is transmitted via blood contact or body secretions, and the risk of acquiring hepatitis B is considerably higher in individuals with close contact with HBsAg-positive patients.

The pathogenesis of liver disease in HBV infection is mainly immune-mediated, and in some circumstances, HBV can cause direct cytotoxic injury to the liver. HBsAg and other nucleocapsid proteins that are present on cell membranes promote T cells-induced cellular lysis of HBV-infected cells. Cytotoxic T cell response to HBV-infected hepatocytes is relatively ineffective; a significant majority of HBV DNA is cleared from the hepatic system prior to maximal T cell infiltration, suggesting that the immune response is likely more robust in the early stages of infection. The immune response may not be the sole etiology behind hepatic injury in hepatitis B patients. Hepatitis B-associated injury is also seen in post-liver transplant patients with hepatitis B that are on immunosuppressant therapy. The histological pattern that follows from this infection is termed fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis and is thought to be associated with an overwhelming exposure to HBsAg. This lends credence to the idea that hepatitis B may possess pathogenicity regardless of the immune system’s response.