The overall prevalence of restrictive diseases is difficult to estimate precisely because the groups involve multiple pathological conditions, each of which can occur in numerous clinical stages. It has been determined, however, that up to 3-6 cases per 100,000 persons suffer from intrinsic lung diseases in the United States.

National and global population studies demonstrated that there are certain classes of individuals reported to be at a higher risk for having a restrictive pattern on spirometry. The populations with higher associations to restrictive lung patterns include:

- Elderly- The prevalence of restrictive conditions increases from 2.7 cases per 100,000 persons in individuals aged 35-44 years to over 175 cases per 100,000 in those older than 75 years.

- African Americans- Compared to Whites (10.9 cases per 100,000), the prevalence in this group is 35.5 cases per 100,000 persons.

- Females- Sarcoidosis is slightly more common in women. Moreover, the female gender has also been reported an increased risk for a restrictive pattern.

- Obese individuals- Restrictive patterns are related to an elevated body mass index (BMI) with a decrease in lung volumes attributed to an increased amount of central obesity.

- Smokers

Those that have specific occupational and environmental exposures are also at increased risk. Frequently encountering substances at workplaces such as asbestos, coal dust, and several other hazardous specks of dust can cause tissue alterations in the lungs leading to inflammation, tissue scarring, and a restrictive pattern on spirometry.

An interesting finding concerns not only the epidemiology of the established pathology but functional subclinical alterations as well as the temporal evolution. In an epidemiological study, Kurth et al. showed that restrictive patterns on spirometry were found to fall from 7.2% to 5.4% from 1988-1994 and from 2007-2010, which may be related to increased occupational safety precautions and falling rates of cigarette smoking.