There are specific histological criteria that are common among atypical moles, which may be split into architectural and cytological features.

The majority of dysplastic nevi are compound, and the remainder junctional. Architectural features include lentiginous melanocytic proliferation, disordered junctional nesting, reduced cohesion between cells with junctional nests, and the "shoulder phenomenon" (where the junctional component extends beyond the intradermal component and diminishes without clear demarcation). Nuclear atypia is the key cytological feature, but atypical moles may also display a spindled or epithelioid cell pattern, large melanin granules, and abundant pale or dusky cytoplasm.

Additionally, host response features may be noted. These include lymphocytic infiltrates, dermal fibroplasia, and prominent vascularity.

Atypical moles may be graded as to their degree of cytologic atypia, although there is considerable interobserver variability. Mildly dysplastic moles may be difficult to distinguish from moles without atypia reliably. In the same respect, severely atypical moles may be difficult to distinguish from melanoma.

The most common dilemma during the diagnosis of an atypical mole is the lack of universal histopathologic features or pathognomonic features. Consequently, the terms MELTUMP (melanocytic tumor of uncertain malignancy potential) and SAMPUS (superficial atypical melanocytic proliferation of unknown significance) can be used to describe lesions where the diagnosis of an atypical mole is possible but not felt to be sufficiently certain.