Dosing with CBD should begin at lower doses and titrate up to clinical levels. CBD administration is usually via oral preparation.

For patients with Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome, the maximum dose is 20 mg/kg/day. In patients ages 2 years and older, the initial dose should be 2.5 mg/kg orally twice a day. If the patient has tolerated CBD for the week, increase the dose to 5 mg/kg twice a day. The maintenance dose is 10 to 20 mg/kg/day. The dose can be increased by 2.5 mg/kg twice a day, every other day, as tolerated. For patients with Dravet syndrome, the maximum dose is 20 mg/kg/day, with a maintenance dose of 10 to 20 mg/kg/day. The dosing schedule is the same as that for patients with Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome. Patients who need a more rapid titration may gradually increase the dose every day.

It is important to titrate slower in patients with hepatic impairment, as CBD can cause liver damage. In patients with mild (Child-Pugh A) hepatic impairment, the maximum dose is 20 mg/kg/day with a maintenance dose of 10 mg/kg/day. In patients with moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, the maximum dose is 10 mg/kg/day with a maintenance dose of 5 mg/kg/day. The starting dose for these patients should be 1.25 mg/kg twice daily. In patients with severe (Child-Pugh C) hepatic impairment, the maximum dose is 4 mg/kg/day with a maintenance dose of 2 mg/kg/day. The starting dose in these patients is 0.5 mg/kg twice daily.

While better seizure control has been seen at a dose of 20 mg/kg/day, there is also an increase in an adverse reactions. It is important not suddenly to discontinue CBD use. Sudden discontinuation can cause an increase in seizure frequency and possibly status epilepticus.