E+S ↔ ES ↔ E+P

The initial step occurs when an enzyme binds to a substrate to form an enzyme-substrate [ES] complex (reaction 1). Increasing the concentration of a substrate [S] will, in turn, increase the rate of reaction until it reaches maximum velocity.  After forming the ES, a product forms that dissociates from the enzyme, and the enzyme is then ready to repeat the catalysis steps.

Enzymes do not alter or shift the equilibrium of a given reaction but instead affect the free energy required to initiate a conversion, which affects the reaction rate. The energy hump that must be surmounted for a reaction to progress is called the activation energy; this is the highest energy on a reaction diagram. It is the most unstable conformation of the substrate in the reaction. Enzymes generally do not add energy to the reaction but instead lower the transition state energy to require less activation energy.

Inhibitors are regulators that bind to an enzyme and inhibit its functionality. There are three types of models in which an inhibitor can bind to an enzyme: competitive, non-competitive, and uncompetitive inhibition.

- Competitive inhibition occurs when the inhibitor binds to the active site of an enzyme where the substrate would usually bind, thereby preventing the substrate from binding. For enzymes obeying Michaelis-Menten kinetics, this results in the reaction having the same max velocity but less affinity for the binding substrate.

- Non-competitive inhibition occurs when the inhibitor binds to a site on the enzyme other than the active site but results in a decreased ability of the substrate to bind to the active site. The substrate is still able to bind in this model, but the active site functions less effectively. The max velocity under non-competitive inhibition decreases, but the affinity for substrate stays the same.

- Uncompetitive inhibition (also called anti-competitive inhibition) occurs when an inhibitor binds only to the enzyme-substrate (ES in reaction 1). This reaction usually occurs when there are two or more substrates or products in a reaction. In uncompetitive inhibition, the max velocity and binding affinity both decrease.

Another kind of inhibition occurs with allosteric enzymes. These can bind a molecule called an allosteric effector, which will affect either the Vmax of the catalytic reaction or the substrate binding affinity.