# Continuing Education Activity

Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is a rare subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Patients commonly present with a nasal mass, nasal obstruction, or nasal bleeding. With the application of modern therapies, clinical outcomes of patients with this disease have improved significantly. This activity describes the evaluation and management of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.
- Describe the evaluation of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.
- Outline the management options available for extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

# Introduction

Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is a rare subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, characterized by a universal association with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and disfiguring clinical presentations.

# Etiology

Irrespective of the ethnic origin of patients, there is a strong association of EBV infection in almost all cases of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, suggesting an important role of the virus in the etiology of this disease.

# Epidemiology

Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is regarded as a rare subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

# Pathophysiology

Genetic abnormalities, EBV infection, and tumor microenvironment have been shown to play significant roles in the molecular pathogenesis of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

**1. Genetic Abnormalities**

**JAK/STAT Pathway**

The Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway is important for hematopoiesis and immune development. In extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, STAT3 of the JAK/STAT cascade is the most frequently mutated genes followed by TP53, JAK3, JAK1, and SOCS1.****STAT3 mutations promote STAT3 phosphorylation and transcriptional activity of STAT3 in the absence of cytokines. By binding to the programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) gene promoter, activated STAT3 then upregulates the expression of PD-L1. Increased PD-L1 interacts with the programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), an inhibitory co-receptor on T-cells, and suppresses T-cell activation and receptor signaling.

**Epigenetic Dysregulation**

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone methyltransferase and a catalytic component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) molecule.

EZH2 is aberrantly overexpressed in extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, which is mediated by MYC-induced repression of regulatory microRNAs.

Besides, phosphorylation by JAK3 promotes EZH2 as a transcriptional activator.

**PD-L1 Genetic Abnormalities**

Structural variations and focal copy number alterations affecting PD-L1 are associated with an overexpression of PD-L1 in extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

**Hereditary Susceptibility**

A genome-wide association study found out that a single-nucleotide polymorphism located in HLA-DPB1, namely rs9277378, was associated with a 2.3 times higher risk of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma compared to baseline, rendering its hereditary susceptible to the disease.

**Other Gene Mutations**

Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is associated with the deletion in the chromosome 6q21-25, and mutations in the cell surface receptor FAS (Apo-1/CD95), p53, K-ras, and c-kit.

**2. EBV Infection**

EBV infection is believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma though its actual mechanism is still undetermined. It is known to integrate its genomic fragment into different repeat families of the human genome, such as SINE, LINE, and satellite.

By expressing EBV nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1), latent membrane protein (LMP) 1, LMP2A, and LMP2B (latency phase II), EBV modulates cell signaling, and forms barriers to apoptotic signals to escape from T-cell-mediated immune response.

**3. Tumor Microenvironment**

Chemokines play a crucial role in the proliferation of tumor cells with the recruitment of inflammatory cells.

# Histopathology

Angioinvasiveness and necrosis are distinguishing pathologic features in most cases of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

# History and Physical

Most patients with extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma are of nasal type, which is localized to the upper aerodigestive tract.

In patients with an extranasal involvement, skin, testis, and gastrointestinal (GI) tract are typically affected.

# Evaluation

A definitive diagnosis requires an adequate biopsy with histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations. It is followed by proper staging with positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scans to assess the extent of the disease and to guide therapy.

- Stage I: a single lymph node, a group of adjacent lymph nodes or single extranodal lesions without nodal involvement

- Stage II: two or more lymph node groups on the same side of the diaphragm or limited contiguous extranodal involvement

- Stage II bulky: stage II as above with a bulky feature defined as a single nodal mass of 10 centimeters or greater than a third of the transthoracic diameter

- Stage III: nodes on both sides of diaphragm or nodes above diaphragm with spleen involvement

- Stage IV: additional noncontiguous extralymphatic involvement

A useful prognostic model for patients with extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is the prognostic index of natural killer lymphoma (PINK), which includes age above 60 years, stage III to IV disease, distant lymph node involvement, and non-nasal disease.

# Treatment / Management

The therapeutic approach of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is based on several factors, such as the age of patients, the extent of disease, potential toxicities, and survivorship.

**1. Induction Therapy**

**Nasal Disease (Stage I–II)**

Patients with nasal disease (stage I–II) may be treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CRT) regimens such as DeVIC (dexamethasone, etoposide, ifosfamide, and carboplatin) with radiation therapy (RT), or VIPD (etoposide, ifosfamide, cisplatin, dexamethasone) with RT.

**Nasal Disease (Stage IV) and Extranasal Disease (Stage I–IV)**

Pegaspargase-based combination chemotherapy regimens such as AspaMetDex (L-asparaginase, methotrexate, and dexamethasone), modified SMILE, or P-GEMOX, with or without RT may be considered in patients with nasal disease (stage IV) or extranasal disease (stage I–IV).

**2. Response Assessment**

At the end of induction therapy, patients should undergo an evaluation with PET/CT scans, ear, nose, and throat examination, and EBV viral load to establish remission status. Results from PET/CT scans are interpreted using the Deauville criteria.

Patients with nasal disease (stage I–II) with complete remission (disappearance of all disease) may be observed without further treatment.

In patients with nasal disease (stage IV) or extranasal disease (stage I–IV), hematopoietic stem cell transplant may be considered in those with complete remission or partial remission with a negative biopsy.

**3. Relapsed or Refractory Disease**

A diagnosis of relapsed or refractory disease must be confirmed histologically by biopsy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Conditions that mimic extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma include aggressive NK-cell leukemia, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and other mature T- and NK-cell neoplasms. Therefore, it is crucial to have an adequate biopsy with histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations to make a definitive diagnosis.

# Prognosis

Clinical outcomes of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma have improved significantly with the application of modern therapies.

# Complications

The most common cause of death among patients with extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is non-Hodgkin lymphoma, followed by other malignant cancers, heart disease, and infection.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Being diagnosed with extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma and undergoing treatment can have significant psychosocial impacts on patients and their families, as these can bring dramatic changes in their physical, spiritual, emotional, and interpersonal dimensions. Every clinic visit should include screening and assessment of emotional and social concerns of patients and their families. They should also be well-informed of the types of treatment, such as CRT and combination chemotherapy regimens, pros and cons of each treatment, side effects, supportive measures, and long-term management plan. Regular follow-up with primary care physicians and oncologists is also important to monitor treatment response and treatment-related toxicities.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patient-centered teamwork approach is essential when managing patients with extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma. An interprofessional team should work together in every step of management—treatment of the disease, prevention and management of complications related to disease or treatment, and providing comprehensive care for patients and their families, with regular follow-ups, psychosocial support, survivorship care, and in end-of-life care.