**Standard tests include:**

- CBC (Complete blood count) to rule out the infection, look for complications of cirrhosis: anemia, thrombocytopenia, a leukemoid reaction in alcoholic hepatitis.

- LFTs (liver function tests): AST (aspartate aminotransferase) is markedly raised compared to ALT (alanine aminotransferase) in alcoholic liver disease, albumin is low, bilirubin is elevated. GGTP ( gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase) is usually elevated along with elevated triglyceride levels.

- Prothrombin time (PT) and INR (to assess liver synthetic function): Elevated value indicates more severe disease.

- Abdominal imaging (abdominal ultrasonography) to look for biliary obstruction and liver tumors.

- BMP (basic metabolic profile) should be ordered to look for renal failure and electrolyte disturbance (low levels of potassium, magnesium, and phosphorus).

- Ascitic fluid SAAG (serum-ascites albumin gradient) should be calculated to assess the reason for ascites if present.

- Screening blood tests for other causes of chronic liver disease, including viral hepatitis.

- Endoscopy to look for esophageal varices due to portal hypertension in patients with cirrhosis.

- A liver biopsy can make a definitive diagnosis in cases where the diagnosis is uncertain. It is used more often for evaluation of severity, staging, prognosis and treatment monitoring. At least 1.5-2 cm long sample of liver tissue is needed for accurate diagnosis of fibrosis. Liver biopsy has a risk of complication including life-threatening hemorrhage so it is reserved for cases where results of biopsy can make a difference in treatment plan.