Insulin is a peptide hormone secreted in the body by beta cells of islets of Langerhans of the pancreas and regulates blood glucose levels. Medical treatment with insulin is indicated when there is inadequate production or increased insulin demands in the body.

The FDA-approved indications for treatment with insulin are as follows.

**Outpatient Indications for Insulin**

Insulin is primarily used for the treatment of diabetes mellitus. According to the American Diabetes Association, in 2018, 34.2 million Americans, or 10.5% of the U.S. population, had diabetes. Approximately 90 to 95% of patients with diabetes have type 2 or insulin-resistant diabetes, 5 to 10% have type 1 diabetes, and 1 to 2% have maturity-onset of young diabetes (MODY).

- In Type 1 or juvenile diabetes mellitus, pancreatic beta cells are destroyed by the body’s immune system or trauma or injury to the pancreas, leading to decreased or absent insulin production.

- Type 2 diabetes mellitus is the most common type of diabetes and usually occurs after the age of 45 years. However, children and teens are also developing it more frequently, mainly due to childhood obesity. In type 2 diabetes, cells are resistant to the action of insulin. The exact cause of this is unknown, but factors such as genetic, obesity, metabolic syndrome, or sedentary lifestyle play a role. As the pancreas secretes more insulin to try to get glucose into the cells, they eventually burn out, and glucose starts building up in the blood. Treatment with insulin is necessary for the later stages of type 2 diabetes.

- Maturity onset diabetes of young (MODY) is an inherited condition in which beta cells of the pancreas cannot secrete insulin due to genetic mutation.

- Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM): Approximately 4% of all pregnancies in the U.S. are complicated by GDM.

**Inpatient Indications for Insulin**

- Management of diabetes mellitus patients in the hospital: Glycemic control in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes admitted to general wards for conditions other than diabetes is achievable with subcutaneous or intravenous insulin infusion. This therapeutic approach is to avoid hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, volume depletion, or electrolyte abnormalities during hospitalization.

- Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperosmolar hyperglycemia (HHS) are complications of type 1 and type 2 diabetes, respectively, and both represent extremes in hyperglycemia. Insulin is indicated in both DKA and HHS to normalize blood glucose levels.

- Stress-related hyperglycemia: Hyperglycemia in non-diabetic critically ill patients, like ICU, surgical, or trauma patients, is managed by insulin. In stress, hormones like catecholamine, glucagon, growth hormones, cortisol as well as glycogenolysis, and gluconeogenesis, cause hyperglycemia related to poor outcomes in hospitalized patients. Therefore, insulin is used to maintain a blood glucose concentration of 140 to 180 mg/dl in these critically ill patients.

- Treatment of hyperkalemia: IV insulin is used to help manage hyperkalemia in hospitalized end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients.