There are numerous clinically significant aspects of the skin, including the dermatomes of the skin, skin segments divided based on the afferent nerves they are supplied by which are numbered according to the level of spinal vertebral from which they arise. There are seven cervical, twelve thoracic, five lumbar, and five sacral. Certain diseases like shingles, caused by varicella-zoster infection, have pain sensation and eruptive rashes that involve a dermatomal distribution. Dermatomes are useful in the diagnosis of vertebral spinal injury levels. Aside from the dermatomes, the cells of the epidermis are susceptible to neoplastic changes resulting in various cancer types. Some autoimmune and immunological diseases target the desmosomes and hemidesmosomes founds in the epidermis. Certain infections can also disrupt the integrity of the epidermis along with drug reactions that present variably as well.

**Squamous cell carcinoma**is cancer that arises from mutated keratinocytes, usually due to UV damage in individuals with Type I or II skin types (light skin, blue or green eyes, red or blonde hair, burn and never tan) and often appear as scaly, flaky, thick red patches that may bleed or even appear wart-like. This type of skin cancer can metastasize. Squamous cell carcinoma may arise from actinic keratosis, which is also caused by sun damage to the epidermal layer of skin and may have cutaneous horns.**Basal cell carcinoma**is a cancer of the basal layers of the epidermis and is much less likely to metastasize. This type of skin cancer is more common in sun-exposed areas and often appear are pearly papules on the face, with telangiectasias and ulcerate easily.**Melanomas**are cancers of the melanocytes and have a high metastatic potential, significantly mediated by the depth of the lesion. Melanomas can be found anywhere on the body, are usually irregularly pigmented but can be amelanotic.**Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis**is a type of cancer where Langerhans cells accumulate in the body and result in the formation of granulomas, often in the bones, resulting in bone pain. These granulomas can also appear in the skin like rashes, erythematous papules or blisters. An interesting association with this condition is the effect of the pituitary gland, which can be affected and individuals may present with diabetes insipidus, infertility, or other endocrine diseases due to insufficient hormones. Other serious and deadly complications are due to pancytopenia (anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytopenia) as a direct response to overcrowding by the Langerhans cells.**Merkel cell carcinoma**is an uncommon cancer of the Merkel cells and is categorized as neuroendocrine small cell carcinoma

**Pemphigus vulgaris**is an autoimmune disease that targets the intercellular proteins, desmosomes, that connect the keratinocytes to each other. Blisters form within the epidermis and are easily ruptured, resulting in acantholysis histologically. This disease is associated with a positive nikolsky sign, peeling away from the epidermis with rubbing of that area.**Bullous Pemphigoid**is another blistering disease that results in tense subepidermal blisters in older populations, that are due to antibodies that target the hemidesmosomes that connect the epidermis at the level of the basement membrane to the extracellular matrix of the dermis. This condition is not acantholytic and is not associated with a positive nikolsky sign.

Infections that affect the integrity of the skin include **scalded skin syndrome**caused by the exfoliative toxin released by staphylococcal aureus bacteria infection. This infection results in peeling away of the skin, positive nikolsky, an appearance of a severe burn (very red), and fever.**Drug reactions**like DRESS syndrome, erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnsons syndrome, and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis syndrome are often associated with certain medications that include sulfa-containing drugs, NSAIDs, and anti-seizure medications.