Adverse effects vary depending on the COX inhibitor used.

**Mortality Rate**- The mortality rate associated with COX inhibitors is 21 per million and 24.8 per one million for NSAIDs and low-dose aspirin, respectively.

**GI Effects**

COX inhibitors can cause upper and lower gastrointestinal side effects ranging from mild irritation to more severe adverse events such as bleeding and perforation. Risk factors include patients older than 65 years old, have had a history of peptic ulcer disease, or are also on steroids or blood thinners. It is best to avoid NSAIDs in these patients.

Upper GI side effects get reported more frequently.

Lower GI side effects are present within 75% of patients taking NSAIDs.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is now implicated in increasing the risk of peptic ulcer disease in patients who are on NSAIDs, and eradication of H.pylori before the initiation of NSAID use has been shown to reduce the risk of upper GI ulcers and can be useful as a preventative tool.

The current recommendation is the lowest possible dose of celecoxib with a PPI for patients with significant GI bleeding risk who require NSAID therapy.

**CV Effects**

Non-aspirin cox inhibitors increase the risk of cardiovascular events, namely myocardial infarction, cardiovascular-related mortality, and stroke. The risk is small in patients without cardiovascular disease and slightly greater in patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease.

**Renal Effects**

The risk of renal effects with cox inhibitors is 1 to 5%.

Acute renal failure, chronic renal failure, acute interstitial nephritis, sodium and fluid retention, and hypertension have all had reports as adverse effects of COX inhibitors. PGE2 and PGI2 both act as vasodilators in the kidney, and a decrease in them is thought to lead to adverse renal effects. Acute renal failure is dose-dependent, duration-dependent, and reversible and is believed to occur due to a decrease in PGE2 and PGI2.

NSAIDs may decrease blood flow to the papillae leading to destruction and renal papillary necrosis. There have been cases reported for both traditional NSAIDs as well as celecoxib.

Acute interstitial nephritis occurs when there is inflammation within the interstitium of the kidney at the level of tubules; this can be due to a hypersensitivity reaction. Acute interstitial nephritis is reversible and occurs days after exposure. It commonly leads to nephrotic syndrome and can also lead to chronic renal failure.  At this time, the mechanism of how NSAIDs cause acute interstitial nephritis is unknown.

NSAIDs can cause sodium retention leading to weight gain and edema. Hyperkalemia can occur as well. Celecoxib and diclofenac have a higher risk of causing hyperkalemia.

**Hematologic Effects**

COX inhibitors have been known to cause platelet inhibition by inhibiting thromboxane A2 production. Aspirin causes irreversible inhibition of COX, and therefore, the duration of platelet inhibition lasts until 7 to 10 days after drug discontinuation. Patients with other reasons for increased bleeding, such as alcohol, anticoagulants, or liver failure, have enhanced bleeding risk.

Platelet inhibition increases bleeding time. NSAIDs cause reversible COX inhibition, and therefore the duration of platelet inhibition depends on specific pharmacokinetics such as drug dosing and half-life.

**Malignancy**

COX inhibitors have commonly shown favorable effects on cancer rather than adverse ones. Continuous aspirin use has demonstrated effectiveness in colorectal cancer prevention through a multitude of colorectal cancer pathways. It is recommended to select patients who are also at increased cardiovascular risk.[15] Aspirin and NSAIDs have been studied in prostate cancer as well, and results have shown that COX inhibitors could reduce the risk of prostate cancer, but currently, there are no clear guidelines or indications. Furthermore, long-term use has to balance against the negative effects.

**Hypersensitivity Reactions**

NSAIDs are the most common medications that cause hypersensitivity reactions.  The number of hypersensitivity reactions caused by NSAIDs is extensive, complex, and classification is evolving. Hypersensitivity reactions vary widely in presentation and mechanism. They can be due to a specific drug, termed selective responder in the literature, or due to any NSAID, termed cross intolerant. Clinical manifestations include urticaria, rhinitis, asthma, angioedema, bullous or desquamating skin lesions, DRESS syndrome, or toxic epidermal necrolysis. Some reactions are organ-specific clinical entities, causing bile duct syndrome, meningitis, or vasculitis. Mechanisms can be IgE mediated, T cell-mediated, prostaglandin inhibition mediated, or are often unknown. Other possible causes are present as well, and clinicians may miss NSAIDs as the primary cause. Ibuprofen is the most common among all NSAIDs to cause a hypersensitivity reaction.

The most described hypersensitivity reaction is NSAID exacerbated respiratory disease. It has a complex mechanism involving eosinophils and many other mediators. Chronic inflammation leads to symptoms such as rhinitis, nasal polyps, sinusitis, and asthma. It can result from an NSAID and has cross-intolerance. Single NSAID-induced urticaria, angioedema, and anaphylaxis can occur, and symptoms usually occur in less than one hour.