# Introduction

The most important component of simulation-based learning is debriefing; this is the opportunity participants have to reflect on events that have happened and to modify their behavior as a result.

# Function

There are several reasons for recording in the health care environment. Some clinical sites already video their actual resuscitations and perform debriefings of actual patient care.

Traditional simulation sessions may also be recorded. Sometimes, these recordings are not reviewed by the participants. In these cases, access to the recording of simulations or actual resuscitations may aid research or drive subsequent quality improvement projects.

Proponents of video-assisted debriefing (VAD) cite several benefits with this method. One frequently cited benefit is obtaining an objective record of what happened during the simulation.

The second benefit of VAD is the opportunity for learners to observe their performance from a different perspective. It may highlight the performance of either an individual or the whole team and allow for reflection of communication and teamwork during simulated events.

The third benefit of VAD is that it may help fill in learning gaps. There is data to suggest that video-assisted debriefing improves subsequent performance in both teams and individuals.

Although there are potential benefits to VAD, there are several concerns as well. Competent technical support may help prevent most audio/visual- or equipment-related problems. However, realistically speaking, there is no way to eliminate the risk of these issues.

A second concern with the use of VAD is the potential threat to psychological safety. Much emphasis is placed on the concept of the learning environment being a “safe container” for learning.

Additionally, concerning the use of VAD, while some studies have suggested mild effectiveness, others have found mixed efficacy. The same early study found no difference in VAD versus VD for subsequent improvement in nontechnical skills. They also found a trend toward lower post-test scores among those participants who had received VAD.

Opponents of VAD cite the time spent on video review could have been applied to a complete verbal debriefing opportunity. Finally, incorporating a video review process adds the additional layer of recording equipment expenses.

Results on the direct comparison between VAD and VD are mixed.

One early study addressed anesthesia residents performing nontechnical skills. The participants who had no debriefing showed no improvement in subsequent simulations. The participants who had either VD or VAD demonstrated improvement, but neither group improved more than the other.

Other authors have also failed to demonstrate significant differences between VD and VAD for time-based skills, or overall improvement.

Others have found that video did appear to provide more information than only a single perspective could.

# Issues of Concern

While the goal of simulation-based education is better patient care, the learning experience is also important. The use of video in a debriefing did not appear to change the learner's perception of the importance of the simulation session when compared with a debriefing that had no video review.

Fear (stress/discomfort) may have been one consideration from the learner's perspective. Some learners have described the process of watching themselves in a VAD as an emotional roller coaster. They seemed to have feared the judgment by others and maybe felt defensive. Yet, at the same time, they expressed both desire and appreciation of feedback and appeared satisfied with the overall experience.

Other learners may have had a more positive experience as a result of VAD. Although Ha, et al. found a group of learners whom they classified as having a reluctant view (namely the group that felt VAD made them feel humiliated and tried), they identified two other learner groups with more positive viewpoints. These they classified as holding a strategic view, who felt VAD aided in their self-reflection, or a forward view, who felt VAD improved their self-confidence.

# Continuing Education

VAD facilitators have the added responsibility of choosing appropriate video clips. The actual professional title of the debriefer is not as important as attention to general high-quality debriefing skills. One study has suggested that participants prefer faculty-led VAD to peer-led VAD. Indeed, they indicated that they trusted the knowledge and feedback skills more.

There is no consensus on VAD elements or best practices.

# Clinical Significance

Simulation without debriefing is ineffective in creating change.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Benefits of VAD include an objective record of events, the ability to gain an outside perspective, and effectiveness in closing learning gaps.

- Challenges of VAD include adding potential distractions, a potential threat to psychological safety, mixed learning outcomes, time constraints, and cost.

- The effect of VAD on learner experience is similarly mixed.

- While VAD may be preferable in some situations, there is no definitive evidence to suggest it is a superior method of debriefing.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The ultimate goal of simulation is to improve patient care. Debriefing is a critical component of healthcare simulation, regardless of whether the primary learning objective is knowledge transfer or the development of teamwork and/or communication skills. The use of VAD may contribute to a high-quality debriefing, but it is not a necessary component.

Participants may derive benefit from reviewing their performance on videotape and discussing it during debriefing. VAD provides the opportunity to evaluate team processes and offers support to improve teamwork.