MAC is treated surgically with wide excision or Mohs micrographic surgery. However, MAC frequently extends beyond the clinical margins. For this reason, Mohs micrographic surgery is the treatment of choice as it offers a higher cure rate and is the most tissue-sparing. Several case series in the literature have demonstrated that the tissue defects remaining after Mohs surgery were four times larger than the prior clinical estimate.

This indicates that the preoperative estimate of margins is unreliable, and a complete histologic assessment of margins is recommended. Radiation is ineffective because the tumor is known to be radioresistant, and the literature suggests that surgical excision is the most effective and definitive treatment method.

**Wide Local Excision**

- Standard surgical margins should be more comprehensive than clinical margins because of the infiltrative growth of the tumor.

- With wide local excision, recurrence rates range from 40% to 60%.

- Significant soft tissue defects can be noted after tumor resection and may necessitate reconstruction with local flaps and skin grafts. Reconstruction after incomplete tumor excision, however, could require the later removal of a flap or graft, which has further obscured the area of tumor positivity. This can result in delayed detection of recurrence and significantly increased complexity of definitive treatment.

**MMS or Excision With Pathologic Margin Assessment**

- MMS uses horizontal en-face sections of the excised tissue, thereby examining 100% of the peripheral and deep margins. Several case series have been published showing much lower recurrence rates when MAC is treated with MMS.****Tumors exhibiting PNI are regarded to be more aggressive and have higher morbidity and mortality. The infiltrative nature of MAC and associated PNI emphasize the importance of excision with margin control.

**Lymph Node Sampling/Dissection**

- Nodal staging is not recommended initially for primary MAC.

- Nodal metastasis in MAC is rare.

- Lymph node dissection of the draining nodal basin is rarely performed. Most of the rare cases of distal spread have been gleaned from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database and the medical oncology literature.

**Radiotherapy**

The use of radiotherapy as monotherapy is not recommended. Although the role of radiation therapy is questionable, adjuvant radiotherapy has been used successfully and has sometimes been recommended if peripheral nerves are involved or if margins cannot be cleared surgically--based on recent evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Despite this, chemoradiation with a carboplatin/paclitaxel combination has been used in patients who refused surgical treatment and those who remained tumor-free for six years.

**Follow up**

The frequency of follow-up should be based on patient risk factors and the extent of local and systemic involvement. Education on photoprotection, periodic self-examination, post-operative care, and expectations regarding surgical scars and changes in sensation is advised.