**Incision and Dissection**

The skin is incised 1 to 2 mm below the lash line or within the prominent natural skin crease (if present) to hide the scar. Care should be taken to never extend the incision laterally beyond the orbital rim to prevent surgical stigmata. The incision should include only skin, not the orbicularis muscle. A Frost suture is placed at the grey line to protect the globe and facilitate retraction. Placing a corneal shield is optional and at the discretion of the operating surgeon.

Based on the anatomical correction planned, a skin-only or skin-muscle flap is elevated using blunt and sharp dissection. Hemostasis at every step is of the utmost importance using bipolar electrocautery under low power. If a skin-only flap is planned, the dissection below the skin is carried out to the inferior orbital rim or the last wrinkle. A skin-muscle flap can be elevated via the same subciliary skin incision with the following adjustments: the dissection below the skin is carried out to 4 to 5 mm below the lash line, preserving pretarsal orbicularis. Then orbicularis is divided, and an avascular plane below the preseptal orbicularis and above septum is reached, and dissection is carried to the inferior orbital rim. Great care should be taken not to breach the septum while dissecting.

Various modifications of traditional transcutaneous blepharoplasty have been described in the literature. McCollough places the skin incision inferior to the tarsal margin, thus preserving a cuff of pretarsal orbicularis oculi muscle, which plays an important role in blinking and tear drainage.

**Orbital Fat**

The marking of fat pads should be done preoperatively and always in an upright, sitting position to determine the precise volume and location of fat pads to be excised and to determine whether post-septal or retro-septal fat needs to be preserved or transposed. This is of particular importance since over-resection of post-septal fat can lead to negative effects like a hollowed or cadaveric look.

If skin-flap is elevated, a button-hole incision of the orbital septum and orbicularis is made to reach medial, central, and lateral fat pads separately. If a skin-muscle flap technique is employed, all the fat compartments can be exposed at once through a single incision in the septum. Excess orbital fat easily pops out and can be teased using forceps and gentle, blunt dissection. Excess fat can be cross-clamped with a hemostat and then resected using insulated fine-tipped electrocautery. Complete hemostasis before leaving the resected fat stalk is mandatory. Care should be taken while resecting medial and central fat pads as inferior oblique muscle lies between them and can potentially be injured.

The arcus marginalis and the attachments of the orbicularis muscle can be released from the medial and central aspect of the inferior orbital rim to blunt the tear trough. After the release of arcus marginalis, supra-periosteal dissection is carried out to create pockets. The medial and central post-septal fat can be transposed over the orbital rim into the pockets and secured with 6-0 polyglactin sutures to fill the tear-trough further.

A modified transcutaneous lower lid blepharoplasty technique described by Huang uses a subciliary elliptical skin excision, and the medial, central, and lateral orbital fat pads are resected and then replanted via a micro-autologous fat transplantation technique to recontour prominent nasojugal and malar grooves, giving a rejuvenated appearance.

Another alternative technique described by Liapakis et al. includes a subciliary approach for fat transposition and mid-face lift. In this technique, the nasal fat pad is repositioned with suturing at the medial canthus along with a lateral canthopexy to stabilize the lower lid. then a cheek flap is created and passed through a tunnel, and suspended to the periosteum of the lateral orbital rim.

A percutaneous lower blepharoplasty technique has recently been described by Guner, consisting of removal and transfer of lower orbital fat pads through 4-mm skin incisions with minimal dissection.

**Orbicularis Oculi Muscle**

Following the management of orbital fat, excess orbicularis muscle is elevated and resected, giving smooth contour. Hamara described a technique that utilizes the orbicularis muscle to support the lower lid. A laterally based flap of redundant orbicularis is suspended to the lateral orbital rim via upper lid incision.

**Lateral Canthal Support**

Lower lid laxity, if left undiagnosed and untreated while performing lower lid blepharoplasty, can lead to potential complications, including ectropion and lower lid retraction. The snap-back test and lid distraction test should be performed preoperatively to identify candidates for lateral canthal tightening. Various suture canthopexy and canthoplasties described in the literature can be chosen based on the patient’s need and the surgeon’s preference.

**Skin**

Excess lower lid skin excision should be performed cautiously, as overzealous excision can lead to lid retraction and scleral show. The lower lid skin is gently placed over the lower lid structures, and skin is held vertically at the level of lateral canthus without any tension; this point is fixed with a suture. The excess skin medial and lateral to this point of fixation at lateral canthus is excised at the level of subciliary incision. The skin edges are sutured with 6-0 polypropylene or 6-0 polyglactin. In the case of a skin-muscle flap, the excess pre-septal orbicularis is excised and approximated with pretarsal muscle followed by skin excision and suturing.

Some surgeons prefer using ‘pinch blepharoplasty’ using transcutaneous subciliary incision to remove a pinch of excess skin with transconjunctival removal of fat, avoiding incision in the middle lamella.