The management of transplantation osteoporosis comprises of the following strategies:

- Preventive pharmacotherapy

- Treatment of established osteoporosis, and

- Treatment of the secondary causes of osteoporosis.

**Preventive Pharmacotherapy**

The ISHLT (International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation) 2010 guidelines recommend preventive therapy for all heart transplant recipients throughout the first year after transplantation. The AASLD (The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases) 2012 practice guidelines recommend therapy for all liver transplant patients with osteoporosis and patients with osteopenia and other risk factors for fractures.

Since studies have failed to demonstrate an association between clinical indicators such as cumulative corticosteroid dose or the rate of change of BMD and fracture risk in transplant recipients, many authors recommend preventive pharmacologic therapy in all patients undergoing heart, liver, lung, and bone marrow transplantations.

In kidney transplant recipients, there is no consensus regarding preventive pharmacologic therapy. Most authors recommend a comprehensive fracture risk assessment of these patients based on factors like BMD, vertebral fractures, PTH level, patient's age, sex, body weight, etc. and consider preventive therapy for high-risk patients. Some studies also suggest the measurement of bone turnover markers such as C-telopeptide crosslink (CTX) and bone-specific alkaline phosphatase to risk-stratify patients.

**Bisphosphonate Therapy**

Bisphosphonate (antiresorptive) therapy is the initial choice of preventive therapy for transplantation osteoporosis as it directly counteracts the effects of CS. Several studies have proven their efficacy in decreasing bone loss and the number of vertebral fractures at one year after transplantation. Presently, there is no preference of one bisphosphonate over another, or of the route of administration. A study that compared the efficacies of intravenous zoledronic acid and oral alendronate for the prevention of bone loss in transplant recipients showed equal efficacy using either of these agents.

**Vitamin D Metabolites**

Calcitriol, a vitamin D metabolite, can be used as preventive therapy when bisphosphonate therapy is contraindicated. It increases calcium absorption in the intestine and its reabsorption in the kidneys, and as a result, leads to negative feedback on PTH release. At a dose of 5 micrograms per day, calcitriol has shown efficacy in decreasing bone loss and vertebral fractures.

**Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT)**

All transplant recipients with hypogonadism should be treated with HRT as it has been shown to slow bone loss in this population.

**Denosumab**

Denosumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody to the RANK ligand, is efficacious in the treatment of osteoporosis in kidney transplant recipients. It has also demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of osteoporosis in liver transplant recipients.

**Teriparatide**

Teriparatide, a recombinant human PTH, has shown efficacy in steroid-induced osteoporosis. A study that used teriparatide as preventive therapy in kidney transplant recipients did not show BMD improvement in the teriparatide group compared to the placebo group.

**Calcitonin**

Calcitonin acts by directly inhibiting osteoclastic bone resorption. Its role in the prevention and treatment of post-transplantation osteoporosis has not been elucidated. An older study has illustrated the efficacy of combined preventive therapy with intranasal calcitonin and calcitriol in improving BMD at 18 months following heart transplantation. Nevertheless, newer studies are required to clarify the role of calcitonin in transplant recipients.

**Non-pharmacologic Measures**

Non-pharmacologic measures that have been shown to decrease the risk of osteoporosis and fractures in the post-transplantation period are early mobilization, resistance training exercises, improved nutrition, and prevention of falls.

**Treatment of Transplantation Osteoporosis**

Treatment of osteoporosis diagnosed in the post-transplantation period comprises of correction of secondary causes of osteoporosis and initiation of pharmacologic therapy. The preferred initial drug of choice is bisphosphonate therapy. Denosumab can be an alternative therapy for use in patients with poor renal function (GFR <30 mL/min). Teriparatide is another drug that can be utilized in patients with poor renal function where bisphosphonates are contraindicated. The anabolic effects of teriparatide are particularly useful in patients with low bone turnover, as seen with adynamic bone disease. Both denosumab and teriparatide are alternative drugs for the treatment of post-transplantation osteoporosis that is unresponsive to bisphosphonate therapy.

**Treatment of Secondary Causes of Osteoporosis**

All secondary causes of osteoporosis noted above under pre-transplantation bone disease should be identified and treated. Some of the common causes are hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, hypogonadism, and CS exposure. Adequate supplementation of calcium and vitamin D is imperative for all transplant patients before and after transplantation. Appropriate lifestyle modifications such as smoking and alcohol cessation, improvement in nutritional status, and increased mobility are crucial as well. Patients should receive the lowest dose of CS necessary for avoiding rejection. Optimization of PTH and vitamin D levels are particularly effective for protecting against bone loss in kidney transplantation due to their high incidence in these patients.