The specific etiology underlying the various SLAP tear presentations is multifactorial and remains a topic of debate and controversy. Regardless of the underlying etiology, patients presenting with symptomatic SLAP tears will commonly report the acute onset of deep shoulder pain accompanied by mechanical symptoms such as popping, locking, or catching with various shoulder movements.

**Acute Traumatic SLAP Lesions**

Traumatic injuries commonly occur following acute, index events based on one of the following mechanisms:

- Compression-type injuries

- Classically advocated by Snyder as his original case series from 1990 reported about half of the patient presentations were status post a fall onto an outstretched arm with the arm in varying degrees of shoulder abduction.

- Traction-type injuries

- Occur secondary to sudden jerking movements or after lifting heavy objects
- Can occur after an unexpected pull on the arm

- Combined-type injuries

**Attritional SLAP Injuries**

**Peel-back Mechanism**

Compared to the acute, traumatic SLAP injuries, the overhead athlete is more likely to present with attritional-based etiologies. In these scenarios, SLAP tears present with the insidious onset and progressive deep shoulder pain in young athletes with the arm in the abduction and external rotation position during the late-cocking phase of throwing.  In this position, the force on the biceps coupled with the posterior glide of the humerus results in the peeling off of the posterosuperior quadrant of the glenoid and posterior labrum.

There remains debate regarding whether the so-called peel-back mechanism versus the deceleration phase of throwing is most responsible for the pathologic forces driving SLAP tears in overhead athletes.

**Degenerative SLAP Lesions**

Degenerative SLAP tears can develop secondary to the normal “wear-and-tear” patterns seen in patients with advanced age.  Degenerative SLAP tears often affect overhead laborers with increasing degrees of association in patients over 40 years old

**Types I – VIII**

- **Type I SLAP Tear**
- Degenerative
- Fraying occurs at the free edge of the labrum.
- Insertion to the superior glenoid remains intact.

- **Type II SLAP Tear**
- Acute
- The labrum and the long head of the biceps tendon (LHBT) are torn and avulses off the glenoid cavity.
- The avulsed area is now devoid of cartilage in the zone of injury.

- **Type III SLAP Tear**
- The “bucket-handle” pattern
- The labral insertion of LHBT is left unaffected.
- Rarest form

- **Type IV SLAP Tear**
- “Type III plus anterior shoulder instability.”
- Type III tear pattern plus extension into the LHBT
- Often seen in association with shoulder instability and anterior labral tears.

- **Type V Slap Tear**
- “Type II plus anterior shoulder instability.”

- **Type VI Slap Tear**
- The incidence rate is unknown.
- Tear pattern involves larger superior labral flaps without detachment of the LHBT insertion.

- **Type VII Slap Tear**
- Type II SLAP tear pattern plus middle and inferior IGHL compromise
- Tear pattern seen in the setting of complex shoulder instability presentations

- **Type VIII Slap Tear**
- Type II SLAP tear pattern plus additional cartilage injury adjacent to the bicipital footplate