The differential diagnosis for BPSD includes:

- Delirium

- Schizophrenia

- Bipolar disorder

- Major depressive disorder

- Post-traumatic stress disorder

- Central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms

Delirium characteristically demonstrates acute onset, fluctuating course, and the presence of an underlying medical condition, medication or psychoactive substance, or medication/substance withdrawal. Patients with BPSD can also have superimposed delirium as a cause for an abrupt worsening of their usual symptoms. History is the key to differentiating BPSD from delirium: in delirium, the onset of symptoms occurs over days to 1 to 2 weeks, while in BPSD, symptoms gradually worsen over several weeks to months. Patients with delirium frequently have changes in the level of consciousness, such as periods of somnolence or extended periods of wakefulness, which are typically less prominent in BPSD. Visual hallucinations may be prominent in delirium, whereas delusions are more common in patients with BPSD. It can be challenging to distinguish Lewy body dementia from delirium since patients with Lewy body may have visual hallucinations and fluctuations in the level of consciousness, but these symptoms will have a more gradual onset than in patients with delirium. Patients with suspected delirium should have a thorough medical evaluation, beginning with history and physical and followed by targeted laboratory testing and imaging based on these findings; typically, comprehensive metabolic panel, CBC, urinalysis, cardiac enzymes, chest X-ray, and toxicology screens are performed routinely, with neuroimaging, lumbar puncture, blood gases, and EEG reserved for select cases. Unlike BPSD, symptoms related to delirium will resolve, albeit sometimes gradually, once the underlying cause is corrected.

Patients who have pain, urinary retention, constipation, or other causes of discomfort yet cannot communicate their experience may become agitated, but once the cause is corrected, the behavioral disturbances improve.

Presentations of psychiatric conditions, such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder, may be quite similar to BPSD. Still, patients will have a history of these disorders before the onset of their dementia. In the case of psychotic or mood disorders, the presentation is generally episodic rather than continuous, which is typical for BPSD.

Patients with primary CNS neoplasms have a high frequency of behavioral and psychological disturbance, most commonly apathy, anger, and disinhibition. Compared to BPSD, the emotional and behavioral symptoms that occur with CNS neoplasms are more prominent than the cognitive deficits that can also occur in patients with brain tumors, and there are usually other neurological findings. All patients with new BPSD should have a thorough neurological evaluation. Neuroimaging may be necessary, especially in patients with frontotemporal dementia, who frequently present with behavioral disturbances rather than memory impairment.