Insulin is the preferred treatment for individuals with cystic fibrosis-related diabetes. Insulin therapy has been associated with better glycemic control, improved weight gain, and improved pulmonary function in CFRD. Individuals with CFRD are advised to maintain the same level of caloric intake recommended before their diagnosis and start insulin therapy to optimize their glycemic control. Management of CFRD without fasting hyperglycemia is possible with rapid-acting insulin alone for meals. Premeal doses are calculated using insulin to carbohydrate ratios. Individuals with CFRD who experience fasting hyperglycemia should start an insulin regimen consisting of long-acting basal insulin combined with rapid-acting insulin for meals. CFRD patients receiving overnight continuous gastrostomy tube feeding may benefit from an insulin regimen consisting of combined intermediate-acting insulin such as regular insulin and NPH insulin to handle the prolonged carbohydrate load delivered throughout the overnight hours.

Individuals with CFRD may develop insulin resistance, and experience increased insulin requirements during times of acute illness due to inflammatory cytokines. Insulin requirements may decrease rapidly as the acute illness resolves. Blood sugars in CFRD require close monitoring during times of acute illness. Based on current guidelines, the recommended fasting glucose target in patients with CFRD is between 70 to 130 mg/dL, and a 3-hour postprandial glucose target is below 180 mg/dL.

There is currently insufficient data to recommend non-insulin injectables or oral hypoglycemic agents in CFRD. Prescribing these medications should not take place in this population outside of clinical trials.