Preoperative patient preparation is extremely critical while planning and attempting keratoplasty.

**Ocular Examination**

**Torch Light Examination**

Detailed torch light and slit lamp evaluation are mandatory in each case. Torchlight examination helps grossly assess ocular motility, the presence of any strabismus, and adnexal pathology.

**Anterior Segment Assessment**

A detailed anterior segment examination is mandatory to assess the extent and depth of infiltrate, extent of corneal involvement, limbal involvement, anterior chamber depth, presence and absence of exudates, iris, pupil, and lens status if visible.

**Posterior Segment Assessment**

Usually, the posterior segment assessment is masked by the corneal infiltrate, but a dilated fundus assessment can still be attempted.

Another school of thought is that B scan should be avoided preoperatively to avoid cross-transmission of infection and instruments becoming unsterilized. Postoperatively when the patient has undergone TPK, the retina will be better visualized, and a B scan can be attempted to assess the status of the retina. If retinal intervention is needed can be done as a staged procedure post-TPK. Endophthalmitis risk is higher in long-standing chronic infection, aphakia, and corneal perforation patients who have undergone cataract extraction previously.

**Preoperative Antimicrobial Therapy**

All patients should be treated with preoperatively topical and systemic antimicrobial therapy in required cases. Targeted antimicrobial therapy is warranted when the etiology is known to reduce the virulence of microorganisms and the microbial load.

Broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy should be given in cases where etiology is doubtful and not labeled. Donnenfeld et al. proposed that topical ofloxacin (0.3%) should be used hourly for patients prepared for TPK to prevent the risk of secondary bacterial infection irrespective of the etiology. They also proposed that a tablet of ofloxacin 400 mg should be used 12 hours before admission, and intravenous vancomycin and tobramycin should be given after admission. As per significant studies, topical steroids should be avoided because it worsens the infectious process.

In contrast, one of the studies recommended the use of topical and systemic steroids in cases with fungal keratitis. Besides antibiotics, antifungals such as natamycin, Itraconazole, and voriconazole are used in patients with established fungal etiology. The other adjuvant drugs needed are topical timolol and homatropine.

**Corneal Scraping**

Gentle corneal scraping should be done in all cases when the patient first presents to the clinical outpatient setting. This helps in knowing the etiology and prescribing targeted antimicrobial therapy. Smear and culture analysis should be performed wherever possible. The culture report can be assessed after 48 to 72 hours. Preoperative culture reports give an idea regarding postoperative antimicrobial regimen and deciding on when to start steroids.

**Preoperative Intravenous Mannitol**

Preoperative intravenous mannitol 50-100 ml should be given as a routine in all cases undergoing TPK to decompress the vitreous and reduce positive vitreous thrust while performing surgery.