When considering endoscopic resections of sinonasal cancer, the oncologic principle of adequate clearance of tumor margins must be the primary goal. Sinonasal tumors that originate within the maxillary sinus and the ethmoids/skull base can have both direct as well as perineural spread into the pterygopalatine and infratemporal fossas.

The primary site of disease is managed first, and then the margins are cleared in the PPF. A medial maxillectomy is performed initially with the removal of the inferior and middle turbinates. This allows for complete visualization of the maxillary sinus. After creating the transmaxillary corridor, the trans-pterygopalatine fossa approach proceeds by stripping the mucosa that overlies the medial pterygoid wedge to expose the sphenopalatine artery. The sphenopalatine artery is then ligated, and the mucosa overlying the medial pterygoid plate is stripped down. The bone of the posterior maxillary wall is then removed, and the descending palatine artery either cauterized or ligated. It should be noted that the sacrifice of the palatine artery is not always necessary for liberal access and tumor removal within the PPF, but it can be undertaken for surgical access to the more lateral and deeper aspects of the infratemporal fossa. The Vidian nerve is then encountered and is often sacrificed. The orbital process of the palatine bone then drilled. The entire fossa is now mobile and can be resected or pushed laterally to gain access to the infratemporal fossa and pterygoid musculature.

Prior to undergoing surgical resection, it is important to obtain proper imaging of the paranasal sinuses and skull base. High-resolution CT images should be obtained using a stereotactic navigational protocol. Neurogenic tumors of the PPF usually enlarge the bony openings as they pass through the respective foramina. An MRI scan may also be beneficial in studying the anatomic outlines of the soft tissue structures, as well as assessing the perineural spread of a sinus or skull base neoplasms.