Dens evaginatus/talon cusps are managed with a multidisciplinary approach in mind. Treatment options from a recent consensus study by Smail-Faugeron et al. in 2016 stated the following modalities of treatment: complete reduction of the talon cusp in one appointment, periodic or gradual cuspal reduction, abstention, or the possibility of extraction.

Dens invaginatus should be evaluated radiographically with either a series of periapical radiographs from different angles or a CBCT to evaluate the internal structures. Depending on the complexity of the tooth's internal structure or the extent of the invagination, treatment and management strategies of these teeth can range from monitoring to surgical intervention. Treatment has phased into an endodontic approach compared to the previous oral surgery-driven approach with extractions due to the development of better diagnostic aids, such as the CBCT.

Amelogenesis imperfecta ranges from mild to severe, which will dictate the extent of the treatment required. As far as management is concerned, treatment should be considered in symptomatic cases or cases where the patient expresses esthetic concerns. Treatment can range from composite fillings and veneers to full-coverage ceramic restorations depending on the severity of the condition.

Dentinogenesis imperfecta ranges from mild to severe, which will dictate the extent of the treatment required. Due to the esthetic changes in tooth coloration, patients may desire more esthetic restorations for anterior teeth, such as composite resin restorations or porcelain veneers. Associated enamel pits may require minimal intervention with esthetic, non-preparation facial composite restorations.