Treatment of Tay Sach disease is largely supportive and aims at providing adequate nutrition, controlling seizures, managing the infectious disease, protecting the airway, and early aggressive physical and occupational therapy. Seizure control usually needs multiple antiepileptics. However, seizure becomes progressive and change in pattern, so frequent dose change and new medications are important. As the child with Tay Sachs disease becomes more disabled and debilitated, good bowel management becomes essential.

Therapeutic modalities for Tay Sachs disease include enzyme replacement therapy, cell transplantation, substrate reduction therapy, enzyme enhancing therapy, and gene therapy.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is a promising option for Tay Sach disease. Currently, ERT is less effective in Tay Sachs disease due to the inability to cross the blood-brain barrier and prevent neurological complications. Another major challenge in ERT is to synthesize both of the subunits. The synthetic Hexa A is treated with alpha-mannosidase to expose mannose 6 residues on the N-Glycans.

Enzyme enhancing therapy: Most mutations causing Tay Sachs are not localized to the active site but often cause instability of native folded protein. The strategies to reduce the substrate includes the use of molecules called chaperones to stabilize the enzyme. Interestingly the pharmacological chaperones used are enzyme-specific competitive inhibitors. A trial of Hexa A inhibitor pyrimethamine has shown to increase the Hex A levels to 4 folds, but clinical benefits are not reported.

Substrate reduction therapy (SRT): The rationale behind SRT is balancing substrate synthesis with that of diminished enzyme degradative power. Substrate reduction drug Miglustat (N- butyldeoxynojirimycin) has been successful in mouse models but not in humans. Currently, the FDA did not approve the use of Miglustat in Tay Sachs.

Gene therapy: Since Tay Sachs is caused by a single gene disorder will be an excellent option for gene therapy. Great progress has been achieved so far by developing adeno associated virus-based vectors. The major limitation of adeno based vectors is their capacity to carry constructs. For clinically significant therapy, a vector should carry Hex A isoenzyme that should carry both alpha and beta subunits. Genome editing therapies using zinc-finger nucleases are being explored. There were few scattered reports of tumor development in mice models kept alive for a prolonged time following gene therapy, so a cautious approach is warranted. Huge efforts are being invested in developing viral vectors for the effective delivery of isoenzymes.

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT): The transplantation of ex vivo modified multipotent neural cells with human HEX A gene expression produced by retroviral transduction is another major breakthrough approach.

Overall, adequate production and distribution of Hex A are required for a better therapeutic effect in Tay Sachs disease. So far substrate reduction therapy, bone marrow transplantation, and enzyme replacement therapy have shown low efficacy in preventing Neurodegeneration. Hence, a combination of multiple therapies at an early age is important since myelination defects appear early and worsen with time.