Small asymptomatic cavernous sinus aneurysms less than 12 mm do not need emergent treatment. Most small aneurysms have a benign history and a very low risk of rupture. Lesions that are observed should be followed with serial CT scans or MRI imaging. A few small series do indicate that thromboembolic events and acute thrombosis may occur in about 2% of asymptomatic patients with cavernous sinus aneurysms.

Proposed indications for treatment of cavernous aneurysms include disabling pain, diplopia/decline in vision, a cavernous carotid fistula as a result of aneurysm rupture, erosion of an aneurysm through the bone into the sphenoid sinus that can result in life-threatening epistaxis, and extension into the subarachnoid space. Strategies for treatment have evolved in recent decades and employ deconstructive or reconstructive strategies. Deconstructive techniques include open surgical or endovascular parent vessel occlusion. This is most safely accomplished following an angiogram with balloon test occlusion study of the affected internal carotid artery demonstrating adequate collateral circulation to compensate for the occluded vessel. If a cavernous carotid fistula is present this study should be performed with the occlusion balloon distal to the aneurysm/fistula to prevent dumping of the collateral circulation through the fistula during the test occlusion which can result in a falsely positive test. Even if the test occlusion demonstrates inadequate collaterals to support permanent occlusion of the vessel parent vessel, sacrifice is still possible if combined with a surgical bypass.

When a cavernous sinus aneurysm ruptures, this constitutes a surgical emergency and requires an experienced neurosurgeon. The type of surgery depends on the location of rupture, the patient's comorbidity and age, and the availability of endovascular therapy. The majority of ruptured lesions are managed with endovascular techniques.

In the past, reconstructive methods for the treatment of cavernous aneurysms were limited to surgical clip ligation. This often resulted in significant morbidity secondary to the often large size and atherosclerotic nature of these aneurysms as well as the necessary cavernous sinus dissection which put the adjacent cranial nerves and parent vessel at risk. With advances in endovascular technology, aneurysm embolization with vessel preservation is often possible using a combination of detachable aneurysm coils and stents. Flow-diverting stents represent the newest technological advance in the endovascular management of these lesions. The decreased porosity of these devices results in the disruption of blood flow within an aneurysm and, in most cases, gradual aneurysm thrombosis. The long-term follow-up of the PUFS trial (Pipeline Embolization Device for Uncoilable or Failed Aneurysms) showed a 95% 5-year aneurysm occlusion rate with a 5.6% risk of major stroke neurologic death morbidity, all of which occurred within the first six months of treatment for large internal carotid artery aneurysms treated with flow-diverting devices.