Extreme obesity is a widely recognized worldwide epidemic. The rates of obesity have exponentially risen in the United States during the last two decades. Accordingly, the prevalence of 30.5% has escalated to 41.9%. Similarly, the mortality rates of this disorder increased. It is the second most common cause of preventable death in the United States after smoking.

Bariatric surgery was first conducted in the 1960s as the jejunoileal bypass procedure. This procedure showed good weight loss results that involved numerous complications, especially malabsorption.

The two primary mechanisms bariatric surgery allows a patient to lose weight are restriction and malabsorption. Restriction refers to achieving weight loss by limiting the intake of calories. Malabsorption refers to altering the intestinal tract to bypass a certain length of the small intestine. This bypass results in a decrease in the absorption of ingested nutrients. Some procedures change bodily hormonal concentrations, leading to weight loss and resolution of co-morbidities. The laparoscopic adjusted gastric bypass is strictly a restrictive procedure, which may explain why its long-term results are inferior to other bariatric surgeries.

Although the performance of this procedure is rare in the modern era, many patients may continue to have adjustable gastric bands. Therefore, it is necessary to educate clinicians on the laparoscopic adjusted gastric banding technique to diagnose and treat any potential complications safely and promptly.