**Tuning Fork**

The audiometric tuning fork generally consists of the tines (the U-shaped prongs), the stem, and the footplate.

**Striking the Tuning Fork**

- Hold the tuning fork by the stem between the thumb and the first finger.

- Strike the tines one-third of the way from the free end of the prong onto a firm but elastic object (e.g., the clinician's knee or elbow). This will produce a relatively pure tone.

- Avoid striking the tines onto a hard surface, as this may damage the tuning fork and produce multiple overtones.

**Performing Weber Test**

- Place the vibrating tuning fork on the vertex (other common sites used are the midline of the forehead, bridge of the nose, and chin), equidistant from both ears. These vibrations will be conducted through the skull and reach the cochlea.

- Ask the patient whether it is heard loudest in either one side or the midline (e.g., "Is the sound louder in your right ear, left ear, or the middle?")

**Interpretation**

**Normal Hearing**

- Weber test does not demonstrate lateralization: In a normal subject, the sound should be heard in the middle and equally on both sides.

- Rinne test: Normal/positive in both ears (AC greater than BC)

**Unilateral Sensorineural Hearing Loss**

- Weber test lateralizes to the unaffected ear. In other words, it is heard louder in the better ear.

- Rinne test: Normal/positive on the affected ear (AC greater than BC); normal/positive on the unaffected ear (AC greater than BC)

Note: an abnormal/negative response on the affected ear (BC greater than AC) can also occur in a severe sensorineural hearing loss, also called a dead ear. This is termed a "false negative." Rinne test "true negative" only occurs if there is a conductive hearing loss element. However, when testing a dead ear, the bone conduction is perceived to be heard louder than air conduction due to a cross-over of bone conduction detected by the opposite normal-functioning cochlear, resulting in a Rinne false negative.

**Unilateral Conductive Hearing Loss**

- Weber test lateralizes to the affected ear. In other words, it is heard louder in the poorer ear.

- Rinne test: Abnormal/negative on the affected ear (BC greater than AC); normal/positive on the unaffected ear (AC greater than BC)

**Symmetrical Conductive Hearing Loss**

- Weber test does not demonstrate lateralization.

- Rinne test: Abnormal/negative on the affected ear (BC greater than AC)