While the secondary structure is formed by interactions between the backbone constituents, the tertiary structure is the overall three-dimensional shape that is formed by the interactions of the side chains of the various amino acids. The side chains of amino acids are often called R groups. They can be polar, nonpolar, or charged, and this gives rise to amino acids with varying physical properties. The polar and charged amino acids are hydrophilic and can dissolve in water, whereas the nonpolar amino acids are hydrophobic and do not dissolve in water. The properties of amino acids also influence the tertiary structure or overall shape of the protein.

One type of interaction that plays a major role in the correct folding of a protein is the hydrophobic interaction. As a polypeptide folds into its correct shape, amino acids with nonpolar side chains usually cluster at the core of the protein, staying away from water. Once the nonpolar amino acids have formed the nonpolar core of the protein, weak van der Waals forces stabilize the protein. Furthermore, hydrogen bonds and ionic interactions between the polar, charged amino acids contribute to the tertiary structure. These are all weak interactions in the cellular environment, but their cumulative effect helps give proteins their unique shape. Disulfide bridges, covalent bonds formed between two cysteine residues, further reinforce the shape of a protein. Disulfide bridges form when the sulfhydryl groups of two cysteine residues come into close contact because of protein folding. Covalent bonds are not a weak interaction.

Primary structure determines tertiary structure and protein function. The most important proof of this came from experiments showing that denaturation of a protein is reversible. Certain proteins denatured by heat, extreme pH, or denaturing reagents will regain their native structure and original biological function when conditions return to the state in which the native conformation of the protein was stable. For example, ribonuclease denatures in the presence of urea and mercaptoethanol, two denaturing reagents. The disulfide bridges break apart in the reducing environment. Ribonuclease regains its native conformation after the removal of urea and mercaptoethanol. This is just one of the many examples that have shown that primary structure determines the tertiary structure.

Most proteins probably go through several intermediate structures on their way to the most stable shape, and there is no way of knowing these intermediate forms by just looking at the final, folded protein. Crucial to the folding process are chaperonins, protein molecules that assist in the proper folding of other proteins. Chaperonins keep the protein away from the disruptive chemical conditions in the cytoplasmic environment and allow the polypeptide to fold spontaneously. Defects in protein folding provide the molecular basis for a number of genetic disorders.