Providing CAR T-cell treatment to the patient requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes physicians in different specialties, nurses, pharmacists, and laboratory technologists. CAR T-cell therapy preparation is from the patient's peripheral blood cells obtained via leukapheresis and infused back to the patient for tumor-attacking. Nurses are required to perform both leukapheresis and infusion. Different specialty nurses may also be required, for example, in some facilities the dialysis nurse performs leukapheresis, and an oncology nurse delivers immunotherapy. It is a significant role of the nurse in taking care of the patient especially during and after the transfusion. Close attention is required for monitoring any adverse effect including early symptoms and signs of cytokine-releasing syndrome and CAR-T-cell-related encephalopathy. A variety of physicians in different specialties are required especially when adverse effects occur. Pharmacists are important prior to treatment because Interleukin-6 antagonists (ie, tocilizumab or siltuximab), corticosteroids, and emergent equipment are needed prior to infusion and during the recovery period in case of side effects. Critical care may also warranted if side effects are severe and need to stand by during and after the medication infusion. Neurology consultation and evaluation and required if neurotoxicity occurs. The adverse effect can happen in most organs or systems, interprofessional communication and opinion exchange are essential when taking care of a patient undergoing CAR-T cell therapy especially in the situation of any adverse effect.[Level V]