Before stool collection and testing, it is imperative to ensure that the FOBT card and developer are not beyond their expiration dates. Tests commonly used in clinical laboratories are based on detecting hemoglobin, heme, or heme-derived porphyrins.

The most common method for detecting fecal occult blood is based on the detection of heme. In these methods, the pseudoperoxidase activity of heme liberates nascent oxygen from hydrogen peroxide.Guaiacum officinale.

These tests consist of a card containing a high-quality filter paper impregnated with guaiac. This is stable for long periods because the guaiac is not in solution.

The immunological methods are more specific and use antibodies against one of the components in blood, most commonly against the globin chain of the hemoglobin.

Many commercial kits have been developed for detecting blood by immunochemical methods, some of which are automated and therefore are more reproducible.

Immunochemical methods do not require dietary restriction. Immunochemical methods are also more sensitive; the detection limits are lower than the guaiac-based methods.

In one device, a combination of immunological and guaiac-based tests is used. Hemoglobin is immobilized by a monoclonal antibody, and the hemoglobin is then visualized by the guaiac-based reaction. Non-hemoglobin peroxidases will give a background blue color, which is discounted.

The heme-porphyrin test is based on the fact that the heme in the hemoglobin entering the gastrointestinal tract is converted to porphyrins, probably by gut bacteria. In this method, porphyrins in the feces are extracted and then quantitated by spectrofluorimetry.

Recently a method using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) has been described. In this method, the fecal sample is mixed with water, ultrasonicated, and after centrifugation, the supernatant is combined with a matrix solution and used for MALDI-TOF-MS.