Intersection syndrome is a clinical diagnosis, although a musculoskeletal ultrasound can easily confirm it. The initial steps for diagnosis include a focused physical exam of the elbow, wrist, and hand.

As with all musculoskeletal exam, you must have a structured approach that includes inspection, a range of motion, palpation, muscle testing, and other special tests. Each joint above and below the injury should be tested in all motions. Look for swelling over the distal forearm as there can be some cases that present with a palpable finding on exam 4 cm - 6 cm proximal to Lister's tubercle. Crepitus is a very common finding on the exam over the site of irritation. This is a finding that is specific to intersection syndrome. As the two dorsal compartments cross the movements of pronation and supination, create friction resulting in the exam finding of crepitus. Pronation is typically found more uncomfortable than supination.

When developing or working through your differential diagnosis, resisted pronation that leads to the recreation of the patient's pain, along with the palpable finding of crepitus about 2 cm - 3 cm proximal to the radial styloid, can help differentiate from tenosynovitis of De Quarvein Syndrome. De Quarvein Syndrome is a condition that also involves the first dorsal compartment of the wrist extensors. This condition is noted below the radial styloid and can be classically tested via the Finkelstein maneuver.

Plain film imaging and CT will not be helpful in the diagnosis of Intersection syndrome. MRI would give excellent soft tissue picture and diagnosis, although MRI would not be a cost- or time-effective choice.

Ultrasound technology has pushed musculoskeletal medicine forward in both diagnosis and treatment provided by physicians. There have been some that say it can be as specific as MRI in the hands of the skilled user. Remember that as in most musculoskeletal conditions, the anatomy is mostly superficial. Therefore a linear ultrasound probe is utilized. When observing Intersection syndrome under ultrasound, the ideal image is in the transverse plane in short axis. The findings that would correlate to the diagnosis would be a hypoechoic area in between the two dorsal compartments as they are on top of each other. This represents swelling/edema as caused by friction. There also may be a thickening of the tendon sheaths.