Cobalamin consists of four compounds with different biological functions, although these molecules are chemically similar. Cobalamine is a tetrapyrrolic corrin ring with central cobalt moiety. Cyanocobalamin and hydroxocobalamin are synthetic forms of cobalamin, whereas adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) and methylcobalamin have a biological activity to act as cofactors in enzymatic reactions that play a role in the synthesis of DNA, myelin, and fatty acids, which are vital for cell division and growth. The bioavailability of cyanocobalamin and hydroxocobalamin is different, has distinct pharmacologic properties, and can be used according to approved standards in a particular country.

**FDA approved indications:**

- Pernicious anemia: Intrinsic factor of Castle deficiency due to autoantibody formation against parietal cells of the stomach, which results in decreased absorption of vitamin B12 through ileum.

- Malabsorption: Impairment of vitamin B12 absorption.

- Atrophic gastritis: Intrinsic factor level decreases and leads to reduced absorption of vitamin B12.

- Chronic acid-reducing medication use: Chronic reduction of acid secretion decreases the release of bound vitamin B12 from the protein of food particles, so R factor is unable to bind, and ultimately vitamin B12 absorption is reduced.

- Long-term metformin use: May correlate with reduced intestinal mobility or intestinal bacterial overgrowth that competes with vitamin B12 and decreases its absorption.

- Total or partial gastrectomy: It reduces the level of the intrinsic factor of Castle needed for vitamin B12 absorption, so decreased intrinsic factor leads to decreased vitamin B12 absorption.

- Small bowel bacteria overgrowth: Vitamin B12 is overused by bacteria leading to B12 deficiency.

- Diphyllobothrium latum infection: Competes with vitamin B12 for absorption through the intestine.

- Pancreatic insufficiency

- Helicobacter pylori infection

- Dietary deficiency of vitamin B12

**Non-FDA approved indications:**

- Cyanide poisoning

- Smoke inhalation

- Surgery-associated vasoplegia

- Folic acid deficiency