With appropriate preparation, most subclavian venous lines can be placed without assistance; however, in the operating room, a surgical scrub tech is often beneficial.

Before the initial incision or needle stick, excellent skin prep is required to prevent invocation of the catheter with skin flora. This can be completed with either betadine or chlorhexidine solution. It is also important to ensure that all participants in the room are wearing a surgical mask and head cover. The operator should use sterile gown and gloves as well. Before the procedure, the patient is placed in the Trendelenburg position. This promotes venous dilation and can help prevent complications of air embolus. A shoulder roll can also be placed along the patient's superior thoracic spine to aid in the initial access. Caution must be taken, and shoulder roll often omitted, in cases of traumatic injury with suspicion of spine injury. The access site (right or left subclavian vein) is then selected. It is important to note that while the right side has a lower incidence of pneumothorax; it has a higher incidence of catheter malposition. The chest wall is then prepped with surgical prep, in general, it is good practice to prep the entire superior aspect of the chest wall from the top of the shoulders to the nipple line and up the patient's neck to the chin. After the prep is dry, sterile drapes are applied so that only the prepped area is exposed. It is useful to ensure there is enough drape to prevent the guide wire from touching the bedding after it is inserted into the vein. Before inserting the needle, all catheters should be flushed with sterile saline. A procedural "time out" should be undertaken prior to beginning the procedure.