Nyctalopia may be the first presenting symptom of inherited conditions such as retinitis pigmentosa or acquired diseases such as vitamin A deficiency. Night blindness is sensitive and specific for serum retinol levels and is the earliest clinical manifestation of vitamin A deficiency. Night blindness may present with recurrent nighttime falls and difficulty with nighttime driving.

Myopia, or nearsightedness, is refractive error pathology, which can cause nyctalopia. Refractive error refers to an abnormal change to an aspect of the eye that results in converging light prisms crossing at a focal point significantly in front of or behind the retinal plane. Myopia occurs due to an “elongated” eye in which the focal point converges in front of the retina, creating a progressively blurrier image of far distance objects. This blurriness may be accentuated in dim light, manifesting as a common etiology of nyctalopia. Corrective lenses and prescription eyeglasses based on calculated refractive error improve dim light vision.

Hereditary retinal dystrophies are a rare, but significant, cause of nyctalopia. In congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB), there is impaired photoreceptor transmission leading to impaired dark adaptation. Complete type (CSNB1) and incomplete type (CSNB2) are rare heterogeneous conditions, most commonly X-linked. CSNB1 results from a diseased gene in the region between DXS556 and DXS8083 in Xp11.4-p11.3. CSNB1 characteristically results from mutations in genes involved in neurotransmitter detection by bipolar cells and reduced rod sensitivity up to 300x. A different locus is responsible for CSNB2, localized to the region between DXS722 and DXS8023 in Xp11.23; CSNB2 demonstrating membrane defects involved in neurotransmitter release by photoreceptor cells.

Vitamin A deficiency is among the leading causes of blindness worldwide, particularly in developing countries. The World Health Organization estimates 254 million children have vitamin A deficiency, which is the most common cause of childhood blindness. An estimated 45% of these children are from South and Southeast Asia.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), also known as hereditary retinal dystrophy, refers to a group of disorders with progressive loss of vision representing the most common inherited retinal disease. Nyctalopia is generally the first symptom of RP, followed by a gradual narrowing of the visual field or “tunnel vision” and eventually, total vision loss. Dyschromatopsia (loss of color discrimination), loss of acuity, photopsia (perceived flashes of light), and visual hallucinations are among other ocular signs and symptoms associated with RP. Isolated vision loss is termed nonsyndromic RP (70 to 80% of cases), with additional systemic symptoms termed syndromic RP.