Media 2 (figure 2) shows abnormal hemoglobin electrophoretic patterns in various hemoglobinopathies and thalassemia. Comparison of abnormal fraction with the control sample helps the clinician narrow down the diagnosis of hemoglobinopathies and thalassemia. The following table shows the interpretation of hemoglobin electrophoretic patterns shown in Media 2 (figure 2).

The presence of abnormal bands or attenuation of the normal band in serum protein electrophoresis can provide insight to the clinician regarding the ongoing disease process. The following table shows the main content of the zone of serum protein electrophoresis (pH – 8.6).

The following table shows conditions related to an abnormality in serum protein electrophoretic pattern.

Chronic infections, Amyloidosis, Lymphoma, Leukemia, Collagen vascular diseases

Sharp band in the gamma-globin region can be seen in Monoclonal gammopathies such as multiple myeloma, solitary plasmacytoma, heavy chain disease, and plasma cell leukemia.

The electrophoresis technique can also be used to identify abnormally elevated or decreased enzyme isoforms. Various clinical conditions show specific enzyme patterns based on tissue/organ involvement which can help the clinician to diagnose and develop a treatment plan for the case. The following table shows the tissue origin of different isoforms of some plasma non-functional enzymes of clinical significance.

The utility of electrophoresis is not limited to diagnostics. It is widely utilized for research in genomics and proteomics. Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), nucleotide sequencing, next generation sequencing, southern blotting, western blotting, etc., are examples of a few techniques having electrophoresis as one of the steps in it. DNA fingerprinting is the technique utilized by forensic experts to compare DNA acquired from the crime scene and the DNA of the suspects and/or victims. DNA fingerprinting is also utilized for confirmation of the biological parents of a child in case of a dispute.