The management of temporal lobe epilepsy is best with an interprofessional team. Early diagnosis and intervention allow for better outcomes in patients with epilepsy. Anxiety, depression, memory impairment, and cumulative ictal time are some of the variables reducing the quality of life for the individual with epilepsy.

Recent advancements in imaging technology have resulted in improved identification and characterization of epileptic lesions.

Expert evaluation and referral to epilepsy centers, where appropriate, provide additional benefit.

Effective communication between the health care provider (HCP) and the individual with epilepsy is central to achieving an optimal prognosis. Significant management and outcome variables, such as complications associated with ongoing seizures, potential adverse effects of AEDs, and the benefits and risks of all other therapeutic interventions, should be discussed in a manner that is clear, concise, and considerate of individuals psychosocial and economic status. Educational opportunities, such as one-hour courses offered to clinicians to assist them in how to formulate open-ended questions, and effectively communicate with their patients, help to improve the clinician's communication skills.

Chronic disease management models for epilepsy, aim to maintain quality of care while minimizing healthcare costs; emphasis is on patient education, interprofessional communication-due to the numerous overlap among the specialties, and continuity of care. The provision of educational resources and clinical guidelines to primary care practitioners treating individuals with epilepsy is also of benefit by increasing the skilled knowledge base for the management of this disorder. Epilepsy specialty nurses (ESNs) play vital roles in information gathering, distribution, and counseling, and their skillset should be employed when available. The ability to provide timely interventions for the epilepsy population contributes positively to the outcome of this disorder. Technology has been an efficient modality for the distribution of accurate and up-to-date information for patients and HCPs alike. It also permits for evaluation of patients who are not close to epilepsy centers. However, increasing clinical documentation requirements and shorter consultation sessions may be an inhibitor to adequate information gathering. Level II studies conducted in the United Kingdom indicated benefits with an "open-access model" whereby individuals with epilepsy are provided ease of access to ESNs via telecommunication, leading to a reduction of clinic visits.

Given the necessity and use of AEDs in treating the condition, a pharmacist, particularly with pharmacotherapy board certification, can assist with agent selection, checking for potential interactions, and verifying dose and duration, as well as recommending alternative agents in the event of inadequate response.

The examples above with nursing access and pharmaceutical intervention are examples of how an interprofessional team approach optimizes treatment for epilepsy in general and temporal lobe epilepsy in particular, leading to better patient outcomes. [Level V]

It is essential to recognize the relationship between psychiatric disorders and temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurologist should be trained in screening for anxiety and depression, and provided appropriate interventions; the use of screening questionnaires such as the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS) and the Neurological Disorders Depression Inventory for Epilepsy (NDDIE), as well as the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Test (MoCA) are effective screening tools for  psychiatric evaluation, and clinicians should incorporate them when indicated.

Epilepsy support groups and other social interventions may also provide some benefit to the individual with epilepsy due to evidence for improvement in cognitive function in structured environments.