Treatment consists of two major components: management of the underlying vasculitic process and specific interventions for the gastrointestinal pathology. Medical management of systemic vasculitis usually consists of glucocorticoids and other forms of immunosuppressive therapy, including cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, and mycophenolate mofetil.

In patients with intestinal ischemia, when there is a suspicion of complications like infarction or perforation, surgical exploration should be performed at the earliest. Segmental resection of the affected bowel can be life-saving.  In patients presenting with chronic bowel ischemia, timely intervention can reduce the risk of these complications.  Triple-phase CT angiography can help identify stenosis and occlusion in the mesenteric circulation.  Symptomatic stenosis can be treated with percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) with or without stenting for revascularization.

The following section discusses the presentation and management of mesenteric vasculitis in detail, more specifically relative to the underlying etiology.

**Polyarteritis Nodosa**

Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a necrotizing vasculitis predominantly affecting the medium-sized and small-sized visceral arteries. HBV infection is an environmental association in almost one-third of PAN cases, while the rest of them are idiopathic.  The clinical presentation is highly variable due to the extent of arteries that can be involved in the disease. Gastrointestinal symptoms are a patient complaint in more than 50% of patients, and abdominal pain is the most common

In patients presenting with gastrointestinal symptoms, imaging evidence of bowel wall thickening or visceral infarction or rupture should raise suspicion for PAN. CT Angiography and catheter-based angiography can reveal typical findings in the form of scattered aneurysms and stenotic segments, giving rise to a beaded appearance.

**ANCA Vasculitis**

An ANCA-associated vasculitis is a group of three necrotizing vasculitic diseases involving the small arteries, capillaries, and venules.  It includes granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA, previously Wegener granulomatosis), eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA, also called Churg-Strauss syndrome), and microscopic polyangiitis (MPA). GPA characteristically demonstrates granulomatous inflammation of the upper and lower respiratory tract and sometimes immune glomerulonephritis. MPA also involves the respiratory tract and is associated with crescentic glomerulonephritis. Clinical features of EGPA include asthma, recurrent rhinosinusitis, and eosinophilia. ANCA-associated vasculitis can also affect the eye, ear, and nervous system.  Gastrointestinal involvement by these disorders is less common and usually occurs in the advanced stages of the disease. The presentation can range from benign and non-specific symptoms like abdominal pain and vomiting to more serious complications like bleeding or perforation resulting from ischemia and ulceration in the small and large intestines.

In patients with suspicion for ANCA-associated vasculitis, serological testing is vital. More than 80% of patients with GPA and MPA are positive for ANCA. The antibodies in GPA are anti-proteinase-3, whereas those in MPA are anti-myeloperoxidase in most patients. ANCA can be negative in about half of EGPA cases. ANCA can also be positive in other conditions, which can make the diagnosis of these disorders very challenging.  Patients with mesenteric involvement tend to have severe disease and usually receive treatment with cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids for induction, followed by some form of immunosuppression. Rituximab is also an option in patients with mesenteric ischemia from underlying GPA and MPA.

**Immunoglobulin-A Vasculitis**

IgA vasculitis, also known as Henoch-Schonlein purpura (HSP), is the small-vessel vasculitis that is more common in the pediatric population.  The classical presentation of IgA vasculitis consists of palpable purpura, mostly involving the lower extremities, hematuria, and arthralgia.  Gastrointestinal manifestations are seen in about one-half of these patients and generally occur following the rash.  Acute onset, colicky abdominal pain is the most common symptom.  Inflammation leading to intestinal wall edema, bleeding, and ischemia her thought to be the underlying pathology for the abdominal pain. Both upper and lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage can occur in these patients. In children, bowel wall ischemia can lead to intussusception. Most patients describe a preceding upper respiratory infection. Though the disease course can be waxing and waning, it is usually self-limited. About 12 to 50% of patients suffer from a relapse.

The diagnosis of IgA-associated vasculitis is mostly clinical. Elevated serum IgA levels are neither sensitive nor specific to these disorders. Histopathology of the skin reveals leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and direct immunofluorescence shows deposition of IgA. In children presenting with severe abdominal pain and suspicion of IgA vasculitis, CT abdomen should be done to rule out intussusception or intestinal obstruction.  Glucocorticoids, commonly prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/kg per day, have been shown to offer symptomatic benefit in patients with abdominal pain. However, it remains unclear if they affect the course of the disease. The role of other immunosuppressive agents and rituximab in these patients is still not well established.

**Single Organ Vasculitis**

Localized vasculitis of the gastrointestinal tract usually gets diagnosed after abdominal imaging or histopathology examination of organs from surgery reveals evidence suggestive of vasculitis.

**Takayasu Arteritis**

Takayasu arteritis is a granulomatous vasculitis, commonly affecting the aorta and its primary branches. Though the classical pathology is stenotic lesions involving the subclavian, carotid, or abdominal aorta, involvement of the mesenteric circulation is also not uncommon. Most patients with mesenteric involvement are asymptomatic due to the establishment of extensive collateral circulation in the mesenteric bed.  Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy, and some require additional immunosuppression. Patients can present with mesenteric ischemia from critical occlusion of the celiac axis or superior mesenteric artery, in which cases percutaneous intervention with stenting is beneficial.

**Behcet Disease**

This pathology is an idiopathic vasculitic syndrome characterized by recurrent painful ocular and genital ulcerations. Though it can involve any vessel, it has a propensity more towards the venous system. Gastrointestinal symptoms are due to mucosal ulceration that most commonly involved the terminal ileum, cecum, and ascending colon.

**Systemic Lupus Erythematosus**

Gastrointestinal vasculitis in SLE is usually accompanied by active vasculitis of other organ systems as well. Lupus mesenteric vasculitis (LMV) has been known to occur in up to 10% of patients with SLE, and the prevalence is highest in patients with active disease.

Prompt institution of anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive treatment can be life-saving in these patients. High doses of intravenous steroids are the first line of treatment, and refractory cases get therapy with cyclophosphamide. In patients presenting with frank signs of peritonitis, surgical exploration to identify large areas of bowel ischemia or complications like perforation should not delay.  The prognosis of LMV is variable and depends on the extent of ischemia. However, some data shows mortality rates of up to 50%.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

Vasculitis can occur in patients with longstanding and severe rheumatoid arthritis. Patients who receive inadequate therapy, dose with high titers of antibody, and erosive arthritis are predisposed to developing vasculitis. Vasculitis of the gastrointestinal tract is very rare. The involvement of arterioles can present with ulcers, while vasculitis of medium-sized arteries can result in bowel ischemia. Medical treatment involves therapy for the underlying disease with glucocorticoids, other immunosuppressive agents, and biologicals.

Mesenteric vasculitis has also been described infrequently in other systemic vasculitides like giant cell arteritis, relapsing polychondritis, Kawasaki disease, and cryoglobulinemic vasculitis.