Health care outcomes can be enhanced by judicious prescribing methods and by taking steps to identify and deprescribe the medications posing more harm than benefit. Before prescribing any new medication for a condition, we need to understand the goals of the patient/caregiver, and medication's benefit/risk should be discussed in length. Also, the proper rationale, alternative therapies like preventative or non-pharmacological, life expectancy, affordability, and compliance should be considered. Patients should receive prompt follow-up, and medications safety and effectiveness should be assessed in every visit. The medications should be continued in the long term only if there is a clear benefit and minimal or no harm seen.

Implementing the available screening tools to identify and assess the safety of polypharmacy in elderly age groups is the first step in mitigating the risk. The various tools which can be used in various settings are listed below.

A. NO TEARS tool can be useful to review the medications.

- **N**eed an indication: The indication and duration for each medication should be reviewed in every visit. The intended treatment duration, appropriate dosing, and other non-pharmacological options should be reviewed.

- **O**pen questions: Patients should be asked open-ended questions about medication understanding. These questions should include indications, compliance, any issues with it, including understanding the benefit and side effects.

- **T**ests and monitoring: Patients' conditions based on clinical findings and labs should be assessed.

- **E**vidence and guidelines: Medication appropriateness should be reviewed based on current evidence and guidelines. Any appropriate tests of the disease should be ordered.

- **A**dverse events: Any adverse drug reaction should be noted.

- **R**isk reduction or prevention: Any risks of optimizing medications should be assessed. Any risk for falls, opportunistic infections, or any side effects should be assessed.

- **S**implification and switches: Medical treatment should be simplified with medication reconciliation and proper transition of care.

B. Hyperpharmacotherapy Assessment Tool (HAT) - This tool will delineate six goals and help prescribers reduce polypharmacy in long-term care facilities.

C. Beers Criteria - This is widely used and provides an evidence-based approach to improve prescription drug selection; educate prescribers on appropriate drug use and clinically important drug-drug interactions, and assess health outcomes. Beer’s criteria will provide the list of high risks medications that should be avoided or used with caution, used in reduced dosage, and list the possible alternatives. This will help to filter inappropriate medications for the elderly. The details can be reviewed in the 2019 Updated American Geriatrics Society (AGS) Beers Criteria.

D. Screening Tool of Older Person's potentially inappropriate Prescriptions (STOPP) - This is a screening tool to identify drug interactions, duplicate therapies, and inappropriate prescription medication use in the elderly.

E. Medication Appropriateness Index (MAI) - This index is not drug-specific but provides the scoring methods and shows a positive correlation between a high score and drug-related hospital admissions.

F. Anticholinergic Drug Scale - This is mostly useful for elderly patients in nursing homes, hospitals, and community settings. This list provides the 117 medications known to have anticholinergic effects affecting cognition, functional activity, falls, hospital readmission, and mortality.