**Etiology in Children**

Arthritis or inflammation of the joint has multiple etiologies in the pediatric age group. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common bacterial pathogen overall. Some etiologic agents are associated with specific age groups and underlying medical conditions.  Kingella kingae is the most common gram-negative bacterial cause in children younger than 2 to 3 years. Group B Streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, Neisseria gonorrhea, and gram-negative Bacilli are common among neonates. Neisseria gonorrhea is a concern in sexually active adolescents.  Salmonella species infection is associated with sickle cell disease. Patients on prolonged antibiotic therapy are at risk for fungal infections. Puncture wounds and injection drug use are associated with joint infection due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The hip joint is most commonly affected in children.

**Etiology in Adults**

Staphylococcus aureus is the most common infecting organism in adults. Streptococcus pneumonia is less common, but still a significant source of infection in adults. Other special circumstances are as already described as above (Salmonella in patients with sickle cell, and Pseudomonas in trauma/puncture wounds). In young sexually active patients, nontraumatic acute monoarthritis is most frequently caused by Neisseria gonorrhea. In high-risk patients, Neisseria gonorrhea should be cultured from other sites such as the oropharynx, vagina, cervix, urethra or anus as the organism grows poorly from cultured synovial fluid.

Polymicrobial joint infections occur in about 5% of patients as a result of trauma or abdominal infection. Infection of the sternoclavicular and sacroiliac joint often occur in patients with IV drug abuse and usually involve serratia and pseudomonas. Individuals with leukemia are highly susceptible to Aeromonas infections.

Joints previously damaged especially in patients with rheumatoid arthritis are highly susceptible to infection. The organisms damage the articular cartilage along the lateral edges of the joint. Effusions are common and often associated with pain.