Pleural effusions develop when changes in fluid and solute homeostasis occur, and the mechanism causing these changes determines whether it will be an exudative (high protein content) or transudative (low protein content) effusion. Exudate is fluid that leaks around the cells of the capillaries and is caused by inflammation, while transudate is fluid pushed through the capillary due to high pressure within the capillary. An imbalance between the hydrostatic and oncotic pressure within the capillaries causes a transudate effusion. An alteration of the local inflammatory factors that precipitate a pleural fluid accumulation represents an exudative effusion.

The accumulation of fluid in the pleural space is due to the rate of pleural fluid production exceeding the rate of reabsorption. Effusion of exudative type occurs when filtration rate exceeds maximum lymph flow, resulting in an effusion with higher than usual protein content. Exudate forms when protein permeability of the systemic capillaries is increased, causing an increase in pleural liquid protein concentration. Exudative pleural effusions generally are caused by infections such as pneumonia, malignancy, granulomatous diseases such as tuberculosis or coccidioidomycosis, collagen vascular diseases, and other inflammatory states.

An increase of both capillary and mesothelial water permeability leads to hypooncotic fluid (lower protein content), and if filtration exceeds the maximum lymph reabsorption through the parietal stomata, transudate forms. Transudative pleural effusions occur in congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome and malnutrition. The last three conditions reflect a decrease in colloid oncotic pressure due to hypoalbuminemia.

Localized pleural fluid effusion seen from a pulmonary embolism may result from increased capillary permeability due to cytokine and inflammatory mediator release from the platelet-rich thrombi.