**Optical Uses**

Prisms are an essential part of ophthalmology. These are the basics behind many instruments used routinely in ophthalmic practice, from basic investigations to the outpatient department to the operating theatre.

**Prism Adaptation Test**

This test is helpful in patients with partially accommodative esotropia. Patients wearing full hyperopic correction are advised to press on base out prisms and review every two weeks. If the esotropia has increased further, additional power prisms are prescribed till a stable angle is achieved. The surgeon then operates on the full prism-adapted angle; this helps in reducing the chances of under correction.

**Prism Alternate Cover Test**

This test measures the total deviation, including the latent phoria. The first Hirschberg test estimates the tropia, followed by an alternate cover test to estimate the total deviation, i.e., tropia plus phoria. A prism of the estimated amount by an alternate cover test is placed over one eye to neutralize the deviation. An alternate cover test is repeated, and prism power increases or decreases until no refixation movement is noted.

**Simultaneous Prism Cover Test**

This test helps in small-angle strabismus to measure the tropia without dissociating the phoria. The Hirschberg test measures the size of tropia, and a prism of the estimated amount is placed in front of the non-fixing eye to neutralize the tropia. The fixing eye is covered simultaneously with an occluder to prevent fusion. The process is repeated with increasing or decreasing prisms' powers until no refixation movement is noted on removing the occlude.

**Fusional Vergence Amplitudes**

These are measured using a prism bar. Fusional convergence amplitudes are measured by placing the prism bar with the base in front of one eye in increasing steps until the patient reports double vision or inability to fuse. Similarly, fusional divergence amplitudes are measured with base in prism bar by increasing prism powers in steps till the patient reports double vision or failure to fuse.

**Vertical Prism Test**

This test assesses fixation preference. A 10 to 15 D base up or down prism is placed over one eye, inducing vertical strabismus. For example, when a 12 D base-up prism is placed in front of the fixing eye, both the eyes will show an infraduction. But, when the same prism is placed in front of the non-fixating or the amblyopic eye, there will be no deviation of either eye.

**4D Prism Test**

This test is used to diagnose microtropia.

**To Measure the AC/A Ratio**

Prisms are used to measure the AC/A ratio by the fixation disparity method. Changes in fixation disparity induced by prisms and that induced by spherical lenses are noted, which indicates the AC/A ratio. The advantage is that fusion is maintained throughout the test.

**Prisms as Low Vision Aids**

These are convex spherical lenses of powers ranging from +5 to +16D are prescribed as reading aids. These work on providing a magnified image, thus useful as low vision aids.

**Fresnel Prisms**

These prisms have advantages over loose prisms as they are lighter, more comfortable to wear, cosmetically better acceptable by the patient, higher power can be prescribed compared to loose prisms.

**Field Expansion Lenses**

They are composed of two 12 D lateral prisms and one 8D inferior prism. The apex of lenses is placed towards the central non-channel. The lens system is designed for various degrees of peripheral field loss. It is recommended for patients with glaucoma retinitis pigmentosa.

**Prisms in Age-Related Macular Degeneration (ARMD)**

These are based on the principle of image relocation. Prisms are added to the glass prescription to produce image relocation to the presumed retinal locus. The effect is probably created by the facilitation of oculomotor function resulting from the reduction of fixation instability.

**Ankylosing Spondylitis**

Patients with head or neck problems, such as severe ankylosing spondylitis, may benefit from prisms. For example, any patient with chin down posture bilateral equal power base up yoke prisms can improve straight-ahead vision and thus facilitate mobility.

**Prism as Reading Glasses**

These are 15-30D base-down prisms in the form of recumbent spectacles, which allow bedridden patients to read or watch television comfortably in a lying-down position.

**Prisms in Nystagmus**

Prisms are used to move the image towards the null point, thus helping by dampening the nystagmus. Examples include:

- Base out prisms stimulate fusional convergence, thus improving visual acuity by dampening the nystagmus

- In patients with left face turn, the null position is in dextroversion. Thus placing a base in prism in front of the right eye and base-out prism in front of the left eye will shift the image towards the right, thus correcting the abnormal head posture.

- Prisms in contact lens- prisms are used to stabilize the near vision portion in a segmental bifocal contact lens and stabilize a toric contact lens using prism ballast.