There are several relative contraindications for lung biopsy. Proceeding to biopsy without taking special precautions is not advisable for several pulmonary, sedation, bleeding, and other risks.

**General Limitations**

- Uncooperative patients

- Pulmonary hypertension (as determined on CT or better by right heart catheterization)

- Respiratory failure requiring invasive or non-Invasive mechanical ventilation

- Severe hypoxic respiratory failure requiring Oxygen supplementation

- Severe bullous emphysema

- Extensive pleural disease

- Contralateral pneumonectomy

- End-stage pulmonary fibrosis

- Severe impairment of diffusion capacity DLCO <35% of predicted

- Recurrent cough (cough suppressants should be prescribed)

- Advanced age (>76 years) with interstitial lung disease

- Uncorrectable coagulopathy

**Contraindications to Sedation**

Determination of periprocedural anesthesia risk is institution-dependent. Many hospitals require physicians to assess the patient using the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) Physical Classification System and a Mallampati score. The ASA in 2014 provided greater detail to the classification regarding what constitutes a threat to life (class 4). Symptomatic CHF, sepsis, and myocardial infarction or stroke within three months constitute class 4 disease. In general, an uncontrolled or worsening neurologic, respiratory, cardiac, hematologic, or renal situation can qualify as a threat to life.

If the patient is ASA class 4 or higher, has unstable risk factors not qualifying as ASA class 4, and/or has any other anesthetic risk factors (such as a "difficult" airway), then some institutions and authors recommend or even require that the patient should have anesthesiology and/or other clinical subspecialist consultation prior even to otherwise "low risk" sedation procedures (Cohn S, ed. Perioperative Medicine. London: Springer-Verlag; 2011).

This consultation determines whether the risk factor is modifiable/able to be made stable and/or whether extra help should be available during the procedure. It is suboptimal patient care for the radiologist to discover risk factors the day of the procedure and/or to proceed with the biopsy out of the desire to "just get it over with." Patients with difficult airways or low threshold for sequelae of pneumothorax may need to have extra equipment and medications available in the room and/or healthcare personnel made available before the procedure to assist with complications.

**Bleeding Risks**

Standards of practice recommendations for the cessation of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications for interventional radiology procedures are categorized based on hemorrhage risks from level 1 to level 3. Percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is classified as a level 2 procedure. An INR of no more than 1.5 and a platelet count of at least 50,000 cells/microliter are recommended for such procedures. The same guidelines offer specific criteria for the cessation of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications for level 2 procedures.

In the Johns Hopkins Surgical Risk Classification System, which is based primarily on the potential need for blood replacement, percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is considered a category 2 procedure (blood loss up to 500 cc) on a scale of 1-4. This is equivalent in risk to laparoscopic cholecystectomy and inguinal hernia repair. Both of these procedures are almost always performed with the aid of an anesthesiologist or certified registered nurse anesthetist present who can help with hemodynamic correction, as well as with airway maintenance and analgesia. A rapid large pneumothorax can cause a degree of chest pain similar to that of a heart attack or aortic dissection. Some lesions can be anticipated to be highly vascular, such as renal cell carcinoma or melanoma metastasis.

There may be no more reasonable alternative than percutaneous lung lesion biopsy for the next step in a patient's management despite one of the above contraindications. A patient may have a poor cardiopulmonary function that would be more likely to lead to death during surgery than during pneumothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage, or other complications from a lung biopsy.

The diagnosis of cancer may be considered too tenuous in the mind of the oncologist that treatment with radiation or chemotherapy would be considered unacceptable without tissue confirmation. In these circumstances, as suggested by the language of the NCCN and ACCP guidelines, it is the responsibility of a team of physicians (primary care, oncology, surgery, pulmonology, etc.) to work together to optimize the patient (e.g., respiratory function, blood pressure, glucose level, coagulation ability), to be ready to assist immediately for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy complications and to set expectations for the patient.

**Other**

The reality of percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is that it is often performed on highly mobile targets without the use of real-time imaging guidance. In this setting, a "noncooperative" patient (i.e., a person who cannot lie still or breathe in a controlled fashion for the time needed to perform the biopsy) is a major contraindication to continuing with the procedure.