Tizanidine is a centrally acting alpha-2 agonist. Tizanidine is widely used as an anti-spastic agent for multiple medical conditions.

**FDA-approved Indication**

- Tizanidine is indicated for spasticity management due to multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, stroke, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and traumatic brain injury.

**Off-label Use**

- Chronic neck and lower back pain

- Rebound headaches due to analgesic withdrawal

- Chronic migraine headaches

- Refractory insomnia in spastic quadriplegic patients

- Regional musculoskeletal pain syndromes

**Clinical Studies**

- Placebo-controlled studies confirm the significant efficacy of tizanidine in reducing spasticity in patients with spinal cord-induced spasticity. Literature suggests that patients with severe spasticity are more likely to benefit from the therapy. Drug comparison studies have shown no differences in the efficacy of tizanidine compared with baclofen or diazepam. The tizanidine treatment group did not report increased weakness compared to the controls. Furthermore, patients given tizanidine experienced fewer adverse effects than those using controlled substances.

- Studies exhibit that tizanidine, baclofen, and diazepam effectively decreased excessive muscle tone in patients with multiple sclerosis or cerebrovascular lesions. Muscle strength improved in all three treatment groups, but the improvement was most significant with tizanidine. Shakespeare et al. also reported similar findings showing no differences in efficacy between tizanidine, baclofen, and dantrolene compared to diazepam. However, diazepam was associated with more sedation.

- Another study by Lataste et al. showed no significant differences between tizanidine and baclofen or diazepam for muscle tone, muscle spasms, clonus, muscle strength, or overall anti-spastic effect. However, tizanidine tolerance is slightly better than diazepam and baclofen.

- Groves et al. report no significant differences between tizanidine, baclofen, or diazepam for spasticity by Ashworth score. However, applying global tolerability to treatment favored tizanidine compared to baclofen and diazepam.

- Animal studies have shown that tizanidine provides benefits in the perioperative period and the management of neuropathic pain, such as trigeminal neuralgia, similar to the effects of clonidine under similar circumstances.

- A recent study indicates that tizanidine and other alpha-2 agonists can be used for medically supervised opioid withdrawal.

- The American Academy of Neurology guidelines reports that tizanidine should be used for generalized spasticity in cerebral palsy, for segmental/localized spasticity treatment with botulinum toxin-A is more effective.