Managing selenium deficiency can be difficult, considering this phenomenon typically occurs in underdeveloped and developing regions of the world where healthcare and nutrition are limited. Selenium levels are rarely tested, and clinicians and other healthcare providers are often unaware of deficiencies and treatment options. Therefore, the entire interprofessional healthcare team needs to work together, starting with gathering a good history from the patient. Along with physicians, mid-level practitioners (PAS and NPS), nurses, medical assistants, pharmacists, nutritionists/dieticians, and technicians can ask questions and collect data from the patient. Specifically, it is essential to ask about diet, as many selenium-deficient patients lack selenium in the food they consume. Pharmacists must stay up to date with the most recent guidelines regarding selenium supplementation dosing so that pharmacists and clinical staff can communicate to ensure the most beneficial course of action for patients.

The same approach is valid when patients have a condition that will respond to topical selenium preparations. This therapy may also involve a dermatologist working with the family clinician, nursing staff, and pharmacist to answer patient questions and provide guidance on using the drug and what to look for in the rare event of an adverse reaction.

This interprofessional approach will optimize selenium therapy and use the agent only when necessary, leading to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]