It is essential to distinguish between conductive and sensorineural hearing loss, which can help establish the associated pathologies. Conductive hearing loss occurs when soundwaves are inhibited from reaching the cochlea, occurring primarily due to mechanical pathology of the pinna, ear canal, or middle ear. The causes of this vary from conditions affecting the pinna such as microtia, canal conditions including cerumen impaction and otitis externa, to middle ear pathologies such as serous otitis media, cholesteatoma, or ossicular disruption. The management options vary considerably depending on the underlying pathology, so patients must receive a thorough clinical assessment.

Sensorineural hearing loss occurs due to pathology of the inner ear or the cochlear nerve at any point during its course from the inner ear to the auditory cortex.

Presbyacusis typically causes a high-frequency hearing loss, and patients may struggle to hear high-pitched noises and alarms. Hearing loss is thought to be related to depression and cognitive decline in older adults. Awareness, assessment, and management of hearing loss with amplification devices are important, with sound amplification having been shown to positively impact the quality of life.

Other causes of sensorineural hearing loss include noise-induced hearing loss, which typically shows a drop at the 4 kHz frequency that may be detected on an audiogram. Rarer but more serious causes of hearing impairment such as vestibular schwannoma, a benign tumor arising from the Schwann cells of the vestibular nerve, should be excluded if a unilateral hearing loss is detected.

Accurate and appropriately masked, pure tone audiograms form a key element of the overall clinical assessment of individuals experiencing hearing loss. A single pure tone audiogram should be validated, meaning the results are analyzed and should be consistent with the clinical history, examination findings, immittance (tympanometry), and speech audiometry. Inconsistent results may highlight the need for further investigation, with repeated audiological testing, to ensure the accuracy of findings.