Erythrasma responds to topical and oral therapies, but it often reoccurs. Topical therapies include fusidic acid, clindamycin, or erythromycin. Fusidic acid is an antibiotic that is not available in the United States. It acts by blocking aminoacyl-tRNA transfer to protein in susceptible bacteria. It was compared to oral erythromycin and clarithromycin in a double-blind placebo-controlled, randomized study at the University Hospital in Izmir, Turkey. It enrolled 151 adults over age 18 and divided them into five groups: group one got a single dose of 1 gram of oral clarithromycin, group 2 got 1 gram per day of oral erythromycin for 14 days, group 3 got placebo tablets for 14 days, group 4 got topical fusidic acid cream 2% twice a day for 14 days, group 5 got placebo cream twice a day for 14 days.

The fusidic acid cream was found to be superior to oral clarithromycin and erythromycin in reducing Wood's lamp scores. The score was based on the intensity of coral-red fluorescence. This was thought to be due to the ability of fusidic acid to remove coproporphyrin III from the stratum corneum. Fusidic acid was also found to cause a complete clinical response in 96% of patients, while clarithromycin caused the same response in 66% of patients and erythromycin in 53% of patients.

Extensive erythrasma requires oral therapy. Oral options include 1 gram of clarithromycin for a one time dose. 1 gram of oral erythromycin (in divided doses) for 14 days is also an option.

Clarithromycin has some advantages over erythromycin in that it can be given as a single dose. Clarithromycin is a macrolide that inhibits protein synthesis by binding to the 50s ribosomal subunit of the bacteria. It has better bioavailability than erythromycin due to a hydroxy to O-methyl substitution at position 6 on the lactone ring. It may be more effective in treating erythrasma in the groin. There have been few comparative studies between erythromycin and clarithromycin.

Side effects and adverse effects of both oral options listed above include nausea, abdominal pain, hearing loss, metallic taste, ventricular arrhythmias, cholestatic jaundice, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.