**Adaptations of the Quadriceps Muscle in the Presence of Disease**

Skeletal muscle adapts in the presence of systemic diseases. This means that the function of the muscle changes both metabolism and volumes, worsening the symptomatic picture.

As has been demonstrated in chronic respiratory and cardiac diseases, there is no direct correlation between the symptom (dyspnea and fatigue) and the values of the cardiac function (ejection rate) and pulmonary function (FEV1). It is the musculature that determines, over time, the manifestation of the disease, fatigue, and dyspnoea. Knowing how to adapt the muscles allows better orientation during the rehabilitation process.

**Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)**

The presence of chronic and ingravescent respiratory diseases such as COPD determines a decrease in muscle mass of the quadriceps femoris muscle, an increase of the connective tissue, and fibrosis phenomena. This will lead to decreased contractile capacity, less strength, and less balance during walking or standing posture. The anaerobic fibers will increase at the expense of the oxidative fibers; the muscles will be more easily fatigued. It increases intramuscular fat with local and systemic metabolic alteration (increased cardiovascular risk). The female gender will suffer more from the functional alteration of the muscle than the male gender.

**Chronic Heart Failure**

In patients with chronic heart failure (CHF), there are very similar muscular changes to chronic respiratory diseases. The muscle mass decreases, as well, as the red fibers decrease. Muscle cells have less ability to repair themselves, with a constant inflammatory pattern. The quadriceps has less strength and less neuromuscular control.

**Diabetes**

In the quadriceps muscle of patients with diabetes, a functional alteration occurs, with loss of volumes, precocious senescence of the muscle cells (primarily for women), and a greater decrease for the oxidative fibers in a cellular environment with inflammation and strong oxidation. Exhaustive neuromuscular coordination is lost with an increased rate of falls.

**Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD)**

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is characterized by the absence of the dystrophin protein, which is essential for muscle fiber repair. The muscular cell presents with necrotic fibers, increased intramuscular fat, and fibrosis. The quadriceps muscle loses shape and function, with diminished restorative capacity and volumes.

**Multiple Sclerosis**

In multiple sclerosis, the quadriceps muscle loses muscle mass and strength, with a decrease in oxidative fibers but an increase in anaerobic fibers. Although there is an increase in the number of white fibers, the latter suffer more atrophy. Increase intramuscular fat and fibrosis processes.

**Aging**

The muscular adaptation of the quadriceps muscle with advancing age changes its morphology and function. Tendentially, the musculature loses mass, and volume (sarcopenia) decreases strength and coordination. Motor units are lost (denervation processes) while the percentage of red fibers increases. This increases the fibrosis processes and intramuscular fat.

**Fibromyalgia**

Muscle cells have lower amounts of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) and PCr (phosphocreatine), with less contractile capacity. There is mitochondrial suffering of red fibers and a marked hypotrophy of white fibers; DNA fragmentation; reduced capillarization with thickening of the endothelium; and increases in intramuscular fat.

**The Quadriceps Muscle as a Diagnostic Tool**

There is a close direct relationship between muscle mass and the capillary network; the latter directly relates to insulin sensitivity. Studies on a human model have shown that evaluating the capillarization of the quadriceps muscle can give important indications regarding the insulin sensitivity of the whole body system.

A recent study has shown that studying the quadriceps fibers to determine if inflammatory myocarditis exists is a fathomable and correct procedure. With the increase of intramuscular lymphocytes, the presence of lymphocytic myocarditis can be predicted, with a sensitivity of 71% and a specificity of 100%.

**Knee pain Without Surgery**

Patients suffering from chronic unilateral knee pain lack bilateral quadriceps muscle coordination and less resistance to effort.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

Patients with rheumatoid arthritis demonstrate a functional slowing of the performance of the quadriceps muscle (neuromuscular incoordination) and a lower strength expressed. The quadriceps musculature appears to have fewer muscle fibers (hypotrophy) and reduced the pennation angle.