Tinea corporis can be diagnosed clinically based on history and exam. If there is an atypical appearance, further testing such as a KOH test or fungal culture should be the diagnostic test plan. [Level III]

After diagnosing tinea corporis, the standard treatment is with topical antifungals. Due to the possibility of side effects and adverse reactions from systemic therapy, topical treatment is the usual recommendation over systemic therapy. [Level I]

Tinea corporis requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V] In most cases, the clinician (physician, NP, PA) will diagnose and prescribe treatment. Pharmacists can verify agent antifungal coverage and dosing, and report back to the nurse or clinician if they have any concerns. Pharmacists and nurses can both ensure that the patient has had baseline LFTs and report back to the prescriber if not. The pharmacist should also verify the patient's current regiment has no other drugs that could contribute to hepatotoxicity because of potential add-on effects of many oral antifungal agents. If present, the pharmacist should alert the nurse or prescriber so they can arrange for appropriate changes to the therapeutic regimen. Pharmacists can also check for drug-drug interactions, as these are common with azole antifungals. Nurses and pharmacists can both verify patient compliance and counsel patients on their medications or the dosing/administration of the same, and report any issues back to the prescribing clinician, who can make changes to the patient's drug regimen based on patient needs.