General techniques for ileal conduit, orthotopic neobladder, and continent cutaneous urinary diversions are described below. Open and minimally invasive approaches, either with laparoscopy or robotic assistance, have been described. Principles of adequate exposure and bowel mobilization to allow for tension-free anastomoses are common to each diversion type and surgical approach. Care should be taken to carefully evaluate the blood supply to each segment of bowel used in the urinary reconstruction to assure the diversion is well perfused. In each case, the diversion is started after the bladder, and lymph nodes are removed. The left ureter is passed behind the sigmoid mesentery in preparation for the ureteral anastomosis for each reconstruction.

**Ileal Conduit:**

An appropriate portion of ileum is selected, which should be approximately 15 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. The length of the conduit is chosen to allow for appropriate positioning and for tension-free anastomoses of the ureters to the proximal end of the conduit, with approximately 15 cm of ileum generally required for the diversion. The mesenteric blood supply can be visualized by lifting the distal ileum and shining a light through to visualize the avascular plane for the division to ensure adequate blood supply to the conduit.

The distal division is made along the avascular line of Treves, between the ileocecal artery and the terminal branch of the superior mesenteric artery. The mesentery is then divided with a ligature device or with suture ligation. The proximal mesenteric division should be shorter than the distal division, as the distal segment requires greater mobilization to reach the skin. The distal division requires dividing the vascular arcade connecting the terminal branch of the superior mesenteric artery and the ileocolic artery. A gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA) stapling device is then used to divide the proximal and distal segments of the conduit.

The conduit is then placed into the pelvis, and the ileum to be reconnected to restore bowel continuity is elevated and brought together. A side-to-side anastomosis is completed by excising the antimesenteric corners of the proximal and distal bowel to be reconnected. A gastrointestinal anastomosis stapling device is then used for the anastomosis. The end of the anastomosis is closed with a transverse anastomosis (TA) stapler after the ends are aligned with Allis clamps. The staple line is reinforced, and the mesenteric defect between the anastomosed bowel is realigned with interrupted sutures.

The staple line at the proximal end of the ileal conduit is then excised and closed with running sutures in two layers using the Parker-Kerr technique, and the conduit is aligned to allow for ureteral anastomosis. The ureters are brought to the proximal end of the conduit and are further tapered and spatulated to allow for anastomosis without excessive tension or redundancy of the ureter, which may kink and cause an obstruction. Care must be taken not to handle the ureters directly and risk damaging the blood supply, which is in the adventitial layer. The bowel serosa is grasped and enterotomies made for anastomosis of the ureters, which can be performed with interrupted or running absorbable sutures. Some centers place temporary ureteral stents to help decrease early urinary leak and stricture at anastomotic sites, though the use of stents is not uniformly used, and their role is debated in the literature.

The stoma is then brought through the belly of the rectus muscle to be matured to the skin at the pre-selected site. Turnbull loop stomas or rosebud stomas may be created at the surgeon's discretion. After the stoma is matured, the proximal end of the conduit is retroperitonealized by tracking the medial peritoneal flap to the conduit. A stomal catheter is often placed temporarily to ensure adequate drainage of the conduit during the early perioperative period.

After recovery, the patients should be instructed to change their urostomy appliance every 3-4 days and to attach a urinary drainage bag to their ostomy appliance at night to ensure the urine drains away from the conduit, as urine refluxing into the conduit can lead to skin breakdown leading to an increased risk of urinary infection. The appliance does not need to be sterilized, and the conduit does not require irrigation. Simple hydration is effective in promoting adequate urine flow to avoid stasis and infection.

**Orthotopic Neobladder:**

Numerous orthotopic diversions have been described, each of which relies upon creating a low-pressure reservoir based on double folding of the ileal segment. The distal division, approximately 15 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve, is performed in an identical fashion as described previously for the ileal conduit, though the mesenteric division distally can be deeper to allow for greater mobilization of the bowel segment into the pelvis.  Approximately 55 cm of the bowel is measured proximal to this distal division to create the neobladder. Like for the ileal conduit, the bowel to be used for the neobladder is placed into the pelvis while the bowel to be reconnected is anastomosed and the mesenteric trap closed in an identical fashion described previously.

Two 20 cm segments of the ileum are used for the neobladder, and 15 cm of more proximal ileum is used for the afferent limb, which accommodates the ureteral anastomoses. The back wall of the two 20 cm segments is aligned to create a "U" configuration. The bowel is detubularized on the antimesenteric border. The proximal afferent limb is not detubularized. The posterior plate is closed with a running two-layer closure, and the pouch is folded in half in the opposite direction of the posterior plate. The anterior wall is closed, with the distal suture line remaining open for ultimate anastomosis to the urethra.

The ureters are then anastomosed to the afferent limb in an identical fashion as described previously for the ileal conduit. The reservoir is brought to the pelvis, and the urethra-enteric anastomosis is completed with interrupted sutures over a foley catheter. Ureteral stents, if they are used, can be secured to the catheter or externalized. Suprapubic catheter drainage of the neobladder may be used in addition to foley catheter drainage at the surgeon's discretion.

**Continent Cutaneous Urinary Diversion:**

Though multiple configurations of continent cutaneous urinary diversions have been described, the most performed technique uses a pouch created using the ascending colon and a catheterizable channel created by a portion of the distal ileum.  Approximately 30 cm of ascending colon is selected, de-fatted, and divided using a GIA stapler. A 10 cm segment of the terminal ileum is selected as a catheterizable channel. The bowel is divided with continuity restored by anastomosing the terminal ileum to the transverse colon in a side-to-side fashion, as previously described.

The isolated colon segment is detubularized along the anterior tenia. Care is taken to avoid disrupting the ileocecal valve. The catheterizable channel, which will be made using the terminal ileum, is tapered over a 14 Fr catheter using running sutures, and the ileocecal valve is reinforced as the continence mechanism.  Sites for ureteroenteric anastomosis are chosen on the posterior wall of the detubularized colon. A small colonic hiatus is created for each ureteral anastomosis, and each ureter is passed from outside-to-inside of the colonic pouch. The ureteral segments are shortened and trimmed as needed to ensure that any redundant or poorly perfused ureter is excised. The ureters are spatulated and anastomosed from inside the pouch with interrupted or running absorbable sutures, and stents can be placed at the surgeon's discretion.

With the ureterocolonic anastomosis complete, the open colon segment is folded and approximated in two layers with absorbable sutures. A cecostomy tube can be placed through the anterior wall of the pouch. The catheterizable channel is then brought to the marked stoma site and matured to the skin using a V-shaped incision with interrupted absorbable sutures. A stoma catheter is then placed and secured.