The actions of the quadriceps femoris have repercussions on the knee and hip joints. The rectus femoris can flex the hip, while its synergistic action with vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, and vastus intermedius extends the knee.

The myoelectric balance of the quadriceps is essential for the correct movement of the patella.

The proprioceptive afferents of the muscle contribute to maintaining adequate posture. Recent studies show that the activation of these afferents allows the contralateral quadriceps muscle to improve its coordination, increasing postural balance. The quadriceps muscles allow an independent walk, help with stair climbing, and enable one to lift from a chair.

The rectus femoris can activate its fibers in the longitudinal mode. It can activate the proximal fibers in the absence of contraction of the most distal fibers. If the action of the quadriceps continues, it will activate the most distal fibers in the absence of the most proximal ones. It is probably a mechanism to delay the onset of fatigue.

The patellar tendon insertion of the vastus medialis is small and cannot generate a force capable of medially stabilizing the patella during knee extension. The force expressed by the vastus medialis during the extension is modest. In reality, during its contraction, it pulls the aponeurosis of the vastus intermedius, counteracting the lateral forces on the patella of the vastus lateralis. The vastus medialis acts indirectly as a patellar stabilizer, placing its contractile force on the median axis of the femur.

The strength expressed by the vastus lateralis increases with the increase in knee flexion. This mechanism is due to the length of the fibers compared to the connective structure of the muscle. Longer fibers express greater strength and make better use of the elasticity or resistance of the connective tissue. When the knee is extended, the vastus lateralis places a small force that is useful for maintaining the position with minimal effort.

The following are the functions of the quadriceps muscle:

- Knee extension

- Hip flexion

- Maintenance of posture

- Proper stage of step/gait cycle

- Maintenance of patellar stability

**Anatomy**

The quadriceps femoris muscle is part of the anterior muscles of the thigh, along with the sartorius muscle. It is composed of five muscle bellies.

- It consists of the rectus femoris (RS) that originates from the anterior inferior iliac spine with the direct tendon and the upper rim of the acetabulum with the indirect tendon. With a third and small tendon (reflected tendon), it attaches to the hip joint capsule anteriorly. The first 2 RS tendons continue downward with two aponeurotic laminae, up to two-thirds of the rectus femoris. The direct tendon will become the superficial lamina, while the indirect tendon continues as a central sagittal lamina.

- The vastus lateralis (VL) originates from the lateral face of the great trochanter, the gluteal tuberosity, and the lateral lip of the linea aspera.

- The vastus medialis (VM) runs from the anatomical neck of the femur and the medial lip of the linea aspera. The vastus medialis is deeply inserted in the aponeurosis of the vastus intermedius, while the tensor of the vastus intermedius is inserted in the same aponeurosis, more superficial.

- The vastus intermedius (VI) originates from the proximal three-fourths of the anterior and lateral faces of the femoral body and the lateral lip of the linea aspera. Some bundles of the vastus intermedius are inserted in the upper recess of the supra-patellar bursae, making up the articular muscle of the knee.

The four heads are directed downward to form a single tendon, the quadriceps muscle tendon, which fits on the patella. The most superficial fibers of the tendon continue and cover the patella, inserting on the tibial tuberosity called the patellar ligament. The connective fibers of the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis attach themselves to the margins of the patella; the connective fibers of the vastus intermedius insert at the base of the patella. Some connective fibers come from the RS and, together with connective fibers of vastus lateralis/vastus medialis, will form the lateral and medial retinacula of the patella.

- Recently, another muscle, the tensor of the vastus intermedius (TVI), has been identified as part of the quadriceps femoris. The tensor of the vastus intermedius starts from the anteroinferior portion of the great trochanter. It joins with a wide flat aponeurosis between vastus lateralis and vastus intermedius in the central area of the thigh, and they join with a single tendon in the upper part of the patella, merging into the quadriceps tendon. At the dorsal level of the thigh, the muscle fibers of these three muscles merge in the vicinity of the linea aspera of the femur. At the level of the great trochanter, this muscle also can originate from the gluteus minimus.

We do not know much about its functions; however, it probably allows, together with the other aspects, a correct movement of the patella and/or puts the intermedius muscle in tension.