Tissue expanders are utilized to maximize skin volume before implant placement. There are two types of tissue expanders that have been used for breast reconstruction. One is filled with compressed carbon dioxide and the second type with saline.

Saline tissue expanders are sequentially filled with saline in the outpatient setting. This requires weekly or biweekly clinic visits to reach the desired volume. The saline infusions are performed with percutaneous needle sticks that can cause patient anxiety and discomfort as well as an increased risk of infection. Another potential complication is skin dehiscence due to the sudden expansion with saline bolus causing pressure necrosis on mastectomy flaps. The advantages of the saline tissue expander include not requiring adjustment of radiation therapy protocol, and the saline can be removed from the expander if indicated.

Carbon dioxide expanders are remote-controlled, allowing for gradual expansion to be performed by the patient in the outpatient, home setting. It does not require percutaneous needle sticks, thus reducing the potential for infections. The expansion is more gradual, and the volume is achieved faster than with traditional saline tissue expander. The patients can receive adjuvant radiotherapy; however, the radiation oncologist may have to modify radiation protocol. Another disadvantage is that the carbon dioxide cannot be expelled from the tissue expander if it is required.

Breast implant (saline vs. silicone) remains one of the more popular methods of breast reconstruction. In the case of a rupture, those with saline may feel more comfortable knowing that nothing more than saline is entering their body. Implants still tend to be a much simpler surgery comparatively. On the other hand, saline implants typically last only 10 to 15 years, are palpable, and can be prone to causing a rippling of the skin. Silicone implants are lighter weight, have a longevity of 20 to 25 years, and look more aesthetically natural with less rippling. According to the FDA, there is a possible associated risk of developing breast-implant associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma with either type of implant. The minimal increased risk of developing BIA-ALCL is linked only with textured implants.

The acellular dermal matrix material (ADM) can be derived from porcine, bovine, or cadaver tissue versus synthetic mesh.

Drains are utilized to extract potential fluid collections, whether it is a seroma or a hematoma. A variety of sizes are available, and it is surgeon preference on which size is utilized.