Symmetrical inflammation of various joints of the hands and feet (metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal, wrist, and metatarsophalangeal joints) are the most common initial manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The morning stiffness feeling often lasts more than an hour. As the disease progress, erosion happens, leading to the characteristic deformation of the fingers and toes.

**Rheumatoid Spondylitis**

Diagnostic criteria for RA include inflammatory arthritis involving three or more joints and lasting more than 6 weeks, positive rheumatoid factor (RF), and/or anti-citrullinated peptide/protein antibody testing. Inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) or the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) can be elevated, and symptoms cannot be attributed to other pathologies such as psoriatic arthritis, acute viral polyarthritis, polyarticular gout or calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease, and systemic lupus erythematosus.

Patients with RA that develop cervical spondylitis can present with occipital headaches secondary to compression of the greater occipital branch of the C2 nerve, which occurs secondary to degeneration of the C1-C2 joint.

A classic grading system that has been utilized to categorize severity of neurologic impairment with RA spondylitis is the Ranawat Classification System:

- Grade I: Subjective paresthesias, pain

- Grade II: Subjective weakness, upper motor neuron findings

- Grade III: Objective weakness, upper motor neuron findings

- IIIA: Ambulatory
- IIIB: Nonambulatory

Careful consideration is given to IIIB patients as the literature notes significant controversy with respect to additional benefits (at the cost of significantly high morbidity rates postoperatively) in managing these patients with surgical intervention.

**Ankylosing Spondylitis**

Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is normally classified as an axial spondyloarthropathy and mainly presented with chronic back pain and bilateral, severe arthritis of the sacroiliac joints and lumbosacral spine. Back pain is severe and starts before age of 40. It is insidious in onset, improves with exercise but not with rest, and is worse at night. AS can lead to disabling spinal fusion and hyperkyphosis. Peripheral arthritis only happens in about a third of cases. If they happen, changes are asymmetric and involve one large joint like the hip, knee, or shoulder. Erosion is rare.

Axial spondyloarthritis consists of AS and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, which are characterized by symptoms of spinal inflammation and other features shared with spondyloarthritis in general.