The most common adverse effects associated with hyaluronic acid filler are pain, bruising, redness, itching, and swelling. These side effects are self-limited and typically last no more than seven days. The patient can mitigate them by applying an ice pack to the injection site, remaining upright, and, 1 week before the procedure, stopping medications or supplements that increase the risk of bleeding, for example, aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, vitamin E, fish oils, St. John’s wort, and ginkgo biloba.

Extremely rare side effects of hyaluronic acid gel injection include infection, tissue necrosis, granulomatous foreign body, and activation of herpes labialis. Infection is due to bacterial inoculation through the injection site, which is preventable with proper aseptic technique and ensuring that there is no active infection near the injection site. Tissue necrosis can result from vascular occlusion due to intra-arterial injection of hyaluronic acid filler and highlights the importance of understanding facial anatomy and performing a blood aspiration test before injecting. If this adverse complication is suspected, hyaluronidase should be applied immediately, which will dissolve the hyaluronic acid gel particles. Granulomatous foreign body reaction has been a very rare documented reaction to hyaluronic acid filler injection and is thought to be caused by a reaction to bacterial impurities remaining from the production process. On histology, multinucleated giant cells can be visible at the injection site where the granulomatous foreign body reaction is occurring. The purification process of hyaluronic acid filler has improved significantly, resulting in fewer cases of hypersensitivity reactions. When performing lip injections, it is crucial to be aware of whether the patient has a history of herpes simplex virus infection or has a history of herpes simplex virus reactivation after a previous filler injection. The trauma caused by injection can lead to the reactivation of the virus; this is preventable and treated with oral acyclovir.

Adverse effects of intra-articular injections of hyaluronic acid are usually mild and self-limiting. Local injection site reactions or irritation are the most common side effects. Up to 2% of patients can experience a post-injection flare with more pain, swelling, redness, and warmth, which is usually self-limited and can resolve with icing, rest, and anti-inflammatory medications. Synovial fluid analysis in such cases reveals aseptic fluid with no crystals. Intra-articular infections have not been reported in clinical trials and are extremely rare in clinical practice. Hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis and angioedema, have been reported. Systemic adverse effects such as rash, arthralgia, myalgia, muscle cramps, and nausea have been reported in about 2% of cases in clinical trials.