**Most Common Adverse Reactions**

- Nephrolithiasis/urolithiasis: This may occur with symptoms such as flank pain and hematuria or asymptomatic. Administration of antiretroviral therapy (ART) to patients increases the risk of renal insufficiency.

- Hyperglycemia, leading to insulin resistance

- Heart attack

- Diabetes leading to ketoacidosis

- Hemolytic anemia

- Lipodystrophy

**Most Common Less Serve Side Effects**

- Diarrhea

- Nausea

- Vomiting

- Fatigue

**Rare Side Effect**

Hydronephrosis

**Hepatotoxicity:**Likelihood score: C (a frequent cause of serum bilirubin elevations and probable cause of rare instances of clinically apparent liver injury). The pattern of serum enzyme elevations due to indinavir therapy can be cholestatic or hepatocellular, associated with indirect hyperbilirubinemia. Acute liver injury due to indinavir is generally self-limited, although rare cases of acute liver failure have been reported.

**Drug Interactions:**Indinavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A4. Therefore, concurrent administration of indinavir and medications metabolized by CYP3A4 can increase plasma concentrations, increasing therapeutic and adverse effects. On the contrary, coadministration of indinavir and other medications that inhibit CYP3A4 may reduce indinavir clearance and result in increased plasma concentrations of indinavir. This interaction commonly occurs with herbal supplements such as St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) and primarily occurs due to the activation of pregnane-X-receptor (PXR).