Patients on mavacamten require continuous monitoring for exacerbation of heart failure symptoms and periodic echocardiographic follow-up to assess LVEF and LVOT gradient.

The use of mavacamten has been associated with nearly complete resolution of mitral valve systolic anterior motion and, thus, reduction in the LVOT gradient. In addition, a decrease in left ventricle mass index left atrial volume index, and lateral E/e’ have also been found in patients on mavacamten. These reductions in echocardiographic parameters were also directly related to reductions in natriuretic peptides and cardiac troponin I, both markers of myocardial injury and stress. Regarding cardiac structural changes, mavacamten use has not been associated with reductions in the interventricular septum thickness or the left ventricle end-diastolic diameter; however, significant changes were noted in inferolateral wall thickness and left ventricle end-systolic diameter when compared to placebo.

Once treatment is started, the LVOT gradient should be evaluated after four weeks of therapy. LVOT gradient less than 20 mmHg requires down titration to the next lower available dose (i.e., from 5 mg to 2.5 mg daily). If the gradient is greater than 20 mmHg, a repeat evaluation should be performed at week 8. The same dosage is recommended for patients who remained at the initial dose (i.e., 5 mg) if the LVOT gradient is between 20 and 30 mmHg with an LVEF greater than 50 %. If the LVOT gradient is lower than 20 mmHg, down titration to 2.5 mg is recommended, with reevaluation at week 12. For patients at 2.5 mg daily at week 8, continuing the same dose is recommended if the LVOT gradient is 20 to 30 mmHg. For those with LVOT less than 20 mmHg, withholding treatment is recommended with a reevaluation on week 12.

For maintenance therapy, patients are evaluated at week 12 after treatment initiation. Continuation of the same dose is recommended for patients with LVEF greater than 50 %, with an LVOT gradient less than 30 mmHg. However, if the LVOT gradient is greater than 30 mmHg, increasing to the next available dose is advised with echocardiographic evaluation at week 16.

If the LVEF is less than 50 % at any moment, treatment should be halted. Patients who experience serious infections requiring hospitalization or uncontrolled tachyarrhythmia are at greater risk for systolic dysfunction and should be evaluated to determine treatment continuation or interruption. After treatment interruption, an echocardiographic evaluation four weeks later is recommended to reassess LVEF and LVOT gradient. When reinitiating mavacamten, the dose should be decreased to the next lower daily dose (e.g., moving from 10 mg to 5 mg daily). Repeat evaluation is recommended at weeks 4 and 8 after treatment restoration. If the LVEF is lower than 50 % twice after treatment interruption, permanent discontinuation of mavacamten is recommended.