Tick removal is indicated when a patient presents with a tick attached to their body. Indications for treatment beyond removal are based partially on geography.

Individuals should perform a full-body inspection after being in an area of possible tick infestation. Particular attention should be paid to body crevices, areas with hair, and children. If an attached tick is found, identify it first, if possible; the tick might not be intact after removal. Estimate the time of attachment. If the tick has taken blood, a time-dependent process, prophylaxis against tick-borne disease may be indicated in areas of high prevalence.

The American dog tick (D variabilis and D similis), sometimes called the wood tick, transmits tularemia and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. The highest risk of being bitten by American dog ticks occurs in the spring and summer; adult females are the most likely to bite people. D variabilis is widely distributed east of the Rocky Mountains and in limited areas along the Pacific Coast.D similis is found west of the Rocky Mountains. Further research is required to comprehensively understand the role these species play in disease transmission. [CDC, Regions Where Ticks Live]

The blacklegged tick (I scapularis) is widely distributed in the northeastern upper midwestern United States.I scapularis is a vector of human pathogens, including those causing Lyme disease, anaplasmosis, babesiosis, Borrelia miyamotoi disease, Powassan virus disease, and ehrlichiosis. Humans are at the greatest risk of being bitten in the spring, summer, and fall; bites may occur when temperatures are above-freezing in the winter. Nymphs and adult females are the most likely to bite humans. [CDC, Regions Where Ticks Live] Burtis et al observed that nymphs in Minnesota were most active from May through August, with the peak activity in June; activity did continue through October. Observed nymphal peak activity was directly correlated with the peak incidence of Lyme disease and anaplasmosis cases in that area.

Brown dog ticks (R sanguineus) are the most widespread ticks globally and are well-recognized vectors of many pathogens affecting dogs and occasionally humans.R sanguineus are present in the United States.Rickettsia rickettsii that cause Rocky Mountain spotted fever from the southwestern United States into northeastern Mexico.Rickettsia conorii that causes Meditteranean spotted fever in the Meditteranean basin.

The Gulf Coast tick (A maculatum) is found in coastal areas of the United States, specifically the Atlantic Coast and the Gulf of Mexico. This tick is the primary vector of pathogenic bacteria that cause Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis, a form of spotted fever.R parkeri to humans.

The lone star tick (A americanum) is widely distributed in the southeastern, south-central, eastern, and upper-midwest regions of the United States.Ehrlichia chaffeensis and Ehrlichia ewingii, tularemia, and induces southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI). This very aggressive tick will bite humans, and its saliva can be irritating. Redness and discomfort occur at the bite site but may not indicate infection. Adult females have a white dot or “lone star” on their backs. The nymph and adult females most frequently bite humans and transmit pathogens. [CDC, Regions Where Ticks Live]

The Rocky Mountain wood tick (D andersoni) is found in the Rocky Mountain states and southwestern Canada from elevations of 4000 ft to 10,500 ft. The Rocky Mountain wood tick can transmit pathogens, including the Colorado tick fever virus, R rickettsii, and Francisella tularensis, which causes tularemia; it can cause tick-borne paralysis.

The Western blacklegged tick (I pacificus) is found along the United States Pacific coast, Nevada, Utah, and Arizona. [CDC, Tick Surveillance] I pacificus transmits several human pathogens, including Borrelia burgdorferi, a causative agent of Lyme disease; Anaplasma phagocytophilum, which causes anaplasmosis; Bartonella, and Rickettsiales. Various host species, including small mammals, birds, livestock, and domestic animals, sustain these pathogens within the environment.