There are few absolute contraindications to radionuclide cystography (RNC), given that it is a safe and well-tolerated procedure. Several contraindications are listed below:

- Allergy or history of an adverse event with prior radiopharmaceutical administration: This is an infrequent occurrence. Life-threatening episodes with radiopharmaceuticals are infrequent. Adverse reactions are mostly allergic and sometimes include vasovagal reactions.

- Active or untreated urinary tract infection: If sodium pertechnetate is administered (further discussed below), systemic absorption can occur in inflammation.

There are multiple additional considerations before performing RNC, although none are absolute contraindications to performing this procedure. Clinical judgment and modifications may be necessary to ensure a diagnostic-quality examination.

- **Pregnancy**- The whole fetus radiation dose during RNC is below 5 mGy, far below the known deterministic fetal threshold. In the setting of known pregnancy, alternative studies such as contrast-enhanced ultrasound should be performed. If no alternatives are available, the radionuclide dose should be kept as low as reasonably possible without sacrificing the study's diagnostic quality.

- **Genitourinary Anatomic Anomalies**- Deferral of RNC should be considered if known urethral abnormalities could result in either entrapment of radiopharmaceutical into the bladder vagina, rectum, or elsewhere. Similarly, since a urethral or conduit catheter is used during RNC, special attention should be paid toward abnormalities resulting in substantial leakage or loss of the radiopharmaceutical. Special care might be necessary to minimize radiopharmaceutical contamination.

- **Patient Participation**- The most effective RNC examinations use active patient participation, specifically during the study's active voiding portions. There are circumstances where VUR is only present during micturition, and if the patient cannot participate, the negative study may be falsely reassuring.