The past decade saw a paradigm shift in the management of prostate malignancy. With advances in diagnostics, imaging, genetics, and metabolomics, the evaluation and management of prostate malignancy have become even more complex. However, there needs to be more consensus on various diagnostic and treatment protocols, and different expert guidelines fall short of offering concrete recommendations. Multidisciplinary agreement and coordination are crucial for improving prostate cancer outcomes.

To provide the patient with the best care possible, a team of specially qualified nurses, technicians, general practitioners, pharmacists, genetic counselors, psychotherapists, oncologists, urologists, and allied healthcare workers must collaborate. The team must be able to educate, enlighten and guide the patient for optimal care, taking care not to overdiagnose and overtreat the patient. In addition, prostate cancer screening must be mandated according to guideline recommendations and by including shared decision-making techniques and procedures; any team member who notes any departure from guidelines should be empowered to make their concerns known to the team, including the clinicians.

Optimal use of risk stratification biomarker assays for prostate cancer can significantly reduce unnecessary diagnostic procedures and treatments. The healthcare team should be familiar with implementing these assays when appropriate and help educate the patient and family when necessary or requested.

The screening, diagnosis, and treatment must be patient-centric, depending on his age, high-risk characteristics, comorbid conditions, and preferences. The patient must be empowered to make apt decisions through interdisciplinary team consultations and proper communication between the patient and the care providers. Overtreatment, due to its side effects, can cause harm to the patient, adversely affecting his quality of life and placing the patient under undue psychological distress. Eligible patients may be spared from such adversities by placing them on active surveillance or watchful waiting protocols.