Treatment of dysuria depends on the underlying etiology whenever possible. The most common cause of dysuria is a urinary tract infection. Empiric antibiotic therapy based on a patient's history and symptoms is usually the most cost-effective therapy. No further evaluation is necessary in those cases where dysuria from uncomplicated urinary tract infection is suspected.

Antibiotic therapy for urethritis depends on the underlying organism, which is most likely to be sexually transmitted.Mycoplasma genitalium and Ureaplasma urealyticum.Trichomonas vaginalis or Mycoplasma genitalium.

Trichomonas is present in only about 2.5% of male urethritis cases.

Infrequent causes of urethritis include Treponema pallidum (syphilis) and Haemophilus influenzae which can be transmitted during oral sex.

Physicians should be mindful of the possibility of anti-microbial resistance, and optimal antibiotics should be started based on likely pathogens, local resistance patterns, and costs (or insurance coverage) associated with the treatment.

When the patient presents with dysuria and a perinephric abscess is suspected, it should first undergo evaluation with an imaging study like ultrasonography or a CT scan. Once it is confirmed to be an abscess, the patient should be hospitalized, and intravenous antibiotics should be initiated, followed by open surgical drainage or percutaneous catheter drainage, or both.

Historically, female urethral dilation has been used for many urological complaints in women, including dysuria, but this practice is rarely used today. Nevertheless, there may be the occasional female patient with actual urethral stenosis who would benefit from dilation.

There will inevitably be cases where no specific cause of dysuria can be found.  In such cases, treatment tends to be symptomatic or holistic. Various generic dysuria treatments include:

Dietary modification. A large variety of foods and beverages have been reported to contribute to dysuria symptoms.  These include alcoholic beverages, highly acidic and spicy foods, hot sauces, condiments, high potassium fruits like bananas, lemons, and tomatoes, fruit juices including cranberry, salad dressings, peppers, chillis, tomato sauces, and ketchup.  As mentioned earlier, a more complete list is available on the Cleveland Clinic website.

Phenazopyridine.  This medication can often relieve the irritation and stinging of dysuria and sometimes the urinary frequency that accompanies it. For best results, it must be taken three times a day.  It has an intense orange color when it passes into the urine and will permanently stain anything it touches, so it is best to warn patients of this.  The most common side effects are dizziness, headache, and nausea.  It is not an antibiotic but a topical analgesic. Since it only provides symptomatic relief and can build up in the body, it is not usually recommended for more than three days continuously. The medication should not be used in patients with known glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency as it can lead to hemolysis.

Calcium glycerophosphate is an OTC medication that purports to reduce urinary acidity to help relieve dysuria. While it appears to help with dysuria in at least some patients, there are no published randomized studies on its efficacy, so evidence on the product is purely anecdotal. It is officially classified as a "medical food" and was originally designed to treat interstitial cystitis. It can be sprinkled over food or taken as a tablet at mealtime. The dietary recommendations are essentially the same as for interstitial cystitis.

Hydration. Many patients with dysuria will tend to drink less, so they will have to void less often. However, this tends to increase urinary concentrations and ultimately leads to worse burning. Patients should be encouraged to drink more, not less.

Trial of doxycycline, if not used previously. Doxycycline is a tetracycline-based antibiotic with a unique spectrum of activity that includes many unusual and uncommon organisms. A trial of this antibiotic may cure some patients of otherwise intractable dysuria from an unusual organism.

Trial of azithromycin as Mycoplasma genitalium is a common cause of persistent or intractable urethritis.

A clinical trial of estrogen cream in postmenopausal women is a reasonable therapy to try as at least some patients will benefit.

Other treatments of dysuria to consider include topical anesthetics, tricyclic antidepressants (such as imipramine or amitriptyline), muscle relaxants, alpha-blockers, urothelial barrier protection enhancement drugs (such as pentosan polysulfate), local steroids, and antibiotics.

Some success has also been reported with behavioral therapy such as biofeedback, meditation, hypnosis, dietary therapy (to increase urinary pH and avoid high urinary potassium as well as other known bladder irritants), acupuncture, botox injections, gabapentin (300 to 600 mg daily) and sertraline (50 - 200 mg daily) therapy.

There is generally no specific surgical treatment for dysuria, but Nd:Yag laser ablation has shown some promise in carefully selected female patients with symptoms refractory to medical therapy. Laser ablation of squamous metaplasia of the trigone and bladder neck areas has shown success in some patients with trigonitis.

**Summary of Dysuria Treatments**

- Antibiotics as appropriate for UTIs, urethritis, and/or prostatitis)

- Dietary therapy (avoidance of alcohol, caffeine, hot spices, processed and high potassium foods)

- Second-line antibiotics (doxycycline, azithromycin)

- Third line antibiotics (moxifloxacin)

- Vaginitis therapy (metronidazole, miconazole, fluconazole, etc.)

- Estrogen for atrophic vaginitis

- Alpha-blockers and overactive bladder medications (tolterodine)

- Symptomatic therapy (phenazopyridine, calcium glycerophosphate, and similar)

- Amitriptyline

- Gabapentin

- Sertraline

- Oral or intravesical elmiron

- Female urethral dilation