Evaluating patients with concern for cardiac trauma following physical examination is multi-faceted and varies depending on the nature of the mechanism of injury.  A general trauma evaluation is typical and usually, includes plain films of the chest and a point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS).

Plain films of the chest have limited utility for the diagnosis of BCI but may have some utility in penetrating cardiac trauma. They may demonstrate the presence and approximate location of a foreign body, the presence of a hemothorax, displaced heart, and other non-cardiac thoracic injuries.  Acute cardiac tamponade is unlikely to show significant findings on an initial plain film.

POCUS is common in emergency departments with a focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) exam done routinely that includes a cardiac view, which can aid in rapidly diagnosing pericardial effusions.  While physical examination such as distended neck veins and abnormal vital signs can be used with POCUS for demonstrating tamponade, the findings of inferior vena cava distension and septal bounce can also be identified on POCUS.  For individuals more proficient with POCUS, or through ordering a formal echocardiography study, other findings such as wall motion and valvular abnormalities may be identified.  If the views are suboptimal and the patient is stable then transesophageal echocardiography may be beneficial and may provide additional information about the great vessels.

Computed Tomography (CT) is also part of the trauma evaluation if the patient is stable enough.  It has a high sensitivity for pericardial or myocardial lacerations, cardiac luxation, and other thoracic injuries, and can help identify the path of a projectile and the location of a foreign body.

Evaluation specific to blunt cardiac trauma is difficult as there are no validated screening criteria for BCI.  An electrocardiogram (ECG), while not standard in the evaluation of the acutely injured patient, is useful in demonstrating the presence of new dysrhythmias, which should make a clinician suspicious of BCI (excluding sinus tachycardia).  A normal ECG alone has a high negative predictive value for BCI.  In addition to an ECG, cardiac enzymes such as cardiac-specific troponins should be considered to add to the routine trauma evaluation.  Troponins can help evaluate for the presence of a myocardial contusion or ischemia secondary to a vessel injury, and also have a high negative predictive value of a blunt cardiac injury.  A normal ECG and troponin within the normal range have been shown to have a near 100% negative predictive value for blunt cardiac injury, though there is a debate about when to perform the troponin, and if serial troponins should be done.

Further evaluation based on the suspected underlying injury may be beneficial such as angiography for those with infarction patterns on ECG, or cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) imaging to help identify the extent of a myocardial contusion.

Penetrating cardiac injury evaluation should be considered for any individual with an open wound to the thorax.  Wounds within the imaginary box defined by the inferior clavicles, inferior costal margins, and mid-clavicular lines are especially concerning.  Echocardiography has been shown to have high sensitivity and specificity for cardiac wounds.  No further workup is needed aside from physical examination and echocardiography, though as mentioned above plain films may help provide approximate location and presence of foreign bodies.