**Arterial**

The internal pudendal artery perfuses the majority of the external female genitalia. The internal pudendal artery is a branch of the internal iliac artery. Once the pudendal artery branches from the internal iliac artery, it descends towards the external genitalia. The internal pudendal artery will then become the dominant blood supply to the female external genitalia. The labia majora also received blood from the superficial external pudendal artery. The superficial external pudendal artery is a tributary of the femoral artery.

**Venous**

The venous drainage of the external female genitalia is via the external and internal pudendal veins. The external pudendal vein will drain towards the great saphenous vein. The saphenous vein will drain back into the femoral vein. As the femoral vein ascends pass the inguinal ligament, it becomes the external iliac vein. While the internal pudendal vein drains back into the internal iliac vein. Both the external and internal iliac veins will ascend and merge to form the common iliac veins. The common iliac veins from both sides of the body will ascend to about the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. At the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra, the common iliac veins merge to drain venous blood back into the inferior vena cava. The inferior vena cava will ascend towards the heart. Upon reaching the heart, the inferior vena cava drains its venous blood back into the right atrium.

**Lymphatic**

The lymphatic drainage of the external female genitalia drains toward the superficial inguinal lymph nodes except for the clitoris. The lymph from the clitoris will drain towards the deep inguinal lymph nodes. The lymph from the superficial and deep inguinal lymph nodes will ascend toward the common iliac lymph nodes. All of this lymph will ascend towards the distant part of the thoracic duct called the cisterna chyli. Once at the cisterna chyli, the lymph will drain into the thoracic duct and ascends toward the angle formed from the left subclavian vein and the left internal jugular vein. All of the lymph from the external female genitalia will drain back into the central circulation via the thoracic duct.