Treatment of acute dystonic reaction centers around balancing the disrupted dopaminergic-cholinergic balance in the basal ganglia and discontinuation of the offending agent. The most commonly available drugs in the emergency setting for the treatment of acute dystonic reactions are diphenhydramine and benztropine. Symptoms usually improve or resolve dramatically within 10 to 30 minutes of administration of parenteral anticholinergics. The half-life of most antipsychotic agents is longer than that of most diphenhydramine or benztropine requiring re-dosing of anticholinergic medications.

Supportive measures such as oxygen or assisted ventilation should be provided immediately if indicated.

Diphenhydramine is used for its anticholinergic effect and central nervous system (CNS) penetration. Intravenous administration is preferred to intramuscular administration due to its faster onset. Typical dosing for diphenhydramine is 50 mg intravenous (IV) in adults and 1 mg/kg up to 50mg IV in pediatric patients. Once the acute dystonic reaction is treated and symptoms improve, diphenhydramine should be administered via the oral route every 6 hours for 1 to 2 days to prevent recurrence of symptoms.

Benztropine is another anticholinergic medication with significant CNS penetration. Use, however, may be limited due to availability in the emergent setting. IV and intramuscular (IM) routes are of a similar time to onset of effect.  Typical dosing of benztropine is a single dose of 1 to 2 mg IV followed by 1 to 2 mg by mouth twice a day for up to 7 days to prevent a recurrence. Benztropine use in pediatric patients for acute dystonia is considered off-label.

Second-line therapy with IV benzodiazepines may be considered for patients that fail to respond completely to anticholinergic therapy. IV or IM lorazepam at 0.05 to 0.10 mg/kg or IV diazepam at 0.1 mg/kg may be considered.

Patients who experience respiratory symptoms or required supportive oxygen should be observed for 12 to 24 hours following resolution of symptoms to monitor for recurrence.

For patients that experienced an acute dystonic reaction on antipsychotic medication, close follow-up with psychiatry should be given. If the continuation of the offending agent is necessary, the patient should be continued on an anticholinergic medication until an agent with less potential for a dystonic reaction can be initiated.