- Orally; Two oral formulations are available, the immediate release tablets (0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, 2 mg, 3 mg, 4 mg, and 5 mg) and prolonged/extended-release tablets (2 mg, 4 mg, 6 mg, 8 mg, and 12 mg). The immediate-release form is administered three times daily, while the extended-release is once daily.

- On the other hand, the therapeutic level for this drug is between 0.4 and 6 ng/mL; its use requires caution in older patients (greater than 65 years) and women on hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) because of slower clearance of the medication in these groups.

- In PD treatment, a dose within 6 to 24 mg of extended-release formulation is usually well-tolerated. Still, care is necessary to titrate the dose to the symptoms of the disease, and the clinician can individualize this from patient to patient.

**Parkinson Disease**

**Immediate-release tablets:**Once initiated, If a significant interruption in therapy with ropinirole tablets has occurred, re-titration of dose may be needed.

The dose is titrated gradually every week as follows.

Ropinirole tablets should be discontinued gradually and taper down over seven days in patients with Parkinson disease as follows. First, reduce the administration dose from three times daily to twice daily for the first four days. Then, again for the next three days, reduce to once daily before complete cessation of ropinirole tablets.

**Renal Impairment:**Dose modification is not required in patients with moderate renal impairment (CrCl  30-50 mL/min). Patients with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis are started on 0.25 mg three times a day. Further dose increments are based on the need for efficacy and tolerability. in patients receiving regular dialysis, the recommended maximum daily dose is 18 mg daily. Supplemental doses after dialysis are not needed. Studies are not performed to evaluate ropinirole tablets in patients with severe renal impairment without regular dialysis.

**Extended-release tablets:**The initial dose is  2 mg administered once daily for two weeks. Then the dose may be increased by 2 mg every week or longer intervals based on the patient’s response to ropinirole and its tolerability. The maximum dose is 24 mg administered daily.

**Restless Legs Syndrome**

The recommended initial adult dose for RLS is 0.25 mg once daily about two hours before the onset of symptoms. A dose of 2 mg or less would suffice, and it is a good practice to start on a low dose. In patients with RLS, Ropinirole is usually started at a dose of 0.25 mg per day, incrementing 0.25 mg every two to three days until the reduction of symptoms.

**Renal Impairment:**Dose adjustments are not required in patients with moderate renal impairment (CrCl  30-50 mL/min). Patients with RLS and end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis should be started on 0.25 mg once daily. Further dose increments are based on the need for efficacy and tolerability. The recommended maximum daily dose is 3 mg daily in patients receiving regular dialysis. Supplemental doses after dialysis are not needed.

**Pregnant Women:**If patient using ropinirole intends to get pregnant or get pregnant, they should report to their clinician. Ropinirole is pregnancy category C medicine. Animal studies have reported teratogenic effects, so advise patients of this potential risk.

**Breastfeeding Women:**There is a lack of information on its use during breastfeeding. Since ropinirole suppresses serum prolactin, it can interfere with lactation. Alternative medicine is preferred while breastfeeding newborn or preterm infants.