# Continuing Education Activity

A neurolytic block is the targeted destruction of a nerve or nerve plexus. Frequently, the term neuroablation is used to also describe the physical interruption of pain either chemically, thermally, or surgically. All neurolytic techniques cause Wallerian degeneration of the nerve axon distal to the lesion.Chemicals were extensively utilized in the past for neurolysis in the early 20 century. The first report of chemical neurolysis was made in 1863 by Luton who delivered irritant chemicals subcutaneously in patients with sciatic neuralgia, offering them significant alleviation of pain. This activity describes the indications for, types of, and complications of neurolytic blocks and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with chronic pain.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the techniques used for performing neurolytic blocks.
- Outline the indications for a neurolytic block.
- Review the complications of neurolytic blocks.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the management of pain by utilizing neurolytic blocks, enhancing patient outcomes.

# Introduction

A neurolytic block is the targeted destruction of a nerve or nerve plexus. Frequently, the term neuroablation is used to also describe the physical interruption of pain either chemically, thermally, or surgically. All neurolytic techniques cause Wallerian degeneration of the nerve axon distal to the lesion.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Anatomy is dependent on the location of the targeted peripheral nerve or nerve plexus, and careful needle advancement is employed with guidance through ultrasonography, fluoroscopy, and/or nerve stimulation.

# Indications

There are no consensus indications for neurolysis as targeted nerve destruction can apply to a variety of pain conditions. However, appropriate patient selection is important before interventional pain treatment. Generally, an interventional approach is taken after conservative options fail. In addition to obtaining a thorough history, physical exam, and complete diagnostic laboratory workup, a recent radiological evaluation is often necessary to identify the cause of the pain and to prevent complications associated with the interventional neurolytic technique. A psychological assessment is frequently performed to determine if the patient is suitable for intervention, especially if a neuromodulatory approach is taken.

Celiac plexus neurolytic blocks are frequently performed for visceral pain originating from upper abdominal malignancy, especially pancreatic cancer.

# Contraindications

Absolute contraindications to targeted neurolysis include patient refusal, active infection at the site of injection, and allergy to a chemical neurolytic agent. Bleeding disorders or anticoagulation treatment is considered a contraindication, particularly if injection occurs at non-compressible sites. If a pacemaker is in place and radiofrequency ablation is planned, the proceduralist should consult pacemaker interrogation services.

# Equipment

The necessary equipment includes the following:

- Chlorhexidine gluconate or povidone iodine

- Ultrasound probe with a sterile probe cover and gel (if applicable)

- Fluoroscopy equipment (if applicable)

- Nerve stimulator (if applicable)

- Local anesthetic, typically 1% lidocaine, for superficial layer local anesthesia

- Regional block local anesthetic test solution (2% lidocaine or 1.5% mepivacaine)

- A 10- to 20-mL syringe with extension tubing

- Block needle (length-variable depending on depth of targeted peripheral nerve) or spinal/epidural needle if neuraxial approach (needle characteristics based on body habitus and provider preference)

- Chemical neurolytic agent (alcohol, phenol), if applicable

- Radiofrequency probe, if applicable

- Cryo machine and cryoprobe with cooling agents (i.e. nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide), if applicable

Agents used for chemical neurolysis primarily include 50-100% alcohol and 5% to 15% phenol, although the use of other agents including hypertonic saline, glycerol, ammonium salt solutions, and chlorocresol has also been reported.

Radiofrequency probes are frequently used for nerve ablation of the medial branch nerve, percutaneous cordotomy, thermocoagulation of Gasserian ganglion, percutaneous rhizotomy, and percutaneous radiofrequency sympathectomy.

Cryoprobes attached to a cryo machine can be used to target nerves with extreme cold temperature exposure.

Finally, surgical neurolysis or neurectomy involves directly severing a nerve, and is generally reserved for rare cases with a poor prognosis. This modality carries a high risk of deafferentation pain, which is a complication due to loss of neuronal input leading to spontaneous firing within the spinothalamic tract.

# Personnel

A pain medicine specialist with training in ultrasound- and fluoroscopic-guided nerve injections is preferable. Additional nursing staff with training in sedation anesthesia may assist.

# Preparation

The proceduralist should obtain informed consent. The patient is positioned appropriately depending on the location of the targeted nerve. Minimal or no sedation is typically required. However, moderate sedation may be considered in certain instances, such as chemical neurolysis with alcohol which may be painful, or during RFA. Aseptic technique should be maintained throughout the procedure.

# Technique or Treatment

Under aseptic precaution, the target nerve is identified using fluoroscopy, ultrasound, or nerve stimulation. A local anesthetic is infiltrated at the skin. The needle, radiofrequency probe, or cryoprobe is advanced toward the target nerve, and after a preliminary aspiration, a diagnostic block with a local anesthetic may be performed to confirm position, and subsequently, neurolysis (e.g., injection of alcohol or phenol, RFA, among others) can be performed. Typically, diagnostic blocks are performed before neurolytic intervention to allow better prediction of efficacy. Cardiovascular monitoring with resuscitative backup should be readily available. Patients should be counseled that the therapeutic effect from neurolysis, particularly chemical neurolysis, may not be evident for 3 to 7 days.

# Complications

Bleeding, infection, pain, and damage to surrounding tissue may occur as with any interventional procedure. Intravascular injection of a neurolytic agent may result in systemic toxicity depending on the chemical agent used. Superficial cryoablation may lead to skin damage, manifesting with alopecia, hypo- or hyperpigmentation.

# Clinical Significance

A neurolytic block is used to target the destruction of a nerve or nerve plexus. Chemicals, radiofrequency ablation (RFA), cryoablation, and neurosurgical procedures are often used with fluoroscopy to improve the precision and efficiency of targeted neurolysis. Patients often received substantial reductions in pain.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There are many case series, observational trials, and few randomized controlled trials investigating outcomes in neurolysis, but due to heterogeneity of nerve targets and a large variety of tools for neurolysis, large data pools have not been studied.

In terms of chemical neurolysis, phenol neurolysis may provide therapeutic relief for 8 to 12 weeks, while alcohol neurolysis generally lasts longer from 12 to 24 weeks. RFA of peripheral nerves may last 3 to 12 months until axonal regeneration occurs.

Of studies looking at chemical neurolysis, those targeting the celiac plexus for pancreatic malignancy have been extensively described. A meta-analysis demonstrated that neurolytic celiac plexus block in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer was associated with improved pain scores, reduced opioid use, and decreased constipation.

Of all studies looking at non-chemical interventional approaches to neurolysis of peripheral nerve targets, RFA of the medial branch of the dorsal primary rami that innervate facet joints has been most studied. A prospective 10-year clinical trial investigating radiofrequency neurotomy of the lumbar facet joints for relief of chronic low back pain showed that over 68% of patients reported good (greater than 50%) to excellent (greater than 80%) pain relief lasting from 6 to 24 months.

Despite these meta-analyzed data, controversy still exists on the long-term efficacy of RFA for low back pain. For example, a recent study that included three separate randomized controlled trials performed by Juch and colleagues included patients with chronic low back pain from facet joints, sacroiliac joints, or intervertebral disks. They reported that RFA combined with exercise compared with exercise alone resulted in no difference in pain intensity after 3 months.

A systematic review on the efficacy of cryoablation in the cancer pain population demonstrated that cryoablation decreased pain scores by over 60% at 24 hours post-procedure, by 70% at 3 months, and by over 80% at 6 months.

Data on surgical neurectomy are even more limited, and typically involve peripheral nerves at the trunk. A study investigating neurectomies of the ilioinguinal, iliohypogastric, genotifemoral, lateral-femoral cutaneous, and intercostal nerves demonstrated this as a reasonable modality for treatment of chronic postoperative neurogenic pain, leading to significant improvement in pain scores and quality of life.

Outcomes data on neurolysis for pain relief remains inconsistent due to variable patient selection, diagnostic criteria, type of intervention, and outcome measures. Due to the absence of compelling evidence and the paucity of data suggesting low-risk long-term benefits, neurolysis should be cautiously considered only after a failure of other modalities including pharmacologic, physical, psychiatric, and non-destructive interventional therapy.