Due to its variable presentation, it could mimic other clinical conditions, and therefore other differentials should be considered. Most patients develop additional syndrome features within days or a few weeks. Due to the initial prodrome of fever and headache, infectious causes of meningoencephalitis must be ruled out. It progresses with behavior changes, so clinicians should consider toxic and metabolic encephalopathy in these scenarios. Patients can present with focal neurological deficits, so cerebrovascular accidents (CVA) should be higher in the differentials. These patients should undergo a thorough physical examination in conjunction with neuroimaging for diagnosis. Intracranial space-occupying lesions are a possible cause of seizure or behavior disturbances.

Some autoimmune encephalitides have early and prominent psychiatric manifestations, leading to admission to an inpatient psychiatric unit. Clinicians should focus on the clinical progression of the disease as these patients develop additional features of the syndrome within days to a few weeks. Careful examination may reveal subtle neurologic deficits that should lead to the consideration of autoimmune encephalitis. Patients may present with the demyelinating disorder (e.g., Multiple sclerosis) or autoimmune (Lupus, Neurosarcoidosis) that have multi-system involvement and should be appropriately evaluated with CSF studies and neuroimaging. Neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer dementia usually have chronic onset and should be further evaluated with neuroimaging. Rarely, inherited and metabolic disorders can cause neuropsychiatric manifestations with a positive family history that needs further study.