Medical clearance must be obtained, including pre-operative risk stratification and medical optimization.

Pre-operative photography with static and dynamic images in frontal, three-quarter, lateral, base (worm’s eye), and dorsal (bird’s eye) views should adequately document position and shape of the nose, facial asymmetries, and the effect of the smile on the nose. Digital imaging software can demonstrate proposed surgical outcomes that are otherwise difficult to verbalize, thus improving communication between the patient/surgeon and setting realistic expectations of surgery.

Incisions are marked in narrowest portion of the columella with an inverted-v pattern which results in better scar formation and less notching than transverse incisions.

Though not routine, specific nasal landmarks may be marked, including the rhinion (keystone), upper lateral and lower lateral cartilages.

General anesthesia or intravenous techniques (e.g., propofol) are advisable during the open rhinoplasty. If general anesthesia is employed, muscle relaxants are an option.

A single dose of intravenous antibiotics covering skin flora requires pre-operative administration.

A single dose of an intravenous steroid injection (.e.g., 8 mg of dexamethasone) may help with swelling.

A single dose of intravenous tranexamic acid (10 mg/kg) may help reduce intra-operative bleeding.

Local anesthesia is infiltrated along the septum, columella, margin, soft tissue triangle, sidewalls, and dorsum with care not to distort the appearance of the nose with excess injection.

Nasal pledgets soaked in nasal decongestant are applied to the bilateral nasal cavity

Vibrissae are trimmed to help with visualization and decrease crusting post-operatively.