**Selection of the Local Anesthetic**

The selection of local anesthetic is based on drug onset and duration of action. Thus, it is common to find a mixture of short-acting and long-acting drugs (see Table 1). To prevent muscular toxicity induced by local anesthetics, lidocaine should not be used in concentrations higher than 2%.

To decrease the time of onset and facilitate local anesthetic spread through the tissue, some physicians have used hyaluronidase as an adjuvant agent. Hyaluronidase may also decrease the incidence of postoperative strabismus by limiting local anesthetic myotoxicity. A safe dose is 50 IU per milliliter of local anesthetic. Epinephrine has been used to increase the duration of nerve blockade. However, the risk of vasospasm and subsequent retinal ischemia coupled with the increased availability of local anesthetics with long durations of action has limited its use in recent years.

**Retrobulbar Technique**

- Two drops of local anesthetic can be instilled in the eye.

- Clean the lower and upper lids with an alcohol wipe or povidone-iodine.

- Localize the point of insertion. This can vary between different authors as the junction of 2/3 medial and 1/3 lateral along the lower orbital rim or the inferotemporal quadrant as laterally as possible.

- Ask the patient to fix the gaze in a neutral position. Avoid Atkinson gaze position upward and inward due to the high risk of optic nerve damage.

- With the non-dominant hand, place the index finger between the inferior orbital rim and the ocular globe. This maneuver elevates the globe to prevent direct trauma with the needle.

- Hold the syringe with your dominant hand. Stabilize your hand by placing the little finger and hypothenar eminence over the bones of the patient's cheeks.

- Insert the needle perpendicular to the skin and advance it parallel to the orbital floor. You might feel a first pop penetrating the orbital septum.

- After the first pop, advance the needle approximately 1 cm to 1.5 cm until it crosses the equator line of the ocular globe. Redirect the needle 30° to 45º in the superior and medial direction. Advance the needle 2.5 cm to 3.0 cm until a second pop is felt crossing the muscle cone where the needle is stopped.

- Aspirate to verify the needle tip is not in the intravascular space.

- Slowly inject 3 mL to 5 mL of local anesthetic, monitoring for any resistance to injection, excruciating pain, or significant rotation of the globe.

- Check ocular globe akinesia after 5 minutes of infiltration.

**Peribulbar Technique**

- Two drops of local anesthetic can be instilled in the eye.

- Clean the lower and upper lids with an alcohol wipe or povidone-iodine.

- Localize the point of insertion (junction of 2/3 medial and 1/3 lateral along the lower orbital rim or inferotemporal quadrant as laterally as possible).

- Ask the patient to fix the gaze in a neutral position. Avoid Atkinson gaze position upward and inward due to the high risk of optic nerve damage.

- With the non-dominant hand, place the index finger between the inferior orbital rim and the ocular globe. This maneuver elevates the globe to prevent direct trauma with the needle.

- Insert the needle perpendicular to the skin and advance it parallel to the orbital floor beyond the equator of the ocular globe. Infiltrate with 6 mL to 8 mL of local anesthetic.

This block requires a second infiltration, as the superior oblique muscle may not receive the effects of the block with just one injection.

- Several anatomical landmarks have been described for the second injection, including the medial canthus, tear caruncle, and medial third of the superior orbital rim (nasal superior site). However, there are some important considerations to review:

- The insertion of the needle through the nasal superior site must be avoided. At this level, the distance between the orbital roof and the ocular globe is reduced, increasing the risk of ocular globe perforation and superior oblique damage. Instead, a nasal inferior injection should be attempted.
- Insertion of the needle for a second puncture should be no deeper than 25 mm, as this increases the risk of injecting a local anesthetic into the retrobulbar compartment and subsequent optic nerve damage.

- Infiltrate with 3 mL to 5 mL of local anesthetic.

- Honan balloon at a pressure of 20 mmHg to 30 mmHg can be used to increase the spread of local anesthetic. This is also an alternative in the case of chemosis.

- Check ocular globe akinesia after 10 to 15 minutes of infiltration.