Anesthesiologists usually perform lower extremity nerve blocks, but a nurse must be dedicated to patient monitoring. Resuscitative equipment must be in the room where the procedure is being done. Complications, though rare, can potentially cause cardiac or respiratory arrest, bleeding, and nerve damage.

**Skills**

Knowing how to manage anesthesia in patients with lower extremity blocks is essential. Recognition, treatment, and prevention of perioperative adverse events associated with lower extremity blocks is an important strategy. Therefore, management of lower extremity nerve blocks crosses over the breadth and depth of healthcare situations and settings in the perioperative environment.

**Strategy**

It is most appropriate and ideal to maintain continuous closed-loop communication between all members of the perioperative care team regarding the need, technique, and potential management issues associated with lower extremity blocks. Collaboration, interdisciplinary interprofessional teamwork, and a culture of integrity and quality improvement are essential to a successful strategy.

**Ethics**

It is necessary to obtain thorough and comprehensive informed consent from either the patient or, in the case of patients without the capacity to consent, their designated and authorized decision-maker before administering a lower extremity nerve block. All team members should feel empowered to state any concerns regarding the process, as this provides additional layers of review and insight into any problematic matters as soon as possible.

**Responsibilities**

All team members must communicate their concerns, responsibilities, and activities with all other team members contemporaneously and as indicated throughout the perioperative period, based on their professional discretion. All team members are responsible for maintaining professional interactions with, respecting different opinions, and engaging in shared-decisionmaking with all involved stakeholders.

**Interprofessional Communication**

All team members should respect the free flow of information and concerns among team members without allowing or producing an environment of hostility. Monitoring must be diligent and consistent between and among team members. Maintain clear and closed-loop professional communication between interdisciplinary team members and among all team members.

**Care Coordination**

All interprofessional team members should consider it their duty to neither disrupt the work done by other team members nor to, through their actions or inaction, create additional issues or increase the workload for other team members. [Level 5]