**Instrumental Evaluation**

To evaluate the function of the scalene muscles, electromyography can be used to identify contractile anomalies. This can use sonography or ultrasound, as well as other more expensive instruments, such as magnetic resonance and CT scans.

To assess whether vascular compromise exists, there are no valid manual tests to identify the compromised area or determine if the cause is arterial or venous. Only an examination with an echo-color doppler can make a vascular diagnosis on a scalene level.

Electromyography can be used in suspected thoracic outlet syndrome and other clinical settings. In patients with temporomandibular joint dysfunction, it has been shown that anterior scalene has greater electrical activity than people without mandibular joint problems. This could be useful information for the physiotherapist or the osteopath. We know that a dysfunction of the scalene muscles reduces the ventilatory capacity of the patients, and a mandibular disorder could be a symptom rather than the cause.

**Manual Assessment of Scalene Muscles**

Palpation is a valuable tool used to evaluate, classify, and make a diagnosis. The fingertip's tactile sensitivity can be used to evaluate objects measured in microns. Clinicians can use palpation to determine the position of the joints and recognize abnormal joint movements, tissue abnormalities, including temperature, tone, and hardness on the surface and deep in the various layers, and identify painful areas.

From an osteopathic point of view, tissue injury always creates a “mnemonic tattoo.” This immediately allows clinicians to understand, at the touch, the direction of the tissue toward the primary lesion. This lesional tattoo is the changed morphology of the cells, as well as their preferential vector, the altered behavior using the pressure from being touched.

According to literature, when palpating to verify the status of the scalene muscles, it is necessary to ask the patient to laterally flex the neck, with the direction opposite to our fingers; touch to the right with the neck flexion to the left. In this way, the scalene muscles are put in tension, and it is easier to palpate them.

The scalene musculature (including the posterior scalene) can fatigue during a repeated respiratory effort, particularly in patients suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. These contractile districts are often over-stimulated and hypertonic compared to those in comparison with healthy subjects.

To evaluate tone and the tissutal quality of the scalene muscles, the examiner must position himself behind the patient, who is supine (better) or seated. With one hand, they hold and control the patient's nape, while with the other hand, he tries to prevent the first thoracic rib from rising, supporting the eminence hypothenar in the anatomical area of the supraclavicular fossa. This last position is necessary to prevent the first rib from moving during neck movement and prevent an incorrect tension of the muscles.

- For the anterior scalene, the patient's head tilts to the left and simultaneously turns to the right side. (See photo 1)

- For the middle scalene, the head bends to the left without rotations, respecting the functional anatomy (See photo 2). The hand placed on the rib is useful when the stretching of the muscle involves the insertion area, with an additional passive movement of the head. The abnormal tension in the muscle and often painful, induced movements will result in a reduced excursion. Tension and pain in the anterior and middle scalene muscles can be frequent causes of thoracic outlet syndrome.

- For the posterior scalene, preventing the elevation of the first rib, slightly incline the neck while trying to rotate the head to the left.

Stretching exercises can be performed with the same positions used for assessing any restrictions on each portion of the scalene muscles. The exercise must be performed in the presence of an operator because the patient cannot understand the movement of the first rib during the small movements allowed by each scalene muscle.

To differentiate a problem of the scalene muscles from a dysfunction of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM), an operator positions himself behind the patient (sitting or standing). The operator places his hands on the patient's shoulders and asks for a deep inhalation, preventing the movement of the shoulders. In this way, the intervention of the sternocleidomastoid muscle is excluded, and the elevation of the first ribs is allowed. If the scalene musculature is painful or has some restrictions, the problems of the scalene muscles will be highlighted. On the contrary, to focus attention on SCM, the elevation of the first ribs is prevented by resting the thumbs during a forced inhalation.

**Clinical Implications**

An increase in tone or thickness of the anterior scalene muscle may result in distant symptoms. Vascular compression of the subclavian artery would give pallor and cold sensation to the extremities, cyanosis, and difficulty using the arm. If C5-C6 crosses the muscle in non-physiological conditions (hypertrophy, shortening), it could cause paresthesia, anesthesia, or weakness of the muscles innervated by these roots. If the root of C8 runs back to the two attacks, the anterior scalene, and there is a squeeze, there may be symptoms such as tingling, pain, and weakness of the hand and the interosseous muscles. If the anterior scalene tendon mixes with the longus capitis muscle, headaches may occur.

- If the suprascapular nerve passes through the middle scalene (hypertonic and hypertrophic, shortened), symptoms such as weakness of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscle may occur, with paresthesia and pain in the shoulder and scapular area and subsequent alteration of the arthrokinematics of the scapulohumeral joint. If the deep branch of the transverse cervical artery passes through the muscle, it could cause nuanced symptomatology or difficulty in identifying the problem.

- An increase in thickness of the posterior scalene muscle could alter the course of the long thoracic nerve and the scapular dorsal nerve, with pain or weakness in the anterior serratus muscle, the scapula elevator, and the rhomboid muscles.

- The presence of minimum scalene may reduce the brachial plexus passage space and the passage of the subclavian artery and the subclavian vein, causing symptoms related to thoracic outlet syndrome.