Initial management of ankle sprains includes the PRICE protocol (protection, rest, ice, compression, and elevation). Resting the injured ankle for the first 72 hours followed by gradual resumption of activity as tolerated is a reasonable approach. Initially, crutches can be used, if needed for comfort. When compared with immobilization, early weight-bearing with support (elastic compression wrap or a walking boot, aircast, or walking cast) has been found to improve return to sports, return to work, persistent swelling, the range of motion, and patient satisfaction.

Compression can be achieved with an elastic bandage, any lace-up ankle support, or a semi-rigid or inflatable brace. Elevation of the injured ankle above the level of the heart as frequently as possible for the first 24 to 48 hours may lessen the swelling associated with the injury. The range of motion exercises can be initiated when pain and edema resolve. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or acetaminophen can be used for analgesia.

Early functional rehabiilitation programs should begin with a focus on restoring range of motion, following by proprioception and neuromuscular training, and strength training (especially the peroneal muscles) to help combat recurrent injuries.  The strengthening phase should begin once swelling and pain has decreased and the patient demonstrates full range of motion (active and passive). The functional braces should be utilized early on in the strengthening phases and when the patient initially returns to activity.

Mild to moderate ankle sprains typically have a full recovery in 7 to 15 days. Symptoms persisting beyond this period should prompt reevaluation. All symptoms should be resolved before return to sports. For highly competitive athletes, reevaluation by a sports medicine physician for all but mild sprains is reasonable before returning to play to ensure full recovery to avoid recurrent injury and ankle instability.

**Recurrent Instability Patients**

Patients with evidence of ligamentous laxity should be immobilized, given crutches to allow ambulation without weight-bearing of the injured ankle, and referred to a sports medicine specialist or orthopedic surgeon. The referral is critical given that higher energy injuries are often associated with osteochondral defects of the talus, peroneal tendon injuries, intra-articular loose bodies, and fractures.

Patients suspected of having syndesmotic complex injuries should also be referred given that these injuries are often associated with a prolonged recovery and may require surgical intervention.  Acute syndesmotic injuries demonstrating diastasis and ankle instability on exam and stress radiographs will require screw versus tightrope fixation methods