Because of the varying presentation of this condition, canaliculitis may be misdiagnosed, or there may be a delay in diagnosis. The symptoms are usually unilateral. Patients may present with watering, discharge, a pouting punctum, or a medial canthal swelling; these symptoms may be confused with chronic conjunctivitis, inflamed chalazion or acute dacryocystitis. Mattering on the eyelids, expression of yellowish granules, concretions, and stones by massage are other presentations. These yellowish granules are called sulfur granules, and they are thought to be caused by Actinomyces species.  Some studies have shown that watering and ocular discomfort are the most typical symptoms while other studies found ocular discharge to be the most common presentation. One may see other additional symptoms in secondary canaliculitis such as intermittent blood-stained tears, blood-tinged discharge, or presence of a mass protruding from the punctum.

A thorough examination is mandatory, and a high index of suspicion is needed to arrive at a correct diagnosis of canaliculitis. Historically, the presence of concretions was considered to be firm evidence of canaliculitis, which was later extended to include pericanalicular inflammation and pouting puncta. Various studies demonstrate that the most common signs in primary canaliculitis are punctal swelling, eyelid swelling, and discharge or concretions from the punctum. Concretions are thought to be an indicator of recurrence and require surgical removal to prevent further attacks. Cases of secondary canaliculitis may reveal signs of canalicular inflammation, an inflammatory mass protruding from the punctum, granuloma formation, blood-stained discharge, presence of canaliculitis and dacryoliths, eyelid swelling and erythema. Lacrimal irrigation reveals intact patency of the lacrimal system in canaliculitis, even in the presence of canaliculitis. Irrigation and probing may help localize a migrated punctal plug in patients with secondary canaliculitis.