Treatment begins in the antenatal period. In cases of preterm premature rupture of membranes, corticosteroids are used for fetal lung maturation in fetuses more than 24 weeks of gestation. The lecithin to sphingomyelin ratio of more than 2 in the amniotic fluid signifies a low risk of fetal distress in the newborn. A combination of antibiotics, corticosteroids, and tocolytics are frequently administered.

A study conducted by Locatelli et al. in 49 patients with premature rupture of membranes at <26 weeks of gestation demonstrated that serial amnioinfusions reduce perinatal complications and prolong pregnancy.

An amniopatch is an alternative that consists of an intraamniotic injection of platelets and cryoprecipitate.****In the immediate post-partum period, the infants may require respiratory support, which can be utilized in the form of supplemental oxygen to mechanical ventilation to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Limited data exist suggesting the possible benefit of inhaled nitric oxide, but more extensive studies are needed before results show a definitive advantage.

In regards to congenital diaphragmatic hernias, fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion minimizes pulmonary arterial hypertension and hypoplasia so that the fetus remains viable to undergo maturation. The major limiting factor is that tracheal occlusion leads to a reduction in the number of type 2 pneumocytes and hence reduced surfactant proteins. The tracheal balloon is deflated shortly before delivery to help restore the surfactant expression.

Surgical repair of congenital repair is best delayed for 48-72 hours after birth to allow time for cardiopulmonary stability.

Survivors of pulmonary hypoplasia tend to have chronic lung disease. Management in adults is conservative with bronchodilators for airway symptoms, antibiotics for respiratory infection, chest physiotherapy, and prophylactic vaccinations. Localized bronchiectasis associated with recurrent respiratory infections can be surgically resected.