As with all physiology, the anatomy of a structure is related directly to its function. The smaller size of cervical vertebrae relative to the other regions reflects their decreased load-bearing requirements. Their decreased size allows for the greatest range of motion of all vertebral segments. The transverse and spinous processes serve as points of attachment and leverage for cervical and upper thoracic musculature. Atlas has the lowest load-bearing requirement of all vertebrae, which accounts for its small size and lack of vertebral body.

The absence of the body and the positioning of the lateral masses allows for the majority of cervical flexion and extension (motion in the sagittal plane) to occur through the atlantooccipital joint. The dens of C2 serve as an axis around which C1 rotates. This allows for the rotation of the head in the transverse plane. Due to the size of the intervertebral discs and the orientation of the facet joints, the cervical region has the greatest flexion ability of the spinal column.

**Ligaments of the Vertebral Column**

The anterior longitudinal ligament lies anterior to the bodies of the vertebrae and intervertebral discs. It passes from the base of the skull to the sacrum. It is strong and helps to prevent anterior protrusion of a herniated intervertebral disc.

The posterior longitudinal ligament lies within the vertebral column posterior to the vertebrae. It connects the intervertebral discs from C2 to the sacrum.

The posterior longitudinal ligament prevents the direct posterior dislocation of the nucleus pulposus of a herniated intervertebral disc. Instead, the herniated nucleus pulposus will pass lateral to the posterior longitudinal ligament. The posterior longitudinal ligament is richly supplied with nociceptive fibers that help to account for the pain of a herniated intervertebral disc. These are associated with the meningeal branch of each spinal nerve.

The posterior longitudinal ligament can undergo ossification. The development of this condition is associated with irreversible severe cervical paralysis. Risk factors are female gender and obesity.

Each zygapophyseal joint has a joint capsule. The cervical joint capsules are especially thin, allowing increased movement of these cervical joints.

The ligamenta flava are formed from thin connective tissue bands that connect adjacent laminae. These are especially thin, long, and broad in the cervical region. As one passes caudally down the vertebral column, they become broader and stronger. They are composed of elastic tissue. They resist the separation of the laminae during flexion of the vertebral column.

The interspinous ligaments serve to join the spinous processes.

In the cervical region, they join with the ligamentum nuchae. This fibroelastic ligament connects the base of the skull with the cervical vertebrae.

The first cervical vertebra (atlas) is connected to the base of the occipital bone. This joint permits flexion and extension of the head (as in nodding yes), as well as lateral flexion and rotation.

The ligaments that stabilize the craniovertebral joint consist of the alar and apical ligaments, the cruciate ligament, and the tectorial membrane.

Ligamentous injury is an important part of cervical trauma, such as whiplash injury.

Herniated intervertebral discs can occur in the cervical region, although they are more common in the lumbar region. Herniated cervical discs can be dangerous because the nucleus pulposus can compress the spinal roots that innervate the back and upper limbs.

Vertebral bone marrow edema can correlate with herniated intervertebral discs, although their role is controversial.