Metabolism plays a major role in the maintenance of a healthy weight after weight loss. Besides calorie restriction, exercise is a significant metabolism booster. Exercise helps build lean muscle mass and increases the metabolic rate to utilize more energy in maintaining it. Many health conditions are related to metabolic derangements. Specific illnesses such as insulin resistance, thyroid problems, etc., that may affect metabolic function are associated with an inability to maintain a healthy weight. Some medications such as steroids, blood pressure reducers, antidepressants also induce slowing down of metabolism and hence pose risks of weight gain and regain after a healthy weight loss has been achieved.

From a clinical standpoint, metabolic derangements due to genetic predispositions, lifestyle, behavior, and medication or illness may prevent the maintenance of a healthy weight. Hence, regulation and maintenance of healthy metabolism are imperative to overcome unhealthy weight conditions such as obesity and other associated comorbidities. Notably, as much as 5% weight loss may significantly improve the health of an overweight or obese individual besides reducing the risks for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, impairment in liver and kidney function, etc. Additionally,  it leads to an overall reduction of fat and an increase in healthy muscle mass.

Weight loss management is clinically recommended to prevent weight regain and affirm normal blood pressure, healthy triglycerides, and cholesterol levels, or reduce the risk for metabolic diseases. Besides a general health index, maintaining a healthy weight has far-reaching benefits. Healthy weight loss reduction causes a general sense of well-being, more energy, reduction in stress levels and better sleep, improved immunity, better mental health, balanced hormones, and an overall enhancement in the quality of social life.