**Accidental Percutaneous Injuries**

Dentists are always at risk of accidental sharps injuries in their daily practice. A sharp injury is an accidental skin-penetrating stab wound from a needle (needlestick injury) or a sharp object containing blood or body secretion.

**Factors to Consider When Exposed to Blood-borne Viruses (BBVs)**

- Type of exposure (penetrating injury or mucosal splash)

- Type of body fluid (blood, saliva)

- The volume of body fluids or blood

- Time of contact with the body fluid

- Time since the exposure

- Type of procedure and device involved

- If the injury was through a glove or clothing

- If the source patient is viraemic

If a percutaneous injury occurs, like a needlestick, the operator must stop the procedure immediately and proceed with the post-exposure protocol.

- The wound must be washed with soap and rinsed under running water, allowing it to bleed.

- A supervisor must be notified, and the date and patient details must be recorded.

- Serological tests may be recommended for the operator and the source patient. These tests include HIV antibodies, HCV antibodies, and antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigens (anti-HBs).

- A medical consultation is required as the physician will determine the need for post-exposure prophylaxis according to the patient's medical history and risk for blood-borne infections.

**Source Positive for HIV**

The risk of seroconversion after a sharps injury with HIV-infected blood is 0.3%, and after a mucous membrane exposure to HIV-infected blood is 0.09%.

If the source is possibly infected with HIV, post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) should be considered. The goal of post-exposure prophylaxis is to prevent viral replication. The basic HIV PEP regimen combines zidovudine (ZDV) and lamivudine (3TC). Alternatively, 3TC and stavudine or didanosine and stavudine can also be indiccated. The expanded regimen includes the basic regimen and indinavir, nelfinavir, efavirenz, or abacavir.

Toxicity and side effects of HIV PEP should be considered. PEP is only indicated if there has been significant exposure and a proper risk assessment has been undertaken. Drugs should be administered between 24 to 36 hours post-exposure. HIV PEP should not be used in the case of exposure to nonblood-stained saliva.

Postexposure testing for HIV antibodies is recommended at baseline, six weeks, 12 weeks, and six months postexposure.

If the status of the source is unknown, decisions should be based on the exposure risk and the chance that the source may be HIV positive, e.g., an IV drug user. If the source consents to HIV testing, post-exposure prophylaxis can be given as soon as possible after exposure and discontinued if the result is negative.

**Source Positive for Hepatitis C (HCV)**

After exposure to the hepatitis C virus, the exposed professional must be closely followed up and referred for appropriate therapy if the infection does occur.

The risk of transmission after an injury from a positive source varies whether active viral replication is occurring or not. If the source is HCV RNA negative in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay, the risk is between 1.8 and 3.1%. If the source is PCR positive, the risk increases to 10%. It is recommended to be tested at baseline, three months, and six months. Liver function tests like aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) at two, three, and six months are recommended. An infectious disease clinician or gastroenterologist should monitor clinical signs and symptoms.

**Source Positive for Hepatitis B (HBV)**

Postexposure management for hepatitis B virus (HBV) involves providing multiple doses of HBIG (hepatitis B immune globulin) and the hepatitis B vaccine.

The level of antibodies of the exposed individual should be tested if the source is positive for HBsAg. If the exposed person is not immune (has never been immunized, did not seroconvert to the vaccine, or has antibody levels to HBsAg less than 10 mIU/mL), the treatment is to give a single dose of hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) between 48 to 72 hours of the exposure and to start a course of HBV vaccination.

The HBV vaccine should be given within seven days of exposure, one or two months after, and then six months after the first dose. The level of immunity should be tested two to four weeks later. The risk of transmission of HBV is more than 30% if the source is positive and post-exposure prophylaxis has not been used.