# Introduction

The aorta is the main artery of the human body. It arises from the left ventricle of the heart and travels superiorly to form the ascending aorta. It then loops inferiorly to form the arch of the aorta and through the thorax to form the thoracic aorta. After crossing the diaphragm into the abdomen, the aptly-named abdominal aorta eventually bifurcates into the common iliac arteries in the lower abdomen. Along the way, the aorta gives rise to the arterial branches that are responsible for transmitting oxygenated blood to all the tissues of the body. As such, pathology arising in the aorta frequently results in serious consequences. Thus, it is important for the clinician to be aware of the functional, anatomical, surgical, and clinical considerations about the aorta.

# Structure and Function

The aorta is the central source of oxygenated blood from which all the arteries of the body arise before traveling distally to their destination tissues. The aorta gives rise to major arterial branches such as the left and right coronary arteries, brachiocephalic artery, left common carotid artery, left subclavian artery, celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery, left and right renal arteries, gonadal arteries, inferior mesenteric artery, median sacral artery, and the left and right common iliac arteries.

The abdominal aorta enters the abdomen posterior to the median arcuate ligament and lies anterior and slightly to the left of the anterior aspect of the lumbar vertebrae, with the inferior vena cava lying to its right.

Structures crossing the abdominal aorta:

- Between the origins of coeliac and superior mesenteric arteries - splenic vein and body of pancreas

- Between the origins of superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric arteries - left renal vein, the uncinate process of the pancreas and 3 part of the duodenum

The branches of the abdominal aorta:

- Paired branches: the middle adrenal, renal, gonadal, inferior phrenic, and lumbar arteries

- Unpaired branches: the coeliac, superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric, and median sacral arteries

- Terminal branches: the common iliac arteries

# Embryology

The abdominal aorta arises from the fusion of the paired dorsal aortae during embryonic development. The paired dorsal aortae are continuous with the aortic arches in the embryologic head region which, in turn, arise from the aortic sac. The aortic sac gives rise to the ascending aorta. The aortic arches, also known as the pharyngeal arch arteries, are six pairs of embryologic vascular structures that give rise to the great arteries of the head and neck, including parts of the common carotid arteries, internal carotid arteries, maxillary arteries, aortic arch, pulmonary arteries, right subclavian artery, ductus arteriosus, stapedial arteries, and hyoid artery.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The walls of the aorta are supplied by a network of small blood vessels known as the vasa vasorum whose function is to deliver nutrients and oxygen and remove waste products.

# Nerves

The vascular smooth muscle of blood vessels, including the aorta, is innervated primarily by the autonomic nervous system (ANS), particularly the sympathetic nervous system. Activation of alpha-1 receptors causes vasoconstriction in response to low blood pressure. Activation of beta-2 receptors causes vasodilation.

# Muscles

The wall of the aorta consists of 3 layers known as the tunica adventitia, tunica media, and tunica intima. The innermost layer, the tunica intima, is lined by a single layer of endothelial cells and bound by the internal elastic lamina. The middle layer, the tunica media, is composed of smooth muscle cells, collagen, elastin, and fibroblasts. These components control vasodilation and vasoconstriction by way of signals from the autonomic nervous system. Elastin fibers in the media of the aorta provide tensile strength and the ability to withstand the pulsatile nature of the circulation. The outermost layer, the adventitia, is a thin layer containing connective tissue, fibroblasts, and the vasa vasorum.

# Physiologic Variants

Knowledge of anatomic variability of the aorta and its branches is important in medicine, particularly in the surgical and radiologic fields. The clinician should be able to recognize the various physiological variants of the aorta on imaging and correlate with clinical findings to guide management. Anomalies are often visible on computed tomography (CT), including CT angiography, but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is widely considered the preferred standard for imaging of the aortic arch and its arterial branching pattern.

**Dextrocardia**

Dextrocardia refers to the occurrence of a right-sided cardiac apex. Dextrocardia of embryonic arrest is an isolated form in which the heart is simply placed further to the right than is normal. This form is often associated with severe heart defects.

**Bovine Aortic Arch**

A bovine arch is the most common physiologic variant of the aortic arch. It occurs when the brachiocephalic artery shares a common origin with the left common carotid artery. It is a misnomer as this branching pattern is found in many animals such as canines, felines, and Macaque monkeys, but differs from the true branching pattern of bovine.

**Aberrant Right Subclavian Artery**

Also known as arteria lusoria, this branching pattern occurs when the right subclavian artery arises distal to the left subclavian artery (rather than arising from the brachiocephalic artery) and hooks back to reach the right side. It can be associated with trisomy 21 as well as other chromosomal abnormalities.

**Innominate Artery Compression Syndrome**

Innominate artery compression syndrome occurs when the brachiocephalic trunk (innominate artery) is located further to the left than normal in a location that is directly anterior to the trachea, thus causing compression. Compression can be seen on tracheography, CT, or MRI. There is a tendency for the origin of the brachiocephalic trunk to become more rightward with age, thus leading to the resolution of symptoms in many cases. Symptomatic patients are treated with aortopexy or reimplantation of the innominate artery.

**Right Arch Mirror Image**

This variant occurs when the aortic arch travels posterior and rightward rather than posterior and leftward. The arch passes over the right main-stem bronchus rather than the left. Although asymptomatic, the majority of patients have associated congenital heart disease.

**Double Aortic Arch**

A double aortic arch (DAA) accounts for up to 45% to 65% of patients undergoing repair of a vascular ring. Many subtypes exist, but all types commonly result in compression due to the splitting of the ascending aorta into 2 vessels that pass on either side of the trachea and esophagus. The 2 vessels then join to form a single descending aorta. See Image 1.

# Surgical Considerations

For the repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, the vessel is approached either transabdominal or retroperitoneal. Nowadays, many aneurysms are being repaired with the help of minimally invasive endovascular approaches.

# Clinical Significance

**Vascular Ring**

Any of the subtypes of vascular rings may cause compression of the tracheobronchial tree and/or esophagus leading to respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms. Complete vascular rings completely encircle both structures while incomplete vascular rings do not. In retrospective reviews and case series, DAA along with the right aortic arch with an aberrant left subclavian artery accounts for up to 90% of reported cases of vascular rings causing significant symptoms.

**Aortic Aneurysm**

Aortic aneurysm (AA) describes an increased diameter in the ascending aorta to greater than 5.0 cm or descending aorta to greater than 4.0 cm (increase in diameter >50% from baseline).

**Aortic Coarctation**

Aortic coarctation (AC) occurs when there is a narrowing of the lumen at the distal arch or descending aorta. AC accounts for 4 to 6% of all congenital heart defects with a reported prevalence of approximately 4 per 10,000 live births.

**Aortic Dissection**

Aortic dissection (AD) occurs when blood enters the medial layer of the aortic wall through a tear in the intimal layer forming a second blood-filled pathway called a false lumen. The majority of intimal tears originate in the ascending aorta. The dissection can propagate proximally or distally to affect structures such as the aortic valve, cerebral arteries, coronary arteries, renal arteries, or pericardial space resulting in ischemic manifestations such as aortic regurgitation, acute coronary syndrome, stroke, and cardiac tamponade. The incidence of AD is estimated at 2.6 to 3.5 per 100,000.

**Aortitis**

Aortitis describes inflammation of the aorta and encompasses a wide range of conditions. The most common causes of aortitis are large vessel vasculitides, including giant cell arteritis (GCA) and Takayasu arteritis (TA). Other causes include anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, seronegative spondyloarthropathies, sarcoidosis, and infectious aortitis.

**Atherosclerosis**

Atherosclerosis is a pathological process involving the deposition of fatty and fibrous plaques on the inner walls of the systemic circulatory vessels. The process can begin as early as childhood with the development of fatty streaks. In the United States, 1 in 6 teenagers was found to have abnormal intimal thickening on ultrasound.

**Trauma (Traumatic Aortic Rupture)**

Traumatic aortic rupture (TAR) most commonly occurs at a site immediately distal to the left subclavian artery known as the aortic isthmus. This part of the aorta is tethered by the ligamentum arteriosum making it prone to injury during sudden deceleration, such as during an automobile collision.