Several major complications can occur when a patient is on ECMO. For patients on venovenous ECMO, inadequate flow is a major complication. Since most of these patients present with septicemia, it is not uncommon to encounter a patient with high cardiac output due to the profound drop in systemic vascular resistance from the vasodilatory effects of inflammatory mediators. When cardiac output exceeds the ECMO pump's flow rate, the ECMO circuit cannot sufficiently oxygenate the circulating blood volume.

Veno-arterial (VA) ECMO can cause similar complications, but several major differences exist. The most common artery cannulated in VA-ECMO is the femoral artery. Once the femoral artery is cannulated, retrograde flow occurs in the systemic circulation. In the ipsilateral lower extremity, the femoral artery becomes partially occluded by the cannula, and retrograde flow prevents adequate perfusion distally. Several methods have been developed to overcome this complication and include various selective reperfusion circuits to the affected lower extremity.

In VA-ECMO, retrograde flow occurs, which can have dire cardiac consequences, including left ventricular (LV) distension and watershed phenomena. The left ventricular distention caused by increased afterload will produce increased wall tension and reduced coronary artery flow, increasing cardiac injury's propensity. In patients whose LV function is severely decreased, a thrombus can form in the LV. This issue can be mitigated by observing pulsatile flow on arterial line monitoring.

A complication implicated in both VV and VA-ECMO is thrombosis. Thrombosis occurs due to exposure to ECMO circuit components as well as shear stress induced by the pump. Also, several other patient-dependent factors such as liver failure, sepsis, or other causes of coagulopathy associated with a critical illness have profound effects on thrombus formation. The predominant anticoagulant used to prevent thrombosis is unfractionated heparin (UFH). UFH binds to antithrombin, which increases its ability to inhibit thrombin.

Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a potentially devastating consequence of heparin usage. During HIT, antibodies are formed to platelet factor 4 complexed with heparin. The result is a massive increase in clot formation and life and limb-threatening thrombosis. A decrease in platelet level of approximately 50% from baseline should alert the physician to HIT, and heparin should be discontinued immediately. The patient should be started on a direct thrombin inhibitor immediately.