The initial component of the ultrasonographic evaluation should be the determination of the number of fetuses. There is an increased risk of morbidity and mortality associated with unexpected multiple gestations. Common errors that can lead to misidentification of the correct plurality include not performing a full scan, including the uterus's fundus, or not tracking the fetal head continuously to its corresponding body.

Subsequently, once a fetus is identified, viability should be assessed by evaluating cardiac motion and fetal heart. Fetal heart rate also provides additional prognostic value.  A slow fetal heart rate has been associated with a poorer prognosis, but this should not be the sole determination to consider the pregnancy nonviable.

Fetal lie and presentation are of higher importance in the third trimester than the first and second trimester. Change in these two parameters decreased as the due date approaches. Fetal lie refers to the angle of alignment of the fetus and uterus in the sagittal axis. Longitudinal lie, the most commonly found, refers to both the fetal and uterine axis aligning in parallel. The other two possibilities include a transverse, and less commonly, an oblique lie.

Presentation, on the other hand, refers to the fetal anatomic part closer to the cervix. The cephalic position is the most commonly found with the fetal head as the presenting part, and it correlates with improved delivery outcomes. Malpresentation, including breech, footling, or kneeling, is often associated with increased labor difficulty and, consequently, with increased morbidity and mortality. Ultrasound can determine both complete and incomplete variations of presentation. Both fetal lie and presentation must be assessed concurrently since an incomplete examination can misinterpret the findings. If the fetal head is closer to the cervix or lower segment of the uterus, the fetal lie in the sagittal axis should be confirmed before reporting a cephalic presentation since the fetus could be in a transverse axis. If a malpresentation is identified, the ultrasonographer should assess and evaluate potential causes, including placental abnormalities or fetal malformations.

Estimating gestational age and weight should be attempted with the caveat that measurements in the third trimester are less accurate than those made during the first trimester. Fetal abnormalities can also affect the measurements of different body parts.

An important aspect of the examination in the third trimester is the evaluation of the amniotic fluid. There remains some controversy about the best methodology when there are moderate abnormalities in fluid volume, but more concordance exists at the extremes. The initial evaluation should subjectively allow for assessment for polyhydramnios and oligohydramnios. It is important to remember that near-term, amniotic fluid volume may appear decreased due to the relatively larger size of the fetus. Objective measurements should follow either using the deepest vertical pocket method (DVP) or amniotic fluid index (AFI). A diagnosis of oligohydramnios should prompt emergent referral and assessment by an obstetrician due to the associated prognosis of fetal demise. On the other hand, polyhydramnios requires a less emergent consultation but should prompt further evaluation and testing since it can be associated with complications for the mother and the fetus. In the case of multiple gestations, an increased amniotic fluid volume must raise immediate suspicion for an etiology related to a fetal abnormality. The majority of cases are related to twin to twin transfusion syndrome.

Determining the location of the placenta and its relation to the cervix is a critical aspect of the examination. If performing a transabdominal ultrasound examination, various maneuvers can correctly assess the placenta, including changing patient position. If this fails, a transvaginal exam can be considered. If the diagnosis of placenta previa cannot be excluded despite all efforts, one must be cautious and assume the presence of the diagnosis. In patients with prior cesarean section in which a placenta previa is identified, further detail should be directed towards assessing for placenta accreta.

In patients that present for abdominal pain, a significant concern is a placental abruption. However, ultrasound is not ideal for identifying placental abruption as both false positives, and false negatives are common. The myometrium and its supplying vasculature can frequently be mistaken for a hematoma. On the other hand, a small abruption can be easily confused for normal myometrium.

Ultrasonography also offers the opportunity to evaluate the umbilical cord and determine the presence of vasa previa. Findings that should raise suspicion for this diagnosis include resolved placenta previa, succenturiate placental lobe, and velamentous cord insertion.

A commonly asked question during the ultrasonographic examination is the presence of fetal abnormalities. It is impractical to examine every patient for every possible abnormality. However, major abnormalities are usually evident on a routine examination. Determining what is considered reassuring in the absence of any obvious abnormality remains debated, given the complexity of the issue. Furthermore, abnormalities detected during the first and second trimester of pregnancy can disappear in the third trimester. Opposite to that, some abnormalities only become apparent with the advancement of gestation. It is currently recommended that if only one ultrasound is performed, that it should be done at 18 to 20 weeks of gestation. Any malformation found should be further evaluated by a sonographer with expertise in the precise abnormality discovered.