Episcleritis has an acute onset of sectoral or diffuse redness of one or both eyes. Episcleritis most often presents unilaterally, about 80% of the time, but may also have an acute bilateral presentation.

It may be necessary to determine the depth of the congested vessels to differentiate between episcleritis and scleritis. However, a patient with scleritis will be significantly more symptomatic with severe radiating pain, photophobia, tearing, and possibly reduced visual acuity. The clinician will instill one drop of 2.5% phenylephrine to the affected eye and evaluate the vasculature after 10 to 15 minutes.  If the inflammation is localized to the episcleral tissue, then the vessels will blanch with the phenylephrine, and the eye will be relatively white and asymptomatic. Scleral vessels do not blanch with phenylephrine, and the eye will still appear to be significantly hyperemic if the scleral vessels are inflamed.

Patients with acute episcleritis are likely to have a concurrent ocular surface disease as well. Ocular rosacea is the most common, along with keratoconjunctivitis sicca and atopic keratoconjunctivitis.

A review of systems should be completed, and if the patient has a history of or is currently suffering from joint/muscle pain or weakness, skin rash, psoriasis, diarrhea, oral or genital ulcers, history of drug abuse or possibility for sexually transmitted infections or any other symptoms to suggest a systemic association, then laboratory testing should be done.