Benzodiazepine overdose is usually suspected or diagnosed based on clinical presentation. Many patients are arousable and can provide supporting information regarding their ingestion. In the acutely poisoned patient who cannot provide an adequate history, a general approach should be undertaken to stabilize the patient.

Before any diagnostic tests are ordered in the patient presenting with altered mental status with suspected overdose or toxicity, any respiratory or abnormal vital signs should be addressed first. Mechanical ventilation may be required to address respiratory compromise and intravenous fluids administered to manage hemodynamic instability.

In terms of general diagnostic testing, routine testing for the acutely poisoned patient should include a point of care glucose to immediately rule out and address hypoglycemia as the cause of altered mental status. Acetaminophen and aspirin levels, along with ethanol levels, should be ordered to evaluate for possible coingestions. An ECG should be ordered to rule out the ingestion of drugs that may widen the QRS or QTc intervals and may precipitate arrhythmias. A pregnancy test should be ordered for all women of childbearing age. A head CT without contrast may be considered to rule out an intracranial abnormality related to the patient presenting with an acutely altered mental status.

While a standard urine drug screen (UDS) should be ordered, it comes with many limitations. Qualitative immunoassays for benzodiazepines in urine are readily available but do not typically aid in acute management decisions. Most of these screening tests detect only benzodiazepines that are metabolized to oxazepam glucuronide. Some benzodiazepines such as clonazepam, lorazepam, midazolam, and alprazolam will not show up on many urine drug screens as a result. A positive urine drug screen only indicates recent exposure but does not confirm causality for acute toxicity or overdose, nor does it name a specific agent.