**Vertebral Augmentation**

Vertebroplasty is a minor procedure and can be associated with a few complications but is often associated with limited efficacy, except for select populations. Thus it is imperative to identify the correct demography and perform a thorough assessment of the patient before vertebral augmentation. A team approach is an ideal way to limit an unnecessary procedure. Before vertebroplasty, the patient should have the following done:

- Failed conservative management

- The patient has shown radiographic evidence of pain in the area of the compression fracture

- The patient has considered alternative treatment options

- A diagnosis of an osteoporotic compression fracture or a pathological fracture of the lumbar spine secondary to multiple myeloma or similar malignancy has occurred

- The patient has undergone evaluation by either neurosurgery, pain medicine, or orthopedic surgery

- Advanced imaging such as MRI has been done

- Labs to assess for renal function and coagulation disorders have been complete

The procedure requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team. While care may initiate with the family physician or GP, a spinal specialist (usually an orthopedist or neurosurgeon) should be brought in and lead the treatment plan. Orthopedic and medical/surgical specialty-trained nursing staff can assist throughout all aspects of the procedure, from prep, intraoperative, and post-op care, monitoring the patient, and informing the surgeon of any concerns as well as assisting with patient and family education. Post-surgical recovery may include physical or occupational therapy, and these professionals must chart and report to the rest of the team on patient progress. The entire interprofessional healthcare team must be involved, communicating, and operating from the same information base in these vertebral augmentation procedures, to drive the best possible patient outcomes. [Level 5]