# Continuing Education Activity

Nintedanib is a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) that binds to a family of growth factor receptors and prevents the proliferation of fibroblasts. It reduces the ongoing fibrotic process and delays the progression to long-lasting damage. Nintedanib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor used to treat and manage idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease, and interstitial lung disease with progressive phenotype. This activity outlines the indications, contraindications, adverse events, and other key elements of nintedanib therapy in the clinical setting and highlights the essential points needed by members of an interprofessional team managing the care of patients with progressive interstitial lung disease.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for nintedanib therapy.
- Identify the most common adverse events associated with nintedanib therapy.
- Describe the mechanism of action of nintedanib.
- Explain the importance of monitoring patients on nintedanib therapy.

# Indications

Nintedanib is a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) that binds to a family of growth factor receptors and prevents the proliferation of fibroblasts. It reduces the ongoing fibrotic process and delays the progression to long-lasting damage. Nintedanib was initially approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2014 for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).

These lung volume benefits are primarily seen in the Usual Interstitial Pneumonia (UIP) pattern and SSc-ILD when nintedanib is used in combination with mycophenolate mofetil or cyclophosphamide.

# Mechanism of Action

Nintedanib is a small molecule indolinone derivative that binds the tyrosine kinase receptors. The proposed mechanism of action is the restriction of neo-angiogenesis by inhibiting a number of growth factors such as *FGFR, VEGFR, PDGFR, CSF1R, and FLT3.

*FGFR: Fibroblast growth factor receptor; VEGFR: Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor; PDGFR: Platelet-derived growth factor receptor; CSF1R: Colony-stimulating factor-1-receptor; FLT3: Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3.

# Administration

Nintedanib therapy is available in soft capsules with 100 mg and 150 mg dosages.

The manufacturer's recommendation is for the capsule to be taken whole with food and fluids. Chewing, crushing, or splitting the capsules can cause a bitter taste. The typical recommended dosage is 150 mg twice daily.

In cases of mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class A), low body mass index (BMI), or persistent gastrointestinal side effects, a dose reduction to 100 mg twice daily is recommended.

The drug should be kept tightly closed in the same container it came in and out of reach from children. Nintedanib should be stored at room temperature, away from moisture and excessive heat. Disposal of nintedanib should be done safely, ensuring that children, pets, or other people do not have access to the disposed-of capsules. The best way of drug disposal is through a medication take-back program at a local pharmacy.

Precaution should be taken when nintedanib is co-administered with medications metabolized by CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein enzymes due to altered bioavailability and metabolism.

# Adverse Effects

Nintedanib has been reported to have the following side effects in clinical studies:

- Gastrointestinal-related side effects were most common, including nausea (31%), vomiting (23%), diarrhea (76%), abdominal pain (10%), and decreased appetite (10%).

- Hepatic impairment was commonly seen with elevation in liver enzymes.

- Endocrinological - decreased weight (7%)

- Respiratory - nasopharyngitis (7%), cough (14%), upper respiratory tract infection (14%)

- Nervous system - headache (12%), fatigue (14%)

- Dermatological - dermal ulcer (16%)

- Genitourinary - urinary tract infection (12%)

The majority of diarrheal events were classified as mild to moderate and occurred mainly within the first three months of therapy. Patient education and supportive treatment such as adequate hydration, antidiarrheals, and antiemetics should be provided when appropriate. A dose reduction or treatment interruption should be considered in patients with persistent gastrointestinal symptoms despite being on supportive treatment, or treatment should be discontinued.

Post-marketing adverse events that have been reported include gastrointestinal perforation, proteinuria, and pancreatitis. In several clinical trials, nintedanib was also found to be associated with an increased risk of bleeding, likely secondary to VEGFR inhibition. Although severe bleeding and arterial thromboembolic events such as myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke were rare, bleeding events with serious and fatal outcomes have been reported in the post-marketing surveillance of the drug.

The inhibition of VEGFR and its downstream signaling pathways were also associated with renal dysfunction, including proteinuria and hypertension. Several cases of proteinuria and thrombotic microangiopathy have been described in the literature related to the chronic use of nintedanib.

# Contraindications

The use of nintedanib during pregnancy and lactation is not recommended.

Nintedanib is pregnancy category D, and females of reproductive age should be counseled to use highly effective contraception (for example, reversible implantable contraceptive device) before starting the medication and during therapy. Contraception should be continued for at least three months after the last dose of nintedanib. A Pregnancy test should be performed before and at regular intervals during treatment.

The excretion of the drug in breast milk is not defined, but breastfeeding while on this therapy is not recommended.

Moderate to severe hepatic impairment (Child-pugh class B and C) is also a relative contraindication to nintedanib therapy.

Caution should be exercised in female patients over 65 years of age with low body mass index(BMI) and in those patients with coronary artery disease, thromboembolic events, anticoagulation, recent abdominal surgery, and a history of gastrointestinal perforation. The safety profiles of nintedanib therapy in adolescents, children, or infants have not been established.

# Monitoring

Pregnancy testing before the initiation of therapy and periodically during the therapeutic course is recommended in females of the reproductive age group.

A liver function test is necessary at baseline and within the first three months of therapy initiation. After which, regular monitoring should be performed at least every 6 to 12 months or as clinically indicated.

The optimal time to assess treatment response is not well defined. Clinicians should perform routine monitoring with pulmonary function tests (PFT), 6-minute walk tests (6MWT), home spirometry, as well as subjective exercise tolerance and physical exam findings.

Changes in the patient's clinical condition may reflect superimposed infection, malignancy, or even the development of pulmonary artery hypertension and not just the progression of the underlying ILD.

Quantitative HRCT is also a sensitive tool used to quantify the disease progression and response to treatment in SSc-ILD.

# Toxicity

The standard dose of nintedanib therapy is 150 mg every 12 hours. There are no recommended guidelines for managing overdose. Any patient with a suspected overdose should undergo close monitoring in a healthcare facility. Nintedanib has a high protein binding ability (approximately 98%), predominantly to albumin, with a bioavailability of around 5%.

Nintedanib therapy is frequently associated with elevated liver enzymes and bilirubin, but this is usually reversible with dose reduction or treatment interruption. For patients with ALT/AST elevation less than 3 to 5 times the upper limit without signs of hepatotoxicity, it is recommended to hold the therapy and resume at a lower dose of 100 mg twice daily once the liver enzymes normalized. Treatment should be discontinued in patients who develop signs and symptoms of hepatotoxicity with AST/ALT elevation more than 3 to 5 times the normal upper limit.

Female patients with low BMI, low body surface area (BSA), and Asian ethnicity are at higher risk of hepatotoxicity when treated with doses of 150 mg twice daily. This is reversible with treatment interruption or dose reduction.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Treatment of progressive fibrosing ILD remains challenging for health care providers, and these patients have significant unmet needs. ILD can lead to the continued deterioration of lung function, reduced exercise tolerance, worsening dyspnea, and cough. These changes can result in reduced health-related quality of life (HR-QOL), increased morbidity and mortality, and some diseases with ILD have a median survival rate as low as 4.5 years.

Over the last decade, anti-fibrotic drugs such as nintedanib and pirfenidone have become the emerging therapy for IPF. Other conditions associated with progressive ILD have also shown promising results in slowing the progression of the disease. When used alone or in combination, the safety and tolerability of these medications are well established, although more studies are needed to determine the degree of the potential synergistic effect.

Patient education is crucial and should be included in the provider's management tool kit. The pros and cons of this therapy, as well as supportive care, should be discussed with patients in detail. Adjunctive treatments, including oxygen therapy, should be prescribed to maintain daily activity and prevent or delay the onset of secondary pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary rehabilitation has been shown to have long-term benefits as it emphasizes the importance of a comprehensive therapeutic approach to fibrotic lung disease.

A multidisciplinary team, including a pulmonologist, rheumatologist, cardiologist, and pulmonary rehabilitation medicine specialist, should be involved in patient care to prevent long-term complications. Although more studies are needed, such an approach may delay disease progression and reduce the need for lung transplantation. ILD is also a risk factor for ischemic heart disease.

Interprofessional teamwork is also essential to optimal patient management and care. In addition to the multidisciplinary physician team, mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), nursing staff, respiratory therapists, and pharmacists can all contribute from various areas of expertise to manage cases using nintedanib. All interprofessional team members must maintain meticulous records of their interactions and observations with the patient, so all team members operate from the same accurate, updated information. If any caregiver notes any concerns or changes in status, they should reach out to the appropriate team member(s) for further evaluation and possible interventions. This interprofessional approach will drive optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Patients should be encouraged to get approved vaccines against coronavirus, age-appropriate pneumococcal vaccine, and annual influenza vaccine. Continuous exposure to first-hand and second-hand smoking is detrimental and should be discouraged. There is also a strong association between ILD and depression is independently related to sleep quality, pain, and forced vital capacity.

In patients with progressive IPF not amenable to pharmacological therapy, the introduction of advance directives and palliative care should be considered as the prognosis remains guarded.