Before IDET consideration, patients should have treatment with a comprehensive exercise training regimen and an optimized regimen of medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The performance of the IDET procedure requires collaboration from all members of the interprofessional medical team. Although a relatively safe procedure, all involved members of the interprofessional team need to communicate across interprofessional lines such as nursing staff working together with physicians and anesthesiologists to provide the highest level of care and patient comfort during the procedure. [Level 5]

Pain relief after IDET is not immediate. Furthermore, it may increase during the first couple of days. Physical therapy is a crucial aspect of recovery, and the PT should keep the rest of the team appraised of patient progress. Orthopedic specialized nursing staff can counsel and direct the patient following the procedure, and coordinate with the PT afterward as rehab begins. During the first month after IDET, 5the patient can plan to walk and do easy stretches. During the first 2 to 3 months, the patient should exercise as directed, and avoid lifting, bending, and long periods of sitting. It is recommendable for patients who have had IDET to wait at least 5 to 6 months to return to vigorous sports such as skiing, running, or tennis.

The best possible outcome for patients undergoing IDET could be encouraged through clear and efficient communication and collaboration among the members of the interprofessional team, as outlined above. [Level V]