The only way to avoid contracting dengue is to prevent mosquito bites and not travel to endemic areas.

Preventative measures include

Personal Prophylactic Measures: Use of bed nets while in bed even in the daytime, Insecticide-treated materials (ITMs) like window curtains, application of mosquito repellent creams (containing DEET, IR3535, or Icaridin), coils, developing the habit of wearing full sleeve shirts and pants help prevent mosquito bite.

**Biological Control**

a) Fish: Viviparous species Poecilia reticulata have been used in confined water bodies like large water tanks, open freshwater wells. Only native larvicidal fishes should be used.

b) Predatory Copepods: These small freshwater crustaceans have proven to be effective only in specific container habitats

c) Endosymbiotic control: Mosquitoes infected with Wolbachia (an intracellular parasite) are less susceptible to DENV infection than wild type A. aegypti.

Chemical Control: Larvicidal use in big breeding containers; Insecticide spray: Space sprays can be applied as thermal fogs and cold aerosols. Oil-based formulations are preferred as it inhibits evaporation. Some of the commonly used insecticides are organophosphorus compounds (fenitrothion, malathion) and pyrethroids (bioresmethrin, cypermethrin).

Environmental Measures: Finding the breeding areas and eliminating the pests; proper management of rooftops and sunshades; appropriate covering of stored water like buckets, pots, etc

Health Education: It is the most important weapon to fight against dengue. Sensitizing the people regarding dengue in detail is necessary for the effective implementation of the dengue control program. The sensitization can be done by audiovisual media or mass awareness campaigns.

Community Participation: It's essential to sensitize the communities for their active participation in dengue control programs.

Vaccination: CYD-TDV: a live recombinant tetravalent dengue vaccine, first to be licensed, is approved for endemic areas in 20 countries.