During normal wakefulness, orexin-containing neurons in the lateral hypothalamus increase the activity of the nuclei of the Reticular Activating System (RAS), which increases wake-promoting neurotransmitters in the cortex; dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and histamine inhibit REM and acetylcholine is increased in both wakefulness and REM. The RAS also inhibits the sleep-promoting ventrolateral preoptic area (VLPO), suppressing GABA, which in turn increases the activity of motor neurons and muscle tone. Heightened emotions increase activity in the amygdala and subsequently the orexin-containing neurons, which suppresses REM. The wake-promoting and the sleep-promoting systems are usually mutually inhibitory to ensure complete transitions.

During normal REM sleep, orexin decreases, which decreases RAS activity and promotes atonia. In narcolepsy type 1, the mechanism that separates wake from sleep becomes unstable without sufficient levels of orexin. The RAS no longer consistently causes the release of wake-promoting neurotransmitters to the cortex and inconsistently inhibits the VLPO. This results in rapid transitions between sleep and wake and allows the intrusion of REM-related phenomena into wakefulness.

The cataplexy seems to have its origin in the pons and the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic system.

Hypocretin

The hypocretin system now appears to play a vital role in narcolepsy. Many patients with narcolepsy have no or little hypocretin in the CSF. The deficiency in hypocretin is believed to produce intermittent wake and sleep states. Unfortunately, many other neurotransmitters play a role in the sleep-wake cycle, and making a correlation with any one of them is difficult.