# Continuing Education Activity

Breast milk jaundice is a type of jaundice that occurs in neonates due to breastfeeding. It happens within the first week of life due to the abnormal accumulation of bilirubin, causing a yellowish discoloration to the neonate's skin known as jaundice. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of breast milk jaundice and explains interprofessional team members' role in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of breast milk jaundice.
- Review the pathophysiology of breast milk jaundice.
- Identify the use of phototherapy in the management of patients with breast milk jaundice.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by breast milk jaundice.

# Introduction

Jaundice, also known as hyperbilirubinemia, is a frequently encountered clinical problem in neonates. About 60-80% of all term or late-term healthy newborns will develop some degree of hyperbilirubinemia.

Breast milk jaundice was first described in 1963. Arias et al. noted that some breastfed infants had unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia that persisted beyond the third week of life.

# Etiology

The exact etiology of breast milk jaundice has not been determined. Most of the proposed etiologies involve the factors present in the human breast milk itself. Other hypotheses suggest potential genetic mutations present in the affected neonates.

Some human breast milk factors that may be related to breast milk jaundice's etiology include pregnane-3a,20ß-diol, interleukin IL1ß, ß-glucuronidase, epidermal growth factor, and alpha-fetoprotein.

Several studies have shown that mutations in the coding region of the UGT1A1 gene increase the risk of developing breast milk jaundice. Mutations in this gene's regulatory region are known to cause Crigler-Najjar and Gilbert syndrome, two syndromes known to cause persistent hyperbilirubinemia

# Epidemiology

The frequency of breast milk jaundice within the United States is about 20 to 30% of neonates who are mostly breastfed.

# Pathophysiology

Before discussing the mechanism for breast milk jaundice, it is crucial to understand neonatal bilirubin metabolism and why neonates, in general, are affected by hyperbilirubinemia. Newborns have markedly increased bilirubin production compared to their adult counterparts, secondary to a higher blood volume and hemoglobin concentration, a shorter red blood cell lifespan, and liver enzymes' physiological immaturity. These factors combined result in relatively high production of unconjugated form, which is not water-soluble. To excrete bilirubin from the body, there is the conversion of the unconjugated form to the conjugated (water-soluble) form is required. The conjugation process occurs within the hepatocyte by bilirubin uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (bilirubin-UGT) enzyme. UGT1A1 gene codes this enzyme production. Therefore those with genetic mutations in this gene are unable to conjugate bilirubin adequately. This enzyme is also significantly less active in neonates than in adults, leading to less efficient conjugation. After conjugation and excretion from hepatocytes, the bilirubin passes to the small intestine, where it gets converted to stercobilin by gut flora and subsequently excreted via the stool.

Infants have a decreased concentration of gut flora needed for this process than adults, leading to a higher concentration of bilirubin remaining within the intestinal tract. The enzyme ß-glucuronidase will deconjugate bilirubin remaining within the intestine. After this process, it is returned to the liver for re-conjugation via portal circulation. This process is known as "enterohepatic circulation." Neonates have significantly higher activity of the enzyme ß-glucuronidase and a more permeable gut wall, leading to overall higher concentrations of unconjugated bilirubin and increased enterohepatic circulation.

Basic and clinical studies were conducted and are still ongoing to investigate breast milk jaundice's pathophysiology by studying breast milk's effect on the processes discussed above.

# History and Physical

Breast milk jaundice typically presents within the first two weeks of life in an otherwise healthy infant who is predominantly breastfed. These infants exhibit normal weight gain with adequate production of urine and stools.

# Evaluation

The evaluation of a patient presenting with hyperbilirubinemia must include a work-up to rule out pathological causes of hyperbilirubinemia before making the breast milk jaundice diagnosis. First, both unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin levels must be measured. Conjugated bilirubin levels higher than 1 mg/dL or 20% of the total bilirubin level indicate conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (also known as cholestasis or direct hyperbilirubinemia). Once cholestasis is suspected, disorders such as biliary atresia, neonatal hepatitis, and other bilirubin excretion disorders. Both breast milk jaundice and hemolytic anemias cause elevated unconjugated bilirubin levels. Hemolytic causes for hyperbilirubinemia include ABO incompatibility, G6PD deficiency, hereditary spherocytosis, and other antibody-mediated hemolysis. Hemolysis assessment should consist of direct Coombs’ testing, measurement of hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte count, a peripheral blood smear, and genetic testing.

The clinician should consider other non-hemolytic causes of prolonged hyperbilirubinemia, such as Crigler-Najjar or Gilbert syndrome but need not investigate them unless jaundice persists longer than what is expected for breast milk jaundice. Galactosemia and hypothyroidism can also cause unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, hence should be ruled out.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment is not necessary for breast milk jaundice unless the infant's total serum bilirubin level is greater than the phototherapy guidelines recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis of breast milk jaundice include:

- Physiological jaundice of newborns

- Hemolysis associated hyperbilirubinemia ( ABO, G6PD, hereditary spherocytosis, others)

- Breastfeeding jaundice ( inadequate milk intake and dehydration)

- Genetic causes ( Crigler-Najjar, pyruvate kinase deficiency, and Gilbert syndromes)

- Cholestasis (Biliary atresia, neonatal hepatitis, choledochal cyst, and disorders of bilirubin excretion)

# Prognosis

Overall, infants' prognosis with breast milk jaundice is excellent as it is a self-limited condition that usually resolves around 12 weeks of age.

# Complications

The most feared complication of all neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, including breast milk jaundice, is acute bilirubin encephalopathy acutely and kernicterus (chronic bilirubin encephalopathy) in the long term. This concern is due to its potential for permanent neurodevelopmental delay. It is a rare complication of breast milk jaundice and occurs in less than 2% of breastfed term infants who have no evidence of hemolytic anemia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Parents of affected infants should be educated about the nature of breast milk jaundice and the expected clinical course. The mother of the affected newborn should continue to breastfeed unless otherwise contraindicated.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although jaundice in breastfed infants is a common and usually benign finding, it cannot be ignored. Clear communication between all healthcare team members and the parents is necessary to provide medical guidance and rule out other neonatal hyperbilirubinemia causes. With routine newborn evaluation and timely management, kernicterus, the most severe complication of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, is preventable, and the successful continuation of breastfeeding is possible.