If carpal tunnel syndrome is identified early, conservative treatment is recommended.

**Physical and Occupational Therapy**

Initially, the patient should be instructed in modifying symptom provoking wrist movement. This can be through proper hand ergonomics such as placing the keyboard at a proper height and minimizing flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction of the hand when typing. It should be recommended to decrease repetitive activities if possible. Counseling on weight loss and increased aerobic activity also can be beneficial. A properly fitted nighttime wrist splint can be offered. An occupational therapist trained in hand therapy also may be a beneficial referral. Combined therapy may be more beneficial than any single treatment. A short course of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication can relieve symptoms but some do not feel it of adequate benefit.

**Medical Treatment**

Patients with mild to moderate carpal tunnel syndrome respond to conservative management, which includes splinting the wrist at nighttime for at least three weeks. If conservative treatment fails, a steroid injection into the carpal tunnel can be beneficial.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be useful against CTS in patients with wrist flexor tendinitis. Similarly, diuretics can be helpful in patients with fluid overload. gabapentin and pregabalin, which are used in different types of neuropathic pain, can be used, for CTS off-label.

**Surgical Treatment**

Patients who do not get better following conservative treatment and those who have severe carpal tunnel syndrome as defined by electrophysiologic testing should be considered for surgery. The definitive treatment for persistent carpal tunnel syndrome is a surgical intervention with carpal tunnel release after nerve conduction studies showing significant axonal degeneration. Carpal tunnel release typically is performed by a neuro/orthopedic/plastic surgeon or hand surgeon. This procedure can be performed either open or endoscopically. Carpal tunnel release is considered a minor surgery in which the transverse carpal ligament or flexor retinaculum is cut, opening more space in the carpal tunnel and decreasing pressure on the median nerve. It does not typically require overnight hospitalization.

**Guidelines by the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons**

The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons released guidelines on the management of CTS. Following recommendations were made:

- Thenar atrophy is strongly associated with ruling in CTS but is poorly associated with ruling it out

- Phalen test, Tinel sign, flick sign, or upper limb neurodynamic/nerve tension test (ULNT) criterion A/B should not be used as independent physical examination maneuvers to diagnose CTS, because alone, each has a poor or weak association with ruling in or ruling out the condition

- Independent history interview topics should not be used to diagnose CTS, because alone, each has a poor or weak association with ruling in or ruling out the condition: sex/gender, ethnicity, bilateral symptoms, diabetes mellitus, worsening symptoms at night, duration of symptoms, patient localization of symptoms, hand dominance, symptomatic limb, age, and body mass index

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should not be a routine for the diagnosis of CTS

- Diagnostic questionnaires and/or electrodiagnostic studies can be used to aid the diagnosis of CTS

- The following factors are associated with an increased risk of developing CTS: peri-menopausal, wrist ratio/index, rheumatoid arthritis, psychosocial factors, distal upper extremity tendinopathies, gardening, assembly line work, computer work, vibration, tendonitis, workplace forceful grip/exertion

- Physical activity/exercise is associated with a decreased risk of developing CTS

- The use of immobilization (brace/splint/orthosis) should improve patient-reported outcomes

- The use of steroid (methylprednisolone) injection should improve patient-reported outcomes

- There is no benefit to oral CTS treatments (diuretic, gabapentin, astaxanthin capsules, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], or pyridoxine) over placebo

- Oral steroids could improve patient-reported outcomes in comparison with placebo

- The surgical release of the transverse carpal ligament should relieve CTS symptoms and improve function

- Surgical treatment of CTS should have a greater therapeutic benefit at 6 and 12 months in comparison with splinting, NSAIDs/therapy, and a single steroid injection

- There is no benefit to routine postoperative immobilization after carpal tunnel release