RCM is a fairly rare disease, but it does account for approximately 5% of all cases of cardiomyopathy. The three major cardiomyopathies are dilated, hypertrophic, and restrictive. RCM is the least common form. Most causes of RCM are acquired. Its prevalence varies depending on regionality, ethnicity, age, and gender.

- Amyloidosis: The most common cause of RCM in the United States. It affects men and women equally. AL amyloidosis most common cause of RCM. Several different types of amyloidosis. The wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis is most often found in the elderly population. The V1221 mutant transthyretin has a higher rate of symptomatic heart failure.

- Sarcoidosis: More common in women than men. The highest prevalence is among black women. The highest incidence worldwide is in Japan.

- Hemochromatosis: Affects men and women equally. The prevalence is 1 per 200 individuals. Men are more likely to have cirrhosis associated with hemochromatosis. The predominant gene mutation HFE C282Y. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Another common mutation seen in hemochromatosis is the H63D.

- Loffler endocarditis: Common in tropical climates and sub-Saharan Africa. Up to twenty percent of heart failure in this region is thought to be secondary to endomyocardial fibrosis.

There are several other causes of restrictive cardiomyopathy, each of which has its unique epidemiology. They all vary by region, gender variance, incidence, prevalence, and mutation affected. These conditions are not mentioned in detail here as they are much rarer than the above. If any of the above does not fit the patient's diagnosis, then the recommendation is to consult a specialist if one is not already involved.