During the evaluation of patients presenting with right upper quadrant abdominal pain, ultrasound should be the primary modality to assess such patients initially. The ultrasound findings could be characteristic of adenomyomatosis, and it could be of great benefit to help providers reach a diagnosis. Sometimes, gallbladder wall thickening is seen on ultrasound but cannot be well characterized. In such a case, further characterization could be achieved via magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen. Gallbladder wall thickening could be an incidental finding on computed tomography (CT) scan; an ultrasound or an MRI scan may be useful for further characterization. The characteristic findings of adenomyomatosis are gallbladder wall thickening, Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses, and the calculi or cholesterol crystals often found in sinuses. On ultrasound scanning, adenomyomatosis is seen as gallbladder wall thickening, intramural cystic spaces, and echogenic intramural foci (cholesterol crystals in the Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses) that show comet tail artifacts. In most cases, all of the characteristic findings are not present.

Of the ultrasound findings described, the echogenic foci with associated V-shaped comet tail artifacts have been described as specific for adenomyomatosis. On MRI, adenomyomatosis shows gallbladder wall thickening and T2 hyperintense intramural cystic spaces. Calculi are seen as signal voids. The T2 hyperintense cystic areas can align in a curvilinear fashion, producing a “pearl necklace sign.” On CT imaging, nonspecific gallbladder wall thickening and wall enhancement are sometimes seen. The “rosary sign” can be present, which is caused by a thin layer of enhancing epithelium lining the intramural diverticula, which is surrounded by hypo-enhancing hypertrophied muscularis, causing the gallbladder wall to resemble a rosary.