Treatment can be surgical and non-surgical: arthrolysis (open or arthroscopic), interposition arthroplasties, and prosthetic replacements. It is considered essential to address the treatment related to an adequate clinical evaluation, determining the decrease and disability for the patient since it may vary according to activities and expectations. The time of evolution and cause of stiffness are also relevant components needed to plan the treatment strategy.

**Non-surgical treatment**

Among the non-surgical options, supervised stretching, dynamic and static splints, the serial plasters, and the physical therapy were described to be effective. Splint treatment shows better outcome results when the time of the clinical evolution of the contracture is shorter and does not present large joint conditions (extrinsic causes).

Mobilizations, under anesthesia, have been associated with heterotopic ossification. For some authors, extrinsic causes of stiffness are better treated with a  non-surgical approach with good results.

**Surgical Treatment**

Indications: intrinsic causes that will not improve with non-surgical treatment, serious stiffness (i.e., less than 30 degrees of range), poor outcomes with rehabilitation, for example, heterotopic ossification. As mentioned above, knowing the cause of the stiffness is necessary for an adequate pre-operative planning. According to the information obtained, type of surgery, open or arthroscopic, the proper approach and procedure will be planned.

**Surgical Approaches**

The choice depends on the location of previous scars, the need for nerve decompression and the presence and extension of ossification.

**Medial approach:**Indication. Medial articular injuries, ulnar nerve disease, medial ectopic bone, ossification, or ligament insufficiency.

**Lateral or column procedure:**Lateral approach allows anterior and posterior capsulectomy.  Afterwards, mobility should be evaluated.

**Collateral Ligaments:**During lateral and medial approaches, ligaments are retained. Sometimes it is necessary to release them. In severe and long-term contractures it may be necessary to partially release the ligaments. If the pre-operative restriction is less than 110 to 120 degrees, the posterior fascicle of the medial collateral ligament and the posterolateral capsule must be released to restore flexion.

**Posterior approach:**It is possible to have access to the posteromedial and posterolateral capsule. The cutaneous incision is in the posterior midline lateral to the olecranon. The ulnar nerve should be identified and protected.

**Arthroscopic release:**The capsular contracture causes a notable decrease in capsule volume. This makes it difficult to enter in the joint. Several portals must be considered. Based on a clinical experience, some authors have proposed the procedure in four steps.

- Entrance

- Preparation

- Bone removal and free bodies

- Capsulectomy

**Surgery on Heterotopic Ossification**

Surgical treatment is indicated when ossifications represent a functional limitation. The approach will be planned according to the location and the area of extension.

**Postoperative Care**

Perform an immediate evaluation of neurological integrity. Place a padded bandage with a  splint to decrease bleeding and immediate post-op edema. The placement of an axillary catheter or anesthetic blockade has been proposed.

Continuous passive mobility is recommended. Evaluation of the continuity of the continuous motion splint is performed according to the capacity of patient’s mobilization without it (3 to 4 weeks). It can be continued with static splints.

It has been recommended the use of indomethacin to avoid the ossification.

**Surgical Result**

Both, open techniques and arthroscopic approach showed good outcome results. Bibliographic reviews suggest up to 90% increase the mobility range of at least 10 degrees and approximately 80% achieve functional range (between 30 and 130 degrees). Mobility acquired by surgery may be often lost.

There is not enough evidence through randomized clinical trials about advantages of arthroscopic technique over the open approach.

**Rehabilitation**

The postoperative program should be individualized, according to etiology and patient preferences. However, certain objectives can be determined: 1) Restore a functional arc of motion, 2) Regain muscle strength, 3) Incorporate the limb to functional activities. Regarding the beginning of the mobilization, some authors recommend starting after two days of the Arthrolysis, as long as adequate control of the pain is achieved. Continuous passive motion (CPM)  presents the advantage of reaching the limits of extension and flexion achieved in the surgery. This strategy is not recommended in cases in which ligaments have been reconstructed or repaired. Rehabilitation efforts should be maximised until the patient gains adequate degrees of movement. Static or dynamic splints are also useful.

Some authors recommend the use of NSAIDs or low doses of radiation in the prevention of ossification.