**Effect on Patient Satisfaction**

In addition to improving patient satisfaction, physicians ultimately want to reduce the number of times patients have to be hospitalized or visit specialists. Positive patient interactions correlate with better emotional recovery and decreasing follow up imaging and referrals.

Maintaining a positive attitude and believing that patients can recover is an important motivator to the provider. If patients sense that the physician or other provider is offering positive social support, they may be less apt to give up on themselves. It is important to realize that patients seek assistance in some of the most vulnerable and sensitive moments in their lives. Patients may have experienced some form of socioeconomic hardship and have resorted to using substances as a coping mechanism. Furthermore, explaining a diagnosis transparently gives patients the sense that the disease is treatable and offers closure and peace of mind.

**Shared Decision Making**

Healthcare is shifting from a period in which physicians “know best” because they spent numerous years on education, and therefore their recommendation should be taken firmly,

**Solutions**

Decreasing Patient Anxiety

- Ask for permission to gather specific information that could improve their care. Be transparent. Explain why such information is useful.

- If confidentiality issues arise, address them appropriately. Inform patients on the legal responsibility of the provider to safeguard patients from unauthorized disclosures. However, recall that patient-physician confidentiality is usually preserved but does not guarantee full protection from legal discovery. Physicians must report information if a patient is harming himself/herself/others or is involved in domestic violence. Legal policies and procedures differ from state to state.

- Providers need to be cautious of how they word questions, keeping questions professional but understandable. For example, instead of saying “illicit” drugs, say “street” or “recreational” drugs. Avoid subjective words such as “healthy,” “drunk,” “happy,” or “sad,” as these words have different meanings to different people.

- Ask close-ended questions and offer response choices. Asking closed-ended questions increases specificity, which increases the likelihood of getting an accurate history and reduces stress for the patient. For example, instead of “Do you use cocaine?” ask, “How often do you do cocaine? Daily? Weekly? Monthly? Yearly”?

- Ask for pertinent history, such as the frequency and duration of their drug. For example, identify current and past drug use, frequency of drug use, and assess for dependency to determine proper treatment and referral. For example, “Have you used meth”? “How often do you use meth”? “On a scale of 1 to 10, how likely are you to quit”?

- Normalize the problem by saying a generalizing statement. For example, use words such as “These are routine interview questions that I ask all my patients… ”. By doing so, patients feel like they belong to a generalized group and that they are not the only ones with problems. If patients understand that they are part of a collective community, they may be more inclined to be open.

- Explain your medical reasoning behind your diagnosis and plan in layman’s terms.