EDH is a neurosurgical emergency. It, therefore, requires urgent surgical evacuation to prevent irreversible neurological injury and death secondary to hematoma expansion and herniation. Neurosurgical consultation should be urgently obtained as it is important to intervene within 1 to 2 hours of presentation.

The priority is to stabilize the patient, including the ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation), and these should be addressed urgently.

Surgical intervention is recommended in patients with:

- Acute EDH

- Hematoma volume greater than 30 ml regardless of Glasgow coma scale score (GCS)

- GCS less than 9 with pupillary abnormalities like anisocoria

**Operative Management**

In patients with acute and symptomatic EDHs, the treatment is craniotomy and hematoma evacuation. Based on the available literature, “trephination” (or burr hole evacuation) is often a crucial form of intervention if more advanced surgical expertise is unavailable; it may even decrease mortality. However, the performance of a craniotomy, if feasible, can provide a more thorough evacuation of the hematoma.

**Non-Operative Management**

There is a scarcity of literature comparing conservative management with surgical intervention in patients with EDH. However, a non-surgical approach may be considered in a patient with acute EDH who has mild symptoms and meets all of the criteria listed below:

- EDH volume of less than 30 ml

- Clot diameter of less than 15 mm

- Midline shift of less than 5 mm

- GCS greater than 8 and on physical examination, shows no focal neurological symptoms.

If the decision is made to manage acute EDH non-surgically, close observation with repeated neurological examinations and continuous surveillance with brain imaging is required, as the risk for hematoma expansion and clinical deterioration is present. The recommendation is to obtain a follow-up head CT scan within 6 to 8 hours following brain injury.