**Conduct of Bypass**

Satisfactory CPB means the pump has successfully managed to take over the function of the heart and the lungs. To achieve that, the surgeon goes through the following steps:

**Step 1: Establishing the Circuit (Priming)**

Establishes the circuit (as described above) and carries on priming and heparinisation.

As previously described, the circuit's aim is to drain blood from the venous side of the heart via a venous cannula and return it to the heart via an arterial cannula and process the blood in between. Initially, the tubes of the venous( inflow) and arterial (outflow) are in continuity. This is to allow the perfusionist to fill the circuit with fluid from the reservoir and run the main head pump, to expel all air out of the tubes and keep air confined to the top bit of the reservoir. Creating what is referred to as the level below which no air must be detected because this will be the connection between the patient and the heart-lung machine. No air is allowed in there. If air exists on the arterial side, it causes air embolism, and if it exists on the venous side, it creates air lock. Hence arises, the importance of this crucial preliminary step. This process is referred to as priming**.**

Priming solution constituents vary from one center to another; however, they are not vastly variable. One of the standard protocols is 1 L crystalloid, 500 mL colloid, and 250 mL mannitol. (Studies have shown them to reduce the incidence of kidney dysfunction postoperatively.) Other constituents sometimes added include magnesium (counteracts calcium's deleterious effects ), HCO3 (acts as a  buffer), and procaine/lidocaine (enhances membrane stability). Another protocol sometimes used is replacing the crystalloid with blood; this could be cross-matched stored blood from the blood bank or from the patient’s own blood. The latter is referred to as autologous retrograde priming.

**Step 2:**

Next, it goes on bypass after achieving sufficient priming and heparinization. In other words, the pump starts running while the heart and lungs are still functional.

**Step 3:**

The surgeon then must be able to confirm the function of both the heart and the lungs is entirely replaced by looking at specific parameters.

**Step 4:**

If all goes well, the surgeon stops the heart via a proper myocardial protection strategy (described in a different section) and stops the lungs merely by switching off the ventilator.

- Establishing  the Circuit: Heparinization

CPB is a non-endothelial circuit. Blood is prone to massive clotting if not well anticoagulated. Accordingly, before going on bypass, IV heparin in a specific dose is given (300 units /kg or 3g/kg). The sufficient level of anticoagulation is judged via checking ACT in theatre.

- ACT greater than 300 sec is safe for Cannulation

- ACT greater than 400 sec is safe for going on bypass

- ACT greater than 480 sec is safe for going on DHCA

If ACT does not or only marginally increases after full heparinization, heparin resistance is suspected.  The most common cause is antithrombin III deficiency.  After discussing with the surgeon and if a total dose of 600 units of heparin per kg does not achieve ACT >480, recombinant ATIII concentrate should be considered.  Otherwise, fresh frozen plasma may be administered as it does contain anti-thrombin III.

(ACT is checked every 30 min during the operation. If it falls below 480 sec extra 500 units are given.)

At the end of the operation, Heparin is reversed by giving Protamine (1 g/100 units of heparin given).  Protamine is obtained from salmon sperm and is used to reverse heparin anticoagulation.  The positively charged molecules form 1:1 complexes with heparin.  Protamine is associated with hypotension, pulmonary vasoconstriction, bronchoconstriction, reduced cardiac output, and even anaphylaxis.  Hypotension may also be rate of administration dependent.

**Going "On Bypass"**

The surgeon carries on arterial cannulation and venous cannulation, then connects the arterial and venous cannulas to the pump. As previously explained, both sides of the circuit are in continuity, so the surgeon must "divide the lines." Before dividing lines, the surgeon must confirm two things with the perfusionist:

- The pump is off: otherwise, the pump will push against a closed clamp leading to machine breakage

- The venous line is clamped: otherwise, the fluid in the venous line will all siphon back into the reservoir.

Before connecting the lines to the cannulas, the surgeon instructs the perfusionist to:

- Arterial cannula: to push some fluid to de-air the connection completely (i.e., "come around").

- Venous cannula: to pull back some fluid, reduce the length of tubes, and make sure it sits nicely.

Two features to confirm after the surgeon connects the arterial line tube to the aortic cannula:

- Good swing: meaning the cannula is in continuity with the bloodstream (i.e., inside the aorta).

- Good pressure: meaning it is not on an inappropriate site. (e.g., back wall, dissection lumen).

It is always best to connect the arterial cannula first for several reasons. First, to be able to transfuse volume into circulation provided should the patient get hemodynamically compromised at any point. Also, sometimes venous cannulation leads to atrial irritation and supraventricular arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation, which may be poorly tolerated with certain heart conditions such as LV hypertrophy or aortic stenosis. Additionally, atriotomy to insert the venous cannula will always lead to blood loss, which could compromise the patient. Provided the Arterial cannula is ready and connected, the surgeon can then quickly correct this by instructing the perfusionist to transfuse volume. Once the connections are all satisfactory, the surgeon asks both the anesthetist and the perfusionist if they are happy to go on bypass. If all is well, they give the go-ahead order to go "on bypass."

An example of a typical dialogue is:Surgeon:  ACT ok?   Anesthetist: ACT satisfactory. Surgeon: Cannulating (The anesthetist could instruct to wait if pressure is high.)  Anesthetist: Go ahead.   Surgeon: Dividing the lines.  Perfusionist: Off and clamped.  Surgeon: Connecting A-line, come around please, Stop, A-line connected. Perfusionist: Good swing and pressure.Surgeon: Cannulating atrium, return losses, please.  Perfusionist: Transfusing.  Surgeon: Take back, please; connected, ready to go on bypass?  Perfusionist/anesthetist: All good. Surgeon: On bypass, please.

**Confirming Satisfactory Bypass**

To confirm satisfactory CPB, specific parameters must be checked. Collectively, these can be grouped into drainage and perfusion.

(Flowchart 2)

For intracardiac repair, cross-clamping the aorta is essential, which renders the heart ischemic. Cardioplegia is a method of myocardial protection where the heart is perfused with a solution to cause electromechanical arrest - which in turn - reduces myocardial oxygen consumption. The cardioplegia cannula is inserted proximally, while the aortic cannula is distal to the clamp. A separate pump delivers cardioplegia either antegrade into the aortic root or retrograde into the coronary sinus or both. TEE can guide the placement of the balloon-tipped retrograde cannula into the coronary sinus. Retrograde cardioplegia alone results in inadequate right ventricle protection. However, retrograde cardioplegia may be compulsory in addition to anterograde or ostial cardioplegia when aortic insufficiency is present.  When there is aortic insufficiency, anterograde cardioplegia may 'leak' through the incompetent valve resulting in inadequate cardiac protection due to insufficient delivery of the solution and myocardial stretch of the left ventricle.  In this scenario, retrograde cardioplegia may also be used.  Ostial cardioplegia is given when there is severe aortic regurgitation.