When concerned for exposure to nerve agents, the first line of treatment is the protection of the provider and decontamination of the patient. Don personal protective equipment (PPE) following local institutional guidelines; rubber suits and charcoal filtered respirators will provide general protection.

The pharmacological mainstays of treatment are atropine, oxime-derivatives (pralidoxime and obidoxime), and potentially diazepam. Atropine acts by competitively inhibiting the acetylcholine receptor mostly at the muscarinic sites, thus decreasing the downstream effects of excess acetylcholine at the receptor site. Oxime-derivatives, such as pralidoxime, displace the nerve agents from the acetylcholinesterase enzyme thus enabling it to begin hydrolyzing acetylcholine again. However, as mentioned previously, as time after exposure increases, the enzymes run the risk of becoming irreversibly inhibited. This is particularly noticeable with Soman where pralidoxime is ineffective due to the rapid rate of aging within minutes.

In severe cases, the CNS effects of acetylcholine excess can cause seizures, which require treatment with intravenous (IV) benzodiazepines.

Autoinjectors are available for atropine and pralidoxime and are carried by agencies with a high risk of exposure, for example, the military. However, should an autoinjector not be available, both medications can be given intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously, noting that they should be given together or in close succession. The dose for atropine is 2 mg and should be repeated until the signs of cholinergic muscarinic excess begin to disappear. Specifically titrating to dying of pulmonary secretions is the gaol of atropine therapy. Pralidoxime can be given at doses of 15 to 25 mg/kg via slow IV injection. Diazepam dosing follows typical seizure treatment doses of 5 to 10 mg or IV.

Additionally, for agents such as Soman where aging occurs nearly instantaneously, prophylactic agents such as pyridostigmine can be used. These agents competitively inhibit the nerve agent from binding to acetylcholinesterase. Prophylactic treatment does not remove the necessity to receive treatment with atropine and oxime derivatives.