Linaclotide is an orally administered medication with a once-a-day dosage regimen and a first-in-class, potent, and highly selective agonist of guanylate cyclase-C (GC-C) receptors in the inner lining of the intestine. This therapeutic peptide has negligible bioavailability following oral administration and a favorable safety profile. In the USA, the FDA approved it on 30th August 2012 for the treatment of adults suffering from the following medical conditions.

- Irritable bowel syndrome with predominant constipation(IBS-C).

- Chronic idiopathic constipation(CIC).

**Non-FDA-Approved Indications**

Linaclotide can be used to manage refractory lower gastrointestinal manifestations in patients with systemic sclerosis. A low dose of linaclotide is an effective regimen and might be better tolerated, but a subset of patients may need a high dosage.

- Constipation induced by drugs such as opioids, calcium channel blockers, etc. Linaclotide significantly improves opioid-induced constipation symptoms of stool consistency, straining, abdominal bloating, and treatment satisfaction score in patients with chronic noncancer pain.

- Diabetes mellitus with chronic constipation

- Constipation due to neurological conditions such as stroke, Parkinson disease, brain or spinal cord injuries, multiple sclerosis, or weak pelvic floor muscles

- Constipation after surgery

- Hemorrhoids

- Anal fissure

The following studies have provided a rationale for the potential therapeutic development of linaclotide:

In animal studies, activation of guanylate cyclase 2C receptors located in the mediobasal hypothalamic region by orally administered linaclotide stimulates the sympathetic nervous system leading to thermogenesis of brown fat, causing increased energy expenditure and ultimately, loss of body weight without dietary modification.

Linaclotide inhibits the absorption of sodium, leading to fluid retention and increased fluidity of intestinal contents, improving gastrointestinal transit in cystic fibrosis model of mice carrying either deltaF508 or null mutations by inhibiting sodium/hydrogen exchanger 3.

According to an emerging paradigm, guanylate cyclase C (GUCY2C) behaves as a tumor suppressor in the intestine, and the loss of endogenous hormone ligands for GC-C receptor results in dysfunction of mucosal cells, and this represents an important step in the pathogenesis of the disease. In this context, replacement therapy with GUCY2C ligand has been proposed as a strategy for preventing colorectal cancer, a translational opportunity for linaclotide.

Linaclotide decreased trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), a hepatic metabolic product of trimethylamine derived from dietary phosphatidylcholine or carnitine generated by microbiota. TMAO has been directly associated with the progression of cardiovascular diseases and the dysfunction of kidneys. Therefore, linaclotide could be used as a powerful tool for preventing and controlling cardiorenal syndrome by ameliorating the gut-cardio-renal axis.

A wealth of studies indicates that guanylate cyclase plays a multitude of diverse additional protective roles in the barrier function of the mucosa and tissue injury and inflammation besides cell proliferation and apoptosis. Signaling from the recently identified extraintestinal GC-C pathways contributes to food intake regulation and symptoms linked with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.