# Introduction

The vertebrobasilar (VB) system,  comprised of the vertebral and basilar arteries,  serves as a critical arterial supply to the cervical spinal cord brainstem, cerebellum, thalamus, and occipital lobes. Disruptions of VB circulation can have devastating neurologic consequences; thus, a thorough understanding of the anatomy and clinical significance of the VB system is critical for assessing neurologic syndromes and preoperative neurosurgical planning.

# Structure and Function

The vertebrobasilar system is comprised of bilateral vertebral arteries (VA) and an unpaired basilar artery (BA). The vertebral artery divides into four segments along its course.transverse foramen (also known as the foramina transversarium, TF) of the sixth cervical vertebrae (C6),

The basilar artery serves as the primary source of arterial supply to the brainstem and posterior cerebral hemispheres. The BA courses anterosuperiorly within the basilar sulcus of the pons, giving off bilateral anterior inferior cerebellar arteries, multiple paramedian perforating pontine arteries, and the paired superior cerebellar arteries. As the BA approaches the base of the pituitary gland, it divides to give rise to the bilateral posterior cerebral arteries and posterior communicating arteries to complete the circle of Willis. The connection of the BA to the circle of Willis allows for the collateral pathway of the BA to supply anterior brain structures if flow through one of the internal carotid arteries (ICA) is compromised.

# Embryology

The development of the fetal cerebrovascular system begins with the development of the ICA from the third branchial arch arteries at day 24.

Between 33 and 55 days of development, the VA begins to form from anastomoses of the seven cervical intersegmental arteries, starting with the pro-atlantal artery and proceeding caudally to the sixth intersegmental artery.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The VB system provides circulation to the cervical spinal cord, cerebellum, brainstem, and posterior cerebrum via its major branches:

- Vertebral arteries

- Anterior spinal arteries supply the cervical spinal cord 
- Muscular branches supply the deep cervical musculature
- Posterior inferior cerebellar arteries supply the cerebellum and the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle

- Basilar artery

- Anterior inferior cerebellar arteries supply the inferolateral pons, anteroinferior cerebellum, and the middle cerebellar peduncle
- Paramedian arteries supply the thalamus and pons
- Superior cerebellar arteries supply the superior cerebellum and parts of the midbrain

Venous drainage from the territory supplied by the VB system is mainly via the vertebral venous plexus surrounding the vertebral arteries within the transverse foramina and the dural venous sinuses, which drain into the internal jugular veins.

# Nerves

The vertebrobasilar system has an intimate relationship with many nerves along its course. The V1 segment of the vertebral artery courses anteriorly to the inferior cervical ganglion and the sympathetic trunk at the level of C7. As V2 ascends within the transverse foramina, it is surrounded by branches of the sympathetic plexus. As V3 crosses the posterior arch of C1, it passes laterally to the suboccipital nerve. After entering the cranium, V4 courses along the medulla oblongata between the anterior nerve root of C1 and the hypoglossal nerve. The basilar artery ascends along the anteroinferior surface of the pons and terminally gives off the superior cerebellar artery and posterior cerebral artery with the sixth cranial nerve traversing between them.

# Physiologic Variants

While commonly arising from the subclavian arteries, the left vertebral artery may anomalously arise from the aorta in 2.4 to 5.8% of patients due to failed anastomosis between the sixth and seventh intersegmental arteries.vertebral arteria lusoria variant, in which the right VA arises from the aortic arch and takes a retro-esophageal course, which may be problematic during esophageal surgery.

Anomalies may also arise in the TF of the cervical vertebrae. The VA most commonly enter the TF at the level of C6, although in a small percentage of individuals, the arteries delve into the TF at C4, C5, or C7, which may predispose to injury during cervical spinal surgery from an anterior approach.arcuate foramen or Kimmerle anomaly, has an estimated prevalence of 15% and is more common among women.

Nearly 4% of autopsy specimens display fenestrations of the BA, also known as segmental duplication.

# Surgical Considerations

Although injury to the vertebral arteries is an uncommon complication of spinal surgery, particular care must be taken to avoid disturbing the vertebrobasilar system, as bleeding may be profuse and uncontrollable.

For the surgical management of symptomatic intracranial VB stenosis secondary to atherosclerosis, patients may undergo intracranial angioplasty with or without stent placement.

# Clinical Significance

One of the direst neurologic presentations, locked-in syndrome, is resultant from thrombosis of the proximal and middle portions of the BA, sparing the pontine tegmentum.

Transient partial ischemia of the posterior circulation due to decreased VB blood flow is known as VB insufficiency and may be classified as a transient ischemic attack if symptoms resolve within 24 hours. Vertigo is often the only symptom of VB insufficiency, although patients may also develop diplopia or suffer from drop attacks (sudden fall without a loss of consciousness).

Vertebral artery dissections result from a tear in the tunica intima of the VA, leading to blood accumulation within the tunica media. The blood eventually thromboses within the arterial wall, causing the stenosis of the VA and increasing the risk of embolic stroke. Dissections may be traumatic or spontaneous, with spontaneous dissections associated with connective tissue disorders, including Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV and Marfan syndrome.

The subclavian steal phenomenon is resultant from the redundancy of the VB system. Proximal stenosis of the subclavian artery by atherosclerosis, a cervical rib, or Takayasu arteritis results in a high resistance path to blood flow through the subclavian artery. The low resistance distal to the occlusion leads to retrograde blood flow down the ipsilateral VA to the affected upper extremity and diminished blood supply to the posterior circulation.

Diagnostic evaluation of the VB system can be performed via several imaging modalities. Doppler ultrasonography was the initial technique used to assess the patency of the extracranial segments of the VAs, although it is unable to visualize the origin of the VAs in some patients.

# Other Issues

The hemodynamic alterations from vascular variants can predispose to aneurysm formation within the VB system. Other vascular anomalies include arteriovenous malformations (AVM), dural AV fistulas (DAVF), and sometimes persistent primitive carotid-vertebrobasilar communications. Aneurysms and AVM though less common compared to their supratentorial counterparts, the risk of rupture as well as ensuing morbidity and mortality is substantially high. Though micro-neurosurgery remains a gold standard in their management,  other modalities like radiotherapy and endovascular modalities also play a pivotal role in selecting and planning a correct therapeutic algorithm in many of them.

The intrasellar primitive persistent trigeminal artery can be inadvertently damaged during trans-nasal transsphenoidal endoscopic or microscopic pituitary surgery thereby leading to neurological deficits contributable to vascular compromise in territories within the distal VB system.

The presence of fetal posterior communicating arteries plays a significant role while managing internal carotid artery (ICA) bifurcation, posterior communicating artery (PCOM), and basilar tip aneurysms. The fetal PCOMs should be preserved, and their patency assured to maintain normal vascularity in the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) territory.