As with all potentially unstable patients, the initial focus of the clinician should remain on assessing the patient's ABCs. Once the ABCs have been evaluated and managed, the patient should be exposed to remove all clothing. Warm blankets should then be placed over the patient once he/she is fully exposed. Standard laboratory evaluation should include finger-stick glucose, complete blood count, a metabolic panel with basic serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine. One may expect increased hemoglobin and hematocrit in hypothermic patients due to cold diuresis from impaired secretion of antidiuretic hormone. Electrolyte reassessment approximately every 4 hours is the recommended procedure when resuscitating the moderate to severely hypothermic patient. Glucose also does not follow a specific pattern but maybe the earliest clue for a patient in DKA.

In moderate to severely hypothermic patients in whom invasive procedures may be necessary, it is reasonable to obtain a coagulation panel to rule out coagulopathy. However, coagulation studies generally require blood warmed to 37 C, so it does not accurately reflect actual function. Fibrinogen should also be checked to rule out disseminated intravascular coagulation. Serum lactate, creatinine kinase, troponin, TSH, cortisol, toxicology screen, fibrinogen, lipase, magnesium, and any other labs deemed necessary may be necessary under the right clinical settings.

Imaging should be dictated by clinical scenarios as some patients may have experienced trauma, cerebrovascular accident, or other events that led to prolonged cold exposure. If obtaining a chest X-ray, it is not uncommon for severely hypothermic patients to show signs of pulmonary edema. Bedside ultrasound can be used to confirm cardiac activity and volume status. Head CT may be beneficial for individuals whose mental status is not consistent with measured core temperature or if there is a concern for trauma.

Due to the different dysthymias that often present in hypothermic patients, an ECG is necessary. Hypothermia can cause slowed impulse conduction through potassium channels resulting in prolonged ECG intervals. There may also be an elevated J point that can produce an Osborne or J wave. The height of this wave is proportional to the degree of hypothermia and is most common in the precordial leads. Any dysrhythmia is possible, with atrial fibrillation being the most common. Those with more moderate to severe hypothermia will likely exhibit bradycardia and are at increased risk for ventricular arrhythmias.