As a whole, tyrosine kinases phosphorylate specific amino acids on substrate enzymes, which subsequently alter signal transduction leading to downstream changes in cellular biology. The downstream signal transduction set off by TKs can modify cell growth, migration, differentiation, apoptosis, and death. Constitutive activation or inhibition, either by mutations or other means, can lead to dysregulated signal cascades, potentially resulting in malignancy and other pathologies.

Despite the diverse primary amino acid sequences, human kinases share similar 3D structures, particularly when it comes to the ATP-binding pocket located in the catalytically active region. The starting amino acid sequence (ASP-Phe-Gly or DFG) of the flexible activation loop that controls access to the activation site is also typically conserved.

Kinase inhibitors are either irreversible or reversible. The irreversible kinase inhibitors tend to covalently bind and block the ATP site resulting in irreversible inhibition. The reversible kinase inhibitors can further subdivide into four major subtypes based on the confirmation of the binding pocket as well as the DFG motif.

Below are listed various binding modes of TKIs.

- **Type I inhibitors**: competitively bind to the ATP-binding site of active TKs. The arrangement of the DFG motif in type I inhibitors has the aspartate residue facing the catalytic site of the kinase.

- **Type II inhibitors**: bind to inactive kinases, usually at the ATP-binding site. The DFG motif in type II inhibitors protrudes outward away from the ATP-binding site. Due to the outward rotation of the DFG motif, many type II inhibitors can also exploit regions adjacent to the ATP-binding site that would otherwise be inaccessible.

- **Type III inhibitors**: do not interact with the ATP-binding pocket. Type III inhibitors exclusively bind to allosteric pockets adjacent to the ATP-binding region.

- **Type IV inhibitors**: bind allosteric sites far removed from the ATP-binding pocket.

- **Type V inhibitors**: refer to a proposed subset of kinase inhibitors that exhibit multiple binding modes.