The differential diagnosis for patients with binocular diplopia is vast. The anatomical approach in formulating the differential diagnosis will again be used.

Any lesions affecting the brainstem can affect the nuclei or the fascicles of the 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves, involve the vestibulo-ocular pathways or medial longitudinal fascicule.

Any lesions affecting the horizontal or vertical gaze centers (located in the pons and midbrain, respectively) can rarely cause diplopia.

Lesions of the medial longitudinal fasciculus, which connects the sixth cranial nerve to the medial rectus subnucleus on the other side, can also produce diplopia. These lesions tend to be demyelinating in patients under the age of 50 and ischemic in those older than 50.

Pathology affecting the CSF (malignant cell circulating in it, inflammatory processes disturbing normal CSF composition, increased protein, etc.) can also produce oculomotor palsies.

Guillain-Barre syndrome can cause diplopia when it preferentially affects the oculomotor nerves (3rd, 4th, and 6th) in the so-called Miller-Fisher variant where the levels of GQ1b antibodies are often elevated.

Thiamine deficiency (Wernicke encephalopathy) can produce diplopia as well; thus, intravenous thiamine should be administered in all diplopic patients who are confused, have nystagmus, or ataxia.

A variety of lesions can affect the cavernous sinus, often producing multiple cranial nerve palsies. These include inflammatory lesions from idiopathic cavernous sinus syndrome, sarcoidosis, IgG4 disease or granulomatosis with polyangiitis; vascular lesions from the expanding aneurysms of the intra-cavernous carotid artery, carotid-cavernous fistulas; mass lesions due to expanding pituitary apoplexy, neoplastic or inflammatory lesions in the sphenoid sinus; infections lesions due to cavernous sinus thrombosis, or direct spread of infection from the face;  spread of malignancy from the nasopharynx or sphenoid sinus, as well as distant metastasis.

A multitude of lesions affecting superior orbital fissures can cause diplopia by affecting one or several cranial nerves that travel through it.

Orbital disease (such as thyroid eye disease, any tumors or vascular lesions of the orbit) can also cause diplopia.

Finally, disorders of neuromuscular junctions and myopathies affecting extraocular muscles can also produce diplopia.