Deep Lamellar Endothelial Keratoplasty (DELK)

A 9.0-mm incision is created in the sclera 1.0-mm peripheral to the superior limbus, and viscoelastic is injected. The creation of a deep lamellar pocket is a challenging task and is developed over the entire area under the cornea using a series of curved blades, a specialized trephination device, and scissors. A similar method is used to collect the graft from trephined donor tissue. The viscoelastic is removed, the air is injected into the patient's anterior chamber, and the disk of donor tissue is introduced into the endothelium side with a viscoelastic coated spatula and adhered to the cornea.

Descemet Stripping Endothelial Automated Keratoplasty (DSAEK)

A 3-5 mm incision is created in the cornea/sclera or limbus. A descemetorhexis is performed to remove the pathologic Descemet membrane and endothelium using a reverse Sinskey hook and forceps. Injected the anterior chamber with viscoelastic or air may improve visualization.

Descemet Membrane Endothelial Keratoplasty (DMEK)

Incision and descemetorhexis as in DSEK are performed; however, the thinner graft means a smooth surface on the recipient eye is essential. The donor tissue will spontaneously curl with endothelium facing out, and staining the tissue with trypan blue may help improve visualization of the graft. The graft is preloaded in an intraocular lens injector and flushed to insert into the eye.

Descemet Stripping Only (DSO)

This procedure only involves a descemetorhexis, which is performed similarly to DSEK and DMEK. Preoperatively, the pupil may be dilated for a better red reflex and visualization of the Descemet membrane. Rho-associated kinase inhibitors may play a role in postoperative recovery and improvement of endothelial cell density.