The treatment approach for livedoid vasculopathy should aim at preventing ulceration, promote rapid healing of existing ulcers and pain relief.

General measures:

- Pain management: Pain relief is achieved by the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), tricyclic antidepressants like amitriptyline, gabapentin, pregabalin, and anti-epileptics such as carbamazepine as these drugs are known to relieve neuropathic pain.

- Rapid relief of pain has been reported with the use of IVIG, which causes inhibition of thromboxane A2 and endothelin and thereby improves perfusion.

- Wound care: General principles of wound healing and management should be followed.

- Smoking cessation.

- Compression therapy.

Specific pharmacological measures:

There are no definite therapeutic guidelines for the management of livedoid vasculopathy. However, a combination of anticoagulants, anti-platelet medications, fibrinolytic therapies, and anabolic steroids are reported to be efficacious. Examples of the drugs belonging to these categories are listed below.

- Anti-platelet agents such as aspirin (325mg/day), dipyridamole, pentoxifylline (400mg/day).

- Anticoagulants such as low molecular weight heparin, warfarin - with monitoring for the international normalized ratio (INR) 2-3, rivaroxaban (20mg/day), direct thrombin inhibitors such as dabigatran.

- Fibrinolytic therapies such as recombinant tissue plasminogen activator, danazol, stanozolol.

- Immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive agents like IVIG, cyclosporine, doxycycline, dapsone (especially in myeloproliferative disorders), sulfasalazine, and PUVA.

- Vasodilators such as nifedipine, cilostazol.

- Hyperbaric oxygen therapy.

- Ketanserin

- Alprostadil