B-cell dysfunction is pronounced in several disorders included immunodeficiency, autoimmune diseases, and malignancies. As described earlier, B-cell is responsible for antibodies production, antigen presentation, and immune system regulation, and maintanceAccumulating evidence of several decades’ studies showed that disruption of any of these tightly regulated and controlled pathways might lead to autoimmunity, malignancy, or other well-known diseases. A fundamental feature of autoimmunity is the inappropriate production of autoantibodies and loss of b-cells tolerance. Genetic mutations in b cell lineage may lead to intrinsic disorders in b cells and consequent induction of autoimmunity in the T-cell compartment. Therefore, these findings showed the rationale of B cells in depleting b cells as a therapeutic strategy in autoimmune disorders and other diseases. The upcoming paragraphs show the role of B-cells in the development or initiation of certain disorders.

**Primary B-cell Immunodeficiencies or Pure B-cell Immunodeficiencies**

This category refers to diseases resulting from abnormal B-cells function that includes antibodies production and B cell interaction with T-cells. Classically, patients present with recurrent infections and other complications depending on the disorder and the developmental stage in which the disorder has occurred: the earlier the defect, the more devastating the effect on lymphopoiesis. As b cells begin to express surface receptors, they are subjective to positive and negative selection pressure and become dependent on survival signals. Therefore, defect in these processes will lead to selective or generalized hypogammaglobulinemia.

As discussed in the physiology section, b cell activation requires two waves of activation signals, the first one involves Src family and the second one involves Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) and Syk (figure 4). As a consequence, a mutation in the BTK gene will lead to X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA). Moreover, A failure to express CD40 ligand due to mutation in gp39 (CD40 ligand results in an inability to isotype class switch, causing X-linked immunodeficiency with hyper-IgM (XHM) that correlates in some patients with liver disease, sclerosing cholangitis, and liver/GI malignancies.

**Transplantation Associated B-cells Disorders**

It is well-known that T-cells play a critical role in the development of chronic graft-versus-host diseases (GVHDs); nevertheless, studies showed that B-cells could participate in the pathophysiology through many effector pathways including, antigen presentation to T-cells and dysregulated autoimmune antibody synthesis.

**Autoimmune Diseases Associated with B-cells Dysfunction**

Autoimmune disorders where disease activity correlates with b cell function include Multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), type 1 diabetes, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis, and post-infectious IBS.

**B-cell Malignancies**

Malignant transformation of any step of B-cell lineage causes a host of cancers, including hairy cell leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, follicular lymphoma, Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and plasma cell cancers such as multiple myeloma.