Lateral ankle instability is a complex condition that can, at times, prove difficult to evaluate and treat for general practitioners. The difficulty in evaluation and treatment is due in part to the ankle complex is composed of three joints: talocrural, subtalar, and tibiofibular syndesmosis. All three joints function in conjunction to allow complex motions of the ankle joint. The main contributors to the stability of the ankle joint are the articular surfaces, the ligamentous complex and the musculature - which allows for the dynamic stabilization of the joints. The lateral ankle is comprised of the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL), the calcaneofibular ligament (CFL) and the posterior talofibular ligaments (PTFL). The anterior talofibular ligament originates from the along the anterior colliculus of the lateral malleolus and inserts on the lateral talar articular facet, with its course running in 45-90 degrees to the longitudinal axis of the tibia. The primary function of the ATFL is to resist inversion in plantarflexion and anterolateral translation of the talus in the mortise. The calcaneal fibular ligament originates from the anterior border of the fibula approximately 9mm proximal to the distal tip and inserts on the calcaneus approximately 13mm distal to the subtalar joint and rooted to the peroneal tendon sheath. The CFL crosses both the subtalar joint and the ankle joint. The primary functions of the CFL are to resist inversion in neutral and dorsiflexed position and also restrains subtalar inversion, which limits talar tilt within the mortise. Lastly, the posterior talofibular ligament is the strongest of the lateral ligaments but only plays a supplementary role in ankle stability. The PTFL originates on the posterior border of the fibula and inserts on the posterolateral tubercle of the talus and runs perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the tibia. Of the three ligaments (ATFL, CFL, and PTFL) only the CFL ligament is extracapsular to the ankle joint.