Diagnosing hepatic angiosarcoma remains a challenge due to the nonspecificity of symptoms. Liver tumors are most commonly detected incidentally on abdominal imaging. It is difficult to differentiate hepatic angiosarcoma from other hepatic tumors radiologically due to the hypervascular characteristic of hepatic angiosarcoma. Ultrasonography shows multiple nodules or solitary mass with varying echogenicity from necrosis and hemorrhage in hepatic angiosarcoma lesions. Many studies concluded that contrast-enhanced computed tomography is the best method for the diagnosis of hepatic angiosarcoma. Lesions appear hypodense with multiple patterns of enhancement and postcontrast; the lesions become partly or completely isodense in comparison with the hepatic tissue. MRI can also be used to identify hepatic angiosarcoma as it can reflect the hemorrhagic, heterogeneous, and hypervascular nature of the lesions.

Laboratory studies in patients with hepatic angiosarcoma will show elevated alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase, as well as thrombocytopenia and anemia, as normal liver parenchyma is replaced by tumor. Tumor markers like AFP, CEA, CA19-9, and CA125 are in the normal range or only slightly elevated. Diagnosis of hepatic angiosarcoma should be made with a correlation of radiological findings and histological interpretation (as described previously). It is important to bear in mind that even with a correct diagnosis, rapid progression of the tumor yields a poor prognosis.