# Continuing Education Activity

Cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes have overlap in anatomy and clinical presentation. The cauda equina is a group of nerves and nerve roots stemming from the distal end of the spinal cord, typically levels L1-L5 and contains axons of nerves that give both motor and sensory innervation to the legs, bladder, anus, and perineum. Cauda equina syndrome (CES) results from compression and disruption of the function of these nerves and can be inclusive of the conus medullaris or distal to it, and most often occurs when damage occurs to the L3-L5 nerve roots. This activity reviews the cause and presentation of cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in their management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the causes of cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes .
- Describe the presentation of cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes.
- Summarize the treatment of cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes. 
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes.

# Introduction

Cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes have overlap in anatomy and clinical presentation. Therefore, for the purpose of this discussion, they will be grouped, and notable differences highlighted. The conus medullaris is the terminal end of the spinal cord, which typically occurs at the L1 vertebral level in the average adult.

# Etiology

Cauda equina syndrome and conus medullaris syndrome result from compression of the spinal cord and nerves/nerve roots arising from L1-L5 levels. The most common cause of compression in 45% of CES is a herniated lumbar intervertebral disc.

# Epidemiology

Cauda equina syndrome and conus medullaris syndrome are rare, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 30,000 to 100,000 people per year.

# History and Physical

A thorough history is necessary, with detailed questions regarding recent falls, trauma or injuries, use of anticoagulation, presented spinal instrumentation, intravenous drug use, history of malignancy, chiropractic manipulation, and constitutional symptoms like fevers/chills.

Patients can present with:

- Back pain and sciatica (seen in as many as 97% of patients)

- Weakness and changes in sensation in the lower extremities

- Bladder dysfunction (disruption of autonomic fibers results in either retention or incontinence in up to 92% of patients)

- Bowel dysfunction (retention or incontinence in up to 72% of patients)

- Saddle anesthesia or decreased sensation in the perineum (in up to 93% of patients)

- Sexual dysfunction (impotence in men)

The symptoms above when presenting in isolation, are neither specific nor sensitive for CMS/CES. However, several of the signs and symptoms mentioned above taken as a constellation should raise clinical suspicion.

Once clinical suspicion is established based on history, a thorough neurological examination is paramount. Findings to watch for include:

- Motor or sensory deficits in the legs – usually bilateral but can also be unilateral and asymmetrical (particularly in cases with an incomplete injury)

- Lower motor neuron signs in the legs – areflexia, hypotonia, atrophy (in cases of chronic cord compression resulting in CES)

- Saddle anesthesia

- Absent or decreased rectal tone

- Absent or decreased bulbocavernosus reflex

- Palpable bladder indicating urinary retention

It is important to note that in the case of isolated conus medullaris syndrome, deficits of the lower extremities are more often bilateral and symmetric. Also, upper motor neuron signs can be present, such as spasticity and hyperreflexia.

# Evaluation

The gold standard method of evaluation for CMS/CES is obtaining urgent MRI imaging with sagittal and axial T1 and T2 sequences.

# Treatment / Management

Prompt neurosurgical or orthopedic consultation is necessary in cases of cauda equina and conus medullaris syndromes, as the treatment is surgical decompression via laminectomy with or without subsequent discectomy, or via sequestrectomy.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis centers on non-compressible causes of spinal cord dysfunction such as:

- Spinal cord infarct

- HIV-related myelopathy

- Transverse myelitis

- Multiple sclerosis

- Syringomyelia

- Spinal arteriovenous malformation

# Prognosis

Several studies have looked at prognosis and outcomes based on the timing of surgical decompression. Early intervention by surgical decompression in patients with conus medullaris and cauda equina syndromes is associated with a better prognosis, particularly when surgery occurs within 48 hours of initial presentation.

# Complications

Complications in cauda equina syndrome and conus medullaris syndrome occur in a large percentage of those diagnosed. One study looked at 63-day outcomes on micturition, defecation, saddle anesthesia, sexual function, and sciatica in cauda equina syndrome. The data indicate that a large percentage of patients still experience residual symptoms irrespective of their time to surgical decompression.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients presenting with sciatica and no other evidence of CES/CMS in the history or exam should receive counsel on the possible development of other related symptoms such as bladder or bowel dysfunction, impotence, and saddle anesthesia. These patients must be given strict return precautions in the event they develop other symptoms pointing to CES/CMS. Patients who are suspected to have CES/CMS and are undergoing evaluation for these syndromes need to remain informed and updated on their investigations (MRI, bladder scan, etc.) and pending surgical consultations. Patients who receive a definitive diagnosis need counseling on complication rates and must receive a realistic prognosis based on their degree of injury. Due to the nature of sensitive lifelong sequelae resulting from these syndromes, cases with CES/CMS have a high involvement in medicolegal litigation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The involvement and effective collaboration of the entire healthcare team is essential in any patient encounter, but even more so in cases where the presentation requires urgency in proper diagnosis and management. Due to the high degree of functional impairment arising from CES/CMS, speedy diagnosis and subsequent treatment via surgical decompression are important. The efficiency of the medical system must begin with the person responsible for triaging appropriately in the emergency department, where a significant proportion of patients with CES/CMS initially present for evaluation. After the initial triage, nurses and physicians must work together to keep the patient updated on the suspected diagnosis, workup, and test results. The radiologist must know the reason for ordering the MRI these patients and given the clinical history and suspected diagnosis early.

MRI imaging is considered the gold standard imaging modality to asses of CES/CMS, Class I evidence. Many studies recommend obtaining MRI within an hour from presentation. Furthermore, it is paramount that prompt neurosurgical consultation take palce promptly, as surgical decompression is required. Many studies have been done that show decompression within 48 hours is best, although some studies recommend the timing be closer to under 24 hours, Class II evidence. It is challenging to design large RCTs to obtain Class I evidence for the timing of surgical decompression for obvious ethical reasons.