The two staging systems utilized in the management of rhabdomyosarcoma are the TNM (tumor, nodes, metastasis) staging system and the clinical grouping (CG) system. The TNM and CG staging systems complement each other and are used to assess prognosis and select treatment for patients with rhabdomyosarcoma. The rhabdomyosarcoma prognostic stratification classifies patients based on the above staging systems as low, intermediate, or high risk. The risk stratification is based on the clinical group, site, size, age, histology, metastases and lymph node status

The CG of rhabdomyosarcoma by the intergroup rhabdomyosarcoma study group (IRSG) is as follows:

**I: Confined to the Site of Origin**

- Localized tumor, anatomically confined to the site of origin; the tumor can be completely resected,

- Localized tumor, infiltrating locally into the adjacent structure, the tumor can be completely surgically resected.

**II: Local Infiltration**

- Localized tumor, gross total resection is possible; however, microscopic residual disease is possible.

- Locally extensive tumor (may have spread to regional lymph nodes); however, complete surgical resection is possible.

- Locally extensive tumor (may have spread to regional lymph nodes), the tumor can be completely surgically resected; however, microscopic residual disease is possible.

**III: Localized Extensive Tumor**

- Localized extensive tumor, gross residual disease after biopsy only.

- Localized extensive tumor, gross residual disease is possible after major resection (greater than or equal to 50% tumor debulking).

**IV: Metastatic R****habdomyosarcoma**

- Any size primary tumor, with or without regional lymph node involvement, with distant metastases.

**The TNM Staging**

**Stage 1
**

- The tumor presents in a region with favorable prognosis.

- The tumor can be any size and can show local invasion to nearby areas and/or spread to regional lymph nodes.

- The tumor should have distant spread.

**Stage 2
**

- The tumor presents in a region with unfavorable prognosis.

- The tumor should be 5 cm or smaller with no evidence local invasion to nearby areas and/or spread to regional lymph nodes or distant parts of the body.

**Stage 3
**

- The tumor presents in a region with unfavorable prognosis.

- And one of the following: The tumor is 5 cm or smaller but has spread to nearby lymph nodes. The tumor is larger than 5 cm and with/without spread to regional lymph nodes; in either case, the cancer has not shown metastatic spread.

**Stage 4
**

- The tumor may have started anywhere in the body and is of any size.

- The tumor shows metastatic spread.

Favorable sites are the biliary tract, orbit, head and neck (excluding parameningeal), and genitourinary (excluding prostate and bladder); all others are unfavorable.

**Risk Group Criteria**

**Low-risk
**

- Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinical stage 1-3, Clinical group 1-3

- Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma should not be categorized as a low-risk group.

**Intermediate-risk
**

- Includes patients with stage I, II, or III disease

- Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinical stage I-III, clinical group 3

- Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinical stage I-III, clinical group 1-3

**High-risk
**

- Includes patients with stage IV disease

- Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinical stage IV, clinical group 4

- Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinical stage IV, clinical group 4