Many patients and some physicians unfamiliar with this pathology use the label of “hemorrhoids” even though some patients suffer from other benign anorectal diseases like fissures, fistulas, abscesses. Patients that have symptomatic internal hemorrhoids may complain of itching, bleeding, pain, burning, prolapse, mucus discharge, moisture, swelling or difficulty with perianal hygiene. Patients can complain of a feeling of sitting on a foreign object. Internal hemorrhoids, which originate proximal to the dentate line, traditionally have been thought not to cause somatic pain. But some patients with internal hemorrhoids complain of pain which may be because the patients report the sensation of itching, burning, discomfort as pain. It is important to test for other causes of pain such as fissures or perineal excoriation. Thrombosed or strangulated internal hemorrhoids could cause severe pain. Bleeding from hemorrhoids is classically bright red and typically occurs at the end of a bowel movement as the stool causes trauma to the engorged hemorrhoids, which differs from blood mixed with stool or melena. Patients may describe a sensation of fullness, an urge to defecate, or a sensation of incomplete defecation with internally prolapsing internal hemorrhoids. With complete prolapse, patients may complain of a mass or lump; they can also complain of soiling or wetness. Precipitating factors should also be elicited such as a history of constipation, diarrhea, heavy lifting, chronic cough, and inadequate fiber and water intake. Physical examination may reveal evidence of liver disease, COPD, signs of constipation such as abdominal distention or fecal impaction. An anorectal exam is ideally performed in the prone jackknife position for maximal exposure of the perineum and anus. It can also be performed in the lateral decubitus or the lithotomy positions. The perineum is then inspected, and external hemorrhoids, skin tags, prolapsing internal hemorrhoids, fissures, fistulas, abscesses are noted. Palpation is performed to assess for masses, induration, tenderness. A digital exam then assesses the sphincter tone, masses, pain, and abscesses.