Thrombocytopenia in pregnancy is a benign condition in the majority of patients. However, it may be associated with more severe etiologies in a few patients. A few noteworthy points are listed here.

- Less than 1% of patients with thrombocytopenia in pregnancy have a platelet count of less than 100 x 10^9/L.

- A thorough history and complete physical is the initial step in the evaluation of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.

- A review of the peripheral smear is the first step in the lab evaluation of thrombocytopenia. It helps in ruling out pseudo-thrombocytopenia and schistocytes.

- Gestational thrombocytopenia, which is the most common cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, is a diagnosis of exclusion.

- Despite being the most common cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, gestational thrombocytopenia does not require any intervention as it resolves spontaneously.

- ITP is the most frequent cause of thrombocytopenia in the first trimester of pregnancy. However, it is also a diagnosis of exclusion.

- Corticosteroids and IVIG are the first-line treatment for ITP in pregnancy.

- Rituximab is safe in pregnancy for the treatment of ITP, although it may cause transient B-cell lymphopenia in the neonate, which resolves spontaneously.

- Pregnancy-related TMA management is by the delivery of the fetus. Thrombocytopenia and other abnormalities may take longer to recover after the delivery of the fetus.

- TTP is rare during pregnancy, but 10 to 30% of all patients with TTP are obstetric. Up to 25% of TTP in pregnancy is due to a congenital lack of ADAMTS-13 (Upshaw-Schulman syndrome).

- Eculizumab is designated category C by the FDA, but several reports show that it is safe for the management of atypical HUS and PNH in pregnancy.

Important points to remember for both physicians and patients:

- The mode of delivery depends on the obstetric indication, rather than the platelet count.

- A platelet count of more than 50 x 10^9/L is safe for delivery.

- The goal of platelets for administering neuraxial anesthesia is at 80 x 10^9/L.

- In a patient with gestational thrombocytopenia, if the platelet count drops below 70 x 10^9/L, then a secondary cause, like ITP, should be considered.

- Platelet transfusions are not required for low platelet counts unless the patient is bleeding.

- The neonatal outcome is excellent in neonates born to mothers with gestational thrombocytopenia.

- Transient thrombocytopenia can present in neonates born to mothers with ITP. In less than 1% of neonates, it can lead to intracranial hemorrhage. A pediatrician consult is necessary for such a scenario.

- Maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality are high in patients with TMA. The primary goal of treatment is delivery of the fetus.