Twenty-one different proteins have been identified as amyloidogenic agents. Polypeptides can adopt alternative misfolded states, making them prone to aggregation. There are multiple processes by which misfolding of protein precursors occur. The protein may be intrinsically likely to acquire a pathologic conformation with aging, as seen in patients with wild-type transthyretin senile systemic amyloidosis. This can also happen when there is a high serum concentration of protein precursors, as seen in long-term hemodialysis patients with increased levels of beta-2-microglobulin.

In hereditary amyloidosis, the replacement of single amino acids can lead to amyloidogenic misfolded proteins losing the biologic function of the native proteins and, in turn, aggregate. Proteolytic remodeling of beta-amyloid precursor proteins has been identified in Alzheimer's disease. In patients with AA amyloidosis, serum amyloid A, an acute-phase reactant protein deposits in different tissues.

The amyloidogenic variants of the various precursor proteins are thermodynamically less stable, resulting in tetramers dissociation into monomers in the case of transthyretin and destabilization of the tertiary structure leading to partially folded conformers in the case of lysozyme. Transthyretin monomers and lysozyme partially folded conformers have the propensity to aggregate and assemble into fibrils. Charged residues also play a role in modulating the aggregation using repulsive forces resulting in partial unfolding, rendering the protein susceptible to proteases attacks and the release of amyloidogenic polypeptides. This is the case of gelsolin, an amyloidogenic protein that causes systemic amyloidosis.

Low pH, increased temperatures, limited proteolysis, osmolytes, and metal ions can alter the tridimensional structure of proteins shifting the equilibrium towards the amyloidogenic state. The mechanism of tissue damage in amyloidosis involves alteration of tissue architecture, interaction with cell surface receptors, inflammation elicited by the amyloid protein deposition, oxidative stress, and apoptosis activation.