Balanitis: Inflammation of the glans penis affects 11% of adult men and 3% of boys seen in urology clinics. In boys, it is caused by bacterial invasion of the soft tissue. In men, it is caused by a combination of poor genital hygiene, intertrigo, irritant dermatitis, maceration injury, and bacterial or candidal overgrowth, and treated with better hygiene practices, avoiding irritants to genitals and better glycemic controls in people with diabetes. Chordee: ventral penile curvature that occurs with or without hypospadias. Chordee is considered an arrest of normal embryological development. Typically surgical management is performed after six months of age.

Management should include intraoperative artificial erection tests at the time of repair to identify the point of maximal curvature and then to perform penile plication. Hypospadias should be corrected at the time of surgery if also present—penile fracture: trauma or contusion, fracture of the tunica albuginea during sexual intercourse. The typical story involves the sound of a "pop" with an immediate onset of severe pain and detumescence of the penis. On exam, there is typically penile swelling, ecchymosis, and possible palpable defect in the corpora cavernosa. Diagnosis can be obtained by physical exam and history and with MRI of the penis, which has excellent sensitivity for diagnosing penile fracture.

Treatment involves penile exploration with circumferential incision via subcoronal approach and closure of cavernosal injury with absorbable suture (typically 5-0 PDS). If concern for urethral injury, cystoscopy should be performed, and any urethral injury should be repaired in the same setting. Penile pain syndrome: sporadic etiology could include local conditions such as dermatitis, infection or ischemia, referred pain from the bladder, prostate, lower back or hips, neuropathic pain resulting from injury to the dorsal nerve, pudendal nerve or cauda equina, or psychiatric conditions. Persistent pain can be treated by treating the underlying disease.