Does the use of lights and sirens save time? Does saving that time effect the medical outcome of the patient? Multiple studies conducted over the last 25 years tried to address these questions. The data suggests that there is a modest reduction in response and transport times. Compiling the results of the various studies, the use of lights and sirens reduces EMS response time between 1.7 to 3.6 minutes and reduces transport time 0.7 to 3.8 minutes

Is there an association between the use of lights and sirens, and motor vehicle crashes? One paper estimated that there were over 12,000 motor vehicle collisions involving responding or transporting EMS vehicles in the United States in the 1980s, and 4 times that many incidents involving non-EMS vehicles that reacted in some way to an EMS responder vehicle. Clear cause and effect data is difficult to derive, as each crash is associated with a different set of circumstances, including speed, weather, and experience of both the emergency medical vehicle operator and the operator of the other vehicle involved. But the number of EMS-associated accidents is significant

The use of lights and sirens and the regulations that govern them vary widely among different agencies and locations. Their use is to alert other drivers and pedestrians to the approach or stationary position of an emergency vehicle and to request the right of way. This is hopefully done without overwhelming or otherwise incapacitating the general public. There is less data regarding the effective use of lights than the utilization of sirens. Type, color, and location of lights on EMS vehicles are often subject to local or state ordinances, and the relative effectiveness of light type, color, output, and flashing sequence has not been clearly determined

There is also no clear consensus regarding any association between strobe-type flashing lights and the development of seizures in onlookers. There is a published series of case reports regarding seizures at emergency scenes that were directly attributed to strobe flashing, while DeLorenzo in 1991 suggests that a clear association has never been proven

The usefulness of sirens seems to be better studied without any more consensus regarding effectiveness. The effectiveness of a warning siren is dependent on a myriad of variables, making standardized conclusions after research quite difficult. Acoustic characteristics of the siren, such as level, frequency and volume play a vital role. So also does atmospheric absorption, the effects of local topography, background noise (from other traffic, or the community), and the varying ability of a human to detect the sound.

The US Department of Transportation published a report in 1978 that concluded that sirens were effective in only 3 distinct scenarios: to vehicles traveling in the same direction as the EMS vehicle, to other vehicles on the road as the EMS apparatus are weaving through traffic, and to pedestrians. Even in 1 of these 3 situations of potential effectiveness, siren operators must also be careful to vary the tone or type of the acoustics, due to the human ability to filter out repetitive or constant noise.