Human foregut malformations are relatively common, at a rate of about 1 in 3000 live births. Foregut malformations include a spectrum of pathologies, including tracheoesophageal fistulas with or without esophageal atresia and congenital esophageal rings. The types of esophageal atresias and tracheoesophageal fistulas fall into five subtypes; A-E. The most common type being the Type C esophageal atresia /tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). We will begin with a description of these subtypes and then delve into management. Congenital esophageal rings can be associated with esophageal atresia and TEFs or can occur in isolation.

Esophageal fistulas and TEFs subdivide into five subtypes. Type A is Isolated esophageal atresia without fistula. Type B is Esophageal atresia with the proximal TEF. Type C is esophageal atresia with a distal TEF and is the most common subtype, comprising approximately 85% of cases. Type D is esophageal atresia with both proximal and distal TEF. Lastly, type E is an isolated TEF without esophageal atresia, also known as the H-type. Because the esophagus is still continuous with the stomach, the diagnosis of type E may be delayed as issues with feeding is not readily apparent. The presence of polyhydramnios secondary to impaired swallowing of amniotic fluid may permit prenatal diagnosis. Fetal ultrasounds around 20 weeks gestation can detect esophageal atresia or TEF.

Once suspected, diagnosis can be confirmed by inserting a nasogastric tube with dual lumens (one lumen for continuous suction and another serving as an air vent to prevent the suctioning lumen from attaching to the mucosa). Once inserted, a chest radiograph will show coiling in the atresia portion of the esophagus, which is the gold standard for diagnosis.

Esophageal atresia is also associated with a syndrome of congenital anomalies known as the VACTERL association. This collection of symptoms includes vertebral, anorectal, cardiac, tracheal, esophageal, renal, and limb abnormalities. In order for a diagnosis of VACTERL to be made, at least 2 anomalies must be present. Infants with esophageal atresia and TEF should be evaluated for further anomalies because of the association with VACTERL as well as undergo genetic analysis. Treatment is then aimed at correcting associated anomalies.

Congenital esophageal webs can be isolated findings or found in association with atresias and/or fistulas. The formation of esophageal webs is not completely understood. However, they are thought to occur from incomplete cannulization of the esophagus during development. The webs are often located in the ventral wall of the esophagus and can be completely circumferential.

In summary, defects in the organogenesis of the esophagus can lead to clinically significant pathology. Because these conditions are common, it is important to understand the various subtypes of esophageal atresia and TEFs in order to recommend proper management. Additionally, because esophageal atresia can be the presenting symptom of the VACTERL association, the diagnosis of esophageal atresia should prompt a robust multisystem workup.