A traumatic dental injury to the primary dentition may be the child's first visit to the dentist or emergency department, which can be challenging as a young child is difficult to examine and treat due to fear and lack of understanding of the situation. Early negative dental experiences are linked to significant dental anxiety in children; therefore, we should attempt to minimize anxiety during the initial visit for the child and caregiver. It is essential to adopt a structured and organized approach, conduct a complete clinical history, examine and conduct appropriate investigations, and arrange follow-ups. When examining a young child, the clinician may find knee-to-knee examination advantageous.

Traumatic dental injuries can be classified into soft tissue injuries, hard tissues injuries (e.g., fractures), and periodontal injuries (e.g., luxations).

**Soft Tissue Injuries**

Soft tissue injuries are most commonly found in the 0 to 3 age group.

**Hard Tissue Injuries**

Hard tissue injuries are classified into fractures of tooth structure and alveolar bone.

**Enamel Fractures**

These fractures are limited to the enamel only. No radiographic examination is recommended.

**Enamel-Dentine Fractures (uncomplicated crown fracture)**

An uncomplicated crown fracture affects the enamel and dentine without exposing the pulp. These fractures generally affect upper central incisors' mesial angles or incisal edges.

****Crown Fracture With Exposed Pulp (complicated crown fracture)****

A complicated crown fracture involves enamel and dentine, plus the pulp is exposed. A periapical or an occlusal X-ray should be taken for diagnostic purposes and to establish a baseline.

**Crown-Root Fractures**

A crown-root fracture affects the enamel, dentine, and root; the pulp may or may not be exposed (complicated or uncomplicated). Additional findings may include loose but still attached fragments of the tooth. A periapical or an occlusal X-ray should be taken.

**Root Fractures**

A root fracture affects dentin, cementum, and pulp. They may occur in any direction or orientation and are generally classified as vertical or horizontal root fractures.

**Alveolar Fractures**

An alveolar fracture affects the alveolar bone (labial and palatal/lingual) and may extend to the adjacent bone. In alveolar fractures, the teeth in the affected segment are mobile, usually displaced, and occlusal interference is expected. Intra-oral soft tissue lacerations may also be present.

**Periodontal Injuries**

****Concussion****

The tooth will be tender to touch, with normal mobility and no gingival sulcular bleeding. No baseline radiographs are recommended for tooth concussions.

**Subluxation**

The tooth will show tenderness and increased mobility but no displacement. Bleeding from the gingival crevice may be noted. Radiographs should be taken for diagnostic purposes and to establish a baseline.

**Extrusive Luxation**

The partial displacement of the tooth out of its socket is known as extrusive luxation. The tooth appears elongated and has increased mobility. Occlusal interference may be present. A radiographic examination is recommended.

**Lateral Luxation**

The displacement of the tooth in a palatal/lingual or labial direction is known as lateral luxation. The tooth will be immobile and occlusal interference may be present. A radiographic examination is recommended.

**Intrusive Luxation**

Intrusive luxation is the apical displacement of the tooth, usually through the labial bone plate. The tooth may present as almost or complete disappearance of the tooth into the socket. The tooth can be palpated labially in clinical examination. Radiographic examination is recommended for diagnostic purposes and to determine the orientation of the intrusion.

When the tooth's apex is displaced toward or through the labial bone plate (away from the permanent tooth germ), the apical tip can be seen, and the image of the tooth will appear shorter (foreshortened) than the contralateral tooth. When the tooth's apex is displaced toward the permanent tooth germ, the apical tip cannot be visualized, and the image of the tooth will appear elongated.

****Avulsion****

Avulsion means the complete loss of the tooth out of the socket. In cases where the avulsed tooth is missing, a thorough investigation is required. Soft tissue radiographs should be taken if the tooth is suspected to be embedded in the lips, cheeks, or tongue. An intra-oral radiograph must be taken to exclude intrusion.****If the avulsed tooth is not found, the child should be referred for medical evaluation to an emergency department for further examination with chest radiography, especially if respiratory symptoms are present.