**Dosage Formulations**

- Ephedrine sulfate oral tablet: 25 mg

- Ephedrine hydrochloride intravenous solution: 23.5 mg/5 mL

- Ephedrine sulfate intravenous solution: 5 mg/mL; 50 mg/mL

- Fixed dose combination of oral ephedrine hydrochloride 12.5 mg/guaifenesin 200 mg

For the treatment of asthma, 25 mg tablets are used every four hours as needed, and the maximum dose should not exceed 150 mg in 24 hours. For adults, bolus dose recommendations are 5 to 10 mg, and intramuscular doses for a prolonged desired effect are 25 to 50 mg.

When treating hypotension, cardiovascular effects via the indirect mechanism depend on adequate native norepinephrine stores. Tachyphylaxis will develop with prolonged and repeated use as this depletes endogenous norepinephrine stores. For this reason, it is administered in intravenous boluses when used intravenously and rarely as a continuous infusion.

**Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dosage adjustments have been provided in the package insert. Use with caution.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**According to the manufacturer's prescribing information, ephedrine and its metabolite are excreted in the urine. In patients with kidney disease, excretion of ephedrine is affected with a corresponding increase in elimination half-life, which will lead to the slow elimination of ephedrine and consequently prolonged pharmacological effect and potential adverse reactions. Therefore, carefully monitor patients with renal impairment after the initial bolus dose for adverse events.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Though ephedrine is frequently used in obstetric patients just before and during delivery, there is insufficient data to support using the drug in earlier stages of pregnancy, and no animal reproductive studies have been performed, making it a category C drug in pregnancy**.**Ephedrine should be given to a pregnant woman only if indicated.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**A single published case report indicates that ephedrine is present in human breast milk. Nonetheless, no information is available on the effects of ephedrine on the breastfed infant or the effects on milk production. Clinicians should consider the risk-benefit analysis for the mother's clinical requirement for ephedrine and adverse reactions in the breastfed child from ephedrine. Administration to the nursing women is not recommended as there is a higher-than-usual risk for infants, according to the package insert.

**Pediatric Patients:**The FDA has not formally established safety and effectiveness in pediatric populations.

**Elderly Patients:**The dose of ephedrine should be initiated at the low end of the dosing range, considering the higher frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function.