The uterus is a pear-shaped muscular organ of the female reproductive system. The uterus is divided into the fundus, lower uterine segment, and cervix uteri. The uterus hosts and nourishes the embryo and fetus until delivery.

- The fallopian tubes are 2 tubular structures attached to the uterus on each side. The fimbriated ends of the fallopian tubes are freely floating next to ovaries, on each side in the pelvis.

- The round ligament of the uterus originates at the uterine cornu of the uterus and blend with the tissue of the mons pubis and labia majora.

- The cardinal ligament is the inferior demarcation at the base of the broad ligament. The 2 cardinal ligaments support for the uterus and the cervix uteri.

- The broad ligament is the peritoneal fold around the round ligament, parametrial connective tissue, arteries, veins, lymphatics, and nerves.

- The uterosacral ligaments are anteriorly attached to the cervix uteri. The uterosacral ligaments are posteriorly attached to sacral vertebrae.

- The ovaries rest in ovarian fossa in the lateral part of the pelvic cavity next to the iliac vessels. The ovaries contain germ cells.

- The ovarian ligaments are attached to the posterolateral aspect of the uterus.

- The infundibulopelvic ligaments are peritoneal reflections of the broad ligaments.

- The bladder is located anterior to the uterus.  The ureters are inserted into the trigon.

- The rectum is located between the vagina and the sacrum.

- The pelvic diaphragm supports all the viscera.

- The round ligament helps maintain the anteversion position of the uterus during pregnancy. The cardinal ligaments support the uterus.