The pattern of presentation varies from patient to patient. It may appear first as unilateral blepharospasm that will later become bilateral. One of the most bothersome features of Meige syndrome is having different phenotypic forms, ranging from tonic spasm or prolonged closure of eye, clonus of orbicularis oculi to complete inability to open the eyes as eyelid weakness or blepharoptosis is also very common. It is a kind of progressive muscle dysfunction. It appears first as a focal neurological function, in other words, as either essential blepharospasm or oromandibular dystonia, and later spreads to other muscles such as muscles of the neck (antecollis, retrocollis, torticollis), respiratory muscles or muscles of upper limb (dystonic tremors). Commonly involved oromandibular muscles are temporalis, masseter, and platysma. Involuntary lower facial and masticatory movements such as lip pursing, chewing, grimacing, jaw thrusting, opening, or closing/clenching. It has been noticed that the risk of the spread of dystonic contractions to nearby muscle groups is most common in the first year of the appearance of initial symptoms, and the probability of spread lasts for the next 3 to 5 years. In patients with blepharospasm, older age-of-onset, female gender, and history of head trauma may increase the risk of spread.

Sensory tricks are the sensory stimuli, learned by the patients to alleviate the dystonia. They are common among patients with Meige syndrome; examples include sleeping, relaxing, talking, pulling the upper eyelid, blowing cheeks, walking, exposure to cold water, yawning, or drinking beverage. More than half of the patients with blepharospasm have one or more sensory tick.