Patients with distal radial fractures will often complain of post-traumatic distal upper extremity pain. DR fractures can also be present as part of a larger multiple trauma presentation. In either case, it is vital not to fixate on an obvious DR injury, and to do a complete evaluation for other possible life-threatening injuries or problems. A systematic approach in trauma situations will prevent a provider from missing occult injuries. Children are also diagnostically difficult as their presentations are often subtle. Children can suffer unwitnessed falls or trauma, and they are often unable to verbalize their symptoms. They can appear well and favoring the uninjured arm may be the only sign of an underlying fracture.

The history should focus on the mechanism of injury, duration, and quality of symptoms. Patient questioning should also include details such as their dominant hand, profession, and comorbid conditions. These are all factors that could affect management and potential surgical planning. The history should also serve to help uncover possible complications. Questions should focus on indicators of neurovascular compromise such as numbness, tingling, weakness, or discoloration of the limb. Of note, the median nerve is most commonly injured nerve in DR fractures and will present similarly to an acute carpal tunnel syndrome.

The focused physical exam should evaluate for gross deformity and general appearance of the distal extremity. Examination of the limb should look for any skin tenting or lacerations that could indicate an open fracture as this will quickly change injury management. There may be crepitus overlying the fracture site. The physical exam should also focus on ruling out complications such as compartment syndrome or other neurovascular issues. Forearm compartments should be soft. The radial pulse should be strong and equal between upper extremities. Capillary refill distal to the fracture should be less than 2-3 seconds. Test the motor function of the radial nerve by having the patient extend the metacarpophalangeal joints of the fingers against resistance. Palmar abduction of the thumb and holding the “A-OK sign” against resistance will test the motor function of the median nerve. Ulnar nerve strength testing is via abduction of the fingers against resistance. The sensation for the median and ulnar nerves should undergo evaluation by two-point discrimination on the pads of the 2nd and 5th fingers, respectively. The radial sensory function may be tested just proximal to the 2nd MCP. Normal two-point discrimination is less than 5mm, or 6mm in the elderly. It is important to document a thorough neurovascular exam as this will be used as a baseline for reexamination by orthopedists and other specialists. Finally, a thorough evaluation of the elbow, carpal bones, and hand should be part of the evaluation. Coexisting DRUJ instability, carpal instability, elbow dislocations, or proximal forearm fractures are easily missed in the evaluation of distal radial fractures.