Ziprasidone is an atypical antipsychotic used to treat schizophrenia, bipolar mania, and acute agitation in schizophrenic patients.

For schizophrenia, studies have shown that ziprasidone was significantly superior to placebo in rate and time of relapse. The research established the efficacy of ziprasidone in bipolar disorder. It also indicated improvement on the manic syndrome subscale that measures symptoms of mania such as mood, insomnia, excessive energy and activity, and overall behavior and ideation. Patients with acute agitation in schizophrenia were measured, indicating effectiveness short term. Those with long-term risks require a reevaluation on a patient-by-patient basis.

Ziprasidone intramuscular injection formulation is used for the following FDA-approved indications.

- Severe or acute agitation/aggression associated with psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia and bipolar disorder

- Agitation or aggression due to substance intoxication or other natural causes

Ziprasidone oral capsule formulation is used for the following FDA-approved indications.

- It is indicated to treat schizophrenia in adults.

- Bipolar I disorder: As monotherapy, ziprasidone hydrochloride capsules are indicated for adult patients with bipolar I disorder. As an adjunct to lithium or valproate, ziprasidone hydrochloride capsules are used as maintenance therapy for adult patients with bipolar I disorder.

- Ziprasidone is also used as off-labeled for monotherapy in acute hypomania, monotherapy as maintenance treatment for adult patients with bipolar I disorder, hyperactivity treatment, and for the treatment of delirium in the ICU.