Treatment aims with Kawasaki disease point to minimize the risk of coronary artery aneurysm (CAA) formation, which peaks two to four weeks after illness onset, by decreasing the inflammation of the coronary arteries.

If the patient is still febrile 36 to 48 hours after the first IVIG dose, then the dose should be repeated once.

Corticosteroids have been proposed as part of the initial therapy (in addition to IVIG and ASA) due to findings of decreased risk of developing cardiac abnormalities. However, research results have been inconsistent  The RAISE trial published in 2012 reintroduced the idea of using extended doses of prednisolone (2mg/kg/day for 4 to 5 weeks) in patients with KD who were at high risk for being resistant to IVIG therapy.

Some have proposed statins for KD due to their immunomodulating properties; however, there is not enough research at this time to suggest their use; the theory is that their ability to target endothelial dysfunction would make them of use during the acute phase to help prevent and/or modify vessel changes.

Patients who develop severe perfusion deficits from an aneurysm may require coronary artery bypass graft surgery and should be a consideration in children who have reversible ischemia or patients that have recurrent MIs.

Long-term management starts after the acute illness has passed, typically 5-6 weeks after the initial onset of the fever; this is typically when coronary artery involvement has reached its peak in severity.  The frequency of follow-up, medication, and repeat images are on a patient by patient basis and their disease severity.