# Introduction

The concept of modeling and simulation (M&S) has long been an integral part of war-fighter military training dating to before World War II when pilots and infantry soldiers would train with simulators and mockups to prepare for battle. Army and Navy aviators would practice flying in simulated cockpits. It was not until the turn of this century that M&S saw application in healthcare. The most recent wars involving the United States and coalition partners have created the need for more training and practice in life-saving procedures on the battlefield and in the hospital. Therefore, in the 1960s, simulation was accepted as a successful addition to the preparation of medical personnel.

# Issues of Concern

**The Need**

In World War II, the mortality rate of combat wounds was up to 30% but dropped to 24% in the Vietnam war.

In 1999, the Army focused on providing better medical care downrange and increased training for combat medics. This expanded training included simulation as a core element.

Despite the improvements in training, a report in 2005 noted no significant change in the number of soldiers dying from preventable deaths, and the U.S. Army Medical Command released an Operational Needs Statement noting a significant gap in battle-focused skills for Combat Medics. The concern was that medics all over the country were receiving different training on different equipment, and therefore, there was no standardization and no sustainment of skills.

# Medical Decision Making and Leadership Development

**The Response**

In response to this report, the Medical Simulation Training Center (MSTC) program was quickly established in the United States Army in November of 2005 with the intention to build, sustain, and standardize the skills of the enlisted Army Combat Medics.

Originally, the plan was to have 35 of these centers worldwide, which was later scaled back to a total of 25.

Since the assimilation of the MSTC programs into medic training, the U.S. Army Medical Department (AMEDD), medical simulation training has been declared a mission-essential imperative for both training new providers and reintegrating those from deployment.

The U.S. Navy has used simulation as a training aid in several contexts. The USNS MERCY and the USNS COMFORT are two large hospital ships that perform regular, advanced-phase training to prepare and test the capabilities of the ship and the crew.  These drills utilize cut-suit simulators and simulated patients to allow for the practice of movement of personnel and at-sea life-saving procedures. The U.S. Navy Medical Department has run simulation drills with live actors and mannequins to practice mass-causality events on many different types of naval vessels (surface ships and submarines) prior to operational deployments.

Navy medical corpsmen assigned to the United States Marine Corps (USMC) are trained at the unit level using simulators. The individual medical battalions run their own independent training with task trainers and mannequin simulators in a tactical field environment

One of the critical roles U. S. Air Force medical technicians play is air evacuation of critically ill patients. In 2002, three Centers for Sustainment of Trauma and Readiness Skills (C-STARS) was established to better train Air Force personnel in the Critical Care Air Transport Teams (CCATT) in Baltimore, St. Louis, and Cincinnati.

# Continuing Education

**Expansion of Military Healthcare Simulation**

The MSTC and other military medic training programs did not include physician and nurse training. There was a new gap observed in military medicine between the maintenance of skills needed on the battlefield and the skills needed for hospitalized patients.  To address patients' needs admitted to military treatment facilities, the military healthcare system (MHS) began establishing a hospital and school-based simulation centers to enhance clinical training and experience among physicians and nurses.

In 1999, the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (USUHS), a military medical and graduate nursing school, established the first simulation center to enhance medical education and training. This Val G. Hemming simulation center employs live actor simulation, mannequins, task trainers, and virtual reality-based simulation. The center helps train medical students, graduate-level nursing students, and Graduate Medical Education (GME) trainees. The center demonstrates improved outcomes of trainees in published works, too numerous to cite.

The Charles A. Andersen Simulation Center at Madigan Army Medical Center was established as the first hospital-based simulation center in March 2002.

The United States Air Force subsequently acknowledged the need for healthcare simulation within their service and developed the Air Force Medical Modeling and Simulation Training (AFMMAST) in 2008 to establish and coordinate simulation centers worldwide.

The U.S. Navy Medical Department established the Naval Medical Modeling and Simulation Training (NMMAST) program in 2014 to coordinate the implementation of 12 simulation centers in Navy medical treatment facilities around the world. This new office worked with existing large hospital simulation centers at Naval Medical Center Portsmouth and Naval Medical Center San Diego to disseminate best practices.

# Clinical Significance

Several studies have demonstrated that surgical subspecialists take a significant amount of time to return to their perceived skill baseline after coming home after deployments.

Multiple studies have demonstrated the impact of simulation on medical training. Simulation-based learning demonstrates improved skills for all participants and increased skill retention.

# Pearls and Other Issues

As the military begins to work towards a unified medical force under the Defense Health Agency, the goals for the advancement of military medicine will continue to require simulation as a critical aspect of training and maintenance of skills. The future of military medical simulation includes working towards remote surgical interventions to allow for those on the front lines of the battlefield or deployed aboard a ship to receive a life-saving surgery from a remote surgeon. These programs allow for the military to create the most prepared and skilled force of medics, corpsmen, technicians, nurses, and physicians to aid those in harm's way.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**The Future of Military Healthcare Simulation**

The future of simulation within the military healthcare system is bright. There are many areas in which the military is using simulation methodologies to enhance skills needed to care for service members in battle and themselves and their family members when hospitalized in military treatment facilities. Among the areas of active interest are:

- AR/VR: the expended use of augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) screen-based simulation to recreate environments of care. At the USUHS Simcenter, an immersive VR theater is being used to train teams of providers in multiple causality situation and aero-medical evacuation of patients. Head-mounted VR displays are being tested in Army field environments to see if this type of simulation method can help first responders recognize and treat life-threatening hemorrhage and airway emergencies.

- Joint Medical Simulation Instructional Methods (JMedSIM): With the increasing emphasis on simulation, there is a pressing need to train more healthcare personnel to deliver healthcare simulation to learners. To that end, the MHS has launched JMedSIM, a standardized simulation instructor/operator online course that will allow simulation instructors to become familiar with effective training methods in healthcare simulation. The goal is for all those who employ simulation for training will be certified through this route.

- Graduate education in simulation: There is a need for more advanced education and research in simulation methodology as it applies to operational military medicine. The USUHS has partnered with the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California, to offer a jointly sponsored certificate program in healthcare simulation. These graduate-level courses have been taken by over 100 personnel in the last six years and are designed to educate the next generation of healthcare simulation professionals. A master's level degree in healthcare simulation is now in the final stages of planning and execution.

- Specific skills project: The MHS has recognized the need to tailor simulation to the individual skills of the physicians and nurses taking care of service members in deployed settings. The Department of Defense has developed specific knowledge, skill, and attribute (KSA) skillsets for each medical specialty. The KSA is essentially an annual tasklist and serves as a marker for how prepared a practitioner is for deployed medical operations. To augment the standard medical practice of the provider in garrison and meet the KSA goals, simulation methods will be implemented where applicable.

This article was completed with multiple interviews with those involved with creating, developing, and introducing much of the reviewed systems and curriculums. Special thanks to COL (ret) S. Deering, MAJ G. O’Keefe, SGM L. Moore, G. Vallejo, MSG R. Gonzalez, J. Higman, CAPT M. Spooner, LCDR D. Weltch, J. Ruisi, COL (ret) E. Lockrow, B. Roth, and R. Garza.