Structurally, all enteroviruses are small, at 15-30 nm viruses within the Picornaviridae family. The capsids are icosahedral and contain positive-sense single-stranded RNA (+ssRNA) of approximately 7400 nucleotides in length. There is no lipid envelope, and the genome, instead of having an AUG-containing cap, has an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES), which allows for mRNA translation.

Rhinovirus species within the Enterovirus genus infect both the upper and lower respiratory tracts and rarely cause disseminated disease. Most Picornaviridae viruses show the most efficient growth at 36 degrees celsius. However, rhinoviruses (and other respiratory-type enteroviruses) demonstrate efficiency at 33 degrees celsius, which likely contributes to their tropism as upper respiratory pathogens. Investigations into this have demonstrated that while viral replication persists with little change at the higher temperatures, host cell response is altered by temperature and creates an environment less conducive to rhinoviruses at higher temperatures.

Non-rhinovirus species of enteroviruses are suspected to be the most common viral pathogen infecting the central nervous system. They initially infect the alimentary tract. Unlike rhinoviruses and other picornaviruses, they are acid-stable, able to survive at pHs below 3. This acid-stability allows them to pass through the stomach's acidic environment to the cells lining the small intestine, where pathology begins.

Diseases caused by enteroviruses include poliomyelitis, Bornholm disease (epidemic myalgia), myopericarditis, hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, nonspecific febrile illnesses, pneumonia, aseptic meningitis, herpangina, enteroviral vesicular stomatitis (hand, foot, and mouth disease), encephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis, the common cold, pharyngitis, otitis media, sinusitis, pancreatitis, and asymptomatic subclinical infections.

Serotypes most commonly identified with various diseases include:

- Poliomyelitis: PV-1-3

- Myopericarditis: CV-A, CV-B

- Hemorrhagic conjunctivitis: EV-D70

- Pneumonia: EV-68, rhinoviruses

- Herpangina: CV-A, EV-A71

- Hand, foot, and mouth disease: CV-A16, EV-A71

- Acute flaccid paralysis and other polio-like illnesses: EV-D68, EV-A71, echovirus 11

- Upper respiratory tract infections: EV-D68, rhinoviruses

- Acute exacerbations of chronic airway diseases (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cystic fibrosis, asthma): rhinoviruses

- Aseptic meningitis: CV-A9, CV-B, echoviruses, EV-A71