**Non-rapid Eye Movement (NREM) Sleep Arousal Disorders**

Non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep arousal disorders comprise sleepwalking and sleep terrors. These peculiarities represent aspects of both wakefulness and NREM sleep, manifesting as complex motor patterns without conscious awareness, also called 'state dissociation.' Sleepwalking typically occurs during the first third of the sleep cycle, during stage 2 and stage 3, within three hours of falling asleep. Individuals will experience repeated episodes of walking, often purposelessly, after falling asleep. In this trance-like state, individuals maintain a blank stare and are unresponsive to external stimuli. When finally awakened, orientation returns within minutes; however, recall is minimal. The episodes are ephemeral, typically lasting less than ten minutes. However, there is cause for concern as the sleepwalker's ability to open doors and windows remains intact.

Sleep terrors, more commonly referred to as night terrors, also occur during the first third of the sleep cycle.

**Nightmare Disorder**

As its name implies, nightmare disorder is a distressing pattern of repeated, dysphoric, and vivid dreams. The themes of the nightmares tend to consist of threats to survival, physical well-being, and security. Unlike the previously mentioned NREM sleep disorders, nightmares occur during the second half of the sleep cycle, with recollection intact, upon awakening. Because nightmares often transpire during REM, movement and vocalizations do not occur. Evaluations of well-being may be inversely related to the manifestation of nightmares.

**Rapid Eye movement Sleep Behavior Disorder**

Normal physiologic sleep function involves atonia during REM. This atonic phenomenon is conducive to self-preservation as humans tend to have their most vivid dreams during REM.

REM sleep behavior disorder characteristically presents with repeated episodes of vocalization and/or abnormal motor patterns during REM. Because REM occurs most frequently in the latter half of the night, so too follows this behavioral anomaly.