# Continuing Education Activity

The human parainfluenza virus (HPIV) is an enveloped, negative-sense, single-stranded RNA virus that belongs to the family of Paramyxoviridae. HPIV can cause both upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) and lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) in children, usually under the age of 5, immunocompromised adults, and the elderly. It is one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality in infants worldwide. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of parainfluenza virus infection and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of parainfluenza virus infection.
- Describe the appropriate evaluation of parainfluenza virus infection.
- Review the management options available for parainfluenza virus infection.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the management of parainfluenza virus infection and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

The human parainfluenza virus (HPIV) is an enveloped, negative-sense, single-stranded RNA virus that belongs to the family of Paramyxoviridae.

Although HPIV demonstrated a resemblance to the influenza virus, HPIV is unique and can be easily and simply separated from the myxoviruses (influenza virus). The parainfluenza virus shared some characteristics with the influenza virus, including few antigenic sites, as well as their poor growth in embryonated eggs.

# Etiology

The parainfluenza viruses belong to the Paramyxoviridaie family.Respirovirus, and the genus Rubulavirus includes HPIV-2 and 4.

The virions of the parainfluenza viruses are pleomorphic, in which diameter ranges from 150 to 200 micrometers.

- The nucleocapsid protein (NP)

- the phosphoprotein (P)

- the fusion glycoprotein (F)

- the matrix protein (M)

- The hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) glycoprotein

- The RNA polymerase (L)

HPIVs share similarities in their structural and biological characteristics, but each of them infects people at different ages and causes different symptoms and illnesses.

# Epidemiology

The human parainfluenza virus is a community-acquired respiratory pathogen, that has some predisposing factors including:

- Malnutrition

- Overcrowding

- Vitamin A deficiency

- Environmental smoke or toxins

HPIVs are one of the main causes of hospitalization in children less than 5 years of age due to acute respiratory tract infection, with a rate accounting for up to 17% of hospitalizations.

The seasonality of HPIV is specific to each of the four. HPIV-1 follows a biennial pattern, marked by a dramatic increase in cases in the months of September to December of odd-numbered years.

The parainfluenza virus spreads through direct person-to-person contact or from large droplets. Outbreaks can occur, for example, in nursing homes and daycare facilities.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of the parainfluenza virus consists of the host immune response and viral mechanisms.

The HN protein cleaves the sialic acid residue and facilitates the release of new virions from the host cell.

The infection with parainfluenza virus first starts at the pseudostratified mucociliary airway epithelium of the nose and oropharynx, then spreading to the large and small airways.

When the infection of epithelial cells of the small airways occurs, inflammatory infiltrates develop, and the host immune response is thought to contribute to disease pathogenesis.

HPIV usually causes a mild and rapidly repaired focal tissue destruction that may even be unnoticed.

# History and Physical

Human parainfluenza virus is associated with upper and lower respiratory tract illnesses in all age groups, including:

- The common cold

- Croup

- Tracheobronchitis

- Bronchiolitis

- Pneumonia

Exacerbations of underlying diseases are also frequent including:

- Asthma

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

- Congestive heart failure

These infections can be mild in healthy individuals, but they may lead to more serious respiratory illnesses in young age children and immunocompromised adults.

Clinical presentation can differ by type; HPIV-1 and HPIV-2 are associated with croup and cold-like symptoms, while HPIV-3 often causes bronchiolitis and pneumonia. HPIV-4 is less well-characterized but has been suggested to have symptoms similar to HPIV-3.

- Croup: Most children present with fever, inspiratory stridor, a hoarse barking cough, as well as laryngeal obstruction. Some of the lower airway signs, such as wheezing and air trapping, also occur.

- Bronchiolitis: Due to the infant's terminal airways being so small, bronchiolitis is observed only in infants and young children.

- Pneumonia:****Pneumonia is one of the main causes of hospitalization among US adults.

- Tracheobronchitis: Lower respiratory tract signs and symptoms that do not fit with the croup, bronchiolitis, or pneumonia often receive a diagnosis of tracheobronchitis.

Although HPIVs primary infection location is the respiratory tract, dissemination of the infection has been described, affecting other organ systems, including neurologic, renal, rheumatologic, and gastrointestinal tract.

# Evaluation

Although human parainfluenza virus 1 (HPIV-1) is commonly associated with croup and may be diagnosed only based on clinical presentations, other HPIV serotypes do not have certain clinical features that allow them to be diagnosed clinically.

The timing of the sample collection is important. Early in the illness, it is more convenient to test samples from the upper airway, which have shown to be positive. Later in the illness, it is better to test secretions such as sputum and bronchoalveolar fluid from the lower airways.

HPIV-3 has been isolated in children from as early as 6 days prior to 6 weeks past the first symptom. Immunocompromised patients and adults have been noted to shed HPIV-1, HPIV-2, and HPIV-3 for many months.

- Viral culture: Considered for years to be the gold standard for diagnosis. The detection of hemadsorption (HAD) to the monolayers or the development of structural changes in host cells called cytopathic effect (CPE), the existence of either one of them is significantly important for viral isolation on the cell culture.

- Fluorescent antibody assays: As a rapid method of diagnosis, it has been used since the 1970s and is based on the identification of viral antigens directly on clinical samples.

- Molecular assays: Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays can be used easily and efficiently to detect and diagnose the HPIV infection. Based on the sensitivity, specificity, and rapidity of the PCR, it is the most accurate test for HPIV diagnosis.

- Serologic diagnosis: Rarely used in clinical practice and is primarily a research tool.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of HPIV infection is basically symptomatic in healthy children and adults. Unfortunately, no antiviral agent with proven efficacy for human parainfluenza virus infection is available.

Treatment of croup: Corticosteroids have been shown to be beneficial for mild and moderate to severe croup.

The exacerbation of chronic respiratory diseases caused by different viruses, including the HPIVs, can be potentially prevented by early treatment with some of the antivirals. Although there is no effective antiviral treatment for HPIV in clinical practice, new strategies are being developed that may be practical and available for HPIV respiratory infections. The most direct approach consists of removing the sialic acid receptors, which are necessary for the attachment and fusion by the parainfluenza's HN and F proteins, thereby inhibiting the first step in infection. It is the DAS181, a recombinant sialidase protein that has been proposed to effectively inhibit HPIV infection.

The most severe disease is found in immunocompromised patients, and treatment at present remains largely supportive.

# Differential Diagnosis

Viruses are the most common etiological agents of acute respiratory tract infection (ARTIs). HPIV shares practically the same signs and symptoms of respiratory tract infection with other bacterial and viral pathogens, which makes it more difficult to have a diagnosis based only on clinical features. Some of the common viral respiratory pathogens which are considered in the differential diagnoses of HPIV include:

- Respiratory syncytial virus

- Influenza types A and B

- Human rhinovirus

- Human metapneumovirus

- Adenoviruses

- WU polyomavirus

- Human bocavirus

# Prognosis

Parainfluenza viruses represent one of the main causes of respiratory viral infection. They can cause more severe and serious problems that may lead to death in immunocompromised patients than they do in the healthy general population.

# Complications

Infection with the human parainfluenza virus in immunocompromised patients and the elderly are generally associated with a range of diseases, from mild upper respiratory tract symptoms to more severe diseases in the lower respiratory tract, which might require mechanical ventilation and can lead to death.

Early childhood infection with the Paramyxoviridae family of viruses (especially respiratory syncytial virus and human parainfluenza virus) is strongly associated with the development of asthma and COPD later in life.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The parainfluenza virus is primarily transmitted between people via large-particle aerosols. High quantities of viruses excreted by young children can last on porous surfaces for a duration as long as 10 hours.

Enhanced infection control measures are recommended in places of immunocompromised patient health care if HPIV outbreaks are detected. These measures include strict limits on visitors and patient-to-patient contact, physical distancing, masking of people in contact with HPIV patients, hygienic and cleaning measures of the environmental surfaces. In difficult-to-control outbreaks, screening of asymptomatic patients and staff might be needed.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of the parainfluenza virus is best done with an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a nurse, a primary clinician, an infectious disease expert, a pediatrician, an epidemiologist, a pharmacist, and in the more severe cases, the ICU team is also involved. Once a diagnosis of the parainfluenza virus is made, the key is to prevent further spread of the infection. The primary clinician and the nurse are in the prime position to educate the patient and the family about the importance of the prevention measures, including isolation and physical distancing.

Management of an outbreak of the parainfluenza virus is an interprofessional work, requiring the participation and the mobilization of not just the team within the hospital settings managing the patient, but also local resources to contain the spread of the disease as early as possible. It is especially important in the immunocompromised, neonatal, and elderly care facilities, to identify infected individuals, educate the population, and prevent further transmission.

National resources such as the centers for disease control (CDC) as well as the global resources such as the world health organization (WHO), must be informed to assists in managing the local cases, prevent further spread, identify the origin of the outbreak, provide diagnostic aid from high-level biosafety laboratories, and provide experimental treatment options.