The pivotal test for the diagnosis of meningitis (including streptococcal) is cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination. It is required to confirm the diagnosis, identify the causative bacterial pathogen, and, therefore, to implement de-escalated treatment later on. CSF should be obtained as soon as bacterial meningitis is suspected unless contraindications for urgent lumbar puncture (LP) are present. Contraindications for immediate LP include risk of herniation, uncorrected coagulopathy, or critical condition of the patient. According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines, head CT before LP is warranted in the case of focal neurologic deficit, abnormal level of consciousness, papilledema, seizure within one week of presentation, history of central nervous system disease, and an immunocompromised state. During LP, samples of CSF are taken and sent for physical and chemical characteristics, cell count, Gram stain, latex agglutination test (LAT), culture, and, if available, polymerase chain reaction (PCR). CSF examination in patients with streptococcal meningitis usually shows neutrophilic pleocytosis (white blood count of 500/ microL or higher), elevated lactate level, and lowered CSF/serum glucose ratio. CSF leukocyte count less than 50/mm^3 and elevated CSF protein level (at least 660 mg/dL) were poor prognostic factors in children with pneumococcal meningitis.H. influenzae, S. pneumoniae, and Group B Streptococcus. Nevertheless, the combination of culture, Gram stain, and LAT was more effective than any single method alone.

Other laboratory tests include blood culture – necessary to take to increase the likelihood of identification of causative pathogen - as well as complete blood count, inflammatory markers (often much elevated), coagulation testing, markers of liver and kidney function. There should be no delays in instituting treatment because of all the diagnostic procedures.