Radiation therapy is the use of directed X-rays or subatomic particles primarily for cancer management in both curative and palliative settings. It can be delivered either externally or internally. External beam radiation, also known as “teletherapy,” is most common and involves a radioactive source outside of the patient, with the energy focused and shaped to the target of interest. Brachytherapy, in contrast, refers to the practice of placing naturally occurring radioactive sources that decay over time and produce high doses of radiation in a focal area. Examples include intracavitary procedures (such as tandem and ovoid placement for cervical cancer), interstitial radioactive seed placement (commonly used for prostate cancer), or placement overlying a cutaneous tumor.

Treatment was traditionally administered with naturally occurring radioactive elements that give off photons during the decay process. However, in the modern era, these are typically generated by machines called linear accelerators, which accelerate a stream of electrons toward a target, producing photons resulting from the atomic interactions occurring within that target. These photons are directed toward the patient through a mobile gantry, and motorized collimators are used to shape the radiation beam as it exits the gantry head.

**Physical and Biological Principles of Radiation**

The most common form of ionizing radiation used in clinical practice is the photon. However, electrons are also commonly used for increasing the radiation dose to the skin when needed. More exotic particles such as protons, carbon ions, or neutrons can be utilized for certain diagnoses or tumor locations but are available only in specialized centers. Each type of radiation possesses unique physical characteristics which dictate the type of interactions that will occur as it travels through the patient’s body. This, in turn, determines how and where the dose is deposited in the tissue, and knowledge of these patterns can be manipulated to limit the dose to normal structures and thereby improve the therapeutic window.

The therapeutic window in radiation also relies on differences in DNA interactions in a cancer cell versus those in a normal cell. Double-stranded DNA breaks caused by radiation result in a mitotic catastrophe where cell division is fatally interrupted; mitotic catastrophe is the main form of cell death induced by ionizing radiation.

Radiation takes advantage of cancer cells because these cells usually have impaired DNA repair mechanisms, in contrast to normal cells, which can rapidly repair double-stranded breaks. Therefore, a fractionated approach, i.e., splitting the total radiation dose over multiple daily treatments, is typically used, such that DNA damage in normal cells is repaired between treatments, while damage to cancer cells accumulates over time, causing preferential cancer cell death.  Both the dose per fraction and the total dose affect tumor and normal tissue response. In general, the lower the daily dose of radiation, the less likely it is to cause toxicity, but only specific cell lines (such as myeloma or lymphoma) are susceptible to these relatively low daily doses. Therefore, a balance needs to be achieved between daily doses low enough to spare normal tissue but high enough to cause cancer cell death. For many cancers, a dose of 180 to 200 cGy per day is used.