Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder marked by behavior and cognitive impairment that eventually interfere with daily functional living activities. The disorder has no cure, and its rate of progression is variable. Further, the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease in the early phase is difficult, and there are no specific laboratory or imaging tests to confirm the diagnosis. The drugs available to treat the condition only work for the mild disease but also have numerous side effects that are not well tolerated. Alzheimer's disease is a systemic disorder and creates havoc in the family. These individuals often wander, fall, have significant behavior problems and loss of memory. The majority of patients end up in an institution because they become unmanageable at home. Because of the nature of the disease, an interprofessional team approach to the disorder has been recommended. Many guidelines and recommendations have been made on how to approach, monitor and treat Alzheimer patients. No one measure can prevent or arrest the disease. Given this, the following health care workers have a critical role in ensuring that the patient with Alzheimer disease remains safe and lead a decent quality of life.

- Physical therapy for exercise. There is now ample evidence that exercise can help reduce the progression of the disease.

- Nurses to educate the patient and family on medications, lifestyle changes, and performing daily living activities. To educate the partner on self-reporting on the worsening of symptoms.

- Pharmacist to ensure that polypharmacy does not occur and that the patient is not developing adverse effects.

- Clinicians to monitor patient progress and enhance the quality of life

- Caregivers to provide support

- Social workers to ensure that the patient has an adequate support system

- Dietitian to ensure that the patient is eating a healthy diet

- Mental health nurses to ensure that both the patient and caregiver are coping with the disorder

**Outcomes**

Alzheimer's disease is initially associated only with impaired memory, but with time, the individual may develop severe cognitive and behavioral symptoms like depression, anxiety, anger, irritability, insomnia, and paranoia. As the disease progresses most of them will require assistance with daily living activities. Eventually, even walking becomes difficult and many may not be able to eat or develop swallowing difficulties that lead to aspiration pneumonia.

The time from diagnosis to death is variable; some individuals may die within five years, and others may remain alive for ten years, but overall the quality of life is very poor. While an interprofessional approach to the management of Alzheimer patients is recommended, an analysis of several studies reveals that this approach has no impact on the care of his patients. However, because of the heterogeneity in the previous studies, more robust studies will be required to determine what type of approach works best for managing these patients.