Retroperitoneal fibrosis is often discovered incidentally in the workup of urinary tract obstruction or venous/arterial insufficiency. The diagnosis is often made by imaging studies, including CT imaging studies and MRIs. A definitive diagnosis requires a tissue biopsy, though it is controversial whether a biopsy is necessary for patients with imaging studies demonstrating findings characteristic of RPF.

Typically, initial evaluation of the patient a laboratory workup is obtained, as well as an initial renal ultrasound, if the patient is presenting with complaints of flank pain. Laboratory findings can be varied, and no hematologic or biochemical abnormality is specific to RPF. Often an elevation in creatinine concentration and blood urea nitrogen is found, depending on the presence and extent of ureteral obstruction. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are elevated in one half to two-thirds of RPF patients. Anemia can also be observed, likely related to renal insufficiency and chronic inflammation. Renal ultrasound often reveals a poorly marginated, periaortic mass that is typically hypoechoic and may be associated with hydronephrosis

A contrast-enhanced CT scan is the exam of choice to visualize the extent of RPF and the presence of lymphadenopathy and tumor. On non-enhanced CT, RPF exhibits the same attenuation numbers to that of the psoas muscle (1 to 25 Hounsfield units). After administration of intravenous contrast, enhancement depends on the stage of the disease. Avid enhancement is often seen in early stages of the disease, whereas in late and inactive stages of the disease, there may be little or no enhancement. The mass is typically confluent and encasing the anterior and lateral sides of the aorta, often encircling and compressing the IVC. Typical findings also include hydronephrosis and medial deviation of the proximal ureter and mid-ureter and a smoothly tapered ureter at the level of the obstruction. One benefit of CT is it enables CT-guided biopsy to obtain tissue for pathologic diagnosis

MRI is considered equivalent to CT in diagnosing and monitoring RPF, but it has a higher contrast resolution. It is helpful as the mass itself has characteristic T1 and T2-weighted images. RPF is characterized by diffusely low signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging, although the T2 signal may vary considerably, with high signal intensity consistent with the active disease. With treatment, T2 signal often diminishes and provides a measure of therapeutic efficacy. Gadolinium enhancement may also be valuable in assessing response to treatment. Associated decreases in gadolinium contrast enhancement should be expected after appropriate therapy

The role of biopsy is controversial. If surgical intervention is planned for treatment of compression of ureters and/or IVC, an open biopsy of the mass is recommended. A CT-guided biopsy can be obtained during initial workup prior to any treatment as well. Expert consensus suggests a biopsy of the mass in certain scenarios. These cases include:

- When the location of the mass is atypical

- When clinical and laboratory findings suggest the presence of an underlying infection or malignancy

- Bulky appearance on imaging studies; extension above the origin of the renal arteries or anterior displacement of the aorta

- Local experience with RPF is limited

- Lack of response to initial therapy

The pathological findings in idiopathic and secondary RPF are often indistinguishable. Microscopically, the fibrous tissue is comprised of an extracellular matrix composed of type-1 collagen fibers organized in thick irregular bundles, often encircling small vessels. The infiltrate consists of macrophages, plasma cells, B and T lymphocytes. The aggregates usually have a core rich in CD20+ B cells and periphery rich in CD3+ T cells. Most plasma cells are positive for immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)