The tests carried out for the diagnosis of Hunter syndrome are as follows:

- 
**Urine and plasma GAG levels:**

The screening test for mucopolysaccharidosis II is the measurement of the urinary and plasma GAG levels. The plasma levels of DM and HS are elevated in newborns with lysosomal storage diseases, including MPS I, II, III, and IV.

- 
**Iduronate sulfatase (IDS) levels:**

The gold standard test for the diagnosis of Hunter syndrome is the IDS level. IDS levels are assessed in the culture of a number of cells, including leukocytes, fibroblasts, and dried blood cells. IDS levels can also be measured in free plasma or serum samples. In high-risk pregnancies, prenatal tests for MPS II can be done by checking IDS levels in chorionic villus samples. Most patients with a clinically severe form of the disease have a very low or undetectable level of the enzyme.

Levels of other lysosomal enzymes involved in the breakdown of mucopolysaccharides should be measured as well to rule out other lysosomal storage diseases.

- 
**Genetic testing:**

Molecular genetic testing is the confirmatory test for Hunter syndrome. It can provide a definitive diagnosis in patients with atypical clinical presentation or patients with the usual clinical presentation but equivocal lab tests. This disease is sporadically reported in a few girls. The molecular genetic test is performed in females with a clinical phenotype suggestive of MPS II.

- 
**Imaging:**

A skeletal survey is performed in patients with a clinical picture suggestive of MPS II. Radiographic X-ray with characteristic findings in the skull, joints, the axial skeleton, and limbs are known as dysostosis multiplex. A few of these findings include a characteristic J shaped deformity in sella turcica, oar shaped ribs with scoliosis and kyphosis of the vertebral column, notching of the vertebral bodies, shortening of the diaphysis of the long bones, multiple epiphyseal ossification centers in long bones, hypoplastic and thickened tarsal, and carpal bones.