Females presenting for evaluation of abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding with elevated B-hCG levels present a diagnostic dilemma in the early stage of pregnancy if an imaging study does not clearly demonstrate an intrauterine pregnancy.  An interprofessional team effort will improve outcomes in diagnosing and treating these cases.

In a female of childbearing age pregnancy test is the first step in the evaluation of their presenting complaint. If the patient is clinically stable, and a pregnancy test is positive, a pelvic ultrasound is necessary to evaluate the location of the pregnancy.  If there is an ectopic pregnancy identified, the OBGYN team must be involved in the patient’s care as soon as possible. However, in cases of pregnancy of unknown location, close follow up must be arranged by the evaluating clinician, and strict return precautions are necessary for the patient, given the possibility of early ectopic pregnancy.  A nurse with obstetric/neonatal specialization may be of great assistance, as they can help irrespective of the diagnosis and direction of treatment by providing counsel to the patient and assisting in any procedures. This situation requires diligence and communication between different providers to ensure proper follow-up. Radiologists must be familiar with normal and abnormal ultrasound findings of early pregnancy and use the most conservative criteria when assessing the viability and diagnosing pregnancy failure. The referring physician should provide clinical history and order B-hCG quantitative level to assist the radiologist in the interpretation of imaging studies. As a team, referring physicians, nurse practitioners, OBGYN specialists, and radiologists must collaborate to protect the mother and baby and to intervene only in cases of definitive ectopic or failed pregnancy. (Level I)

The interprofessional team approach is necessary to manage these cases and arrive at the best management option. [Level 5]