# Continuing Education Activity

Radiotherapy is a widely used treatment modality for managing carcinomas in the head and neck region, either alone or combined with chemotherapy. Although effective in managing malignancies, radiotherapy induces undesirable side effects in the oral cavity. Some develop soon after initiating treatment, and others may appear after months or even years of completion of treatment. This activity describes the dentist's role in evaluating and managing patients before, during, and post-radiation therapy and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients undergoing radiation therapy.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the impact of radiation therapy on the oral cavity.
- Summarize dental treatment considerations for the patient with head and neck cancer pre-radiotherapy.
- Identify common oral complications of head and neck radiation therapy.
- Review the management strategies available for oral complications of head and neck radiation therapy.

# Introduction

Radiotherapy is a widely used treatment modality for managing carcinomas in the head and neck region, either alone or combined with chemotherapy. Head and neck cancer includes malignancies of the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, salivary glands, paranasal sinuses, and nasal cavity. Most of these carcinomas are derived from the squamous epithelium of these regions.

Although effective in managing malignancies, radiotherapy induces undesirable side effects in the oral cavity. Some develop soon after initiating treatment, and others may appear after months or even years of completion of treatment. Oral complications of radiotherapy mainly include oral mucositis, xerostomia, dysgeusia, oropharyngeal candidiasis, radiation-related caries, and osteoradionecrosis.

All of these complications may impair eating, swallowing, and speaking, with consequent loss of weight and appetite. Severe cases require parental nutrition and pausing radiation treatment, significantly affecting patients' prognosis. Dental management strategies must be implemented before, during, and after radiotherapy to prevent or decrease the severity of these debilitating conditions.

# Function

**Radiation Therapy Biology**

Radiation therapy uses ionizing radiation to damage malignant cells by acting on the DNA, leading to cellular death or inhibiting their multiplication capacity.

Radiotherapy can be used to cure or alleviate symptoms caused by malignancy; it can be given in combination with surgery, immunotherapy, or chemotherapy.

Radiotherapy works on the principle of damaging the genetic material of cells (DNA), acting on both cancerous and normal cells. During mitosis, the DNA content of cells duplicates; therefore, cells with high mitotic activity are more susceptible to radiation than those with low mitotic activity. In other words, tissues with higher division activity are more radiosensitive, which is usually the case with malignant tumors. Different tumors have different multiplication capacities, making some more radiosensitive than others.

Normal tissues located in the radiation path also suffer the effects of ionizing radiation, which in the oral cavity leads to complications such as oral mucositis, xerostomia, and radiation-related caries. However, normal cells have a faster repair rate and a better ability to return to normal function than cancerous cells. The lower repair rate of cancerous cells is what causes differential malignant cell killing.

The newer radiotherapy modalities like 3-D confrontation therapy, intensity modulated therapy (IMRT), and proton beam therapy can deliver radiation to localized areas, thus, sparing the normal tissue more efficiently.

# Issues of Concern

**Oral Complications of Radiation Therapy in The Head and Neck**

**Oral Mucositis**

Oral mucositis is a frequent complication of head and neck radiation therapy (RT), occurring in up to 91% of patients.

Oral lesions include erythema, atrophy, swelling, and ulcerations that may be covered by pseudomembranes. Patients report debilitating pain, loss of taste, eating, drinking, and speaking difficulties, which may require parental nutrition.

**Xerostomia**

Xerostomia is an expected side effect of radiotherapy on the head and neck, which starts soon after initiating treatment and may be irreversible in some cases.

Salivary gland damage results in hyposalivation (decreased salivary flow) and thickening of the saliva, perceived as xerostomia. This causes speaking, eating, and swallowing difficulties and affects taste perception. Also, a decreased salivary flow makes the oral cavity more vulnerable to candidiasis, gingivitis, and dental caries.

**Oropharyngeal Candidiasis**

Patients undergoing radiation therapy for head and neck cancer are at an increased risk of developing fungal infections. This may be a consequence of the salivary flow reduction experienced during radiation therapy

Clinically, radiation-related oropharyngeal candidiasis may present as pseudomembranous, erythematous, or angular cheilitis.

**Dysgeusia**

Dysgeusia is an unpleasant or abnormal alteration of taste, frequently described as metallic.

Altered taste perception is reported by about 70% of patients receiving radiotherapy, which is also linked to loss of appetite and weight. Symptoms appear after the second or third week of treatment, and taste perception usually goes back to normal 60 to 120 days after finishing radiotherapy.

**Radiation-related Caries**

Radiation-related caries is a very aggressive type of tooth decay that develops in dental surfaces normally refractive to caries.

Radiation caries are generalized and precipitate about six to twelve months after head and neck radiation treatment. Lesions usually begin as enamel cracks and fractures and evolve into brown-black enamel discoloration.

**Osteoradionecrosis (ORN)**

Osteoradionecrosis (ORN) of the jaws is a late complication of radiation therapy of the head and neck, where exposed irradiated bone becomes necrotic and fails to heal for at least three months with no signs of tumor recurrence.

Risk factors include poor oral health and hygiene, pre-head and neck radiation surgery, dental surgery, and tobacco and alcohol consumption.

# Clinical Significance

**Pre-radiotherapy Dental Management**

Pre-radiation dental treatment is done to prevent further infection and avoid the need for invasive procedures during and after radiotherapy. All efforts are directed at minimizing the risk and severity of head and neck radiotherapy complications: oral mucositis, oropharyngeal candidiasis, xerostomia, radiation-related caries, and osteoradionecrosis.

During this stage, patients must be informed of the importance of maintaining excellent oral hygiene and given careful oral care instructions and dietary advice. All carious lesions must be restored. Scaling, oral prophylaxis, and periodontal therapy should be performed. All sharp cusps and restorations should be smoothened.

If a definitive restoration cannot be placed due to time limitations, carious tissue must be removed and teeth restored with glass ionomer cement. Amalgam restorations should be avoided as they often backscatter and cause local mucosal irritation.

Performing pre-radiation dental extractions is a controversial topic since the evidence available is contradictory. Some studies have shown that pre-radiation extractions may increase the risk of osteoradionecrosis, and others show that the lack of pre-radiation extractions increases this risk too. If extractions are performed before the first cycle of radiation therapy, the ideal interval between extraction and the beginning of RT should be between ten days and three weeks so that complete soft tissue healing occurs.

The urgency to start RT is a critical dictating factor in whether to extract teeth or not.

Finally, obtaining dental impressions pre-radiation therapy for study models that will be useful for fabricating soft mouth guards or medicament-carrying trays is recommended.

**Management of Oral Complications During Radiotherapy**

**Oral Mucositis**

Uncomplicated oral mucositis is usually self-limiting, and palliative care tends to be sufficient.

Basic oral care includes enhancing the patient's oral hygiene (increasing frequency of tooth brushing, clean interproximally, using soft brushes, and replacing the toothbrush more often); rinsing the oral cavity with bland rinses like saline water or sodium bicarbonate every four hours; lubricating the oral mucosa using mousses or topical barrier gels, and avoiding irritants like tobacco or alcohol.

Foods that may unintendedly injure or irritate the oral mucosa must be avoided, such as hard, sharp, and spicy food.

MASCC/ISOO guidelines recommend topical morphine 0.2% for pain management.

**Xerostomia**

The aim of treatment is symptomatic relief, and management mainly includes patient education measures. Patients must be advised to frequently sip water, chew sugar-free gum, suck sugar-free candy, avoid caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, and hard or dry food, and increase fluid intake to prevent dehydration.

Pharmacological treatment is reserved for when local measures are ineffective. The systemic drugs pilocarpine and cevimeline are approved by the FDA for managing xerostomia.

**Oropharyngeal Candidiasis**

Oropharyngeal candidiasis is managed with topical treatment in milder cases, and systemic antifungals are indicated when disseminated candidiasis is suspected, the patient is at higher risk (myelosuppression, immunodeficiency) and upon failure of topical measures.

The first-line treatment includes topical fluconazole, miconazole, or nystatin. When systemic antifungals are indicated, fluconazole is the drug of choice. Generally, systemic therapy with fluconazole is more efficient than topical antifungals in patients with cancer.

**Management of Oral Complications After Radiotherapy**

**Radiation-related Caries**

Prevention, early detection, and treatment are vital. The risk of radiation caries should be explained to patients before, during, and after radiation therapy. Prevention regimens must be implemented immediately after the cancer diagnosis.

The importance of maintaining excellent oral hygiene must be emphasized, including gentle tooth brushing with a soft-bristled toothbrush twice or four times per day, interproximal cleaning, and fluoride supplementation.

The restoration of radiation caries poses a tremendous challenge to the dentist, mainly due to limited mouth opening, poor access and visibility, and changes in the tooth structure that alter the adhesive properties of dental materials.

When the pulp is involved, endodontic treatment is preferred over extraction.

Some authors suggest opening the tooth through the vestibular or incisal surfaces or decoronating teeth with gross caries to improve access.

**Osteoradionecrosis**

The mainstay of osteoradionecrosis treatment is prevention. Oral health should be stabilized before radiotherapy. All necessary dental and periodontal interventions must be performed, oral hygiene instructions carefully instructed, and oral health closely monitored before, during, and after radiation treatment. This is to avoid infection and the need for invasive procedures during and after radiation treatment.

If a tooth is deemed unrestorable, it is recommended that endodontic treatment is tried first. If extraction becomes unavoidable, general practitioners can extract teeth located outside the radiation field, or if in the radiation field, the dose must be less than 50 Gy.

The patient must be referred to a tertiary maxillofacial department for treatment if osteoradionecrosis is diagnosed.

The need for more radical surgical management depends on the severity of the condition.

# Other Issues

**Recurrence of Cancer**

Chronic nonhealing ulcers with indurated margins usually indicate recurrence.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of head and neck cancer involves oncologists, radiotherapists, dental practitioners, dental hygienists, nurses, dieticians, and a counselor.

Often, it is a race against time to start therapy and treat the dental ailment. During the therapy usually, complications are handled by radiotherapists and nurses, and dental inputs can help to manage the condition better. The need for meticulous planning by the dentist and discussion with other professionals involved in managing the patient is highly recommended to lower morbidity and improve outcomes.

While delivering radiation treatment in the head and neck region, pre-RT dental management, along with management of adverse effects during and after RT, can have a major effect on the patient's quality of life.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Since oral intake is compromised because of complications like radiation mucositis and limited mouth opening, the role of dietitians is important.

Proper training and expertise of nurses can provide better care.