There are few, if any, absolute contraindications to the use of modafinil. However, the following is a list of relative contraindications, cautions, and special considerations:

- Dermatological reaction: If serious rash including Stevens-Johnson syndrome develops, discontinue modafinil at the first sign of rash, unless the rash is clearly not drug-related.

- Angioedema and Anaphylaxis Reactions: If suspected, discontinue modafinil.

- Multiorgan Hypersensitivity Reactions: If suspected, discontinue modafinil.

- Persistent Sleepiness: Monitor patients frequently for a degree of sleepiness and, if appropriate, recommend patients to avoid engaging or driving in any other potentially dangerous activity.

- Cardiovascular disease: In patients with preexisting cardiovascular conditions, consider increased monitoring. Modafinil is not recommended in patients with documented left-ventricular hypertrophy or a history of the previous cardiotoxicity related to psychostimulant use. It should be used with caution in patients with uncontrolled hypertension, unstable angina, or recent myocardial infarction.

- Psychiatric disorders: Modafinil should be used with caution in patients with a history of psychosis and/or mania. Such patients should be monitored for hallucinations, delusions, mania, aggression, and suicidal ideation upon starting modafinil. Discontinuation is advised if these symptoms develop.

- Tic disorders: Limited evidence suggests that all CNS stimulants may exacerbate tics in patients with pre-existing tic disorders. A baseline assessment of tics is recommended before initiating treatment.