For successful placement of a DLT, it is important to understand the anatomy of the trachea and bronchi. In humans, the trachea arises at the level of the cricoid cartilage and extends up to carina the narrowest portion of the airway in adults, where it bifurcates into right and left main stem bronchus. The average length of the adult trachea is 12 cm and comprises 18 to 22 C-shaped cartilaginous rings anterolaterally, the ends of which are linked posteriorly by the superficial membranous wall and the trachealis muscle.

The right mainstem bronchus lies in a more vertical plane, is shorter (averages 1.9 cm in men and 1.5 cm in women) and larger than the left main stem bronchus. The left mainstem bronchus lies in a more horizontal plane and averages about 4.9 cm in men and 4.4 cm in women.

The left lung is 10% smaller than the right lung and comprises 2 lobes, the superior and inferior lobes, while the right lung comprises three lobes — the superior, middle and inferior lobes. Each of the lobes is divided by connective tissue into anatomical compartments known as bronchopulmonary segments, supplied by segmental (tertiary) bronchus and artery. Each bronchopulmonary segment is functionally and anatomically discrete and can be resected (segmentectomy) without affecting each other. In general, each lung has 10 bronchopulmonary segments.

Ventilation and perfusion of the lungs are well-matched anatomically, with dependent portions of the lungs receiving both greater blood flow (perfusion) because of gravity and greater ventilation because of the gravitational effect of lung compliance. The initiation of OLV stops all ventilation to one lung, which creates an obligatory shunt (i.e., that lung is perfused but not ventilated). because the left lung is smaller, there is less shunt when the left lung is collapsed.