Given the high rates of transmissibility and antifungal resistance patterns, C. auris was declared a public threat by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In June 2016, the CDC announced to general providers, infection control providers, laboratories, and public health authorities about Candida auris, making all cases in the United States reportable to the authorities and the CDC.C. auris.

Hand hygiene is the basic component of infection control. Healthcare personnel should follow standard hand hygiene principles to control the spread of C. auris.C. auris, as are chlorhexidine hand rubs when hands are not visibly soiled.

The recommendations for infection control of C. auris are adapted from infection control strategies for Clostridium difficile infections and other multidrug-resistant organisms, showing swift nosocomial spread. Infection control is applied to both infected and colonized individuals since both pose a risk of transmission.

Transmission-based precautions are implemented in acute care hospitals, long-term acute care hospitals, and nursing homes, including skilled nursing facilities with ventilator units. In the acute care setting, contact precautions are recommended, and in skilled nursing facilities, either contact precautions or enhanced barrier precautions are used. Contact precautions include using gloves and gowns for healthcare personnel, single room placement, and placing patients in cohorts of patients with only C. auris infection or colonization in non-single occupancy rooms or specific wings of a hospital.

Of note, patients with C. auris should not be in a cohort with patients having other multidrug-resistant organisms besides C. auris. Patients may remain colonized with C. auris for months, even after the treatment and resolution of an acute infection. It is recommended that the patient stays on contact precautions for their hospitalization. The CDC does not recommend routine assessment for colonization. However, patients with a prolonged hospital stay or residing in nursing homes may be screened three months after the last C. auris-positive test and if no longer on antifungal therapy for at least one week or receiving topical antiseptic for 48 hours. Contact precautions may be discontinued if the patient has had two negative colonization tests at least one week apart.

C. auris may persist in the healthcare environment on a variety of surfaces.Candida species and quaternary ammonia compounds may not necessarily be effective against C. auris.C. auris.C. auris.