The concurrent presence of venous varices with pelvic pain in premenopausal women does not always mean that they are causally related. Even in asymptomatic females, the dilation and incompetency of pelvic veins are common findings. This creates a challenge in identifying which patients have chronic pelvic pain due to pelvic congestion syndrome.

The pain associated with PCS presents as a dull ache or a sensation of heaviness in the pelvis. It can last 3 to 6 months and can be unilateral or bilateral. However, the pain can switch from one side to the other. Any factor increasing the abdominal pressure (walking, postural changes, lifting, and longtime standing position) can increase the intensity of pain. It is often exacerbated before or during the menstrual period. The intensity of pain worsens with each subsequent pregnancy, and during or after sexual intercourse. The time of the day also affects the intensity with pain being worse at the end of the day.

If the findings of characteristic pelvic pain are present, physical examination can help in formulating the final diagnosis. The uterine tenderness, ovarian tenderness, and cervical motion tenderness on direct palpation during bimanual examination in a patient presenting with a complaint of chronic pelvic pain support the diagnosis of PCS.

In a study with 57 females suffering from pelvic pain, the combination of a history of postcoital pain with tenderness over adnexa during physical examination came out to be 77% specific and nearly 94% sensitive for differentiating pelvic congestion syndrome from other pathologies of pelvic origin.