# Continuing Education Activity

Presyncope or near-syncope is often ill-defined and may have different meanings to different providers but denotes near fainting or a prodrome of syncope. The most uniform definition is "feeling like one was going to pass out but without actual loss of consciousness." Near syncope can last for seconds to minutes. Symptoms may be accompanied by a feeling of lightheadedness, general weakness, warmth, diaphoresis, nausea, palpitations or blurry vision. Although often perceived as more benign than syncope, data suggest that both the pathophysiology (cerebral hypoperfusion) and outcomes of near syncope mimic those of syncope. This activity outlines the etiologies, epidemiology, evaluation, and management of presyncope and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of presyncope.
- Explain the evaluation of presyncope. 
- Describe appropriate management strategies for patients presenting with presyncope.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with presyncope.

# Introduction

Presyncope or near-syncope is often ill-defined and may have different meanings to different providers but denotes near fainting or a prodrome of syncope. The most uniform definition is “feeling like one was going to pass out but without actual loss of consciousness.” Near syncope can last for seconds to minutes. Symptoms may be accompanied by a feeling of lightheadedness, general weakness, warmth, diaphoresis, nausea, palpitations or blurry vision. Although often perceived as more benign than syncope, data suggest that both the pathophysiology (cerebral hypoperfusion) and outcomes of near syncope mimic those of syncope.

# Etiology

The etiologies of presyncope are diverse, ranging from the benign to the life-threatening. Presyncope causes are the same as for syncope and include cardiac and noncardiac etiologies. Cardiac presyncope may be associated with palpitations, and may occur while in a sitting or supine position or during effort or exercise.

Most common are noncardiac etiologies that include vasovagal or neurocardiogenic, and causes related to volume shifts such as orthostatic hypotension, medication-induced, vascular and sepsis. Vasovagal presyncope is common and is often characterized by a prodrome, including nausea, flushing, diaphoresis, blurred vision, and lightheadedness. High-risk medications include antihypertensives, cardiovascular agents, and antipsychotics

Cardiac causes, which are more ominous, include mechanical (e.g., cardiac tamponade or valvular disease) and dysrhythmic (e.g., paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia or conduction system disease). Dysrhythmias, which induce hemodynamic impairment that can cause a critical decrease in cardiac output and cerebral blood flow, are the most common cardiac cause

# Epidemiology

19% of the United States population will experience a syncopal event in their lifetime, with the majority occurring in either the early adult years or after age 70; almost 58% of patients with syncope are female

# History and Physical

The history, medication review, physical examination and ECG have the greatest utility in evaluating presyncope

Vital signs should be obtained, but are often normal after the resolution of symptoms. Orthostatic vital signs are controversial but may be helpful if there is a concern for volume depletion, particularly in the elderly

# Evaluation

The initial task in presyncope is to obtain vital signs. An EKG and finger stick glucose test should be performed on all patients, but there is no gold standard for diagnostic testing in presyncope

Common predictors that may indicate a need for further workup include a cardiac or valvular disease history (ventricular dysrhythmia, congestive heart failure), a newly abnormal ECG, anemia or severe volume depletion (from a gastrointestinal bleed), syncope while supine or with effort, report of palpitations or chest pain, persistent abnormal vital signs, or family history of sudden death.

# Treatment / Management

As noted, patients with near syncope are as likely as those with syncope to experience critical interventions or adverse outcomes; however, presyncope patients are less likely to be admitted

Most near syncope diagnoses are presumptive, cannot be confirmed by standard criteria and may not be able to exclude cardiac conduction causes that have potentially life-threatening consequences. The need for prompt risk stratification and concern for cardiac etiology may be a factor influencing emergency department physicians to pursue extensive evaluations for many patients who present to the emergency department with presyncope.

The Boston Syncope Criteria has accurately screened patients with presyncope for risk of adverse outcomes at 30 days

Finally, a patient’s social situation, coping capacity and ability to return home safely must be considered for any patient who presents to the emergency department with presyncope. If a patient is discharged from the emergency department, regardless of etiology, they should have close follow-up with their primary care physician or cardiologist, ideally scheduled before discharge.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Cardiac myxoma

- Cough syncope

- Defecation syncope

- Dysrhythmias

- Micturition syncope

- Postprandial syncope

- Sick sinus syndrome

- Sinoatrial block

- Sinus pause

- Swallow Syncope

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Presyncope can be challenging to evaluate in a healthcare setting because of its broad differential diagnosis, which encompasses both relatively benign etiologies such as vasovagal presyncope and more concerning etiologies such as cardiac arrhythmias and GI bleed.  It is important to efficiently and accurately evaluate presyncopal patients, identifying, treating, and discharging those with easily correctable and less serious diagnoses, whilst stabilizing and providing a higher level of care to patients with more serious causes of presyncope who have the potential to decompensate and incur significant morbidity and potentially mortality.  This requires an interprofessional team approach in the healthcare setting with all members in constant communication, coordinating their efforts in a synergistic manner