**Plantar Fasciitis**

Treatment is usually conservative, including weight reduction, shoe modification, stretching, and NSAIDs. Nonresponders can benefit from shockwave therapy, ultrasound-guided corticosteroid injection or autologous blood-derived products (platelet rich plasma).

Hsiao et al. concluded that autologous blood-derived products, followed by corticosteroids, were best in providing relief from pain at three months. Shockwave therapy and autologous blood-derived products had a similar effect of pain relief at six months and were better than corticosteroids at that time.

As regards the placement of the injection, particularly corticosteroids above or below the plantar fascia, Gurcay et al. found that injection of corticosteroid deep to the fascia might cause a greater reduction in plantar fascia thickness, pain, and disability and improved foot-related quality of life. Recalcitrant cases will need surgery.

**Heel Fat Pad Atrophy**

Rest, ice, NSAIDs, heel cups, proper footwear, and taping might be used successfully for reduction of pain and improvement of foot related activities of daily living.

**Calcaneal Stress Fractures**

Treatment aims to provide a satisfactory environment for healing and prevention of progression of the fracture, and subsequently, pain relief and improvement of activities of daily living ensue.

Treatment options include bed rest, four-point weight bearing with crutches and a 0.5-inch sponge rubber insert in the shoes. Also, NSAIDs, calcium, vitamin D and calcitonin injections can be useful. Pulsed magnetic field therapy helps pain reduction and promotes healing. Treatments for underlying systemic illness are mandatory.

**Entrapment Neuropathies**

NSAIDs and anticonvulsants can help reduction of symptoms. Non- responders can benefit from ultrasound-guided corticosteroid injection, hydrodissection using dextrose 5%, radiofrequency or cryoablation. Recalcitrant cases or severe cases might need surgical decompression.