The aorta has some fixed regions, particularly the relatively fixed aortic arch (to the thoracic inlet by the brachiocephalic vessels). The remaining portions of the aorta are relatively free. Ascending and descending aorta are relatively mobile except at specific points. These can result in an unequal distribution of shear forces on the relatively fixed arch and mobile ascending and descending aorta and stress at the site of attachment of the aorta, particularly the aortic root and the aortic isthmus.

The most common sites of injury are the following:

- Aortic isthmus

- Just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. This is the transition zone between the mobile ascending aorta and the relatively fixed descending aorta.

- Tethered site of the aorta at the ligamentum arteriosum.

- Ascending aorta, just proximal to the origin of the brachiocephalic vessels.

Major mechanisms involved in aortic trauma injuries are as follows:

- Rapid acceleration and deceleration. Significant deceleration occurs in head-on collisions or lateral impact. The greatest risk involves frontal or side impacts.

- Significant falls, greater than 4 meters can also result in aortic trauma. These involve the thoracic aorta. In this case, significant physical forces can result in; blunt force compression of chest wall contents (particularly the aorta against the spinal column and tearing of the aorta. In addition, this type of trauma may cause the vertebral column, sternum, first rib, and clavicle to compress the aorta in the region of the isthmus.

- Twisting against fixation points – usually, twisting of the aorta at the ligamentum arteriosum just distal to the left subclavian artery can also result in aortic trauma.

- Seatbelt injuries: This involves the abdominal aorta. Although the abdominal aorta is relatively rarely injured in blunt trauma, severe trauma may disrupt the abdominal aorta.

- Other high-risk mechanisms involved in blunt aortic trauma such as the ejection of an unrestrained passenger from the vehicle, and injuries resulting in death at the scene of the accident.

- Mechanism of injury: rupture of the adventitia. This can cause lethal internal hemorrhage.

Type of injury:

- Intimal tear: This leads to disruption of the media and can cause a false lumen.

- Mediastinal hematoma: Since traumatic aortic injury differs from spontaneous aortic injury with respect to the involvement of multiple layers of the aorta, mediastinal hematoma usually develops secondary to trauma.

- Transection of the aorta: Complete rupture of the aorta, including the adventitial layer and periadventitial connective tissue, results in immediate exsanguination.

Beware that delayed adventitial rupture may occur during hospitalization.