Cardiac arrest is a near-death experience impacting not only the patient but family members too. A variety of health care professionals should be involved from the onset of arrest up to hospital discharge. Studies have continuously demonstrated the importance of Interprofessional communication and teamwork while resuscitating patients. Successful resuscitation is an outcome of good communication and understanding your responsibilities. (LOE-1) Physicians, nurses, pharmacists, laboratory technicians all come together and commit to the success of the team.

Post-resuscitation care brings further contributions from consultants such as a cardiologist, electrophysiologists, and neurologists. These patients need close monitoring by the nurses as recurrence of VF is high. In addition, the patient should be assessed for complications like aspiration, CPR related injuries, renal failure, and brain anoxic damage

Unfortunately, mortality associated with VF/SCA remains high. Involving family in every step of management is pivotal as it helps in providing a holistic picture. Seeking help from chapel when deciding about goals of care can help the family make difficult decisions. Mild hypothermia has been shown to improve outcomes and should be considered. The patient needs to be seen by the neurologist to assess brain activity, dietitian to assess feeding, nephrologist as renal failure is common, and the pulmonologist to ensure that no aspiration has occurred during resuscitation. The entire team should communicate with each other to ensure that the patient is receiving the optimal standard of care.

Outcomes

Patient outcomes can be improved by spreading awareness about the condition and by identifying patients at risk. The outcome of cardiac arrest and subsequently VF depends on time from the arrest to first intervention. Educating the general population about the basics of resuscitation can help avoid delay in treatment and improve patient outcomes especially in OHCA. Identifying and establishing roles amongst various team members can improve outcomes among In-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA). Mock drills to assess for preparedness can help enhance the quality of resuscitation efforts.