It is necessary to pursue the least invasive technique that will allow effective removal of the corneal foreign body (FB). Use more invasive measures only as necessary. Occasionally, the FB is superficial, and it can be displaced with a sterile saline lavage. A moistened sterile cotton-tipped applicator may be used to elevate a superficial FB away from the surface. If the FB is firmly embedded, a needle or a spud will be required to dislodge it. Stabilize the approach by placing the practitioner's hand across a boney facial structure to yoke the two. Approach tangentially from the periphery with the bevel facing outwards. Very gently lift the foreign body away from the cornea until completely dislodged. Magnetized FB spuds facilitate the removal of metallic FB. An iron FB forms a rust ring in as few as 4 hours. A dense rust ring can be removed by brushing a sterile rotating burr across the affected tissues. An Alger brush device can effectively debride the corneal rust ring, enhancing ultimate visual outcomes. The burr requires gentle pressure tangential to the affected corneal surface. Keep in mind that increasing the depth and area of treatment will influence the time required to heal. Do not risk pursuing capacious treatment leaving a central corneal scar or extensive thinning. Any remaining faint deposits will migrate anteriorly and slough off in a short time. If a deeply embedded FB is determined to be physiologically inert, like glass or plastic, it can be let in place and observed over time.

**Post Treatment**

Initiate a broad-spectrum topical antibiotic no less than 4 times daily for one week. Larger, deeper, or central defects may require more frequent applications and longer durations. If the patient is a habitual contact lenses wearer ensure that the antibiotic therapy is effective against pseudomonas.

Expect pain symptoms to improve as the epithelium heals and the associated inflammation resolves. Utilize topical anesthetics only in-office to manage the patients' symptoms throughout the procedure. Home therapy using topical anesthetics is not recommended. When a patient is particularly symptomatic, topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications can be beneficial. If breakthrough pain requires additional consideration, consider over-the-counter oral analgesics. Unless contradicted, alternating acetaminophen and ibuprofen offer sufficient pain relief until the corneal surface structures normalize. A schedule III controlled substance may be necessary for rare instances.

Topical steroids are generally avoided until the epithelium has completely healed.

The anti-inflammatory actions of amniotic membrane therapy may be beneficial in reducing residual scarring while encouraging epithelial healing.

If an anterior chamber reaction is observed, a short-acting topical cycloplegic agent can be used to reduce the associated discomfort. A short course of cyclopentolate or homatropine twice daily for cycloplegia should be prescribed if the patient is particularly symptomatic. This can be used in conjunction with topical steroid therapy once epithelial closure is realized.

A bandage soft contact lens may be considered to relieve pain, correct vision, and reduce surface disruption associated with blinking. However, this should be done with caution if there is a concern for infectious agents. Amniotic membrane therapy has been found to catalyze epithelial healing while reducing inflammation and the potential for corneal scarring. Pressure patching is typically not performed unless there is a large concomitant corneal abrasion.

The standard of care dictates that the patient is to be seen again in 24 hours to evaluate status.