**Catheters for Extracorporeal RRT**

The catheters used for hemodialysis, hemofiltration, hemodiafiltration, or ultrafiltration are central venous lines with wide internal lumens. Externally, the catheter is attached to the RRT machine using color-coded Luer taper connectors: the side where blood gets withdrawn from the patient is typically colored red, with the side where blood is returned being blue.

Early dual-lumen catheters had a coaxial design, with blood being removed through a large outer cannula and returned down the center through a narrow inner cannula; the inner cannula was replaced anew for each session of dialysis. Most modern catheters instead have the two lumens sitting in parallel side by side.

Both non-tunneled catheters and tunneled cuffed catheters exist. (A third category – implantable vascular access devices, with subcutaneous ports – saw limited use in the 1990s, but are no longer on the market.)

When correctly placed, the tip of the catheter should rest in the middle of a large central vein away from the vessel wall so that the opening of the withdrawal lumen – which is under negative pressure – does not become occluded due to the vessel wall being sucked across it. The clinician placing the catheter should consider how the tip position may change when the patient moves. By the Hagen-Poiseuille equation, flow is inversely proportional to length,

The following equipment is required to place a non-tunneled catheter for extracorporeal renal replacement therapy:

- Local anesthetic (commonly lidocaine 1% or 2%), with syringe and needle

- Introducer needle (or introducer cannula with trocar) and syringe

- Seldinger guidewire

- Skin dilator

- Silk suture

- Scalpel

- Bungs for catheter

- Heparin solution (depending on local practice)

- Sterile normal saline

- Skin dressing

If using ultrasound, the machine will require a linear probe, sterile probe cover, and sterile aqueous gel.

**Catheters for Peritoneal Dialysis**

Peritoneal dialysis catheters are single-lumen indwelling transcutaneous cannulas that allow dialysate fluid to be instilled into and removed from the intraperitoneal space. They have a single lumen, with multiple side holes present on the intraperitoneal section. Rigid catheters are usable in the acute setting; however, for chronic renal failure or patients with multiple organ failure, the most common type in contemporary use are Tenckhoff catheters (named for Henry Tenckhoff who pioneered their use).

For acute intermittent peritoneal dialysis, the dialysate fluid (approximately 2000 mL for an adult, or 20 to 50 mL/kg for a child) is instilled through the catheter into the peritoneal cavity and is left there for 30 to 60 minutes before being drained out by gravity. Some newer techniques like continuous-flow peritoneal dialysis require the presence of separate catheters for simultaneous inflow and outflow of fluid.

The following equipment is required to place a Tenckhoff peritoneal dialysis catheter using the Seldinger technique:

- Local anesthetic, with syringe and needle

- Cannula and syringe

- Warmed sterile normal saline

- Seldinger guidewire

- Scalpel

- Sheath with introducer

- Tenckhoff catheter