There have been juvenile and adult cases that carry specific disease presentation features but show increased severity in adult form.

Juvenile cases have been reported between the ages of 10 and 22 years, while most adult cases are seen between 43 and 55 years of age. The unique features are better described according to the sites affected.

Mucosal involvement is characterized by well-defined light brown to brown-black macules usually of size 0.1 to 0.5 cm over the oral and genital mucosa. Oral lesions are present over labial mucosa, buccal mucosa, hard palate, tongue, and posterior pharyngeal mucosa while genital lesions are seen on the glans and shaft of the penis in males and vulva in females. A few cases of isolated tongue pigmentation have been reported.

Acral or cutaneous involvement manifests as sharply marginated light brown to black lenticular macules and patches approximately 0.5 to 1.5 cm in size, specifically seen over distal two-thirds of all digits of the upper limb and bilateral plantar surfaces. Besides this, the lesions extend dorsally by involving the medial and lateral borders of digits.

Nail involvement is seen in two-thirds of cases and can be divided into 4 types based on the extent of pigmentation.

- Single 1 to 2 mm longitudinal streaks

- Double 2 to 3 mm longitudinal streaks on the lateral parts

- Homogenous pigmentation involving radial or ulnar half

- Complete pigmentation

However, one or all types may be seen in the same patient. One striking feature of nail involvement is nail fold pigmentation termed as pseudo-Hutchinson’s sign.

Rare reports of varied pigmentation include isolated tongue pigmentation, conjunctival pigmentation, neck and trunk pigmentation, and diffuse pigmentation are seen while the common finding of oral and acral involvements are more commonly encountered.