Hypoglycemia is defined as a plasma concentration of glucose that results in symptoms attributable to hypoglycemia and is reversed with the administration of glucose. There is no set plasma glucose level above which GSDs can be ruled out, particularly for children. It is important to note that neonates go through a period of transitional hypoglycemia in the first 48 hours of life, during which GSDs cannot be diagnosed.

Duration of fasting that leads to symptoms of hypoglycemia is an important element of history that must be obtained. A short duration of fasting that results in typical symptoms suggests glycogen storage disorder type I or III.

**Laboratory Testing**

Hypoglycemia should be documented by measuring serum glucose levels. In patients where hypoglycemia is suspected, a diagnostic fasting glucose test can be performed but should only be considered in a monitored inpatient setting.

Patients with type I disorder will also present with elevated liver enzyme and uric acid levels. Triglyceredemia is also common. Urinary myoglobin levels can be detected in patients with GSDs as well, particularly in those affected by GSDs that primarily affect the skeletal muscles.

**Biopsy**

Although specific genetic testing is now available for diagnosing most GSDs, histologic examination of liver or muscle biopsy is still used in specific scenarios. In GSD type 0, a liver biopsy will show decreased hepatic glycogen and can make a definitive diagnosis for this disease.

Muscle biopsies will reveal diastase-sensitive vacuoles and positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and acid phosphatase in GSD type IV.

**Molecular Testing**

Molecular genetic testing is noninvasive and, for the most part, available for diagnosing these rare genetic disorders. In some cases, they have eliminated the need for invasive muscle and liver biopsies. The genetic foci of mutations for these disorders are outlined in the following chart.