1. General measures — Individuals with Lynch syndrome should undergo an annual physical examination beginning at age 25 to 30.

2. Surgery:

- Colon neoplasia – In patients with HNPCC and colon cancer or an endoscopically unresectable adenoma, total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is the procedure of choice with continued annual endoscopic surveillance of the retained rectum.

- Segmental colectomy with annual post-operative colonoscopic surveillance for individuals who are not candidates for total colectomy.

- Rectal neoplasia – In patients with HNPCC and rectal cancer, total proctocolectomy with an ileal pouch-anal anastomosis is the procedure of choice given the high risk for metachronous colon cancer in those with proctectomy.

If a proctectomy is performed for rectal cancer, it is important to ensure annual colonoscopic surveillance of the retained colon.

Women undergoing colectomy should be offered concurrent prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy to prevent endometrial and ovarian cancer.

3. Chemotherapy — Immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor that targets the programmed death receptor-1 may be beneficial for advanced high microsatellite instability metastatic CRC.

4. Other strategies for cancer prevention

A. Prophylactic surgery

- Risk-reducing hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy surgery.

B. Chemoprevention

- Aspirin: Although some studies suggest that aspirin can reduce the risk of CRC in patients with HNPCC, further studies are needed to clarify the net benefits in CRC prevention and to find the optimal dose for chemoprevention for individuals with HNPCC.

- Oral contraceptives: Patients with HNPCC who have not completed childbearing but are not currently attempting to conceive may reduce their risk of developing endometrial and ovarian cancer by using hormonal contraception in addition to ongoing surveillance. Estrogen-progestin contraceptives reduce the risk of both endometrial and ovarian cancer; progestin-based contraceptives reduce the risk of endometrial cancer.