Acute termination of PMT is achieved by applying a magnet to the pacemaker pocket. Pacemakers are, in general, programmed to respond to magnet application by switching to asynchronous pacing mode, meaning that the pacemaker will only pace at a set rate and will not track atrial activity. This will terminate the tachycardia by removing the antegrade limb of the reentrant circuit.

Other temporizing measures include carotid massage or medications that act as AV nodal blockers (digoxin, beta-blockers, and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers), which can prevent the tachycardia by slowing VA conduction and thus blocking the retrograde limb of the circuit.

However, the most definitive management is the reprogramming of the pacemaker to prevent the recurrence of PMT. One easy way of doing so is to lengthen the PVARP since, as discussed earlier, a retrogradely conducted ventricular beat can only be sensed by the atrial lead if the PVARP has passed. By increasing the duration of PVARP, there is less likelihood that retrograde conduction will be sensed, and PMT will be triggered. Another option would be changing the sensitivity of the atrial lead, so that sinus P waves are sensed, but not retrograde P waves.

Modern pacemakers have certain manufacturer-specific algorithms that allow detection and early termination of PMT. Including the use of adaptive PVARP in pacemakers with rate response, automatically prolonging the PVARP after an earlier than normal ventricular activation (PVC) is sensed, or dropping a ventricular paced beat after the pacemaker had been pacing at the maximum tracking rate for a specific period of time.