The pediatric orthopedic surgeon’s experience level, the technique of making a hip arthrogram, and the ability to interpret a hip arthrogram are all factors to consider for patients with developmental dysplasia of the hip. Diagnosis and treatment aside, a pediatric hip arthrogram involves an entire interprofessional healthcare team in the operating room. The team includes the pediatric orthopedic surgeon, anesthesiologist, nurse anesthetist, surgical technologist, circulating nurse, and radiology technologist.

It is the primary goal of the healthcare team to prioritize the safety of the patient. Patients with developmental dysplasia of the hip commonly undergo frequent radiographic examinations of bilateral hips. During these X-ray examinations, the gonads are exposed to radiation unless a lead shield is used. Although gonad lead shields exist, they often provide inadequate protection secondary to size and improper placement. Gonad lead shields are frequently not used for female patients.

A previous study performed a retrospective analysis using a database in which 766 pediatric female pelvic radiographs were reviewed. A gonad lead shield design was then developed using radiographic measurements based on the distance between the anterior superior iliac spine markers. The researchers made custom lead shields based on these measurements. Standard general-purpose lead shields were then compared to the custom design lead shields regarding shielding rates and shielding accuracy. The gonad shielding rate increased from 14.5 to 72.7% after implementing the custom lead shields. The gonad shield accuracy increased from 8.4 to 32.2% after implementing the custom lead shields.

A gonad lead shield that is available in multiple different sizes and is placed in the anatomically correct position may decrease the likelihood of gonad radiation exposure during radiographic examinations in patients with developmental dysplasia of the hip.