In general, undifferentiated connective tissue disease, like many autoimmune diseases, is thought to exist in consecutive phases. However, the initial phase may start years before the diagnosis can be established due to the absence of signs and symptoms and the lack of serological biomarkers.

In the subsequent phase, autoantibodies can be detected in the serum despite the absence of clinical manifestations. This phase can be considered an interval phase between detecting autoantibodies and the onset of significant signs or symptoms and can be significantly variable among patients.

The final phase begins when notable signs and symptoms start to appear, leading to a definitive diagnosis. These patients can remain undifferentiated, or they may evolve later into an identifiable connective tissue disease.

Various autoantibodies are associated the undifferentiated connective tissue disease, but it is unknown whether these antibodies are causes or innocent markers of this disease.

To evaluate the disease features, studies were established. For example, Szodoray et al. assessed the association between various immune-competent T-cell numbers and the progression of connective tissue disease. They also evaluated certain immune phenotypes to predict the consecutive progression of defined connective tissue disease. The absolute and relative number of the natural regulatory T-cells were found to be decreased in patients with undifferentiated connective tissue disease when compared with the control groups. Besides, the decrease in the number of natural regulatory T-cells was found to be associated with the progression of the undifferentiated connective tissue disease to a differentiated connective tissue disease. In addition, the number of regulatory T-cells was significantly decreased in patients with a differentiated disease as systemic sclerosis compared to undifferentiated connective tissue disease patients, suggesting that the levels of these cells might represent a useful marker of the disease progression.

Furthermore, vitamin D deficiency can result in pathological changes in the function and number of the CD4+ T-helper cells in patients with undifferentiated connective tissue disease, and the supplementation of vitamin D showed an improvement in the balance of anti-inflammatory and pro-inflammatory processes in the disease.