Communicating information about the diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis to patients with breast disease is important for all reported cases in a breast clinic. The best means to accomplish this is an interprofessional team consisting of primary care providers, general surgeons, radiologists, pharmacists, and specialty-trained breast care nurses.

Concerns of patients included the language of physicians, lack of consideration for patient autonomy, and promotion of decision-making power to patients.

Pharmacists become involved when using medications to treat this condition. They counsel patients, review side effects, check for drug interactions, and stress the importance of compliance. Breast care nurses educate patients about the good prognosis and the importance of close follow-up initially. They can also chart progress in treatment, or lack thereof, and inform the lead clinician of any concerns that may arise. These examples of interprofessional collaboration show how the team approach can improve patient outcomes and minimize adverse events. [Level 5]

Image 4 and 5: Interprofessional care factors to consider during clinical evaluation of breast disease, both benign and malignant findings.

Psychosocial, home, and work environments require a stable structure to ensure both physical and mental wellbeing. Patients diagnosed with fibrocystic breast disease are also associated with fear and uncertainty due to a lack of education regarding their diagnoses.

Proper medical interaction and interprofessional coordination and communication are necessary to ensure a holistic patient output.