The care of older adults can be challenging because they may require multiple medications to manage their complex medical problems. Therefore, optimizing their medication regimen is one of the critical elements in comprehensive geriatric care. Preventable adverse drug events are one of the serious consequences of polypharmacy, and this possibility should always be considered when evaluating an older patient with a new symptom until proven otherwise. This strategy can prevent prescribing cascades and even the risk of hospitalizations. Also, being aware of specific issues related to polypharmacy, like increased risk for hip fractures, falls, and decreased cognitive functions, can help avoid a lot of negative outcomes like falls and decrease health care costs. While prescribing multiple medications cannot be avoided in a specific patient scenario, healthcare professionals should aim for a balance between over-prescribing and under-prescribing and consider medication appropriateness based on life expectancy and care goals.

Polypharmacy is common in patients taking opioids for the long term, and administering interacting medications may increase the risk of opioid overdose. A study was conducted to determine nonopioid medications that may increase opioid overdose. The major investigation quantified the odds ratio (OR) between opioid overdose and nonopioid medication dispensed in the 90 days directly before the opioid overdose date after adjustment for prescription opioid dosage and benzodiazepine prescribing. Polypharmacy with opioids and benzodiazepines may increase confusion, risk of falls, and hip fracture.