**Nucleoside/Nucleotide Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NRTIs)**

- NRTIs are known to cause mitochondrial toxicity that may present as peripheral neuropathy and lactic acidosis that can be fatal. Some NRTIs may also cause bone marrow suppression, anemia, and lipodystrophy.

- Tenofovir is typically well tolerated but may cause kidney injury or decreased bone mineral density. Other medications require consideration in patients with a history of renal impairment (eGFR less than 60 mL/min/1.73m) or osteoporosis. Discontinuation of tenofovir formulas will warrant clinical and laboratory monitoring of hepatic function because discontinuation may cause an acute exacerbation of HBV.

- Abacavir is associated with a CD8 mediated hypersensitivity reaction in patients with the HLA-B*5701 mutation.

- Didanosine is rarely used due to the risk of pancreatitis and hepatomegaly.

**Non-nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NNRTIs)**

- NNRTIs may cause rashes that typically resolve within one month but may progress to Stevens-Johnson’s syndrome, so patients should discontinue the medication if they develop a severe rash with blistering or desquamation. Hepatitis, including fulminant hepatitis progressing to liver failure, can occur as early as six weeks into starting therapy. This class of medications does not have absolute restrictions on use in pregnancy, but some evidence indicates a risk of neural tube defects. Occasionally, QT prolongation can occur with the use of NNRTIs (most commonly with rilpivirine). NNRTIs also cause a range of interactions with hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes, so concurrent medications must be checked closely for dosage adjustments or interaction concerns.

- Efavirenz is known to cause a range of psychiatric and CNS effects, including but not limited to vivid dreams, delusions, sleep disturbances, dizziness, headaches, increased suicidality, psychosis-like behavior, and mania.

**Protease Inhibitors (PIs)**

- PI class effects include hepatotoxicity, insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, lipodystrophy, and PR interval prolongation.

- Other PIs, including indinavir and saquinavir, are no longer used due to inefficiency, increased resistance, and unfavorable side effects such as an increased risk of nephrolithiasis.

**Integrase Inhibitors (INSTIs)**

- INSTIs are generally well-tolerated, and in many cases, they are favorable as the third agent in a HAART regimen due to their neutral effects on cholesterol and triglyceride levels. Some patients may experience dizziness, sleep disturbances, or depression. Reports exist of rhabdomyolysis and myopathy in patients taking raltegravir and dolutegravir, so patients require monitoring for increases in creatine phosphokinase (CK).

- Dolutegravir can block the secretion of creatinine and occasionally cause a decrease in the GFR.

**Fusion Inhibitors (FIs)**

- Enfuvirtide is generally well tolerated though some patients may experience injection site reactions.

**Chemokine Receptor Antagonists (CCR5 antagonists)**

- Maraviroc is generally well tolerated though some patients may experience dizziness or skin rashes. There is a risk of hepatotoxicity with allergic features, so patients should be monitored closely for symptoms of allergic reactions or hepatic dysfunction. Drug-drug interactions should be a consideration if patients are taking concurrent CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers.