While all fractures are important to identify, the most concerning for the image interpreter are the ones most likely to be missed. Failure to identify such fractures can lead to delayed diagnosis and suboptimal management, including growth plate disturbance (in pediatric patients), persistent pain and instability, fracture nonunion, and accelerated osteoarthrosis.

When no fracture is identified, it is helpful to look at specific injury sites, as opposed to a general survey of the ankle. Perhaps the most commonly missed ankle fracture is the anterior process of the calcaneus and may only be seen on the lateral radiographic view.

An important consideration is a case where a fracture is seen involving the posterior malleolus or a displaced fracture of the medial malleolus without an identified fracture of the imaged distal fibula. If there is a concomitant widening of the syndesmosis or medial clear space, this implies a syndesmotic ligamentous injury. The line of force will be transmitted to the proximal fibula. As such, the image interpreter should recommend AP and lateral views of the tibia and fibula to evaluate for proximal fibula fractures, the so-called Maisonneuve fracture. The more proximal fracture may not be clinically suspected because patients will typically complain of ankle pain and not be aware of the more proximal injury.

Radiography remains the principal imaging evaluation of the ankle. Advanced imaging of the ankle with ultrasound, CT, MRI, ultrasound, nuclear medicine, and angiography is reserved for radiographically occult fractures, soft tissue abnormalities, vascular injuries, and other specialized considerations.