# Continuing Education Activity

Epithelial downgrowth is a potentially visually devastating complication of intraocular surgery or trauma characterized by invasion of epithelial cells and growth into intraocular structures. This article will review the etiology, risk factors, clinical presentation, diagnostic modalities, and management options of epithelial downgrowth. It will review the role of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of epithelial downgrowth.
- Outline the appropriate diagnostic studies for epithelial downgrowth.
- Review the management options for epithelial downgrowth, from noninvasive measures to complete surgical excision, as well as their risks and limitations. 
- Outline the importance of the interprofessional team in the diagnosis and management of epithelial downgrowth to improve outcomes and reduce complications.

# Introduction

Epithelial downgrowth is a rare, but vision-threatening, complication of penetrating ocular trauma or intraocular surgery. In this disease, epithelial cells enter the anterior chamber and proliferate into intraocular structures. Stratified squamous epithelium is not normally present in the interior of the eye but can grow into nearly any intraocular structure. Epithelialization can appear in three forms: pearls, cysts, and sheets.

This article presents a brief overview of the etiology, pathophysiology, and risk factors for epithelial downgrowth with a broader discussion of the many diagnostic and therapeutic options, along with the advantages and disadvantages of each. Of note, the terms epithelial downgrowth and epithelial ingrowth are sometimes used interchangeably in the literature. However, this article will not discuss epithelial ingrowth that occurs after procedures such as LASIK where there is ingrowth of epithelium into the corneal flap interface.

Epithelial downgrowth should also be distinguished from fibrous downgrowth. These two conditions are quite similar in terms of etiology, risk factors, and complications and are often managed the same way. However, there are subtle but important differences between the two that will be further discussed in the “Differential Diagnosis” section.

# Etiology

Epithelial invasion was first described in 1832 by Dr. William Mackenzie as a semitransparent cyst in the anterior chamber of a patient after a perforating intraocular injury.

# Epidemiology

Intracapsular and extracapsular cataract surgery have been reported in the literature as the most common cause of epithelial downgrowth with an average reported incidence of 0.076% to 0.12%

# Pathophysiology

Epithelial downgrowth occurs when non-keratinized epithelial cells are introduced through a traumatic or surgical wound and proliferate in the inner structures of the eye. Proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms include implantation of the epithelium, the introduction of a conjunctival flap into a wound, or delayed closure of a wound.

Risk factors potentially allowing for epithelial entry and proliferation include multiple intraocular surgeries, delayed wound healing, gaping wound edges, wound fistulas, iris or vitreous incarceration, and full-thickness sutures.

# History and Physical

Patients with epithelial downgrowth will usually present within a year of the inciting event with a variety of symptoms, including decreasing visual acuity, redness, pain, tearing, and photophobia.

# Evaluation

Many diagnostic tools for detecting epithelial downgrowth have been reported in the literature. Certain modalities may be more useful when specific risk factors or anatomical involvement are suspected. For example, Seidel testing may be useful in identifying fistulas, which are a commonly cited risk factor for epithelial downgrowth.

Specular microscopy, a noninvasive diagnostic test, reveals a pattern consisting of a sharply defined border between endothelium and epithelial downgrowth.

Confocal microscopy is another diagnostic tool. This non-invasive modality allows the observer to image living tissue at higher resolutions than specular microscopy and is less affected by corneal edema.

Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) is another noninvasive imaging modality that has been shown to aid in the diagnosis of epithelial downgrowth after DSAEK and penetrating keratoplasty.

Histopathologic analysis is the gold standard to confirm epithelial downgrowth. Diagnosis is based on the classic finding of one to three layers of stratified, non-keratinized squamous epithelium on the posterior cornea and anterior iris; however, any intraocular structure can be involved.

# Treatment / Management

Historically, many therapeutic modalities have been used to treat epithelial downgrowth. These include surgical interventions such as iridectomy, vitrectomy, cautery, penetrating keratoplasty, cryotherapy, photocoagulation, and mechanical debridement. Medical treatments historically include radiation, alcohol, steroids, and antibiotics. Many of these are no longer used due to complications or high recurrence rates.

Cryotherapy, for example, can be used to eliminate epithelium if localized to the posterior cornea, drainage angle, or ciliary body.

Transcorneal photocoagulation with an argon laser is typically used for the cystic form of epithelial downgrowth, but in rare cases, has shown effectiveness in treating the diffuse form.

Intracameral injection of antimetabolites such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and Mitomycin-C (MMC) have also been reported as potentially effective treatments for epithelial downgrowth.

Mitomycin C (MMC) is a DNA cross-linking antineoplastic agent which also inhibits RNA and protein synthesis. It has been hypothesized that applying MMC in the cystic form of epithelial downgrowth damages the epithelial cells that secrete cyst fluid, leading to regression of the cyst.

Lambert et al. reported a case of recurrent epithelial downgrowth refractory to membrane peeling, endolaser photocoagulation, and 5-FU injection that was treated successfully with intravitreal methotrexate (400 mcg/0.1mL).

More aggressive surgical procedures for epithelial downgrowth vary greatly in technique and rates of success and depend on the location and structures affected. In some situations, epithelial cysts can be treated more conservatively, which may be recommended in children to preserve intraocular structures and manage amblyopia. One such technique consists of the viscodissection of the cyst with the aspiration of cyst contents and photocoagulation.

To prevent epithelial downgrowth, a meticulous approximation of wound edges and attention to incisions intraoperatively and postoperatively are crucial. Wound leaks should also be evaluated and repaired when applicable.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Fibrovascular Downgrowth vs. Epithelial Downgrowth**

The term retrocorneal membrane can encompass both epithelial downgrowth and fibrous downgrowth. Both can be a result of trauma or intraocular surgery; for example, fibrous downgrowth has been reported after cataract surgery

**Pseudophakic Bullous Keratopathy vs. Epithelial Downgrowth**

Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy (PBK) is the development of irreversible corneal edema after cataract surgery and postoperative inflammation. This corneal edema occurs due to the loss of corneal endothelium secondary to surgical trauma. PBK can clinically resemble epithelial downgrowth with a reduction in visual acuity, tearing, and pain. However, signs of PBK include stromal edema and sub-epithelial bullae. Epithelial downgrowth should be considered in patients undergoing penetrating keratoplasty for presumed diagnoses of PBK, and these may be distinguished immunohistochemically with the presence of anti-cytokeratin antibodies in epithelial downgrowth.

**Epithelial Downgrowth vs. Secondary Endothelial Proliferation**

Secondary endothelization usually arises from ischemia and can also present after multiple intraocular surgeries. The endothelial cells can proliferate in the angle and anterior surface of the iris. This can be considered a precursor to rubeosis iridis (neovascularization of the iris), which can lead to neovascular glaucoma, a form of secondary glaucoma. Clinically, this can appear as neovascularization of the iris. Histologically, this can be differentiated from epithelial downgrowth by a lack of stratification.

# Prognosis

Visual outcome after a diagnosis of epithelial downgrowth is generally poor due to recurrence, refractory glaucoma, and corneal decompensation.

In a series of 52 patients from 1980-1996 treated with en bloc excision and corneoscleral grafting, the mean visual acuity at the final follow-up visit was 20/100 in the cystic-type cases and 20/200 in the diffuse-type cases.

# Complications

Complications include chronic inflammation, secondary glaucoma, corneal decompensation, and in severe cases, phthisis bulbi. Glaucoma is common with the diffuse sheet-like form and may occur due to blockage of the trabecular meshwork by the epithelium directly or by mucin from conjunctival goblet cells.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patient should be informed of the treatment options for epithelial downgrowth, and that recurrence is common. Patients should also be educated that depending on the extent of the disease, the goal of treatment may not be to completely restore visual acuity and function, but rather to achieve stability and comfort. If surgery is pursued, the patient should be encouraged to follow postoperative safety measures to improve outcomes.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Epithelial downgrowth is a rare, but vision-threatening, complication of penetrating ocular trauma or intraocular surgery. It ranges in the severity of presentation but can include decreasing visual acuity, redness, pain, tearing, and photophobia. A thorough history and physical examination, in addition to supplemental studies like imaging and histopathology, is crucial to diagnose epithelial downgrowth accurately. Treatment options depend on the extent of involvement and growth pattern and vary from conservative measures to surgical excision with corneoscleral transplantation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Epithelial downgrowth is a rare pathology, but clinicians should be able to identify it promptly to minimize severe complications.