**Periprosthetic Fracture**

Periprosthetic fractures can occur in the distal femur, proximal tibia, or patella. They are most commonly located in the supracondylar region of the distal femur. The most common classification system used for periprosthetic fractures of the distal femur is the Lewis and Rorabeck classification. In this classification system, type-I is non-displaced with a stable component; type-II has more than 5mm of displacement or greater than 5 degrees of angulation with a stable component, and type-III has a loose component. There are several additional classification systems; All of which fail to classify intra-operative periprosthetic fractures. The anatomic location is typically used to describe these fractures. Risk factors that may predispose patients to periprosthetic fractures include:

- Anterior notching of the femur

- Osteoporosis, osteolysis

- Implant loosening

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Neurologic disorder

- Corticosteroid use

- Increased age

- Female sex

Treatment options can include open reduction internal fixation, knee immobilizer, revision arthroplasty if components are loose, or distal femoral replacement if there is not adequate bone stock or significant comminution is present.

**Prosthetic Joint infection**

- Occurs in 1 to 2% of primary knee replacements

- Most common pathogens: 

- Staphylococcus aureus
- Staphylococcus epidermidis

- Acute infection

- Within 6 weeks of surgery

- Chronic infection 

- After 6 weeks of surgery

- Laboratory evaluation 

- CBC
- ESR
- CRP
- IL-6
- Synovial analysis 

- WBC count 

- 27800 is the cutoff in the first 6 weeks after surgery 
- Following 6 weeks, a WBC count of 1100 is suggestive of infection


- Culture 
- Gram stain 
- Alpha-defensin

- Imaging: 

- Can demonstrate periosteal reaction, implant loosening, or osteolysis. 
- The bone scan is useful if other tests are equivocal. Its sensitivity is 99%%; however, it has very poor specificity (30 to 40%)

- Treatment: 

- IV antibiotics for 12 weeks
- In acute infections, a polyethylene liner exchange in addition to synovectomy and irrigation and debridement can be attempted. 

- 50 to 55% success rate 


- In chronic infections or those that have failed other treatments, a two-stage revision is recommended and is the gold standard in the United States. In Europe, a one-stage revision is routinely performed. 
- Two-stage revision involves the placement of an antibiotic spacer for approximately 2 to 3 months. 

- These spacers typically have 3 grams of vancomycin and 4 grams of tobramycin per 40-gram bag of cement used. 
- Spacers can be either static or articulating. 
- With a two-stage revision, repeat frozen section should be performed before reimplantation.

- Persistence of infection is demonstrated by greater than 5 PMN per hpf in 5 hpf at x400 magnification.

**Other Complication**

- Aseptic loosening

- Patellar maltracking

- Extensor mechanism disruption

- Instability

- Stiffness

- Patellar clunk

- Vascular injury

- Peroneal nerve palsy

- Wound complications

- Metal hypersensitivity reaction

- Heterotopic ossification