Initial evaluation of the patient with a chronic cough should include a detailed history, a focused physical examination, and CXR. Patients who smoke are advised to quit smoking, and those who are taking an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor should switch to medication from another drug class. Sequential empirical therapy is advised before embarking on extensive workup. The most common causes of chronic cough in adults are UACS, asthma, and GERD, alone or in combination. If UACS is suspected, a trial of nasal saline rinses, a decongestant, a first-generation antihistamine, and nasal steroids is recommended. Further tests like sinus CT scanning and nasopharyngoscopy are spared for non-responders. The diagnosis of asthma should be confirmed based on clinical response to inhaled bronchodilators and/or corticosteroids. Empiric treatment for GERD with diet, lifestyle modification, and proton-pump inhibitors for three months should be prescribed before considering 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring. NAEP is treated with inhaled steroids if sputum or BAL testing is showing greater than 3% eosinophils. After a period of targeted treatment, patients with a persistent cough are subjected to further investigations like chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scanning, bronchoscopy, and echocardiography. For cases with no clear etiology after an extensive work-up, CHS is the most likely explanation. A trial of antitussive drugs like dextromethorphan or gabapentin that can down-regulate cough reflex sensitivity can be used. Another less common possibility is a psychogenic cough, and it is also a diagnosis of exclusion.