History should first include a thorough personal medical history. The diabetes diagnosis characteristic of MODY occurs in adolescence or early adulthood. Therefore details surrounding their diabetes diagnosis become of utmost importance. Also, birth history can provide some helpful information if known. Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) is seen in those with HNF1B (MODY 5) in addition to some congenital abnormalities such as renal and urogenital tract anomalies as well as pancreatic hypoplasia. Those with the HNF4A (MODY 1) subtype may have a history of a birth weight generally more than 800gr above normal, as well as transient neonatal hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. GCK (MODY 2) patients may have had a history of mild fasting hyperglycemia at birth. Finally, some of those with HFN1A (MODY 3) may have had transient neonatal hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.

Family history is vital and provides some of the most useful information. Patients with MODY have a strong family history of diabetes spanning at least 3 generations. Details surrounding the diabetes diagnosis for each family member should include the age of onset, their body habitus at diagnosis, and history of insulin use. Information on prior genetic testing in the family can be very helpful.

Physical examination does not provide any specific information guiding one to the diagnosis of MODY or a specific subtype. Even though those with MODY are characteristically of normal weight, obesity in these patients can coexist.