There are several muscles balancing the actions of the MP joint. The extrinsic and intrinsic hand muscles function in flexion and extension respectively. The intrinsic muscles acting on the MP joint include the abductor pollicis brevis, adductor pollicis, dorsal interosseus, palmar interosseus, flexor digiti minimi, flexor pollicis brevis, and lumbrical muscles.

The flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum profundus muscles are the flexors of the MP joint. The flexor digitorum superficialis muscle produces more torque at the metacarpophalangeal joint than the flexor digitorum profundus muscle.  Compared to the flexor digitorum profundus, the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle crosses fewer joints and is less likely to lose tension as it shortens. The flexor pollicis brevis flexes the thumb MP joint.

The dorsal interosseous muscles function primarily in MP joint abduction. The abductor pollicis brevis and abductor digiti minimi muscles perform similar functions at the thumb and pinky respectively. The palmar interosseous muscles perform adduction of the MP joint to close spread fingers.

Thumb extension at the MP joint is a function of the extensor pollicis brevis and extensor pollicis longus muscles. Extension of the MP joint of digits 2-5 is a function of the extensor digitorum communis, extensor indicis, and extensor digiti minimi.Specifically, the extensor indicis and extensor digiti minimi muscles extend the MP joints at the index and little fingers respectively. The extensor digitorum communis muscle creates tension over the sagittal bands and pulls them over the proximal phalanx, to create MP joint hyperextension.