It is important to have a systematic approach to the problem of suspected cardiac arrhythmia. Understanding the significance of specific symptoms and the awareness of certain risk factors in each case enables the physician to prioritize the approach.

Diseases that are present continuously, such as hypertension, provide us with an opportunity to monitor our treatment success or at least to confirm ongoing control. On the other hand, arrhythmias usually behave intermittently and in an all-or-none fashion. The impact of the arrhythmia occurs in the midst of the arrhythmia. When not occurring, there is nothing to treat. Despite coexisting with an underlying chronic disease, an arrhythmia will emerge entirely randomly and unpredictably. We have no simple or reliable means of verifying ongoing control of arrhythmias.

Another major difference is that, while symptom severity may vary considerably, the consequence of rhythm disturbances tends to be rather binary: nuisance or death. Our strategy should be focused on the latter. Luckily, the vast majority of arrhythmias fall within the nuisance category. Atrial fibrillation is the biggest exception. It can be present continuously, and significant consequences lying somewhere between nuisance and death do exist, such as stroke, heart failure, and dementia.

Once the approach is completed, a treatment strategy can be initiated. The approach outlined here is a suggestion, as the very first contact with a patient's arrhythmia may be the documented arrhythmia itself. Even if the patient is asymptomatic, the second step is still necessary because an action plan must be formulated if there is a risk.