**Surgery**

Complete excision to negative margins with close clinical follow-up is recommended for granular cell tumors in nearly all locations, whether benign or malignant.

**Chemotherapy and Radiation Therapy**

The current understanding is that there is a limited role for chemotherapy and radiation therapy. There have been rare case reports of these modalities being used with some success on patients with malignant tumors and metastatic disease on presentation.

**Management in the Gastrointestinal Tract**

In the gastrointestinal tract, it is important to follow up on the initial endoscopy with endoscopic ultrasound in order to assess tumor size, location, and anatomic depth of invasion. This will determine treatment modality. In contrast to other locations, asymptomatic esophageal granular cell tumors less than 1 cm can be monitored with follow-up endoscopic ultrasounds. Tumors greater than 1 cm, lesions causing symptoms, rapidly growing nodules, or those suspicious for malignancy are resected. Endoscopic mucosal resection is used to resect benign tumors under 2 cm, while submucosal endoscopic resection is used for benign tumors between 2 to 3 cm in the submucosa. Conventional open surgery or video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery are pursued tumors located in the muscularis propria, large or malignant lesions, and in the presence of other contraindications to endoscopic resection.

In the colon, endoscopic mucosal resection or endoscopic submucosal dissection are also the best strategies for benign tumors under 2 cm. Some authors recommend endoscopic submucosal excavation for benign tumors up to 5 cm with traditional surgery reserved for those greater than 5 cm and for malignant lesions. Others recommend polypectomy for anything under 4 cm, while some recommend colectomy for any lesion greater than 2 cm.