Omphalocele can be associated with several syndromes; the most common is Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by macrosomia, enlarged tongue, neonatal hypoglycemia, ear creases and pits, hemihypertrophy, visceromegaly, umbilical hernia, embryonal tumors, omphalocele, nephrocalcinosis, medullary sponge kidney disease, cardiomegaly, and nephromegaly. Traditionally, macrosomia, macroglossia, and hypoglycemia are noted in the neonatal period. Hemihyperplasia is noted in segmental regions of the body or specific organs.

Other syndromes associated with omphalocele include the following:

- Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome): Small eyes, cleft lip and palate, microcephaly, cryptorchidism, polydactyly, hypertelorism, micrognathia, cutis aplasia, and external ears anomalies.

- Trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome): Dolichocephaly, external ear anomalies, micrognathia, short palpebral fissures, small face, clenched fist with overriding fingers, hypotonia, and rocker bottom feet.

- Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome): Hypotonia, upslanting palpebral fissures, brachycephaly, low set ears, single palmar crease, flat nasal bridge, Brushfield spots around the iris, in-curved fifth digits, and a gap between the first and second toes.

- Pentalogy of Cantrell: Ectopia cordis, midline supraumbilical abdominal defect, sternal cleft, and intracardiac defect.

- Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome: Craniosynostosis, dolichocephaly, hypertelorism, exophthalmos, strabismus, elongated fingers and limbs, umbilical and abdominal hernias.

- Charge syndrome: Coloboma, heart defect, choanal atresia, growth or developmental retardation, genital abnormality, and ear anomalies.

- Cloacal exstrophy (OEIS) syndrome: exstrophy of the bladder, imperforate anus, spinal defects.

- Carpenter syndrome: Kleeblattschadel skull deformity (trilobed cloverleaf skull) from pancraniosynostosis, syndactyly in the hands and feet, and mental retardation.

- Marshall-Smith syndrome: Prominent forehead, shallow orbits, blue sclerae, depressed nasal bridge, micrognathia, accelerated skeletal maturation, respiratory difficulties, mental retardation.

- Meckel-Gruber syndrome: Occipital encephalocele, cleft lip and palate, microcephaly, microphthalmia, abnormal genitalia, polycystic kidneys, and polydactyly.