A FAST exam should be used in hemodynamically unstable patients to assess the degree of trauma and bleeding rapidly. It is understood in the developed world that a CT scan will follow a negative FAST evaluation of a trauma patient with a suspicion of intraabdominal trauma unless other operative or management priorities must be addressed first. Where a CT scan is unavailable in a reasonable timeframe, such as in some areas in the developing world or similar settings, diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL) can be considered as the next step after negative FAST. CT scan of the abdomen has traditionally been performed with oral and/or intravenous (IV) contrast to assess the degree of injury, although there has been a recent movement toward consideration of ingested contrast as no longer mandatory in the CT scanning of trauma patients with suspected intraabdominal injuries. The IV contrasted spleen is significantly different in appearance on CT than similar images obtained without IV contrast. If IV contrast is not used (as of 2017), it is understood that even with modern multi-detector CT scanning, very significant splenic injuries could be missed by the lack of image optimization. CT findings may include hemoperitoneum, hypodensity, and contrast blush or extravasation. Contrast blush and extravasation are predicted to fail to appear in the absence of adequate IV contrast enhancement of the spleen images. Assessment of vital signs is imperative to monitor hemodynamic status. Repeat CT scans are not indicated in hemodynamically stable patients. Follow-up studies are indicated as needed for patients whose clinical status changes. Plain films and MRI offer limited value and are not indicated for the evaluation of splenic trauma.