The exact cause of porcelain aorta is still elusive, but two pathophysiological processes have been described in the pathogenesis of this condition. These mechanisms allowed us to divide porcelain aorta into the following two entities:

**Atherosclerotic Porcelain Aorta**

It is characterized by calcification of tunica intima of the aortic wall due to atherosclerotic plaques development. These atheromatous lesions are induced by an inflammatory endothelial injury that activates the endothelial cells to express adhesion molecules that attract inflammatory cells, mainly monocytes and T lymphocytes, into the subendothelial intima. These monocytes undergo a specific differentiation into macrophages, which phagocytose the modified lipoproteins producing foam macrophages. The activated macrophages secrete cytokines to recruit more inflammatory cells and growth factors that induce the proliferation of inflammatory cells and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and endothelial cells. In turn, these factors stimulate the migration of VSMCs from the tunica media into the tunica intima.

The intimal VSMCs proliferate and ingest lipoproteins forming lipid-laden VSMCs. The layers of foam macrophages and lipid-laden VSMCs are collectively known as fatty streaks, which are recognized as an early sign of stable atherosclerosis. The advanced, stable atherosclerosis is characterized by further enlargement of fatty streaks and secretion of extracellular matrix proteins by VSMCs, forming a fibrous cap covering the lesion. This matrix is followed by apoptosis of foam macrophages, leading to necrosis of VSMCs and degradation of extracellular matrix proteins, thus producing a necrotic core associated with the advanced unstable lesion. The destabilization of atheromatic plaques increases the liability of rupture, resulting in platelet accumulation at the site of rupture and the formation of atherothrombosis that occludes the artery.

**Nonatherosclerotic Porcelain Aorta**

In this type, calcification occurs in the tunica media of the aortic wall in the absence of atherosclerosis. It is induced by vascular inflammation, radiation, and uremia via triggering a metaplastic transformation of VSMCs into osteoblasts leading to the production of bone-associated proteins such as alkaline phosphatase, bone sialoprotein, bone GLa protein, and bone morphogenic protein 2. In cases of vascular inflammation and aging, apoptotic vesicles arising from dead VSMCs, and elastin degradation mediated by matrix metalloprotease will act as a nidus for medial calcification by sending a paracrine osteogenic signal that will provoke the aortic calcium deposition as well as the collagen deposition and loss of the elastic fibers causing an arterial wall stiffness.