Hodgkin lymphoma has unique neoplastic cells in both the classical and NLP-HL types. Reed-Sternberg (RS) cell is a neoplastic, large multinucleated cell with two mirror-image nuclei (owl eyes) within a reactive cellular background. The RS cell is pathognomonic for classical HL. RS cells are derived from germinal center B cells with mutations of the IgH-variable region segment. The RS secrete cytokines to recruit reactive cells that include IL-5 and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). The RS cell is usually aneuploid with no consistent cytogenetic abnormality. Clonal Ig gene rearrangements have been found in the majority of isolated RS cells. Immunohistochemistry stains for RS cells are positive for CD30, CD15, but typically negative for CD20 and CD45 that are positive only in neoplastic NLP-HL cells. In addition to CD15 and CD30, RS cells are usually positive for PAX5, CD25, HLA-DR, ICAM-1, Fascin, CD95 (apo-1/fas), TRAF1, CD40, and CD86. There are RS cell variants that include the Hodgkin cell, mummified cells, and lacunar cells. Hodgkin cells are mononuclear RS-cell variants.

Mummified cells show condensed cytoplasm and pyknotic reddish nuclei with smudgy chromatin. Lacunar cells have multilobulated nuclei, small nucleoli, and abundant, pale cytoplasm that often retracts during tissue fixation and sectioning, leaving the nucleus in what appears to be empty space (lacune-like space).

On the other hand, NLP-HL lacks the typical RS cells but has lymphocytic and histiocytic cells, which are characterized by larger cells with folded multilobulated nuclei (also known as “popcorn cells” or LP cells). The LP cells show a nucleus with multiple nucleoli that are basophilic and smaller than those seen in RS cells. LP cells show clonally rearranged immunoglobulin genes that are only detected in isolated single LP cells. The LP cells are usually positive for C020, CD45, EMA, CD79a, CD75, BCL6, BOB.1, OCT2, and J chain.