# Continuing Education Activity

Horseshoe kidneys are the most common fusion defect of the kidneys occurring in approximately 1:500 individuals. They are characterized by abnormalities in the position, rotation, and vascular supply of the kidney. Although largely benign, they are associated with urological sequelae due largely to the associated ureteric obstruction and impaired urinary drainage. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and treatment of horseshoe kidney and highlights the roles of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the etiology of horseshoe kidneys.
- Describe the imaging modalities that can be used to evaluate for horseshoe kidneys. 
- Review potential sequelae of horseshoe kidneys.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration amongst healthcare professionals who care for patients with horseshoe kidneys.

# Introduction

Horseshoe kidneys are the most common fusion defect of the kidneys, but this still amounts to only about 0.25% of the population

# Etiology

Despite cases of familial clustering, no clear genetic cause has been described for horseshoe kidneys, although several etiological factors may contribute to their development

# Epidemiology

The incidence of horseshoe kidney is approximately 1 in 500 in the normal population with a male preponderance of 2:1

# History and Physical

Horseshoe kidneys are often asymptomatic, and so are often identified incidentally. The presentation can otherwise be non-specific with one study showing that the two most common presenting complaints of children with a horseshoe kidney are abdominal pain or symptoms of a urinary tract infection

The kidneys are normally located in the retroperitoneum between the transverse processes of T12 and L3 with the left kidney slightly more superior than the right. The upper poles are normally positioned slightly medially and posteriorly relative to the lower poles. Horseshoe kidneys are different in three main ways: location, orientation, and vasculature

# Evaluation

Horseshoe kidneys can be identified using most abdominal imaging modalities. The diagnosis of a horseshoe kidney is most commonly made using either ultrasound or CT scans

# Treatment / Management

Shockwave lithotripsy for nephrolithiasis is less effective in horseshoe kidneys due to problems localizing the energy for pelvic stones and poor stone fragment clearance due to impaired renal drainage

The use of perpendicular, alternating, biplanar fluoroscopy has been described to assist in the percutaneous approach to stones in horseshoe kidney patients. The technique allows for better visualization of stone position and the complex renal anatomy during percutaneous surgery without the need for patient repositioning or standard fluoroscopy resulting in reduced patient radiation exposure and reduced overall operating time

It is recommended that patients with horseshoe kidneys who develop stones undergo a 24-hour urine test for kidney stone prevention analysis and treatment. To be successful, this requires a high level of patient compliance on a long-term basis, but every horseshoe kidney patient who develops stones should be given the opportunity to have preventive testing as surgical stone treatment is often far more complex than in anatomically normal patients.

Management of renal cancers in horseshoe kidney patients is essentially the same as in normal patients. Traditionally, the surgical approach has been through open surgery.  Laparoscopic and robotic techniques can also be used, although the surgery will be more complex than in anatomically normal kidneys

The use of computerized 3D image modeling can help dramatically improve surgical decision-making and preoperative treatment planning as well as assist in the tailoring of the surgical approach and strategy in complex anatomical cases such as horseshoe kidneys that require surgical intervention

# Differential Diagnosis

The horseshoe kidney is one form of renal fusion abnormality. The other two main types are crossed fusion renal ectopia and a fused pelvic kidney. In a crossed renal ectopia, both kidneys are positioned on the same side of the body with one ureter crossing the midline to drain into the bladder while in a fused pelvic kidney there is a single renal mass that is drained by two ureters that do not cross the midline

# Prognosis

An isolated finding of a horseshoe kidney is generally considered benign

# Complications

About a third of all patients with horseshoe kidneys remain completely asymptomatic and are often found incidentally during imaging. The intrinsic anatomical defects present within horseshoe kidneys do predispose individuals to a number of urological sequelae due to the associated ureteric obstruction and impaired urinary drainage

# Pearls and Other Issues

Symphysiotomy, or division of the fused isthmus, was previously recommended when doing a pyeloplasty in patients with a horseshoe kidney, but this has changed due to the increased risk of infection, fistulas, leakages, and bleeding

Renal transplants can now be done using patients with horseshoe kidneys as a donor

**Summary**

Patients with horseshoe kidneys are at increased risk for UPJ obstructions, nephrolithiasis, vesicoureteral reflux, urinary tract infections, transitional cell cancers, and malignant renal tumors. Most cases are discovered serendipitously during imaging for unrelated problems, usually with ultrasound.  A CT urogram (CT of the abdomen and pelvis with and without IV contrast) is the basis for a definitive diagnosis and initial evaluation of the horseshoe kidney anatomy as well as identification of any obstruction or calculi. Judicious use of diuresis renal scans and voiding cystourethrograms are helpful in identifying UPJ obstructions and reflux that may not be clear from the CT scans alone. Percutaneous, laparoscopic and robotic surgery can now be safely performed on horseshoe kidneys but require additional planning.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Horseshoe kidneys are the most common fusion defect of the kidneys, but this still amounts to only about 0.25% of the population. Many professionals are not aware of the condition, its evaluation, or treatment. Due to its rarity, this condition is best evaluated and treated by an interprofessional team of specialty trained clinicians and nurses, and radiologists to achieve the best patient outcomes. The nursing urology specialty nurse should assist the clinician in educating the patient and family. [Level V]