Rufinamide is one of the newer generation anti-epileptic medications, which initially was granted an orphan drug status and later got FDA approval for add-on therapy for seizures associated with Lennox Gastaut syndrome in children older than > one year and in adults. American Academy of Neurology (AAN) published updates on practice parameters in treatment-resistant epilepsy in 2018, in which two Class I studies were reviewed.

For treatment-resistant adult focal epilepsy (TRAFE), three class I studies were reviewed by AAN, and updates on practice parameters were published in 2018.

For the treatment of other childhood epileptic encephalopathies other than LGS, one study found rufinamide may be an effective and better-tolerated add-on therapy for the treatment of refractory childhood-onset epileptic encephalopathies other than LGS and was the most effective in patients with drop-attacks.

To conclude, rufinamide has FDA approval and is effective for add-on therapy for seizures associated with LGS in children > 1-year-old and adults. It is also effective in TRAFE and potentially effective in other childhood epileptic encephalopathies other than LGS. It is generally well tolerated with minimal other AED drug-drug interactions. It is contraindicated in familial QT syndrome, and precautionary measures are necessary when using rufinamide with other drugs that prolong QT interval. Since no generic formulation is available to date, the drug is expensive and poses financial issues.

When using rufinamide, employing an interprofessional healthcare team approach to therapy is prudent and beneficial. This team includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists, all exercising open lines of communication and operating from the same patient data. When the prescribers initiate therapy, they should have a complete patient history to preclude familial short QT syndrome, and it is beneficial to have the nurse review dosing and alert the patient or parents regarding the potential adverse events. The pharmacists can reinforce proper dosing and administration schedules when counseling the patient and should be available to address any potential side effects, reporting these to the prescriber or nursing so remedial action can be initiated. This interprofessional team approach to care when using rufinamide (as with any therapeutic intervention) will yield improved patient outcomes and reduce adverse events and therapeutic failure. [Level 5]