An annular ligament injury is much more common in children due to the skeletal immaturity of the elbow joint during development. Three common injuries associated with the annular ligament are radial head or neck fractures, nursemaid elbow dislocations, and Monteggia fracture patterns.

A radial head or neck fracture occurs during a fall on an outstretched hand or trauma/falls with the elbow in extension and forearm in pronation. Because the annular ligament wraps around the head of the radius, a fracture in this area can lead to damage to the ligament, and could potentially compromise joint stability as a sequela of the original injury.

In pediatric patients, a radial head subluxation, also known as a nursemaid elbow or a pulled elbow, occurs due to a sudden pull on an extended arm, often when a parent lifts a child by the wrist or a fall.

Monteggia fracture-dislocations are relatively rare injuries in the pediatric population. Although forearm fractures are the most common fracture in the pediatric population, Monteggia fracture-dislocations constitute only about 1% of all pediatric forearm fractures.

The prognosis in children with Monteggia fractures is usually good with early intervention and treatment. However, several studies in the literature have focused on the long-term clinical and radiographic outcomes following surgical management of pediatric patients with delayed/missed diagnosis of Monteggia fracture-dislocations. The most commonly performed procedure includes an open reduction with ulnar osteotomy with or without annular ligament reconstruction.