Escherichia coli results in intestinal illness as well as infection outside of the intestine. Intestinal illness caused by E. coli is caused by one of five subtypes, and they are identified according to their O and H antigens. The O antigen is determined by a repeating polysaccharide chain present in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) outer membrane, and the flagellum determines the H antigen.

- ETEC causes watery diarrhea in resource-limited settings and is commonly found in food and water in areas without adequate sanitation. Approximately 100,000,000 organisms must be ingested to cause illness in a healthy person. It is the single most important organism causing traveler’s diarrhea. ETEC is also a significant contributor to dehydrating diarrheal illness in infants and children in resource-limited settings.

- EPEC was the first E. coli pathotype identified as a causative agent of watery diarrhea primarily in infants and young children in resource-limited settings and is responsible for sporadic and epidemic outbreaks.

- EAEC is a causative organism of acute and chronic watery diarrhea in resource-limited and resource-rich regions and recently has been increasingly identified as a cause of traveler’s diarrhea.

- EHEC/STEC produces Shiga-toxin and includes serotypes O157:H7, as well as others.E. coli O157:H7 from non-O157:H7 strains. EHEC/STEC infections are common across all age groups, but hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) resulting from EHEC/STEC infections is most common in children less than five years old and adults greater than 60 years old.

- EIEC-induced diarrheal illness is uncommon due in part to the relatively large inoculum required, although recent studies suggest EIEC-induced diarrhea may be underdiagnosed. EIEC is closely related to Shigella and is contracted through ingesting undercooked meats and contaminated vegetables.

Extraintestinal illness caused by E. coli results from a translocation of gut bacteria into other parts of the body or the environmental spread in hospitals and long term care facilities. E. coli is the predominant gram-negative bacteria to cause extraintestinal illness in humans and can cause urinary tract infection, abdominal and pelvic infection, pneumonia, bacteremia, and meningitis, among others.