Caring for a patient that develops CO2 narcosis can be challenging and requires an interprofessional approach to optimize patient outcome. The etiology of CO2 narcosis can be broad, and depending on the cause, can produce different challenges for the care of the patient. Each team member plays an integral role in patient care, but involvement is largely a function of the underlying cause of hypercapnia. These patients are in the intensive care unit (ICU) and require continuous monitoring by nurses. The patient has multiple needs during their care. Chiefly, their condition needs to be addressed ideally by a pulmonologist or an intensivist. Their tools to treat the patient include various modalities such as medications and ventilator management. Nurses play an essential role in these patients by constantly monitoring them, administering medications, and informing the clinicians of any changes in the patient's condition. Nutritionists are also vital to patient care to develop a diet tailored to the patient's needs. This requirement is especially crucial for the patient on a ventilator. Additionally, pharmacists must assist with medication optimization and patient education regarding the proper use of their medications. Poor medication compliance and adherence may have contributed to the patient's condition. After the patient has returned to their baseline, some patients may benefit by speaking to case management regarding living and social environments. Many patients that develop CO2 narcosis have an acute exacerbation of an underlying chronic disease state, such as COPD. These patients may become frustrated and become distressed by their chronic disease. After the condition resolves, speaking to a psychologist may improve the patient's outlook on the future and frame of mind. This is why an interprofessional team approach is needed to address these patients to achieve improved outcomes. [Level 5]

While no trial has taken place examining an interprofessional team's role in the care of CO2 narcosis, data obtained from other sources such as the National Emphysema Treatment Trial (NETT) can be useful and loosely applied as many patients with CO2 narcosis have a chronic underlying lung disease.