Those who perform non-surgical rhinoplasty must be able to determine which patients would be better served by surgical rhinoplasty. In general, results from non-surgical rhinoplasty are typically limited in patients with a large hump, severe deviation, excessive tip rotation issues, or significant tip contour irregularities. Additionally, the surgeon should instead offer surgical correction to patients interested in undergoing a hump reduction, who have a superiorly positioned nasion.  Also, patients should recognize that “nasal reduction” cannot be performed with filler. However, specific techniques (e.g., dorsal augmentation and tip projection) may give the illusion of a thinner or narrower nose. Likewise, realistic expectations require emphasis throughout the consultation process.

Contraindications to fillers, in general, include patients with a history of autoimmune disease, bleeding disorders, and hypersensitivity to one of the filler components (e.g., lidocaine). Patients with signs of inflammation or infection near the injection site, or who are pregnant, or breastfeeding should avoid receiving injectable fillers as well. NOTE: patients with a history of frequent herpes simplex virus outbreaks (e.g., several a year) should receive prophylactic antivirals.

Non-surgical rhinoplasty should be avoided in patients who have had previous non-surgical rhinoplasty with either silicone or with an unknown injection material.

Patients with suspected or known body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) should receive a referral to psychiatry before considering non-surgical rhinoplasty because they tend to have poor satisfaction following such procedures and show a higher rate of aggression and litigation toward those performing them. The prevalence of BDD may be prevalent in up to 43% of patients who present for a cosmetic rhinoplasty consultation.

Relative contraindications to undergoing non-surgical rhinoplasty with fillers would include patients actively taking anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for increased risk of bleeding and bruising. Similarly, patients taking herbal medications and supplements such as chondroitin, ephedra, echinacea, glucosamine, ginkgo biloba, goldenseal, milk thistle, ginseng, kava, and garlic should withhold these supplements for several days before and after treatment to minimize complications (e.g., bleeding and bruising). Additionally, caution is necessary for patients with a history of nasal implants or previous rhinoplasty for fear of increased complications, including infection and tissue ischemia. For this reason, some authors propose waiting up until 12 months after a rhinoplasty to perform injections.