A standard total laryngectomy procedure encompasses the entire larynx with its attached prelaryngeal strap muscles, the hyoid bone, the thyroid lobe ipsilateral to the tumor, and the lymph nodes in the anterior or pretracheal compartment (level VI). Unilateral or bilateral neck dissections are frequently performed concurrently with total laryngectomy to remove the lateral cervical lymph nodes at levels II-IV, sometimes to include levels I and V.

The most commonly used skin incision for total laryngectomy is the Gluck - Sorenson U-shaped incision (also termed the 'apron' or 'utility' incision). The starting point of the incision is located at the tip of the mastoid, continued on the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle up to 1 to 2 cm above the upper edge of the sternal notch, and it is continued in the same way on the opposite side. If a tracheotomy were performed before this procedure, the tracheal stoma would be included in the skin incision. Flap elevation should be in the subplatysmal plane, immediately above the anterior and external jugular veins, and deep to the muscle. The vascularisation of the flap is guaranteed by the rich subdermal plexus located superficial to the muscle. The upper and lower skin flaps are elevated to get exposure from the hyoid to the suprasternal notch.

If concurrent neck dissections are planned, these are typically performed first. The digastric tendon is identified and traced anteriorly to level Ia and posteriorly to the mastoid insertion. The marginal mandibular nerve is then identified and elevated sharply off the underlying submandibular gland to preserve it. This is then performed on the contralateral side. Level Ib nodes may be removed for oncologic indication, to facilitate microvascular access to the facial vessels, or to facilitate pharyngeal closure.

Mobilization of the larynx begins superiorly by detaching the muscles attached to the upper surface of the hyoid bone. Dissection proceeds to isolate the superior thyroid artery and its superior laryngeal branch. Identification, dissection, and ligation of these vessels will minimize hemorrhage during mobilization of the larynx. The stylohyoid attachment is released, and blunt dissection of the pyriform mucosa off the deep surface of the lesser cornua of the hyoid is performed to preserve as much pharyngeal mucosa as possible.

Inferior release of the larynx is performed, with the sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles divided as low in the neck as possible. The sternal heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle are released to facilitate stomal care postoperatively. After dividing and ligating the inferior thyroid artery ipsilateral to the tumor, the thyroid isthmus is divided using two clamps and tied. This leaves the ipsilateral thyroid lobe attached to the laryngeal specimen to be included in the resection. Division of the isthmus exposes the cervical trachea allowing the release of the contralateral thyroid lobe, which is left in situ in the neck with its superior and inferior blood supply intact. The inferior constrictor muscle is detached bilaterally from the posterior edge of the thyroid cartilage using electrocautery. A Freer elevator is used to dissect in a sub-perichondrial plane on the deep surface of the thyroid cartilage to release and preserve as much mucosa as possible.

An incision is made in the anterior tracheal wall at a level dictated by the lower extent of the tumor. The trachea is divided obliquely, leaving a short anterior wall and a long posterior wall; this bevels the lateral tracheal walls superiorly to enlarge the final stoma. Next, the distal trachea is sutured to the skin edges of the chest with interrupted nylon sutures. Some surgeons will also place a permanent suture from the anterior trachea to the manubrium to relieve tension on the stomal suture line. Finally, the party wall between the proximal trachea and larynx is dissected from the cervical esophagus by sharp dissection up to the cricoid cartilage.

Lastly, entry is made in the pharynx through either the vallecula or the pyriform sinus opposite the tumor, depending on the tumor localization determined by imaging and preoperative laryngoscopy. After opening the mucosa to enter the pharynx, the mucosal incision is continued along the periphery of the larynx until the opening is large enough to permit the introduction of a retractor in the pharynx. Subsequent mucosal cuts are made under direct visualization with Metzenbaum scissors, leaving a gross margin from the visible tumor. Circumferential mucosal margins are sent for a frozen section to confirm oncologic resection.

If planned, a tracheoesophageal puncture (TEP) is performed at this time; otherwise, a cricopharyngeal myotomy is performed to maximize postoperative swallowing. If the patient does not have a gastrostomy tube, a nasogastric tube is passed under direct visualization from a naris into the pharynx and into the esophagus. This is sutured to the membranous nasal septum using a 3-0 silk. The pharyngeal defect is closed, preferably in a transverse fashion; if there is sufficient mucosa to close the neo-pharynx over the nasogastric tube, the neo-pharynx will be of sufficient caliber to permit swallowing once healed.

A continuous Connell inverting suture (true or modified) with 3-0 Vicryl closes the pharyngeal defect beginning inferiorly. Many surgeons will test for watertight closure at this time by instilling methylene blue-impregnated saline into the oropharynx with an Asepto syringe. Any leaks will be visualized and should be repaired immediately; meticulous attention at this step is required. After the closure of the pharynx, suction drains are placed lateral to the pharynx, the platysma is closed with interrupted Vicryl sutures, and the skin is closed with interrupted nylon sutures or staples.