Choosing the appropriate airway device is vital to effective airway management.

Facemask ventilation is a basic airway technique that provides oxygenation to the patient before placing an airway device. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation provides positive-pressure airway support without using an endotracheal tube. Patients can be placed on a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device or a bilevel positive airway pressure (BIPAP) device. Patients ideal for noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation are cooperative, can protect their airway, and have intact ventilatory efforts. However, noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation should be used cautiously in hypovolemic hypotensive patients; the positive pressure may cause clinical decline. In addition, if the patient has agonal or absent respiratory effort, an impaired or absent gag reflex, altered mental status, severe maxillofacial trauma, a basilar skull fracture, life-threatening epistaxis, or bullous lung disease, CPAP or BIPAP is not appropriate, and the patient should be endotracheally intubated.

Supraglottic airways are devices inserted into the oropharynx and ventilate from above the glottis. The most common type of supraglottic device is the laryngeal mask airway (LMA). A supraglottic device may be considered in difficult mask ventilation or intubation cases, and a rescue device or conduit for intubation is needed.

Endotracheal tubes are devices inserted through the nose or mouth to provide oxygenation and ventilation. The distal end of the tube is located at the mid-trachea.