Osseointegrated bone prosthesis offers a simple reversible surgical alternative to a patient interested in rehabilitating their audition without risk of further hearing loss. Patients who are candidates for this type of surgery did not tolerate hearing aids or had a contraindication to conventional hearing aids due to the anatomical deformity of the middle/outer ear or a medical condition such as chronic ear infections.

Patients with permanent single-sided conductive hearing loss surgically treated with osseointegrated bone prothesis describe that the device provides them a greater sound quality and perception in soft and louder environments with increased sound localization use of conventional hearing aids. Additionally, subjective questionnaire response has revealed that the OIBP improves patient quality of life and general well-being with a higher compliance rate, with at least 90 percent of the subjects using the device more than eight hours a day every day of the week**.**Results for patients with bilateral permanent conductive hearing loss with bilateral OIBP have superior results compared to single OIBP in a patient with bilateral conductive hearing loss. The patient reports both subjective and objective improvement in pure tone audiometry, speech discrimination in noisy and quiet environments, and sound localization, leading to increased compliance with a medical device.

Patients with single-sided deafness have been traditionally treated with the contralateral routing of signal hearing aids (CROS hearing aids) or binaural contralateral routing signal (BICROS) hearing aid. These hearing aids differ from conventional air conductive hearing aids in that a satellite microphone is placed in the affected ear and is transmitted by a wire that runs behind the head into a loudspeaker at the contralateral working ear. CROS is prescribed to a patient with normal pure tone audiometry in the unaffected ear, and BICROS is prescribed to a patient with mild sensorineural hearing loss in the less affected ear. Compliance rates are often poor due to reduced aesthetic, patient acceptance, and reduced general performance in a noisy environment. Recent studies have demonstrated the beneficial effects of osseointegrated bone conduction prosthesis surgical implantation in a patient with deaf ear with multiple controlled trials revealing that the implant provides better speech discrimination in noisy environments compared to traditional CROS hearing aid. However, neither osseointegrated bone conduction prosthesis nor CROS reported any benefits with sound localization.

Osseointegrated bone conduction prosthesis has been surgically implanted successfully in the pediatric population with unilateral or bilateral conductive or mixed hearing loss associated with congenital anomalies or chronic draining ear. However, when one considers an osseointegrated medical implant as a treatment modality for this population, it is important to state that skull thickness is not fully developed until patients are at least 5 years of age. Most patients have skull thickness less than 3mm. Guidelines for implantation in pediatric patients suggest performing surgery after 5 years of age or, in some cases, until 9 years of age. The results reveal that decreased skull thickness may lead to an increased incidence of intraoperative complications (trauma to the dura and/or sigmoid sinus) and postoperative complications (extrusion of the implant) due to failure of Osseointegration.

Compared to the adult population, pediatric patients have a higher rate of soft tissue complications due to decrease hygiene and a higher prevalence of trauma to implant among younger age groups. Results have suggested that children younger than 5 years old may benefit from a trial with conventional bone conductive hearing aids with a soft band while their skull continues to develop. However, audiometric results in the pediatric population were similar to the adult population, with an average conduction threshold improvement from 65 dB to 30 dB postoperatively. Additionally, this surgical treatment allows the patient to normally develop speech during early age while allowing the possibility to undergo reconstructive surgery in the future. Additional studies have been performed comparing early reconstructive surgery as a treatment modality for hearing loss, and OIBP and results have revealed that the average hearing gain for reconstructive surgery was 18 dB, with 93% of patients requiring further sound amplification. While patients undergoing osseointegrated bone conductive prosthesis showed an average gain of 32 dB, results discourage reconstructive surgery for means of hearing loss rehabilitation at an early age.