Zoledronate, also known as zoledronic acid, is an intravenous (IV) medication that belongs to a class of drugs known as bisphosphonates. It is an antiresorptive therapy used to treat various bone conditions, including both malignant and benign diseases.

Food and drug administration (FDA) approved indications for this agent include the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal females, osteoporosis in males, glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, Paget disease of bone, hypercalcemia of malignancy, multiple myeloma, and solid tumor bone metastases.

Non-FDA-approved indications include adjuvant therapy in breast cancer, bone loss in postmenopausal patients related to aromatase inhibitor therapy, and bone loss related to androgen deprivation therapy.

As zoledronate is administered intravenously, it can be used in patients with an intolerance or contraindication to oral bisphosphonates. It is the treatment of choice for Paget disease of bone and hypercalcemia of malignancy. Using zoledronate as initial therapy in preventing postmenopausal osteoporosis is also appropriate in patients with very high fracture risk.

The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists defined very high fracture risk in the 2020 postmenopausal osteoporosis guideline. A patient is said to be at a very high fracture risk if at least one of the following is present, including

- Postmenopausal with a history of multiple fractures

- The presence of a fracture within the preceding 12 months

- Fracture(s) despite being on appropriate osteoporosis treatment

- Fracture while on a drug known to cause skeletal harm

- T-score less than -3.0

- High fall risk, history of a fall resulting in an injury, or a very high risk of a fracture using a validated fracture risk algorithm