Ossiculoplasty may be performed in the setting of IV sedation/ local anesthesia or general anesthesia, depending on whether other otologic procedures are planned.  If surgical eradication of middle ear or mastoid disease (tympanomastoidectomy) is planned, general anesthesia is administered in conjunction with intraoperative facial nerve monitoring.  If the plan is to restore ossicular continuity in an ear without active disease, for example, in a planned staged ear surgery, the tympanomeatal flap may be raised and ossiculoplasty performed under IV sedation/ local anesthesia.

The ear is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. Access to the middle ear cavity can be obtained either through the transcanal or postauricular approach.  In either approach, a tympanomeatal flap is raised to expose the middle ear and access the ossicular chain. The postauricular approach is better suited for patients who have a narrow external auditory canal or prominent bony prominences where a transcanal approach would be made difficult or if a concurrent mastoidectomy is planned.

Local anesthetic containing a vasoconstricting agent (for example, 1% lidocaine with 1: 100,000 epinephrine) is injected into the ear canal in both approaches to promote local anesthesia and hemostasis.  This is done under direct visualization of the operating microscope to precisely deliver the injection into the ear canal at the bony-cartilaginous junction in the subperiosteal plane to result in a diffuse blanch.

**Transcanal Approach**

The tympanomeatal flap is elevated via a transcanal approach by making two 8 mm radial longitudinal incisions lateral to the annulus superiorly at the tympanosquamous suture line (12 o’clock) and inferiorly (6 o’clock). The two incisions are joined by a transverse incision laterally to form a medially-based U-shaped flap. The canal skin and periosteum are then elevated in continuity with the fibrous annulus, which is then raised out of its bony groove. The tympanomeatal flap is then reflected forward to access the posterior mesotympanum and ossicles.

**Postauricular Approach**

Ossiculoplasty in the setting of chronic ear surgery usually occurs as the last step after tympanomastoidectomy and removal of obstructive or cholesteatomatous disease.  In this case, the middle ear will be already widely exposed, and ossiculoplasty will be performed along with eardrum grafting (tympanoplasty).  If tympanomastoidectomy is not performed and a posterior auricular approach is chosen, ear canal incisions, similar to that described for the transcanal approach, are created that would allow a tympanomeatal flap to be raised.

A posterior auricular incision is created and carried down to the plane lateral to the temporalis fascia. An incision through the musculoperiosteum is created along the temporal line and another perpendicular musculoperiosteal incision posterior to the cartilaginous ear canal toward the mastoid tip.  The anterior-based musculoperiosteal flap created from these incisions is elevated toward the membranous ear canal and entry is made into the bony ear canal. The posterior canal skin of the bony canal is elevated medially until the tympanomeatal flap incisions are reached.  A Perkins retractor is used to retract the auricle and posterior canal skin forward. The tympanomeatal flap can now be raised and the middle ear entered.  If ear canal patency is compromised by an anterior canal wall bulge or hypertrophic tympanic ring, the canal skin overlying the bony prominence is elevated and reduced with an otologic drill until adequate access to the middle ear is obtained.

**Prosthesis Placement**

Once the middle ear cavity is accessed and exposed, the ossicles are inspected for any defects and gently palpated to assess for mobility and continuity.  Identify the most appropriate ossicular reconstruction solution (autologous vs. synthetic/artificial). Stapes footplate mobility is essential for hearing success. If the stapes capitulum is intact, a PORP can be used. If the stapes footplate is intact and mobile, a TORP can be used. The platform of the TORP or PORP can be positioned under the manubrium or undersurface of the native or grafted tympanic membrane. Autologous cartilage is harvested from either the tragus or conchal bowl to be used as a shield or cap over the prosthesis platform to prevent prosthesis extrusion. If the manubrium is intact but medialized or foreshortened, the tensor tympani tendon should be transected and the manubrium lateralized to better accommodate the ossicular reconstruction.

The prosthesis is then trimmed to a length that would span the distance from the mobile stapes superstructure or footplate medially to the tympanic membrane or manubrium laterally.  The prosthesis length must be trimmed to the length that accounts for the thickness of the cartilage shield or cap that will lie on the prosthesis platform.  The final placement of the prosthesis should result in good stability and not prone to dislocation or displacement. Gelatin sponge soaked in ototopical antibiotic drops can be used to pack around the reconstruction to provide additional prosthesis stability. Some metallic prostheses feature a crimpable cage that can be affixed to the capitulum for further stabilization.

The tympanomeatal flap or grafted tympanic membrane is then placed over the cartilage-prosthetic complex. Antibiotic-soaked gelatin sponge is then placed lateral to the tympanic membrane or graft to secure its position.

Postoperatively, patients are seen 1 week after surgery. Antibiotic drops are started at the first postoperative visit for a 3-week course. Thereafter, the canal is carefully debrided free of all packing material. Audiometry is performed 3 months after surgery to assess hearing results.