**Therapy Selection**

Given the different therapies available for SUDs, therapists must individualize treatment to the patient's needs. One way of guiding therapy selection is carefully considering the patient's stage of change. Prochaska's transtheoretical stages of change categorize patients into different stages of behavioral change: pre-contemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance.

Knowing which stage the patient most closely falls into can help the therapist decide which therapeutic processes can be most beneficial. For example, patients in the pre-contemplation stage, without immediate intention to change behavior, may benefit from substance use education and motivation-enhancing therapies. Likewise, the same patients would be less likely to benefit from action-oriented therapies like cognitive-behavioral therapy. Forcing behavioral change on patients in the pre-contemplation stage will likely drive them away from treatment.

The therapist should carefully consider the patient's values and needs and remember that most patients will likely not be immediately ready to create an action plan for change. Broadly aimed therapies like network therapy that bring together multiple schools of therapy simultaneously to treat patients, for instance, individual CBT and psychodynamic therapy while also utilizing a family and peer-based approach to build a support network, have great potential but may also be challenging to provide financially and logistically. The patient's needs, preferences, and readiness for change will dictate the optimal choice of treatment modalities. However, treatment availability will often impose limitations.