High PVR relative to systemic vascular resistance is essential to normal intrauterine fetal circulation. Fluid-filled alveoli and hypoxia-induced pulmonary vasoconstriction in the presence of circulating vasoconstrictors such as endothelin-1 and thromboxane maintain high PVR in the fetal phase Lak. Conversely, circulating levels of vasodilators such as nitric oxide and prostaglandins are low.

During normal transition after birth, several events occur simultaneously, which results in a smooth transition to extrauterine life. A drastic fall in pulmonary arterial pressure following the first breath accompanies increased pulmonary blood flow when the umbilical cord is clamped. The increased partial pressure of oxygen and the initiation of ventilation also stimulate the production of vasodilators such as nitric oxide and prostacyclins; cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) mediate pulmonary vasodilation through endothelial nitric oxide.

Cyclooxygenase enzyme mediates the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostacyclin and is a rate-limiting enzyme. COX-1 is found in the lung and is upregulated when the fetus reaches term gestation. Prostacyclins increase cAMP levels which in turn cause vasorelaxation by decreasing intracellular calcium concentration. Nitric oxide - cyclic guanosine monophosphate (NO- cGMP) and nitric oxide- cyclic adenosine monophosphate (NO-cAMP) pathways are extensively studied in the pathophysiology of persistent fetal circulation.

Persistent pulmonary hypertension in the newborn is categorized into three types:

- Maladaptation: abnormal pulmonary vascular response in lung parenchymal disorders such as meconium aspiration syndrome

- Underdeveloped vasculature: decreased pulmonary vasculature as seen in small for gestational age or oligohydramnios

- Idiopathic persistent pulmonary hypertension in the newborn, likely due to excessive pulmonary vascular smooth muscle thickness

These categories can overlap in any given condition.

High PVR decreases pulmonary blood flow. This causes ventilation-perfusion mismatch and right to left shunting of blood across the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus resulting in refractory hypoxemia. Extra-cardiac shunting across patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) results in more than a 10% differential between pre and post-ductal saturations.

Infants with persistent pulmonary hypertension are vulnerable to wide swings in oxygen saturation and increased left to right shunting with minimal stimulation and agitation.