Locus coeruleus involvement is implicated in processes such as depression, anxiety, Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and even opiate withdrawal. Medications such as norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (NRI), norepinephrine dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRI), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), and alpha-2 agonists act on neurons in the locus coeruleus. Understanding the locus coeruleus can help in finding the best treatment option for many neurological disorders. Bipolar depression is one of many psychiatric illnesses that are difficult to treat. One study observed that when fluoxetine (an SSRI) was administered independently, the LC decreased firing. Administering olanzapine (an atypical antipsychotic) with fluoxetine increased the firing of the locus coeruleus and the levels of norepinephrine release, which helped reduce the overall symptoms of bipolar depression. Increased LC activation has implications in the process of opiate withdrawal. Clonidine is an alpha-2 agonist that acts on receptors within the LC and decreases the activity of noradrenergic neurons. This decrease in activation of the LC can help ameliorate the symptoms of withdrawal. Other neural mechanisms may be involved in opioid withdrawal; however, more research is necessary. There have been many strides towards the advancement in medicine and understanding neural mechanisms. Medicine is a continually evolving field, and further research is required to gain an understanding of LC involvement in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders. Understanding the structure and function of the LC helps determine the best treatment of many neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases that afflict the general population.