Stenosis or occlusion of the iliofemoral arterial system restricts the flow of blood to the lower extremity. Depending on the patient's activity level, those with arterial occlusive disease of the external iliac artery may have no symptoms or pain in the lower extremity muscles with walking. The most common disease-causing external iliac artery occlusive disease is atherosclerosis. Fibromuscular dysplasia can also cause external iliac artery stenosis and should be considered in symptomatic patients who do not have cardiovascular risk factors.

Endofibrosis of the external iliac artery causes stenosis leading to leg pain and activity limitations in some avid cyclists. Histologically an endofibrotic lesion has a loose connective tissue matrix and a medium to high cell density, in contradistinction to an atherosclerotic lesion.

Most kidney transplants involve an anastomosis between the end of the donor's renal artery and the side of the recipient’s external iliac artery. Although the internal or external iliac artery can be used to perfuse a donor's kidney, the use of the external iliac had a lower incidence of post-operative erectile dysfunction in a 2015 study.

A persistent sciatic artery represents a congenital vascular anomaly that can involve aplasia of the external iliac artery. A persistent sciatic artery is classified as complete or incomplete. In patients with a complete persistent sciatic artery, the sciatic artery is the primary blood supply to the lower extremity and the external iliac artery is absent. This anatomy results in the confusing exam finding of an absent femoral pulse and a palpable popliteal pulse. An incomplete persistent sciatic artery partially communicates with a hypoplastic common femoral artery. Limb threatening complications of persistent sciatic artery include arterial thrombosis and aneurysm formation.

Isolated iliac artery aneurysms are rare compared to abdominal aortic aneurysms and combined aortoiliac artery aneurysms. Case series in the literature suggests that less than 10% of all isolated iliac artery aneurysms occur in the external iliac artery.