A detailed evaluation should be done in patients with azoospermia. The evaluation includes a complete medical, sexual, and surgical history of the patients. A detailed history regarding trauma to the genital organs, drug allergies, medication history (gonadotropins, toxins), chemotherapy, pesticide, and radiation exposure must be taken. The history of genitourinary infections and sexually transmitted diseases must be evaluated in detail.

Physical examination of the patient of azoospermia is also essential. The patient should be examined in both the supine and standing positions. The room temperature should ideally be 36 to 37 degrees Celsius (96.8 to 100.4 F) which is quite warm.

The patient should be examined for varicocele. The grading of varicoceles is related to the progression of the disease and helps in determining the further treatment plan for the disease.

Examination of the male genitalia is particularly important. Testes must be palpated, and their length, width, and volume should be noted. A decrease in the size of the testes is associated with impaired spermatogenesis.

The vas deferens and epididymis need to be palpated bilaterally, and their consistency noted. The absence of one or both vas deferens should be carefully noted. (Such an absence is often associated with a cystic fibrosis gene mutation.) A digital rectal examination is essential to rule out any mass and further evaluate the prostate gland's size and consistency. The seminal vesicles may be prominent and felt in ejaculatory duct obstruction.