The breast lies on the anterior thoracic wall and is composed of skin, subcutaneous tissue, and breast tissue. Approximately two-thirds of breast tissue rests on the pectoralis major muscle, while the remaining one-third lies on the serratus anterior muscle as well as the upper portion of the oblique. There are two layers of fascia, including the superficial fascia, which is found deep to the dermis, as well as the deep fascia, which lies just anterior to the pectoralis major muscle fascia. This anatomy is important during a mastectomy as an essential principle of this technique involves removing the breast tissue with adhered pectoralis fascia to prove a complete resection.****

The anatomic boundaries of the breast are the second rib superiorly and the sixth rib inferiorly. The medial boundary is the lateral border of the sternum, and the lateral boundary is the midaxillary line. Often, the tissue of the breast can extend into the axilla; this is known as the axillary tail of Spence.

The blood supply of the breast originates from three major arteries. The first arterial route accounts for approximately 60% of the breast’s blood supply. It originates from the anterior perforating intercostal arteries, which initially arise from the internal thoracic artery or internal mammary artery. These vessels are responsible for supplying the medial and central portions of the breast. An additional 30% of the blood supply to the breast originates from branches of the lateral thoracic artery, which is an extension of the axillary artery, as well as the pectoral branches of the thoracoacromial artery, which supplies the upper outer quadrant. Lastly, the remainder of the breast receives its blood supply from branches of the posterior intercostal arteries. The subdermal plexus supplies the breast skin. Maintenance of the integrity of the internal thoracic artery is important for the nipple-areolar complex due to its perforating branches and anterior intercostal branches. Venous drainage of the breast follows the arterial supply. Drainage is towards the axilla and consists of three main veins. These include the perforating branches of the internal thoracic vein, the perforating branches of the posterior intercostal veins, as well as the tributaries of the axillary vein.

The major sensory innervation supplying the breast derives from the lateral and anterior cutaneous branches of the second through sixth intercostal nerves. An additional nerve to note is the intercostobrachial nerve, which originates as a lateral cutaneous branch of the second intercostal nerve. This nerve is responsible for supplying sensory innervation to the medial aspect of the upper arm, and surgeons generally encounter it during axillary dissection. Other nerves include the thoracodorsal nerve, which supplies the latissimus dorsi and can lead to “winged scapula” if inadvertently transected during surgery.

In the breast, the majority of lymphatic drainage is through the axilla.  The remainder of the breast (i.e., medial aspect) drains via lymphatics traveling along the perforating branches of the internal mammary artery.  In breast surgery, there are three levels of lymph nodes recognized, and these get labeled according to the relationship with the pectoralis minor. Level I lymph nodes are located lateral to the pectoralis minor. Level II lymph nodes are superficial and deep to the pectoralis minor.  Interpectoral, or Rotter’s nodes, are considered level II lymph nodes. Level III lymph nodes are present medial to the pectoralis minor.