**Delivery Techniques**

There are several modalities of delivery of enteral feeds. Traditionally, enteral feeding should be started about 12 to 24 hours after the placement of PEG. This is to allow for a better seal to develop at the site of insertion of the PEG tube.

**Bolus Intermittent Feeding with a Bulb or Syringe**

Enteral feeding is delivered about 100 to 400 ml over 5 to 10 minutes. It is mostly used in ambulatory settings. The risk of aspiration is high.

**Cyclic Intermittent Feeding**

This method is used for patients in a semi-recumbent position. Enteral feeding is delivered via a pump or gravity. Enteral feedings are delivered over an 8- to 16-hour period.

**Intermittent Drip**

This is popular for home enteral feeding. Approximately 1.5 to 2 liters of feeding can be delivered over an 8 to 16 hours period overnight. Feeding is delivered via gravity or pump.

**Constant Infusion**

This method is used for bedridden patients. Feeding is usually delivered via gravity or pump. The head is inclined at an angle of 45% to reduce aspiration or regurgitation.

There are four techniques for jejunostomy placement: open surgical technique (longitudinal or transverse Witzel), laparoscopic technique, needle catheter technique, and percutaneous technique. Although the preferred technique depends on the type of patient and the surgeon's expertise, minimally invasive techniques are the standard of care.

**Open Surgical Technique**

The patient is prepped and draped with sterility. An exit site is chosen in the LUQ, preferably a few centimeters away from the midline. A stab incision is made and dissected with tonsil forceps. A loop of proximal jejunum is delivered into the wound. A diamond-shaped purse-string suture is tied to the antimesenteric border of the jejunal loop, and a small incision is given in the center of the suture, large enough to accommodate the jejunostomy tube. The tube is inserted into the jejunum with care to ensure enough tube length into the jejunum to prevent the backflow of tube feeds. The purse-string suture is secured tightly without kinking the tube.

The Witzel technique is used to prevent extravasation of enteric contents at the exit site of the jejunostomy tube. This involves placing the tube along the length of the bowel for about 5 cm proximally and creating a serosal tunnel to imbricate the tube into position. The serosal tunnel is created by taking perpendicular Lambert sutures with 3-0 silk on either side of the tube. Once the tube is delivered through the abdominal wall, the jejunal loop is attached to the abdominal wall with seromuscular sutures. This is done to prevent bowel obstruction or volvulus.

**Laparoscopic Technique**

It is a minimally invasive approach and preferred modality with the current advancement of technology. The patient is placed in a supine position initially. After creating the pneumoperitoneum and visual entry into the abdomen, the ligament of Treitz is visualized by upward retraction of the bowel and removal of the omentum. The patient is kept in a reverse Trendelenburg position to allow the bowel to be traced. The jejunum is traced from the ligament of Treitz for 1-2 ft, and a site is chosen, which may be adhered to the abdominal wall. Four seromuscular sutures in the shape of a diamond are placed on the antimesenteric border of the jejunum. The loose ends of the sutures are used to pull the jejunum to the corresponding site over the abdominal wall. A percutaneous needle enters the jejunum, and a guidewire is passed into the jejunum. The opposite side of the abdominal wall is inspected to ensure the guidewire has not passed through. Using serial dilators, the skin and subcutaneous tissue are dilated to make a track for the passage of the jejunostomy tube with a stent. Once the tube is in position, the stent is removed, and the balloon is inflated. The tube is secured, and laparoscopic incisions are closed with sutures and glue.

**Needle Catheter Technique**

This technique is often used as part of laparotomy with major gastrointestinal resection. A submucosal tunnel is created through the anti-mesenteric well of the jejunum with a needle catheter after its introduction into the abdominal cavity. The tunnel should be about 4-5 cm. This prevents the development of a fistula after the placement of the tube. The catheter is introduced through the needle and sutured to the jejunal wall with a purse-string suture. Finally, the jejunum is attached to the peritoneal lining with sutures. Tube feeds can be started soon after surgery, within 6-12 hours.

**Percutaneous Technique (Direct Percutaneous Endoscopic Jejunostomy)**

Percutaneous insertion is done with the help of endoscopy. An enteroscope or colonoscope is passed into the jejunum. Transillumination of the tip of the scope is used to identify the position of the endoscope over the abdominal wall. A trocar is inserted through the abdominal wall into the jejunum, and a guidewire is passed distally into the jejunum. The tips of an awaiting snare or forceps are used to grasp the wire. A dilator is subsequently passed to create the track for the tube, and the tube is secured similarly to a 'pull-PEG' technique.