**AMGs are Used in Ophthalmology**

- As a substrate for the growth of epithelial cells

- For tectonic support in cases of small perforations and thinning of the cornea or sclera

- To cover large areas of corneal and conjunctival epithelial defects

AMG has multiple advantages over other similar materials, including pericardium, fascia, and mucous membranes.

**AMG is:**

- Easily available in large quantities

- Transparent/semi-transparent

- Nonimmunogenic

- Good substrate for epithelial cell growth

- Cosmetically acceptable

- AMG provides a smooth surface to cover raw areas

**Disadvantages of AMG include:**

- Biological membrane

- Tectonically, it is not very strong

- Possibility of infection

- Possible transmission of hepatitis, HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), and coronavirus disease (COVID-19)

**Properties of the Human Amniotic Membrane**

The outer chorion and inner amnion make up the human placenta. The amnion is 20 to 50 microns thick and has an outer cuboidal epithelium, basement membrane, and inner stroma. The stroma has an inner compact layer, a middle fibroblastic layer, and an outer spongy layer. The basement membrane of the amniotic membrane has similar properties to the conjunctival basement membrane but differs from the corneal subepithelial basement membrane and can be an effective substitute for the conjunctival basement membrane.

Lack of immunogenicity and the promotion of epithelial growth are favorable properties of AMG. AMG expresses anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, and anti-fibrotic factors.

The structural and regenerative features of AMG have been discussed in detail in the literature.

Anti-inflammatory properties of AMG are due to the secretion of many factors such as:

- Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF β)

- Fibroblast growth factor

- granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF)

- Interferon-gamma (IFNγ)

- Interleukin 1 alpha (IL-1α) and beta (IL-1β)

- Interleukin 4 (IL-4)

- IL-12p40

- IL-12p70

- IL-15

- IL-16

- IL-17

AMG also contains regulators of soft tissue healing (growth factor or GF), including:

- Basic fibroblast GF (bFGF)

- Beta nerve GF (β-NGF)

- Epidermal GF (EGF)

- Fibroblast GF 4 (FGF-4)

- Hepatocyte GF (HGF)

- Growth hormone (GH)

- Insulin-like GF 1 (IGF-I)

- Insulin-like GF-binding protein 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 (IGFBP-1,2,3,4,6)

- Platelet-derived GF AA (PDGF-AA) and BB (PDGF-BB)

- Vascular endothelial GF (VEGF)

- Transforming GF-alpha (TGF-α) and beta 1 (TGF-β1)