Many of the most deleterious adverse effects of procaine penicillin occur in the setting of inadvertent intravascular administration. These include cardiac conduction disturbance and neurologic sequelae, including tonic-clonic seizure as well as permanent neurovascular damage in the form of conditions such as transverse myelitis and gangrene requiring digital and even proximal extremity amputation. Other adverse events noted have included necrosis and sloughing at the injection site and transient psychiatric disturbance. The latter is most often observed with the administration of very high doses such as 4.8 million units IM. A syndrome related to procaine known as Hoigne syndrome has been described to include confusion, combativeness, seizures, anxiety, and a sense of impending death.

Other less frequently described adverse events include anaphylactoid reaction, Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, hemolytic anemia, superinfection at the injection site, interstitial nephritis, and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP). AGEP is a poorly understood condition that has been reported in the timeframe of two to three weeks after the initiation of therapy, resulting in fever and a desquamating rash.

Penicillin gets excreted in breast milk; therefore, appropriate caution is necessary for nursing mothers.

Animal models have shown no evidence of teratogenesis, and penicillin has not been historically observed to adversely affect the human fetus. In light of the lack of randomized trials to demonstrate safety, the manufacturer recommends administering procaine penicillin in pregnancy only if needed.