**Uterus/Cervix**

The midline and parasagittal views are utilized to demonstrate the uterus from the fundus to cervix. The addition of transverse views allow for a complete assessment of size and contour, and the anatomy can be evaluated for abnormalities such as masses, typically benign leiomyomas. The uterine endometrial cavity may show contents of variable echogenicity if obstructed (e.g., from cervical stenosis in an older woman status post radiotherapy or a child with hematometrocolpos). Otherwise, the walls are coated, and the endometrial lining is visualized with a different echogenicity than the rest of the uterus often varied by hormone levels, patient age, and time in the menstrual cycle.

**Ovaries**

The adnexa includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and their associated vasculature and soft tissue support structures. The ovaries appear almond shaped, typically lateral to the uterus and anterior to the internal iliac vasculature. Ovarian morphology, including the presence and number of contained follicles/cysts, vary with age, endocrine function, and time in the menstrual cycle. Knowledge of normal volumes for various ages are important when evaluating a patient for ovarian torsion.

**Adnexa/Other Structures**

Pelvic US can assess other structures within the pelvis. Hernias in the inguinal region or into the labia or canal of Nuck may be seen. Fallopian tubes may appear as dilated fluid-filled tubes (hydrosalpinx) due to obstruction, usually as a sequela of chronic infection. Unusually a fallopian tube may torse without concomitant ovarian torsion. Free fluid can also be demonstrated in the [abdomen and] pelvis. Triangular echoless areas particularly in the posterior cul de sac may be due to ascites or simply be physiologic fluid. Fluid with heterogeneous echogenicity or septation suggests a more complex component such as hemorrhage, infection, or proteinaceous fluid. Various other pathologies including appendicitis, diverticulitis, and gastrointestinal malignancy such as appendiceal mucoceles can also be visualized at times.

**Male Pelvis**

Ultrasound use for the male pelvis is limited. The presence of free abdominal fluid can be assessed. Undescended testes in the groin and hernias can be seen using high-frequency linear array transducers. Magnetic resonance imaging is supplanting transrectal imaging for the evaluation of the prostate and seminal vesicles. TA US can allow visualization of the dilated urethra in posterior urethral valves, and occasionally a valve itself can be seen in real time. Inferiorly angled midline views are most helpful. The transperineal US can also be utilized for the diagnosis of posterior urethral valves.