Busulfan is a medication that can be helpful but has many side effects associated with its use. Busulfan should be used by experienced clinicians due to its vast aside effects profile. The interprofessional healthcare team, e.g., clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs), nurses, pharmacists, etc., needs to effectively coordinate the treatment of patients with busulfan; it is important to monitor and repeat multiple labs. These laboratory tests include complete blood count, liver function test, pulmonary function test, and many others when the suspected side effect is suspected. When a suspected side effect seems to be present in a patient, especially during the period of allogeneic hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation, nurses and other medical staff should relay this information to the doctor. Effective interprofessional communication is key in this situation because the sooner the adverse effect is identified, the easier it will be for the clinician to treat the problem or terminate its use, which will improve patient outcomes while mitigating adverse events. [Level 5]

It is also vital to enhance the care for the many people who survive allogeneic hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation. Some predict that by the year 2030, hematopoietic cell transplantation survivors will surpass half a million in the United States. There are currently patient-centered delivery models for cancer survivors, but not for patients who have survived hematopoietic cell transplantation. This area should be a focus of research in the future with the increasing number of patients who survive hematopoietic cell transplantation, and clinicians and health care workers should always be working together to help in the survival of patients after undergoing chemotherapeutic treatments.