Because of the myriad functions of the facial nerve, its impairment may necessitate the involvement of specialists from many different fields of study during the development of a treatment plan. For any acute facial paralysis, eye care must be a priority to prevent long-term corneal complications; for this reason, early referral to an ophthalmologist for patients with incomplete eye closure is important. In some cases, a plastic surgeon or facial plastic surgeon may be able to address problems with the eye that require surgery, although monitoring of the corneal surface is still best provided by an ophthalmologist. However, a plastic surgeon or facial plastic surgeon is still likely best positioned to provide facial nerve exploration, repair, or facial reanimation services, if necessary.

A neurologist or electrophysiologist should be consulted in cases of complete hemifacial paralysis to perform electrodiagnostic testing to determine whether or not surgical repair or decompression is required. For intratemporal injuries, a neurotologist and/or a neurosurgeon should be a part of the treatment team because their knowledge and technical skills in this area of the body are critical. In the long term, a physical therapist or speech therapist can be useful for helping the patient to regain coordinated movement of the face and verbal articulation. Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, for iatrogenic injuries, the operating surgeon should remain a part of the care team because they have the most accurate information about the nature of the facial nerve injury, and including the surgeon will help to provide closure to both the patient and the surgeon.