Disruption of the gallbladder's normal physiology can result in a significant medical burden. Over 20 million Americans suffer from gallbladder disease and cholecystectomy is one of the most common surgeries performed. Many factors increase the risk for gallstone formation and gallbladder disease, with an increasing incidence as a person ages. Women are at a higher risk, accounting for about 14 million of the cases in the United States.

Knowledge of gallbladder physiology can aid in the prevention, understanding, and treatment of gallbladder disease. In clinical practice, patients can be counseled on weight loss as obesity is a risk factor for gallbladder disease. Those who have been discovered to have asymptomatic cholelithiasis can be educated on the importance of low-fat diets to decrease the incidence of biliary colic. There are many drugs that may increase the risk of gallstone formation and knowledge of these underlying mechanisms is important. For example, hormone replacement therapy containing estrogen causes increased levels of cholesterol. Somatostatin analogs such as octreotide block the release of CCK and lead to the formation of biliary sludge. Fibrates block the rate-limiting enzyme 7-alpha-hydroxylase causing increased cholesterol and decreased bile acid production. Knowledge of these mechanisms has also led to the production of drugs that can make a positive impact on a patient’s health. An example is bile acid sequestrants that prevent reabsorption of bile acids in the ileum and lead to lower cholesterol levels as the body is forced to use it as a substrate to produce new bile acids. In addition to drug side effects, providers treating patients who are undergoing prolonged periods of fasting or receiving total parenteral nutrition now appreciate that their patients are at increased risk biliary stasis due to the decreased stimulation of CCK.

Today, most cholecystectomies are performed laparoscopically as an outpatient procedure. This procedure affords a very low complication rate with a fast recovery. Despite this, expected intraoperative risks such as perforation and bleeding still exist. An uncommon complication termed post-cholecystectomy syndrome can occur postoperatively as persistent abdominal pain despite the surgery. As we garner further understanding of the pathophysiology behind gallbladder disease, more approaches can be taken that are focused on prevention to minimize morbidity and healthcare expenditure.