**Ideal OVD Properties**

- Optically transparent and clear

- Non-toxic

- Non-inflammable and nonpyrogenic

- Not insight any inflammatory reaction

- Non-immunogenic

- Sterile and free from any reaction inside the human eye

- Should have good viscosity to prevent the collapse of AC at rest

- Should have an ability of retention under pressure, should be highly cohesive with high viscosity

- Should have good endothelium protective properties with minimal surface activity

- Should be easy to remove from the anterior chamber

- Should be cost-effective

- Should not obstruct aqueous outflow

- Should be elastic and have shock-absorbing properties

- Should be liquid enough so that it can be injected through a small-bore cannula

**Stabilizing defect**- High viscosity at a low shear rate help to maintain space and protect tissues

**Mobilizing effect -**Moderate viscosity at medium shear rate help in the movement of instruments.

Low viscosity at high shear rates helps in the easy introduction into the eye through a small-bore cannula

**Physical and Rheological Properties of Viscoelastics**

**Viscosity**

It refers to the solution's resistance to flow. Higher the viscosity of a viscoelastic, better is its ability to maintain a uniform shape and difficulty in displacement. Viscosity is dependent on concentration, molecular weight, shear rate, and temperature. An ideal viscoelastic should maintain space for accurate instrumentation during the surgery. It is measured in centipoise and millipascals.

**Pseudo-plasticity**

This is a unique property of viscoelastic. It refers to the ability of viscoelastic to change from gel to a liquid under pressure. It is also defined as the ability to pass from a state of high viscosity at rest to low viscosity at high shear rates. Sodium hyaluronate has greater pseudo-plasticity than hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) and chondroitin sulfate. Sodium hyaluronate can be injected through a 30G needle, while HPMC will require a 25G needle.

**Viscoelasticity**

It is the property of a substance to retain its original form after it has been stretched and deformed. It increases with high molecular weight and increases in the chain length of the molecules. This viscoelastic property helps absorb traumatic maneuvers like shocks during phacoemulsification and the unfolding of IOL during implantation. Sodium hyaluronate has more viscoelasticity than HPMC or chondroitin sulfate.

**Rigidity**

This is also known as complex viscosity. It means the resistance felt while maneuvering the object through a viscoelastic. It is defined as the square root of the sum of squares of viscosity and elasticity.

**Surface Tension**

It is a property by which a viscoelastic coat the surface. This property is also governed by the contact angle formed by a drop of viscoelastic on a flat surface. Lower surface tension and low contact angle have better coating ability. The surface tension of sodium hyaluronate is less; hence it has a better coating ability.

**Viscoadaptability**

This is a viscoelastic property wherein it changes from a supraviscous state at a low shear rate to a fracturable (pseudo-dispersive) at a higher shear rate. Healon 5 has high viscoadaptability and has revolutionized the application of viscoelastics.

**Cohesiveness**

Cohesiveness is a property by which molecules of viscoelastics adhere to one another and form a clump. Higher the molecular weight, higher the surface tension, and higher the pseudo-plasticity, higher is the cohesiveness of a viscoelastic. Sodium hyaluronate is more cohesive than HPMC and is challenging to aspirate from the anterior chamber during surgery.

**Dispersiveness**

Dispersive viscoelastics have less tendency to adhere to each other. Viscoelastics with low molecular weight, low surface tension, and low pseudo-plasticity are dispersive viscoelastics.

**Coatability**

Higher the molecular weight of a viscoelastic, the higher the coatability. More negatively charged sodium hyaluronate and chondroitin sulfate complex has a greater affinity for positively charged instruments, tissues, and implants.

**Classification of Viscoelastics**

**Viscoelastics are classified based on the**

- Rheological Properties

- Source

**Classification based on Rheological Properties**

**Arshinoff's classification**

**S. No**

**Type**

**Examples**

**Properties**

**Advantages**

**Disadvantages**

**1.**

**Cohesives (Higher viscosity)**

****

Hyaluronic acid



High molecular weight,

High viscosity,

High pseudoplasticity,

High surface tension and

Less coatability



Help to create space



Induce and sustain pressure

Greater tendency to escape



Less corneal endothelial protection



If left in the anterior chamber can cause secondary glaucoma



**2**

**Dispersives (Lower viscosity)**

****

Hyaluronic acid

Chondroitin sulfate

Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose



Prolonged retention time, create partition spaces



Lesser tendency to escape from the anterior chamber, better protection of intraocular structures

Protect cornea in Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy patients



It is aspirated in small fragments creating an irregular viscoelastic-aqueous interface that partially obscures the view



Difficult to remove

**3**

**Viscoadaptives**

****

Hyaluronic acid



Act as cohesives under low shear stress

Also called pseudo-dispersive



Ultra-viscous cohesive (solids)



Under high fluid flow, they easily fracture, freeing pieces to float



Retained in the anterior segment similar to dispersive OVDs



**Classification According to the Source**

**S. No**

**Viscoelastic**

**content**

**Anatomical****Source**

**Colour**

**Contact****Angle**

**Pseudo-plasticity**

1

1% Sodium hyaluronate

Rooster comb

Transparent

60 degrees

High

2



2.3% Sodium hyaluronate

Rooster comb

Transparent

-

Very high

3

1.4% Sodium hyaluronate

Rooster comb

Transparent

-

Very high

4

2% Hydroxypropyl-

methylcellulose

Wood pulp

Transparent

-

Medium

5

1.2% Sodium hyaluronate

Rooster comb

Transparent

60 degrees

High

6

3% Sodium hyaluronate + 4%

Chondroitin sulfate

Bacterial Fermentation

Transparent

52 degrees

Medium

7

3% Hydroxypropyl-

methylcellulose

Wood pulp

Transparent

-

Low

8

3% Sodium hyaluronate

Rooster comb

Transparent

-

High

9

Chondroitin Sulphate

Shark fin cartilage

Yellow

-

High