Lumbosacral transitional vertebrae (LSTV) is an increasingly recognized anatomic variant of the lumbosacral joint associated with altered patterns of degenerative changes in up to 35% of the general population. LSTV is considered a congenital spinal anomaly along a morphological spectrum from partial to complete L5 sacralization and partial to complete S1 lumbarization. Sacralization is where the transverse process of the fifth lumbar vertebra fuses to varying extents with the first segment of the sacrum. Complete sacralization of L5 results in only four apparent lumbar vertebrae, with the fifth incorporated into the sacrum.

Lumbarization, in contrast, is when S1 separates from the sacrum to some degree. Complete lumbarization involves a separate S1 segment that appears as a sixth lumbar vertebra. Both have clinical consequences in terms of potential symptoms and surgical considerations. In sacralization, the height of the pars interarticularis and widths of the laminae are smaller, predisposing the patient to spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis. In lumbarization of S1, facets are smaller and often asymmetric, predisposing to accessory joints and may cause low back pain. Additionally, researchers have observed a protective effect of transitional vertebrae in which they mimic outcomes post-fusion operation.

Six variants of the sacroiliac joints have been observed: accessory joints, an iliosacral complex, bipartite iliac bony plate, crescent-like iliac bony plate, semicircular defects at the sacral or iliac side, and ossification centers.

Accessory sacroiliac joint: The accessory sacroiliac joint is found medial to the posterior superior iliac spine and lateral to the second sacral foramen, among a rudimentary transverse tuberosity. On CT imaging, accessory joints have articular surfaces that resemble osseous projects from the ilium to the sacrum. An accessory joint can be present at birth; however, they more commonly result from weight-bearing stress. Accessory joints are more commonly present in the obese and older populations, as well as a higher prevalence in women with three or more childbirths compared to 2 or fewer. Patients may present with low back pain in conjunction with degenerative changes identified on radiologic imaging, such as subchondral sclerosis, osteophytes, and ankyloses on articular surfaces.

Iliosacral complex: Iliosacral complex forms from a projection from the ilium articulating with a complementary sacral recess. These complexes can be unilateral or bilateral, and like accessory joints, these complexes exist at the posterior sacroiliac joint from the level of the first to the second sacral foramen. This variant has been seen more in older patients greater than 60 years, as well as women who are obese more so than women of healthy weight.

Bipartite iliac bony plate: Bipartite iliac bony plate is located at the posterior portion of the sacroiliac joint and appears as described, consisting of two parts and appears unilaterally.

Semicircular defects on the iliac/sacral side: The fourth variant is semicircular defects on either the sacral or iliac aspects of the articular surface of the sacroiliac joint. These can be unilateral or bilateral and, again, are present at the posterior portion of the sacroiliac joint from the level of the first to the second sacral foramen. This defect has been observed more in women than men and in patients older than 60 years.

Crescent-like iliac bony plate: The fifth variant is a crescent-like articular surface which may be present unilaterally or bilaterally. CT imaging demonstrates a crescent-like iliac plate with an accompanying bulged sacral surface. This defect is usually found at the posterior portion of the sacral iliac joint, spanning the first and second sacral foramen levels. This defect was observed only in women and, more commonly, in patients greater than 60 years old.

Ossification centers of the sacral wings: The sixth anatomical variant observed is ossification centers presenting as triangular osseous bodies located within the joint space at the anterior portion of the sacroiliac joint. This defect is found at the level of the first sacral foramen, typically unilaterally.