Review clinical history, preliminary studies, and imaging findings before the study. Obtain a single supine anteroposterior abdominal radiograph (scout image), including kidneys, ureter, and bladder. Fluoroscopic spot image is an alternative to the scout image. The x-ray is useful to evaluate the osseous abnormality, which may be associated with vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) (spina bifida is often associated with neurogenic bladder and sometimes VUR). Document if any calculus is visible along the urinary tract. The scout image is useful to ensure that the abdomen is free of contrast. The contrast from a prior study (e.g., a contrast from a barium enema) may interfere with voiding cystourethrogram (VCU) findings.

The experienced nurse or radiology assistant catheterizes the patient with aseptic precautions. The anesthetic gel minimizes pain and discomfort. The size of the catheter is usually according to the patient's age.

5 French catheter- for premature or small infants, 8- French catheter- above one year of age, > 8 French catheter- for adolescents or adults.

A smaller caliber catheter is in patients with a history of urethral stricture or recent surgery. It is useful for its easy passage into the urethra. Avoid excessive length insertion in the bladder to prevent intravesical looping of the catheter. Secure the catheter to the perineum or thigh in females. Secure it along the dorsum of the penis or symphysis in males. Avoid circumferential tapping around the glans. Reposition the foreskin of the penis to avoid paraphimosis. Drain the bladder before the study.

Connect the bottle of water-soluble to the catheter via a tube. Place the bottle at a height to allow a gravity drip of contrast. The height of the contrast bottle should be at least 3 feet above the patient's table. However, the tubing's caliber (connected to this contrast bottle) limits the pressure, and height above 3 feet is relatively unimportant. Place the bottle at a lower height in patients with recent bladder surgery to maintain lower pressure filling.

Stop the contrast filling if the patient feels pain or discomfort. Obtain fluoroscopic images of the bladder in anteroposterior, right anterior oblique, left anterior oblique, and lateral projections during early filling and when it is distended with contrast. Early filling images are useful to identify ureterocele. It is missed when the bladder is fully distended. Imaging of the full bladder is necessary to document its contour and shape. Document any wall irregularity, filing defects, or masses within the bladder. Oblique projections are useful to demonstrate grade I VUR (discussed later). A contrast-filled urinary bladder may obscure contrast reflux in the lower ureter in the supine position. Lateral imaging helps to identify urachal pathology.

Obtain anteroposterior fluoroscopic spot image in reflux occurs. Include renal fossa to evaluate the VUR grade. Record the volume of the bladder at the time of reflux. Acquire oblique images of the bladder during reflux to evaluate the insertion of the ureter into the bladder. Once the bladder is full to its maximum estimated capacity, ask the patient to void around the catheter. Adult males are more comfortable voiding while standing or when the table is tilted to 30-35 degrees. Acquire fluoroscopic spot images of the urethra when the patient starts to void.

Male patients are required to be slightly oblique during urethral imaging. It will ensure to avoid the superimposition of the pelvic bones on the urethra. Obtain frontal projection images for females. Perform lateral imaging in suspected urogenital sinus abnormality. Evaluate the images for urethral anatomy, extravasation, stricture, or fistula. Obtain renal fossa imaging immediately after voiding because VUR often occurs during or immediately after voiding.

Perform cyclical voiding to increases the possibility of VUR detection.

A catheter masks some urethral pathology in males (e.g., posterior urethral valve). Therefore obtain urethral images after removing the catheter in male patients. Ensure to fill the bladder with contrast before catheter removal. Ask the patient to void after removing a catheter. Urethral imaging after catheter removal is not necessary for a female patient.

If the patient cannot void during the procedure, he/she can go to the bathroom if the bathroom is near the exam room. Obtain a supine image of the renal fossa immediately after voiding. Record the time between the image and voiding. Obtain post-void images to evaluate post-void residue. Include renal fossa in the post-void image that is necessary to evaluate reflux occurring immediately after voiding.

The international grading system of VUR:

- Grade 1: Reflux only into the non-dilated ureter.

- Grade 2: Reflux into the ureter and the renal pelvis without dilatation.

- Grade 3: Reflux with mildly dilated ureter and pyelocalyceal system.

- Grade 4: Reflux with the tortuous and moderately dilated ureter with blunting of renal fornices. The papillary impression is preserved.

- Grade 5: Reflux with the tortuous and severely dilated ureter, dilatation of pyelocalyces with loss of fornices, and papillary impression.

Grading of VUR is not possible if urinary tract obstruction coexists (e.g., pelviureteric obstruction). Dilatation and tortuosity are not necessarily due to VUR alone. It is often due to obstruction and may overestimate VUR grade.

Management of a child with vesicoureteral reflux disease and older than one year of age is ubiquitous. Continuous antibiotic prophylaxis should be considered for the child with bladder-bowel dysfunction and VUR. In the presence of BBD, the risk of urinary tract infection increases. The following recommendations should be considered in managing an older than a one-year-old child with a UTI and VUR: 1. ultrasonography every year to monitor renal growth and exclude any parenchymal scarring, 2. Voiding cystography, either with a radionuclide cystogram or low-dose fluoroscopy, every one to two years.