Handwashing is the act of washing hands with soap, either antimicrobial or nonantimicrobial, and water for at least 15 to 20 seconds with a vigorous motion to cause friction making sure to include all surfaces of the hands and fingers.

It requires a specific skill set to ensure proper technique.

**Handwashing Technique:**

- Begin by standing in front of the sink and taking care not to touch sink surfaces with hands or uniform/lab coat.

- If hands touch sinks at any time during this process, they are considered contaminated, and you must start the process over.

- Turn on the warm water. Allow water to wet hands and wrists thoroughly.

- Remember to keep hands and forearms lower than your elbows, so cross-contamination from water running back does not occur.

- Water should flow in a manner from least to most contaminated areas such as the hands. Microorganisms get washed down the sink.

- Apply approximately 3 mL to 5 mL of an antiseptic soapy solution. Soap requires even distribution with a nice lather making sure all areas of hands receive covering in soap.

- Next, use friction or rubbing of hands and wrists for no less than 15-20 seconds to ensure the removal of germs.

- Use a timer or timed sink if available.

- This vigorous rubbing of hands and wrists will include anterior and posterior surfaces, cuticle area, underneath nails, and in between each finger.

- Leave no part of the hand or wrist untouched.

- Interlace fingers, rub palms and backs of hands at least five times each to ensure all areas have coverage.

- The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends 6 steps in hand hygiene. This includes palm to palm, right palm over the left dorsum and vice versa, palm to palm with fingers interlaced, backs of fingers to opposing palms, rubbing of thumbs and fingertips.

- Rinse hands and wrists making sure all soap has been successfully washed off.

- When rinsing off water remember to keep hands down and elbows up, then dry hands and wrists entirely with clean or disposable towels.

- Throw towels away if disposable or place in the appropriate place/hamper/bin without coming into contact with these objects.

- The end of handwashing will involve making sure you do not recontaminate your hands by touching the sink or faucet handles to turn the water off. Once hands are washed and dried, use a towel to turn off the water and then dispose of it in the appropriate container.

- Surgical sinks/handwashing stations have timers such as in trauma bays that automatically shut off at specific time intervals. These guard against recontamination of hands/wrists by ensuring there is no need to turn the water off manually.