The pelvic girdle is a bony ring comprised of several elements that ultimately form the hip bones and sacrum. The single sacrum is formed from five once-separate sacral vertebrae that typically fuse in adolescence or adulthood. The paired hip bones, also known as the os coxae or innominate, are composed of three once-independent bones that fuse later in life: the ilium, ischium, and pubis. Each hip bone has an articulation with the sacrum, the femur, and the contralateral side. The hip bones serve to resist biomechanical forces in sitting and standing, serve as a muscle attachment site for muscles of the trunk and lower limb, transfer weight between the axial and inferior appendicular skeleton, and protect and support the abdominal and pelvic viscera.

The structure of the pelvis in both size and shape differs between males and females. Females tend to have a broader pelvic inlet and outlet. Additionally, the height of the ilia, the shape and dimensions of the sacrum, the subpubic angle, the angle of the greater sciatic notch, and several other features of the pelvis are of utility in sex determination in recovered skeletons or forensic studies.

**Lumbosacral Complex**

The most superior of the pelvic joints, the lumbosacral joint, is actually multiple joints, including the L5/S1 intervertebral joint with intervertebral disc and two articular or zygapophyseal joints. Reference to the lumbosacral joints as the lumbosacral junction or lumbosacral complex emphasizes this anatomy. The L5/S1 intervertebral joint, or anterior lumbosacral joint, has similar characteristics to the lumbar vertebral joints, except that it typically has the largest surface area of the intervertebral joints. In this case, the intervertebral joints are important in allowing movements of the vertebral column between the lumbar and sacral spine. The L5/S1 intervertebral joint is reinforced by several ligaments, most notably the anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments. The two lumbosacral articular facet joints, or zygapophyseal joints, are wider than those along the rest of the spine.

The orientation of the articular process and facets contributing to the L5/S1 articulation allow interlocking and prevent slippage at this site. In particular, the iliolumbar and lateral lumbosacral ligaments reinforce these joints. The lumbosacral complex transmits the weight of the head, torso, and upper limbs to the pelvic girdle. The pelvic girdle then sends those forces to the contralateral side through the ischiopubic rami, which serve as bony struts, to the femur when standing, and to the ischial tuberosities when seated. The ligamenta flava and anterior longitudinal, posterior longitudinal, sacroiliac, iliolumbar, interspinous, intertransverse, and lateral lumbosacral ligaments strengthen the iliolumbar complex. The iliolumbar ligament, in particular, is the most important in restricting lumbosacral joint motion.

**Sacroiliac Joint**

The right and left sacroiliac joints, or SI joints, are articulations between the auricular surfaces of the sacrum and ilium and their tuberosities. The sacroiliac joints are particularly strong joints with significant ligamentous reinforcement to withstand their role in weight-bearing. Together, they support and inferiorly transmit the weight of the torso, upper limbs, and head. The joints are unusual in their morphology because they are compound synovial and syndesmotic joints. The articular surface of the sacroiliac joint is divided into an anterior and posterior portion. The anterior part of the sacroiliac joint is a synovial joint that serves as the articulation between the hyaline cartilage-lined auricular surfaces of the ilium and sacrum.

The articular joint surfaces are somewhat crescentic, with flattened but irregular surfaces that are congruent to limit mobility and increase the strength and stability of the joint. The posterior portion of the sacroiliac joint is a fibrous joint that serves as the syndesmotic articulation between the tuberosities of the sacrum and ilium.

The posterior sacroiliac ligament is a strong ligament on the posterior aspect of the sacroiliac joint that tightly binds the two bones. It has multiple fibrous extensions extending between the first and second sacral tubercles and the iliac tuberosity, the third sacral tubercle, and the posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS). Part of the posterior sacroiliac ligament is continuous with the sacrotuberous ligament that extends from the posterolateral sacrum and coccyx to the ischial tuberosity. The interosseus sacroiliac ligament is part of the same fibrous tissue as the posterior sacroiliac ligament. The interosseus sacroiliac ligament is a strong and extensive ligament attaching to the sacral and iliac tuberosities that helps to hold the sacrum and ilium together and supports the joint in weight-bearing. The posterior sacroiliac and interosseus sacroiliac ligaments work in concert with the iliolumbar ligament to assist the tight articulation of the sacroiliac joint.

**Sacrococcygeal Joint**

The fifth sacral element and the base of the coccyx articulate at the sacrococcygeal joint. It is a symphysis or secondary cartilaginous joint with hyaline cartilage and a fibrous disc. There is little motion across this joint, which is reinforced by the anterior and posterior sacrococcygeal ligaments, which are elongated ligaments extending across the sacrum and coccyx.

**Pubic symphysis**

Each hemipelvis meets anteriorly at the pubic symphysis along the anterior aspect of the pelvis and in the midsagittal plane. The pubic symphysis is a secondary cartilaginous joint, syndesmosis, or amphiarthrosis with an interposed fibrocartilaginous disc. This interpubic disc is slightly moveable and tends to be broader and thicker in females. The ligaments of the pubic symphysis that strengthen and limit movements of the joint are the superior pubic ligament, inferior pubic ligament, anterior pubic ligament, and posterior pubic ligament. These ligaments extend across the relevant borders of the pubic bodies and connect them to the interposed disc and contralateral bone. The moveability of the pubic bones at the pubic symphysis increases in women during pregnancy due to hormones, such as relaxin.