Management of pneumonia in immunocompromised patients consists of preventing pneumonia in the first place, and treatment of pneumonia if it has occurred.

In HIV-infected patients, antiretroviral therapy plays an important role in preventing opportunistic infections. Prophylaxis against some common opportunistic lung infections is as follows:

- Transplant candidates should receive the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13), and the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) as pneumococcal pneumonia is a common infection after organ transplantation. Likewise, HIV-infected individuals should also receive vaccination against Pneumococcus.

- Annual inactivated intramuscular influenza vaccine.

- Screening for latent tuberculosis should be done in all HIV-infected patients regardless of CD4 counts.

- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) for PCP. In HIV-infected patients, this should be initiated when CD4 counts fall below 200 cells per cubic millimeter.

- In solid organ transplant recipients who are at increased risk of CMV reactivation (e.g., seropositive recipient, or seropositive donor), ganciclovir or valganciclovir is used for prophylaxis.

For the treatment of pneumonia, a risk assessment should be done to decide if the patient can be treated in the outpatient, regular inpatient (non-ICU), or intensive care unit (ICU) setting. Risk assessment scores such as the pneumonia severity index and the CURB-65 score are helpful, and markers of inflammation such as CRP or procalcitonin can further aid in this regard.

Empiric antimicrobial therapy should be started as soon as possible. Some empiric antimicrobials of choice are:

- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) if Pneumocystis pneumonia is suspected. Moreover, glucocorticoids should be added if the patient’s partial pressure of oxygen is less than 70 mmHg, alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient is equal to or more than 35 mmHg or oxygen saturation is less than 92% on room air.

- Ganciclovir or valganciclovir for CMV.

- Antipseudomonal antibiotics, eg, piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, cefoperazone, fluoroquinolones (except for moxifloxacin), carbapenems (except for ertapenem), etc.

- For the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) in the outpatient setting, beta-lactam antibiotics such as amoxicillin, with or without a macrolide or doxycycline.

- For inpatient (non-ICU) patients with CAP, a beta-lactam (e.g., ceftriaxone) plus a macrolide, or monotherapy with a fluoroquinolone (e.g., levofloxacin) may be used. Coverage for methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas should be included (e.g., vancomycin and cefepime, respectively).

- For pneumonia in the ICU setting, a beta-lactam (e.g., ceftriaxone) plus azithromycin or levofloxacin, along with vancomycin for MRSA coverage, and anti-pseudomonal coverage (e.g., imipenem or piperacillin-tazobactam) are used.

- Azole antifungals (e.g., fluconazole, voriconazole) if a fungal etiology, such as Histoplasma, is suspected. Voriconazole is especially effective against Fusarium and Aspergillus.

- A combination of rifampin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide is used for the treatment of active tuberculosis.

The final choice of antimicrobial should be directed by the results of the culture and sensitivity report.

Besides antimicrobial therapy, other measures can include:

- Discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy if possible

- Chest physiotherapy

- Ventilatory support if the patient is in respiratory distress

- Early mobilization