The evaluation consists of detailed history from the patient and family members (including the onset, duration, symptoms, impact, impact on activities of daily living, and changes from the patient's previous level of execution and functioning) and clinical assessment of the patient that encompasses a wide range of information collected from physical, neurological, and mental status examinations.

The history gathered from the patient and the accompanying family/friends should be focused on the following:

- Changes in cognitive functions (onset, course, and examples)

- Change in functional status-Selfcare (cooking, testing, hygiene, finances)

- Physical symptoms (nausea, vomiting, vision, hearing, speech, balance, gait, balance, sensation, and motor functions)

- Psychiatric symptoms (mood changes, behavioral and personality changes)

- Current medication, if any

There are various screening tools used by patients, families, and physicians to assess the patient's cognitive abilities. Screening is to identify those patients who deserve a complete diagnostic assessment. Physicians often assess the patient's mental status with a brief test, such as the mini-mental state examination (MMSE). However, the experts have identified several new and improved instruments suited for use in primary care settings. Popular tools used by primary care physicians are:

- General practitioner assessment of cognition (GPCOG)

- Memory impairment screen (MIS)

- Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA)

- Mini-Cog

- Memory and executive screening (MES), etc.

Short Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE), Dementia Severity Rating Scale (DSRS), AD-8, and General Practitioner Assessment of Cognition (GPCOG) can be used to gather information from caretaker/ family members. Individuals who fail these tests need further diagnostic evaluation or a referral to a specialist. In addition, more detailed neuropsychological testing may help determine the type and degree of impairment and what mental skills are impaired.

Different tools have different applications according to the presenting case. For example, Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) is mostly used for general screening because of its coverage of a broad array of cognitive functions. Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) is used for the evaluation of patients with Alzheimer disease because of its main focus on testing memory.

As part of the physical exam, the physician should perform a detailed neurological examination to determine the involvement of the brain and nervous system. These tests can help detect neurological signs of different brain pathologies like stroke, Parkinson disease, brain tumors, or other medical conditions.  The neurological exam includes the basement of mental status, cranial nerves, motor and sensory functions, reflexes, coordination, balance, and gait.

Other tests depend upon the accompanying physical signs and symptoms. It may include complete blood count, thyroid tests, vitamin B12 levels, basic metabolic panel, urine analysis, liver function tests, and renal function tests, which may help find out different Infectious causes and metabolic disorders. Also, brain imaging like CT-scan and MRI may be useful to delineate brain pathologies like a brain tumors, bleeding, or stroke.