The aims of treatment in acromegaly are:

- Removal of the pituitary tumor to relieve mass effects

- Normalization of IGF-1 levels

- Relief of acromegalic symptoms

- Monitoring of acromegaly and associated comorbidities

Three primary modalities are available for treating acromegaly, each with its advantages and disadvantages: surgery, medical therapy, and radiation. The decision to use these modalities is made on a case-by-case basis.

**Surgery**

Surgical excision of the tumor is the preferred initial treatment unless the patient is deemed unfit for surgery. Surgery is also the preferred modality in case of recurrence as long as the tumor remains accessible. The transsphenoidal approach involves accessing the tumor by getting to the sphenoid sinus either through a nasal or sublabial approach and removing the sellar floor. Even tumors with suprasellar extension can be removed with this approach. Endoscopic transsphenoidal resection has better tumor clearance, decreased morbidity, and complications compared to the microscopic approach. Post-surgical complications include diabetes insipidus and anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies.

IGF-1 and GH levels need to be measured 12 weeks after surgery. The goal is a normalization of IGF-1 and an undetectable GH level.

**Medical Treatment**

Various medical therapies are available for the management of acromegaly. They are used in the treatment of persistent disease after surgery.

- Dopamine agonists: Cabergoline is a D2 receptor agonist that can act on the D2 receptors in somatotrophs and decrease GH secretion. However, their efficacy is limited, with normalization of IGF-1 seen only in 34% of patients. Side effects of cabergoline include dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and postural hypotension.

- Somatostatin receptor ligands (SRL): These mimic the action of somatostatin and inhibit the secretion of GH. Octreotide was the first SRL to be introduced, and it is 0preferentially bound to human somatostatin receptor type 2. The dose was 100 to 200 mg by subcutaneous injection three times a day. Long-acting SRL has become available in the form of octreotide LAR and lanreotide. Both have similar efficacy in suppressing GH levels and normalizing IGF-1 levels. Octreotide LAR is given at a dose of 10 to 30 mg subcutaneously every four weeks, while lanreotide is given at a dose of 120 mg subcutaneously every four weeks. Recently, an oral formulation of the somatostatin approved showed equivalent efficacy to the injectable forms.

- GH receptor antagonists: GH binds to its receptor on two different sites and induces dimerization, activating the post-receptor signaling mechanisms. The novel GH receptor antagonist pegvisomant binds to the first binding site, preventing dimerization and post-receptor signaling. Van der Lely et al. followed 152 patients treated with pegvisomant for 18 months and found normalization of IGF-1 in 90% of patients. Pegvisomant is administered at a dose of 10 to 30 mg subcutaneously every day. Due to the high expense, its role is limited to patients who do not respond to SRL or have diabetes and worsening hyperglycemia with SRL.

**Radiation Therapy**

Radiation is often used as an adjunct treatment for the persistent disease after surgery; rarely, it may be used as a first-line treatment in patients unfit for surgery. Two commonly used radiation therapy modalities are external irradiation and stereotactic single high-dose irradiation.

- External irradiation: Using linear accelerators, the radiation is focused on the pituitary fossa. CT or MRI are used for dosimetry to minimize radiation exposure to the surrounding tissues. The total radiation dose (around 4500 cGy) is divided into fractions (generally 25 fractions of 180 cGy) and given over six weeks; this fractionation helps minimize injury to surrounding tissues. About 60% of the patients achieve normalization of IGF-1 with radiation in 10 years. Hypopituitarism is a known side effect of radiation and can occur years after cessation of radiation; therefore, annual clinical and laboratory assessments for pituitary hormonal deficiencies should be done. With external irradiation, there is a resolution of even radiologically invisible disease.

- Stereotactic single high dose irradiation: Using a gamma knife or stereotactic multiple arc radiotherapy, a high dose of radiation is delivered to a previously mapped area. Care should be taken to limit radiation exposure (< 8 cGy) to the optic chiasm. Since the radiation is delivered to a mapped area, any radiologically invisible disease will not be resolved. The rate of development of hypopituitarism is the same as that of external irradiation.