The majority of patients who present with pelvic organ prolapse do not report symptoms. Patients that do present with symptoms, however, often describe a sense or feeling of a bulge protruding through the vaginal opening. During yearly well-woman visits, it is essential to screen women for urinary and bulge symptoms that a woman often is embarrassed to bring up during her annual.

A physical examination is essential to diagnose and subcategorize the type of prolapse. Exam findings will vary depending on the fullness of both the bladder and rectum. Women who present with procidentia (prolapse of all 3 compartments) can complain of vaginal discharge secondary to vaginal chafing or epithelial erosion. Patients with POP have a high rate of coexisting pelvic floor disorders. 40% will present with urinary incontinence, 37% will present with overactive bladder, and 50% will present with fecal incontinence.

Due to urethral kinking or urethral pressure, bladder outlet obstruction can occur. Pelvic organ prolapse may negatively affect sexual activity, body image, and quality of life. Clinicians should always remember to screen for POP as many patients will not openly admit to symptoms out of embarrassment. A systematic pelvic examination is required to fully characterize the type and extent of prolapse. Begin by asking the patient to perform the Valsalva maneuver and inspect the perineal body, vaginal opening, and screen for apical prolapse. Next, a speculum is inserted in order to better visualize the vaginal apex. Using a one-blade sims speculum, the anterior and posterior vaginal walls can be inspected to assess for the presence of cystocele and rectocele, respectively. Either the Baden-Walker grading system or the pelvic organ prolapse quantification system can be used to quantify the degree of prolapse and can be an aid clinical assessment.