There are three main pathways for complement activation; these are the classical pathway, the lectin pathway, and the alternative pathway. All three pathways are unique in the types of pattern recognizing molecules (PRMs) that initiate a protease cascade leading to the formation of a C3 convertase enzyme complex able to begin the opsonization of complement activating targets. All three pathways are unique in the types of PRMs that initiate a protease cascade leading to the formation of a C3 convertase enzyme complex able to initiate the opsonization of complement activating targets. e.g., C1q, mannose-binding lectin(MBL), ficolins, and properdin are able to recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) or DAMPs for autoactivation and initiation of a serine protease cascade, “the complement cascade” leading to opsonization and potentially lysis of the target microbe.

Initially discovered in 1890, the pathway got its name as “the classical pathway” in the complement cascade. The antigen-antibody complex is the initiation complement component for this pathway. There is an attachment of the C1 to the Fc part of Ig with the help of the C1q subcomponent. This action leads to the commencement of the classical complement cascade leading to many proteolytic cleavage steps. The initial one is the autoactivation of C1r, which cleaves both subcomponents of C1.In the next step, C4 and C2 are cleaved by C1s. The classical pathway C3 convertase gets formed by the combination of newly generated C4b and C2a.C3 convertase then cleaves C3 into C3a and C3b.

Similarly, the C3 convertase of the lectin pathway also gets formed. Here the lectins bind to mannose residues. These mannose-binding lectin-associated serine proteases are substitutes for the C1 enzymatic subcomponents. They target the unique pathogen-related sugar moieties

The capacity of the alternative pathway of self-initiation results from the presence of the internal thioester bond, leading to its deposition on the surface of the pathogen without any prior contact or exposure. This alternative pathway has a self-regulatory mechanism built in it that protects the host cell, and if deposited on the microbial surface, an efficient amplification pathway involving the C3 convertase will create a large amount of C3b to lyse the pathogen.

There are some host regulators of the complement system in both the fluid, i.e., plasma, and the cells and tissues to protect the host cell and tissues from the destructive activity of the complement cascade. Each major step of the complement cascade is under tight control.

The regulatory factors present in the fluid state, i.e., plasma of the host cell, are factor H (FH) and C4b-binding protein (C4BP). Decay-accelerating factor (DAF; CD55),complement receptor 2 (CR2; CD21) complement receptor 1 (CR1; CD35), and membrane cofactor protein (MCP; CD46) are  regulatory factors associated with cell membrane

There is a multigene family, the regulators of complement activation (RCAs), which utilize two processes to maintain complement homeostasis. One is called the cofactor activity. In this process, C3b or C4b are permanently cleaved by proteolytic enzymes serine protease factor 1(FI). This inactive those complement components. The second regulatory mechanism is called decay-accelerating activity. Here the catalytic domain (serine protease) of a C3 or C5 convertase is disassociated.