The diagnosis of epidermolysis bullosa acquisita may be challenging due to the various inflammatory variants that mimic other blistering diseases, both clinically and histologically.

On histology, a skin biopsy taken from lesional EBA skin shows features of papillary edema and vacuolar degeneration along the DEJ in early lesions. Later lesions demonstrate a subepidermal blister with varying degrees of inflammatory infiltrate depending on the clinical variant.

A perilesional biopsy should be taken for direct immunofluorescence (DIF) microscopy, which would show linear deposits of IgG along the epidermal BMZ. Less commonly, linear deposits of C3, IgA, or IgM may also be detected.

Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) may detect circulating autoantibodies to the BMZ in patients with EBA. Approximately 50% of patients with EBA have detectable anti-BMZ IgG antibodies in their serum, which would result in a linear fluorescent band along the DEJ. IIF on salt-split skin would demonstrate EBA autoantibodies in the serum binding to the dermal side of the artificial blister.

Transmission electron microscopy of the DEJ would show cleavage in the sublamina densa zone, a decreased number of anchoring fibrils emerging from the lamina densa, as well as an amorphous, electron-dense material beneath the lamina densa in EBA skin. This material is thought to correspond to the IgG deposits bound to the anchoring fibrils.

Immunoelectron microscopy (IEM) is the traditional "gold standard" for the diagnosis of EBA. It can reveal immune deposits localized to anchoring fibrils within the sublamina densa, in contrast to other subepidermal blistering disorders with immune deposits in the hemidesmosome area (BP) or lamina lucida (MMP).

Western blot analysis of serum from EBA patients demonstrates binding of circulating autoantibodies to a 290 kDa protein and less frequently a 145 kDa protein, which corresponds to the alpha chain of type VII collagen and its NC1 domain, respectively.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is a quick and efficient test with high specificity (>96%). It uses recombinant NC1 and NC2 domains of type VII collagen purified from human cells to detect EBA autoantibodies that target all possible antigenic epitopes within NC1 and NC2. It can detect levels of autoantibodies, which correlate with disease severity.

The diagnostic criteria for EBA have been established by previous authors and are comprised of a bullous disorder within the defined clinical spectrum, lack of family history of bullous disease, a subepidermal blister on histology, DIF of perilesional skin showing IgG deposits within the DEJ, and IEM of perilesional skin indicating localization of IgG deposits within the lower lamina densa or sublamina densa of the DEJ. Alternative tests such as IIF, salt-split skin, ELISA, and Western blot may be done instead of IEM.