Treatment of Richter hernias depends on clinical status, physical examination, and suspicion of strangulation. Clinically stable patients with reducible hernias should undergo repair in the elective setting. Strangulated hernias of any type are a surgical emergency, and Richter type hernias do not deviate from this principle. Immediate operative exploration is required. Simultaneously resuscitation and treatment of sepsis should also be undertaken with intravenous fluids and antibiotics.

The surgical approach depends on multiple factors, including the location of the hernia, the clinical status of the patient, and surgeon preference. An open surgical procedure may be the best option for patients with evidence of hemodynamic instability, obstruction, or strangulation. The placement of the incision depends on the location of the hernia. Midline laparotomy is typically appropriate for ventral incisional hernias. Femoral and inguinal Richter type hernias may require inguinal incision with a counter laparotomy incision.

Minimally invasive hernia repair with either laparoscopic or robotic techniques should also is a consideration. Because of the need to establish pneumoperitoneum, these approaches are more conducive for hemodynamically stable patients without obstruction or strangulation. Dilated loops of the bowel may prevent safe laparoscopic access and provided limited room for establishing pneumoperitoneum. Hemodynamic instability is further exacerbated by pneumoperitoneum because of decreased venous return. Thus, a minimally invasive approach is often best suited for the urgent or elective setting. Transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) and total extraperitoneal (TEP) approaches may be considered for inguinal or femoral defects. Various methods of minimally invasive ventral hernia repair are possible, including preperitoneal or intraperitoneal approaches.

Regardless of the surgical approach, surgeons must be careful to assess for bowel viability. Any questionable bowel should undergo resection and anastomosis undertaken. One group proposed that if the portion of ischemia is a small, coin-like lesion involving less than half of the bowel wall circumference, this may be invaginated, and the new edges reapproximated.

Repair of the hernia defect depends on the defect. The current standard of care for repairing most hernias, including femoral, inguinal, and incisional hernias, involves the placement of a prosthetic mesh. However, as there is often strangulated bowel requiring bowel resection in Richter type hernias, mesh placement is controversial. Ultimately, the decision of whether to place mesh and type of mesh depends on the surgeon’s clinical judgment.