Incidence and prevalence of desquamative interstitial pneumonia are so rare across the population that large population-based randomized controlled trials are not available to guide management and outcomes.

Nevertheless, association with cigarette and marijuana smoking, as well as certain occupational exposures have been proved unequivocally. Once diagnosed; therefore, discontinuation of exposure becomes the single most important intervention, as reiterated by the 2013 American Thoracic Society and European Respiratory Society statement.

As mentioned above, considerable overlap exists between smoking-related interstitial lung diseases like RB, RBILD, DIP and even non-specific interstitial pneumonia. Mixed histopathological features are often reported. A combined clinical, radiological, and histopathological approach to diagnosis as well as a longitudinal follow up becomes necessary to distinguish each of the entities. Prognosis varies between RBILD, DIP, and NSIP in worsening order, and therefore the establishment of a diagnosis early on helps in intervening appropriately and addressing prognosis with patient and families. Mortality is almost never reported for RBILD with disease regression over a period of 30 years from smoking cessation, while DIP has a reported mortality rate of 6% to 28% with disease progression occasionally even on treatment and smoking cessation.

If there is no contraindication, severe disease with activity-induced hypoxemia, pulmonary hypertension, and severe impairment of pulmonary function (DIP or NSIP), should be referred to in the advanced stage for pulmonary transplantation.