Investigations for the cause of secondary hypertension are determined by the history and clinical examination. Confirmatory laboratory and radiology investigations are individualized and preceded by the screening test. The contemporary guidelines recommend screening for secondary hypertension in patients with new-onset or uncontrolled hypertension, who have symptoms/signs consistent with the secondary causes of hypertension.

**Renal Parenchymal Disease**

The initial screening tests for renal parenchymal diseases include serum creatinine with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urine detailed report, urinary protein/protein to creatinine ratio, and renal ultrasound.

**Endocrine Disorders**

Hypertension with hypokalemia is one of the characteristic features of primary aldosteronism, especially in those individuals with a family history of hypertension and cerebrovascular accidents at a young age. The plasma aldosterone/renin ratio is the preferred screening test for primary aldosteronism and it should be done at least four weeks after the withdrawal of aldosterone antagonists and after the correction of hypokalemia.

Screening for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma is recommended in the presence of episodic hypertension, along with palpitations, headache, postural hypotension, and stigmata of neurofibromatosis. Measurement of urinary or plasma metanephrine is the recommended screening test for pheochromocytoma. While computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging is recommended for the localization of the tumor.

Thyroid disorders are the rare causes of secondary hypertension, which can be diagnosed by measuring the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free T4/T3 levels.

**Reno-vascular Hypertension**

Renal artery stenosis is suspected when patients present with uncontrolled hypertension, have renal bruit, and develop deterioration of renal function after taking angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibiting drugs. Ultrasound renal Doppler is the initial recommended test for the screening and diagnosis of renal artery stenosis. While computed tomographic angiogram (CTA) and magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) can be considered in a selected group of patients, especially those with high suspicion of index, who have non-diagnostic ultrasound renal Doppler.

**Vascular and Other Causes of Hypertension**

Coarctation of the aorta is the major contributor to secondary hypertension in this group and an echocardiogram is the best screening as well as a diagnostic test for the coarctation of the aorta. Computed tomographic aortogram (CTA) and magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) is recommended for the diagnosis and confirmation of coarctation of the aorta as well as vasculitis.