**Deep or Extensive Burns Complications**

- Breathing problems

- Bone and joint problems

- Dangerously low body temperature

- Infection and sepsis

- Low blood volume

- Scarring

- Tetanus

Infection is the most common complication. In order of frequency, potential complications include pneumonia, cellulitis, urinary tract infections, and respiratory failure. Pneumonia commonly occurs in those with inhalation injuries.

Superficial partial-thickness burns are characterized by forming blisters within 24 hours between the epidermis and dermis. These wounds are painful, red, and weeping and become blanch with applying pressure. Initial burn assessments might be underestimated. Burns that initially seem to involve epidermal in depth maybe later categorized as partial-thickness wounds. These burns generally heal in one to three weeks; scarring is unusual, although discoloration may occur.  These burns generally heal without any functional impairment or hypertrophic scarring. Deep partial-thickness wounds extend into the deeper dermis and have a different course than superficial partial-thickness burns. Deep burns involve hair follicles and glandular tissue. They almost always blister, are macerated, wet, or waxy dry, and demonstrate variable mottled colorization. Deep burns do not blanch with applying pressure. If the infection is prevented and spontaneous healing without grafting occurs, they will heal in two to nine weeks. Deep partial-thickness wounds always result in hypertrophic scarring. A deep partial-thickness burn that does not heal in two weeks would be considered a full-thickness burn in terms of functional and cosmetic outcomes.

**Other Complications**

- Anemia secondary to full-thickness burns of greater than 10% TBSA is common.

- Electrical burns may result in compartment syndrome or rhabdomyolysis.

- Blood clotting in the veins of the legs occurs in 6-25% of patients with extensive burns.

- The hypermetabolic state that may persist for years after a major burn may decrease bone density and muscle mass.

- Keloids may form after a burn.

- Following a burn, psychological trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder may develop.

- Scarring may result in a disturbance in body image.

- In the developing world, significant burns may result in social isolation, poverty, and child abandonment.