Two forms of bursitis exist, chronic and acute, and the presentations of each will manifest differently from one another. A detailed medical history, as well as an understanding of the patient's daily routine, will help the clinician differentiate the 2 types of bursitis from each other and from other diagnoses. Acute bursitis typically arises from trauma, infection, or crystalline joint disease, while chronic bursitis is more likely the result of inflammatory arthropathies and repetitive pressure/overuse, or "microtraumas." In acute bursitis, patients generally present with pain on palpation of the bursa. The range of motion of the involved joint may be decreased secondary to pain. Active motion involving the affected bursa also elicits pain; however, this is dependent on the location of the bursa and the biomechanics involved in moving the bones, muscles, and tissues around the bursa. For instance, many patients will experience pain with active motion but with passive motion. When the surrounding muscles are not activated and therefore not compressing the bursa, there is little to no pain. Some acute bursitis will produce pain with flexion of the affected joint, but there will be no pain on extension (these findings are commonly seen with prepatellar and olecranon bursitis).

Contrary to the physical exam findings in acute bursitis, chronic bursitis is often painless. The bursa itself has had time to expand to accommodate the increased fluid, and the result is significant swelling and thickening of the bursa. An examination of the skin is very importation in the evaluation of acute or chronic bursitis. The skin should be evaluated for trauma, erythema, and warmth. One study found that a temperature increase of just 2.2 degrees centigrade between the skin overlying the affected bursa compared to that overlying the unaffected, contralateral bursa was highly sensitive and specific for septic bursitis. However, deep bursitis, even when acute, may produce no tenderness with palpation of the overlying structures, nor any obvious skin changes. Lastly, musculoskeletal imbalances or certain anatomic variants are sometimes associated with the development of bursitis. Decreased core strength and chronic back pain can exacerbate trochanteric bursitis, which itself is often precipitated by gluteus minimus or medius tendinopathy, while mechanical factors such as pes planus and genu valgum are risk factors for the development of pes anserine bursitis.