Due to the diverse number and function of epithelial surfaces in the body, many organ systems utilize exocrine glands to carry out their respective actions. Several examples will be included here, including skin, mouth, stomach, pancreas, duodenum, and breasts.

**Skin**

The skin has a variety of exocrine glands, including the eccrine sweat glands and sebaceous glands. Eccrine sweat glands are the most widespread sweat gland in the body and are present on nearly every external body surface. The sweat produced is clear with little to no oil, in contrast to sebaceous glands, also found on the skin, which secretes the more oily substance sebum.

**Salivary Glands**

The salivary glands in the mouth are another example of exocrine glands and include the parotid glands, submandibular glands, and sublingual glands. While each gland has a unique mixture of serous and mucous cells, together, the salivary glands act to begin the process of food digestion while also lubricating and protecting the mucosal surfaces.

**Stomach**

The stomach holds multiple types of exocrine glands that include pyloric glands, cardiac glands, and fundic glands. These glands incorporate many different cell types, including parietal cells, chief cells, and G cells. Together they regulate the gastric pH, release enzymes to breakdown food products to a digestible form, and assist with the absorption of necessary vitamins and minerals.

**Pancreas**

The pancreas has both an endocrine and an exocrine function. The exocrine pancreas assists in food digestion by releasing a secretion rich in bicarbonate, which helps to neutralize the acidic environment created in the stomach. The secretion also includes digestive enzymes.

**Duodenum**

Brunner glands are present in the duodenum of the small intestine. These exocrine glands are submucosal and produce a mucous product that protects the duodenum from acid released from the stomach. The alkaline nature of the secretion also activates intestinal enzymes to assist with food breakdown and absorption.

**Breast**

The mammary gland is one of the most well-known examples of an exocrine gland found in the breast. Mammary glands produce milk rich in nutrients that also provides passive immunity to a baby’s immune system.