As previously described, according to WHO, one of the main changes is the division into postpubertal-type teratoma and prepubertal-type teratoma. Postpubertal type is considered as differentiation from other germ cell tumor types. Therefore, this specific type of teratoma can be associated with GCNIS and may develop metastases resembling the primary teratoma or other germ cell tumors.

Germ cell tumors (GCT) originate from a primordial germ cell that can differentiate into ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, thereby giving rise to a mixture of somatic cell tissues that characterize teratoma. Gains in chromosome 12p and expression of IMP3 are common in GCT.

**Prenatal Risk Factors**

There are recognized risk factors in developing germ cell tumors, mainly intrauterine growth retardation (low birth weight and newborns small for gestational age), cryptorchidism, hypospadias, maternal bleeding, advanced maternal age, jaundice, and retained placenta.

**Cryptorchidism**

Cryptorchidism is strongly associated with an increased risk of about 3-5 fold, and in a recent study, it is considered as high as 8 fold.

**Past History**

A personal history of GCT in the contralateral testis is the most important risk factor for developing a testicular tumor in the future.Also, pelvic irradiation is an important risk factor for the development of a testicular tumor.

**Genetic Predisposition**

A family history of testicular cancer increases the relative risk of developing a similar tumor, with a fourfold rise of the risk in brothers. Nevertheless, the US Preventive Services Task Force recommends against a screening, with a Grade D recommendation.