As discussed above, the determining etiology of abducens nerve palsy requires knowledge of the nerve path. Neoplasm and trauma may affect the abducens nerve at any point along its path and cause a resulting palsy. Other causes are best broken down by the location of the abducens nerve.

Nuclear and fascicular causes****include etiologies that affect the pons directly, including ischemic stroke and metabolic diseases such as Wernicke disease. Demyelinating lesions may also affect this portion of the nerve. These nuclear causes may be associated with facial nerve palsies, secondary to the proximity of the two cranial nerves in the pons.

As the abducens nerve enters the subarachnoid space, other etiologies may arise, resulting in palsy.  In these cases, the palsy is primarily because of the increased intracranial pressure. As such, other symptoms such as a headache, nausea, vomiting, and papilledema may be noted.  Causes include an aneurysm, carcinomatous meningitis, procedure-related injury (e.g., spinal anesthesia, post-lumbar puncture), inflammatory lesions (e.g., sarcoid, lupus), infection (e.g., Lyme disease, syphilis, tuberculosis, Cryptococcus).

Because the abducens nerve courses over the petrous apex, some causes of abducens nerve palsy include complicated otitis media or mastoiditis, sinus thrombosis, and basal skull fracture.

As the abducens nerve traverses the cavernous sinus, the resultant palsy is typically secondary to stretching of the abducens nerve. The etiologies to be considered include cavernous sinus thrombosis, cavernous sinus fistula, and internal carotid aneurysm or dissection.

Finally, orbital lesions also may cause an abducens nerve palsy.  These include neoplasm, inflammatory disease, infection, or trauma.