PEX is characterized by the formation of white, flaky deposits on the lens and iris, which can cause several ocular complications, including cataracts, glaucoma, and corneal endothelial dysfunction. The exact etiology of PEX is not known, however, genetic susceptibility is supported by numerous genetic studies in population studies worldwide.

A genetic predisposition has been shown for the following genes:

- Lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1) enzyme is part of a family of copper-dependent monoamine oxidases secreted by fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. These enzymes are involved in cross-linking collagen and elastin fibers in the extracellular matrix. Multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in this gene are associated with PEX, and various high-risk alleles have been identified in different populations, with important associations between LOLX1 and PEX in individuals from Scandinavia, Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and North America.

- Chromosome 8p21, Clusterin (CLU) gene: Clusterin is a multifunctional glycoprotein that has been proposed to inhibit stress-induced aggregation of misfolded proteins. Clusterin downregulation has been shown to occur in all anterior segment tissues in PEX eyes, suggesting that its deficiency may be responsible for the chronic accumulation of abnormal extracellular fibrillar material in this condition.

- Calcium Voltage-Gated Channel Subunit Alpha 1 (CACNA1A): Gene variants could possibly influence calcium levels that may lead to PEX depositions.

- Chromosome 1p13.3, Glutathione transferase (GST) gene: GST has a role in protecting cells from oxidative damage. Polymorphisms of GST have been detected in Pakistani patients with PEX. However, no significant association was found in other patient populations.

- Fibulin-5 (FBLN5) gene: Studies have shown that downregulation of two variants of this gene that encode for this extracellular matrix protein have been associated with risks of developing PEG.

PEX deposits are composed of different extracellular, molecular, and membrane proteins and enzymes that include tropoelastin, fibrillin-1, elastin, LOL1, amyloid, fibulin, vitronectin, clusterin, etc.

Environmental factors that have been proposed to play a role in the development of PEX include exposure to sunlight and ultraviolet light,

The insoluble extracellular aggregates in the anterior chamber can decrease aqueous humor outflow and congestion in the trabecular meshwork, causing large fluctuations and increases in IOP, thus leading to PEG in some individuals with PEX. PEG is a type of secondary glaucoma as a result of PEX, which is a progressive disease that can lead to blindness if left untreated. Signs of this type of secondary glaucoma include irreversible optic nerve head and retinal nerve fiber layer damage and/or visual field defects,