**Anatomy**

The left main coronary artery arises from the left coronary sinus of the aorta and divides into a left anterior descending artery (LAD)and left circumflex artery (LCx). The left anterior descending artery gives off-diagonal branches, which supply arterial blood to the anterolateral myocardium, and anterior septal branches, which supply blood to the anterior interventricular septum and anterolateral papillary muscles. The terminal part of the LAD provides the left ventricular apex. The left circumflex artery divides into obtuse marginal branches. It supplies blood to the posterolateral side of the left ventricle (Media Item 2).

The right coronary artery originates from the right coronary sinus of the aorta. It travels along the right atrioventricular groove and divides into the posterolateral branch and posterior descending artery. It also gives off the sinoatrial nodal artery and right ventricular marginal artery. The dominance of coronary circulation depends on the posterior descending artery. The right dominant circulation is widespread because, 80-85%of the time, PDA comes from the right coronary artery (Media Item 3).

Anomalous coronary arteries are relatively rare ( 1-2%). Among them, Anomalous circumflex arteries coming off the right coronary sinus or right coronary artery are common. It is considered a benign clinical course. Very rarely, anomalous coronary arteries traverse between the aorta and pulmonary artery, which can be associated with a malignant clinical course.

**Physiology**

Epicardial coronary arteries (>400 micrometers) divide into small arteries (<400 micrometers)and eventually arterioles (<100 micrometers) which further divide into capillaries(<10 micrometers). Coronary blood flow is predominant during diastole compared to systole—the epicardial coronary artery transport blood to smaller arteries. Smaller arteries and arterioles control the coronary vascular blood flow by autoregulation. Small arteries, Arterioles, and capillaries determine the index of microcirculatory resistance. Coronary flow reserve (CFR) depends on blood transport, autoregulation, and metabolite exchange at the capillary level (Media Item 4). Physiological assessment of epicardial coronary stenosis measured by fractional flow reserve (FFR)  and microvascular resistance measured by the index of microcirculatory resistance.   Instantaneous wave-free ratio (IFR)  can be used in place of fractional flow reserve.