There is a wide variation in how eating disorders are managed. Treatments are frequently multi-faceted, with psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy. It is crucial to seek treatment early for eating disorders. The management approach is tailored to patient's needs and may comprise one or more of the following:

- Psychotherapy

- Pharmacotherapy

- Nutritional counseling

- Aftercare and monitoring

**Psychotherapies**

For all eating disorders, psycho-behavioral therapy can be provided on an outpatient basis. People with severe symptoms or not improving with outpatient care may be treated as inpatient service.

- Enhanced Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT-E) is the first-line treatment for all eating disorders. More sessions are required for Anorexia nervosa compared to bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorders.

- Family-based treatment (FBT) is the most promising modality in managing anorexia nervosa among children and adolescents. FBT can also be adapted for bulimia nervosa and Avoidant or restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID).

- Interpersonal psychotherapy can be used as an alternative for CBT in individuals with Bulimia nervosa or BED.

- Maudsley Anorexia Nervosa Therapy for Adults (MANTRA) and Focal Psychodynamic Therapy (FPT) can be used in adults with eating disorders along with CBT.

- Several randomized control trials are going to explore other models of behavior therapy in eating disorders. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is adapted to treat eating disorders, particularly Bulimia nervosa and Binge eating disorders. Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) address maladaptive cognitions and behaviors associated with eating disorders.

- Neuromodulation modalities like repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation and deep brain stimulation are under study as adjunct treatment for eating disorders.

**Pharmacotherapy**

- Fluoxetine is the only FDA-approved drug used for the treatment of Bulimia nervosa and Binge eating disorders.

- Antidepressants, including fluoxetine, has little role in anorexia nervosa except where there is coexisting major depression.

- Medications like antidepressants, antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers may help treat coexisting psychiatric illnesses such as anxiety or depression.

- Trials are going on topiramate and lisdexamfetamine for binge eating disorders. The role of olanzapine for anorexia nervosa has been studied, which shows mixed results.

**Nutritional Therapy**

- Nutrition therapy is indicated for all individuals diagnosed with eating disorders, including anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder.

- Nasogastric feeding is preferred over other enteral or parenteral nutrition when oral feeding is not possible. Total parenteral nutrition is reserved for significant gastrointestinal dysfunction.

- In most patients with anorexia nervosa, the aim of nutritional therapy is an average weight gain of 2 to 3 pounds (1 to 1.3 kg) per week for inpatient and 0.5 to 1 pound (0.2 to 0.5 kg) per week for outpatient management.

- The initial calorie supplement should be 30 to 40 kilocalories/ kilogram per day. In the later stage, caloric intake can be advanced slowly to 70 to 100 kcal/kg per day.

- Though the foremost step in nutritional management is to expand the food choices, patients on vegetarian diets can continue the same vegetarian diets.

- Electrolytes need to be carefully assessed, and refeeding should be gradual.

- Replacement of vitamins and minerals is an integral part of nutritional therapy. Zinc, in particular, enhances the rate of recovery and helps in improving anxiety and depression. Calcium and vitamin D supplements and cautious use of bisphosphonates like etidronate are recommended for reversing osteoporosis. Oral multivitamin and multi-mineral supplements are recommended.

**Aftercare**

- After the patients recover from eating disorders and see their weight gain, they might experience a resurgence of anxiety and depressive symptoms and drop out of treatment programs.

- Anorexia nervosa can relapse in 20% to 30% after first inpatient admission and 50-75% after more than one admission.

- Psychotherapy helps to sustain the remission.

**Specific Management Strategy**

- **Anorexia Nervosa**
- The majority of anorexic patients can be managed as outpatients. However, few require inpatient psychiatric treatment. The criteria for inpatient care are as follow:

- Weight loss greater than 30% of ideal body weight
- Persistent suicidal ideation
- The need for withdrawal from laxatives, diet pills, or diuretics
- Lack of response to outpatient treatment


- Antidepressants, including fluoxetine, have little role in anorexia nervosa except where there is coexisting major depression.
- Enhanced cognitive behavior therapy and family-based treatment are also recommended for anorexia nervosa.

- **Bulimia Nervosa**
- Inpatient psychiatric care is less often considered for bulimia nervosa unless there are comorbid health issues like severe depression, suicidal ideation, electrolyte imbalance, or laxative abuse.  
- The first-line management of bulimia nervosa is cognitive behavioral therapy, focusing on breaking the binge-purge cycle. Individual psychotherapy and other techniques like assertive training, relaxation training can also be used. Group therapy and family-based therapy are also useful. 
- Antidepressants like fluoxetine, amitriptyline, imipramine decrease binge-purge behavior, improve eating habits, and decrease the preoccupation with food and weight. Fluoxetine is the only FDA approved on the list. 
- Comorbid medical conditions like electrolyte imbalance or dehydration should be managed appropriately.

- **Binge Eating Disorder**
- Cognitive-behavioral therapy and interpersonal therapy are the first-line therapy that causes resolution in half of the cases.
- Antidepressants like fluoxetine, anticonvulsants, and lisdexamfetamine may also play a role in the management of BED. 
- Weight-loss management decreases binge eating frequency. The structured meal plans may give reasonable control over food intake. 
- Spontaneous remission is also possible.

- **Avoidant or Restrictive Food Intake Disorder (ARFID)**
- Cognitive behavior therapy can be used for managing ARFID in individuals above ten years of age.

- **Pica**
- The treatment strategy for pica includes decreasing the exposure to the craved items, micronutrient supplementation, and behavioral/aversive treatment, particularly among mentally disabled individuals.
- Comorbid health issues also need to be addressed, including lead poisoning, infectious disease, or micronutrient deficiency.

- **Rumination Disorder**
- The treatment strategy for rumination disorder includes biofeedback-guided diaphragmatic breathing, general relaxation, aversion training, and distraction technique.

- **Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder (OSFED)**
- The management of purging disorder is similar to bulimia nervosa.
- The management of night eating syndrome is similar to Binge eating disorder.