The action of opioid compounds is mediated through their action on opioid peptide receptors (OPR). Opioid receptors exist throughout the body, but their expression and distribution vary significantly among different organs. An opioid peptide can interact with more than one type of opioid receptor. The receptor-ligand binding engenders a series of biochemical events and brings about various effects. In addition to the three classic groups of opioid receptors, the fourth class of receptors has been identified recently, nociception or orphan FQ receptor (NOP/OFQ). Due to the sequence homology, the OFQ receptor does not bind to common opioid ligands but is still considered a part of the opioid family. There is a maximum sequence homology in the cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains and minimum homology in the extracellular domain where the ligand binds.

Opioid receptors belong to a family of 7-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs).

**Opioid-Mediated Pain Suppression**

Opioids mediate both ascending and descending pain pathways. The primary afferent pain fibers are the thinly myelinated A-delta fibers and the unmyelinated C fibers. Stimulation of A-delta fibers releases glutamate, which is responsible for fast pain. Stimulation of C fibers leads to the release of glutamate and substance P, responsible for slow pain. These afferents reach the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, where they synapse with the neurons of the ascending spinothalamic tract. Opio-containing interneurons in the dorsal horn terminate where the pain afferents terminate.

The endogenous opioid system also modulates the descending pain suppression pathway by their action on the PAG in the midbrain. The PAG neurons are influenced by the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Opioids inhibit the release of GABA, thus activating the PAG. The neurons of the PAG then activate serotonergic neurons in the nucleus raphe Magnus and noradrenergic neurons in the rostral ventromedial medulla. These neurotransmitters stimulate the enkephalinergic interneurons in the spinal cord, thus inhibiting pain perception.