Domestic and family violence, which includes child abuse, intimate partner violence, and elder abuse, frequently starts when one partner, parent, or caretaker feels the need to dominate or control. Abuse begins with emotional or verbal threats and may escalate to physical violence. Victims live in a constant state of fear. The perpetrator often becomes explosively violent. After the violent event, the perpetrator may apologize. This cycle of violence usually repeats.

**Reason Abusers Need to Control**

- Anger management issues

- Jealousy

- Low self-esteem

- Feeling inferior due to less education

- Feeling inferior due to poor socioeconomic background

- Cultural beliefs they have the right to control their partner

- Personality disorder or psychological disorder

- Learned behavior from growing up in a family where domestic violence was accepted

- Alcohol and drugs, as an impaired individual may be less likely to control violent impulses

**Risk Factors for Domestic and Family Violence**

Risk factors for domestic and family violence include individual, relationship, community, and societal issues. There is an inverse relationship between education and domestic violence. The less education, the more likely domestic violence will occur. Childhood abuse is commonly associated with becoming a perpetrator of domestic violence as an adult. Perpetrators of domestic violence commonly repeat acts of violence with new partners. Drug and alcohol abuse greatly increases the incidence of domestic violence.

Children who are victims or witness domestic and family violence may believe that violence is a reasonable way to resolve a conflict. Males who learn that females are not equally respected are more likely to abuse females in adulthood. Females who witness domestic violence as children are more likely to be victimized by their spouses. While females are often the victim of domestic violence, the gender roles can be reversed. Common risk factors include:

- Aggressive behavior as a youth

- Antisocial personality disorder

- Individuals with disabilities

- Corporal punishment in the household

- Pregnancy

- Economic stress/families with low annual incomes

- Females whose educational or occupational level is high relative to their spouses' educational or occupational level

- Low self-esteem

- A family history of violence

- Low education

- Poor parenting

- Psychiatric history

- Marital discord

- Marital infidelity

- Multiple children

- Poor legal sanctions or enforcement of laws

- History of abuse as children

- Unemployment

- The use and abuse of alcohol and drugs are strongly associated with a high probability of violence. Alcohol abuse is known to be a strong predictor of acute injury. Approximately half of the domestic violence victims indicate their partner was intoxicated at the time of the assault.

- New cases of HIV infection are linked to intimate partner violence.

Domination may include emotional, physical or sexual abuse that may be caused by an interaction of situational and individual factors. This means the abuser learns violent behavior from their family, community, or culture. They see violence and are victims of violence.

No matter the underlying circumstances, nothing justifies domestic and family violence. Understanding the causes assists us in understanding the behavior of an abuser. The abuser must be separated from the potential victim and treated for destructive behavior before a major event negatively impacts the lives of all involved.