**Bony Anatomy**

The pelvic inlet involves three of the four elements of the bony pelvis. The pelvic brim has contributions from the first sacral segment, the ilium, and the pubis, but not the ischium. The pelvic inlet is delineated by a bony crest that defines its limit (the pelvic brim). The pelvic brim includes the promontory of the sacrum and continues inferolaterally towards the ilium traversing the rounded edge that separates the sacral bases from the anterior face of the sacrum itself: the linea terminalis. The pelvic brim continues laterally, crossing the sacroiliac joint, passes along the iliopectineal line in its initial portion as the linea innominata or arcuate line of the ilium (also called the "innominate bone"), continues along the pectineal line of the pubis (crest) where it passes along the superior-posterior edge of the pubis and the pubic tubercle, and ends just lateral to the pubic symphysis.

Along the internal face of the ilium, the arcuate line ends behind the anterior angle that separates the superior and inferior portions of the auricular surface, which is articulated with the sacrum. Tracing an imaginary line that continues posteriorly, the pelvic brim continues towards the posterior superior iliac spine after passing through the inferior iliac tuberosity. In this way, by analogy, the pubic tubercle and the pubic symphysis are the anterior junction bridge of the two halves of the pelvic inlet, while the posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS) and the space between the ilia (sacroiliac joints and anterior and posterior ligaments) are the extremes of the posterior bridge.

**Visceral Structures**

The sigma crosses the upper pelvic narrow with the root of the mesosigma (at the level of the left sacroiliac joint), the ureter, and the vas deferens. Sometimes even the cecum and the appendix descend into the pelvis from the right iliac fossa, near the right sacroiliac joint. The bladder dome tends to protrude beyond the upper strait when the bladder is full, along with the medial vesicoumbilical ligament (vestiges of the urachus) and the medial vesicoumbilical folds (vestiges of the umbilical arteries). The parietal peritoneum is the deepest parietal structure that crosses the upper pelvic narrow.