**Tonsillectomy**is a surgical procedure where the palatine tonsils are excised from the tonsillar fossa.

**Indications for Tonsillectomy**

Infectious

Tonsillectomy should be considered in patients who

- Have had recurrent throat infections with seven documented cases in the last year

- A minimum of five documented throat infections in each of the previous 2 years

- A minimum of three documented throat infections in each of the last 3 years

- All patients who meet one of the above criteria must also have a temperature greater than 100.9°F (38.3°C), cervical adenopathy, tonsillar exudate, or a positive culture for group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus

- Recurrent or chronic pharyngotonsillitis, peritonsillar abscesses, tonsillar stones, and halitosis are other circumstances where tonsillectomy may be the recommended course of action

Hyperplastic/Neoplastic

Indications for tonsillectomy include a variety of hyperplastic and neoplastic processes.  Some of these include hyperplasia of adenotonsillar tissue associated with obstructive sleep apnea, failure to thrive, or abnormal dentofacial growth.

**Potential Complications associated with Tonsillectomy**

The most frequent complication of a tonsillectomy is post-operative hemorrhage, which is responsible for the majority of post-tonsillectomy fatalities.  Significant risk factors for post-operative hemorrhage include older age, a history of chronic tonsillitis, excessive intraoperative blood loss and elevated mean arterial pressure.

The glossopharyngeal nerve innervates the posterior one-third of the tongue and provides general sensation and taste.  The nerve travels past the palatine tonsils and has the potential to be stretched or injured during a tonsillectomy.  Consequences of this injury could manifest as a reduction or loss of general sensation or taste to the posterior third of the tongue.