People presenting with acute mediastinitis will be ill-appearing. They may complain of dysphagia, chest pain, fever, and respiratory distress. It is crucial to get a thorough history, including recent surgeries or infections, past medical, travel, and social history, to evaluate risk factors for the development of mediastinitis.

When evaluating a person for postoperative mediastinitis, important risk factors such as diabetes, obesity, smoking, renal failure, and an immunocompromised state should be documented. Additionally, obtaining surgical history is critical as patients with longer surgical times, repeat thoracic surgeries, or excessive cautery may have a higher predisposition to developing postoperative mediastinitis. The physical exam in patients with symptoms concerning mediastinitis will often be positive for sternal instability, wound discharge, pain, and tenderness. If a patient has an unexplained slow postoperative recovery, mediastinitis should be on the differential. Patients can present with mediastinitis up to a year after surgery or even longer, but the majority of cases are within 30 days of the surgery.

If descending necrotizing mediastinitis is suspected, these patients will have a head or neck infection that was not adequately treated that then spread to the mediastinum. In addition to the symptoms previously mentioned, these patients may experience dyspnea, cervical, or thoracic pain with crepitus and erythema noted on physical exam.

Fibrosing mediastinitis has a more insidious progression; therefore, many patients may be asymptomatic initially. When patients are symptomatic, common presenting symptoms include cough, shortness of breath, pleuritic chest pain, recurrent lung infections, hemoptysis, fever, or weight loss.