Reflexes can indicate pathology along a particular nerve route, to a section of the spinal cord, or even reveal something about the general state of a patient’s peripheral nerves. For instance, the presence of an ankle jerk reflex is a better predictor of peripheral neuropathy in diabetics than neuropathic symptoms, duration of diabetes, or retinopathy.

Due to the roles of the various pathways indicated in the anatomy section, hyperreflexia can indicate an upper motor neuron lesion, whereas hyporeflexia can indicate a lower motor neuron lesion. In other words, a lesion at C5 would cause hyporeflexia in the biceps reflex (C5-C6) but could produce hyperreflexia in the triceps reflex. This is because the lesion is above the spinal segments (C7-C8) that contribute to the lower motor neuron reflex arc but would affect the upper motor neuron modulation (which are generally inhibitory signals) of that arc instead. This is why one of the “lower motor neuron signs” is considered hyporeflexia (along with weakness, atrophy, and fasciculations), and conversely, “upper motor neuron signs” include hyperreflexia (along with weakness, spasticity, and Babinski sign).  Put another way:  inhibiting the inhibitor causes hyperreflexia, and this is what occurs with upper motor neuron lesions.

The absolute grading intervals are subjective, based on the clinician’s experience of all previous normal reflexes, but are particularly useful when discrepancies are found between different joints in the same patient. Symmetrical reflexes within the 1+ to 3+ range are generally considered normal as long as upper or lower motor neuron signs do not accompany them, or there is increasing briskness with a descent down the spinal cord, which could indicate spinal cord damage between the diminished and hyperreflexic levels.

Especially with regards to the +/- grading, rather than focusing on the difference in value between one clinician calling all reflexes on a patient a 2+, and another calling them all 2, it is more important if any clinician noted that the left side was 2+, but the right was 2 in the same exam. Even an absent reflex, if present bilaterally, without other pathology or reasons for concern, can be normal.