**Types of Fractures**

According to Mosby’s medical dictionary, a fracture is, "A traumatic injury to the long bone in which the continuity of the bone tissue is broken." A fracture can be further described as closed or open. Fractures that have no break in the skin are called closed fractures.

An open or compound fracture occurs when the traumatic force that caused the bone to fracture also results in an external wound. This wound is often caused by the sharp edges of the bone puncturing the skin from the inside out, or by the external compressing force or shearing the skin, leading to an open wound.

Open fractures have a high risk of developing osteomyelitis, an infection of the bone itself. This type of infection typically requires intravenous antibiotics and surgical debridement. When left untreated, can be limb or life-threatening.

Fractures can also be categorized as displaced or non-displaced. In a displaced fracture, angulation and deformity of the bone are often seen. A non-displaced fracture is difficult to diagnose without x-ray films and is not as pertinent for EMS providers to identify.

**Types of Splints**

Air splints are essentially large air bladders that are initially deflated and wrapped around the affected extremity. After application, they are inflated to provide rigidity through air pressure.

Vacuum splints are applied longitudinally along the length of the extremity, and straps are applied around it to secure it in place. A hand pump is then attached to a valve stem on the splint and is used to withdraw air from the splint. As air is removed, the splint forms to the shape of the injured extremity and becomes rigid.

Slings are used to immobilize suspected clavicle fractures or shoulder injuries. They can also be used to hold and support upper extremity injuries in a position of comfort.

Rigid splints are made out of plastic, malleable metals, wood, or other materials. They tend to be less flexible and more supportive than soft splints and are usually padded. They are typically secured to the patient via circumferentially applied adhesive, bandages, or straps. The joint above and below the injury should be immobilized as well.

Traction splints are used to immobilize femur fractures. They are comprised of straps that attach over the pelvis as an anchor, metal rods to mimic bone stability, and a mechanical device to apply traction. This is done in an attempt to reduce pain, realign the limb, and decrease vascular and neurologic complications to the affected lower extremity.

Pelvic circumferential compression devices (pelvic binder) work to provide circumferential stabilization of the entire pelvic cavity. This is performed to reduce pelvic fractures and decrease pelvic volume, in turn leading to decreased hemorrhage. The compression force is applied at the level of the femoral trochanters. This can also be achieved by wrapping a sheet around the pelvis and tying it tightly to secure it in place.