The effective treatment of secondary osteoporosis should, first and foremost, address any underlying reversible causes. The response of secondary osteoporosis to conventional therapy is always suboptimal unless the underlying condition is addressed.

Adequate calcium and vitamin D supplementation should be maintained in all patients.

Weight-bearing exercise helps stimulate bone formation. There is an association between reduced physical activity and bone fracture in older men and the positive influence of exercise in women who have osteoporosis. In addition, smoking cessation and avoidance of alcohol intake should be encouraged.

Antiresorptive agents: Once reversible causes are addressed, if pharmacologic therapy is needed, antiresorptive agents like bisphosphonates such as alendronate, zoledronic acid, ibandronate, and risedronate are the first line and can be used in patients with adequate renal function.

Anabolic agents, including Teriparatide and Abaloparatide: Teriparatide is a recombinant human parathyroid hormone given as a 20 mcg daily subcutaneous injection. Teriparatide is not the first-line drug used in the treatment of secondary osteoporosis, but it can be used in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, in patients with severe osteoporosis, in those who have contraindications to bisphosphonates and those who have failed other modalities of treatment. Abaloparatide is a parathyroid hormone-related peptide molecule that has also been shown to have an anabolic effect and stimulate bone formation. It is given as an 80 mcg daily subcutaneous injection as well. Recent studies have shown beneficial results and BMD gains in men using abaloparatide, and the medication has recently been approved for treating male osteoporosis.

Romosozumab has been studied and approved for treating postmenopausal osteoporosis but not yet for secondary osteoporosis.

Management of some of the secondary causes is discussed below:

**Endocrine Disorders**

a. Primary Hyperparathyroidism: If osteoporosis is present, the management of the disease includes parathyroidectomy, which usually results in the reversal of bone loss in 1 to 2 years.

b. Cushing's Syndrome: Bone loss in patients with Cushing's syndrome improves once the cause for hypercortisolism is addressed.

c. Hyperthyroidism: Bone loss as a result of hyperthyroidism also is reversed by the treatment with antithyroid drugs and controlling the hyperthyroid state.

d. Hypogonadism: Women with premature ovarian insufficiency will benefit from hormone replacement therapy and will have an improvement in their BMD due to estrogen replacement. Testosterone supplementation has been shown to improve BMD in men with hypogonadism. If there is significant osteoporosis with osteoporotic fractures, they may need treatment with osteoporotic medications.

e. Diabetes Mellitus: Good glycemic control has been shown to improve BMD in patients with diabetes. Also, general measures, including weight-bearing and calcium and vitamin D supplementation, have been shown to be of help.

**Chronic Inflammatory Conditions**

a. Rheumatoid arthritis: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis might benefit from treatment with osteoporosis medications, including bisphosphonates. Teriparatide has also been seen to improve BMD and reduce vertebral and nonvertebral fractures in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Lastly, denosumab can also prevent periarticular bone erosions in these patients.

b. Cystic fibrosis: Management of patients with cystic fibrosis-associated bone loss should include optimizing nutrition and ensuring adequate caloric intake. 25 OH vitamin D level of at least 50 should be maintained at all times, but when presenting with Z scores of < -2 and significant bone loss of > 4 %/year, in cases with significant bone loss, bisphosphonates should be commenced.

c.  Obstructive pulmonary disease: Treatment should include addressing the underlying health condition. Also, optimizing general bone health with calcium and vitamin D supplementation and weight-bearing exercises helps. All patients should be evaluated for osteoporosis treatment if they meet the criteria based on the general guidelines of osteoporosis and GIO.

**Chronic Kidney Disease**

Management of bone disease with CKD is extensive. The patients should maintain their phosphate levels in the normal range using phosphate binders. Noncalcium phosphate binders are encouraged to be used. Also, bone markers should be used to differentiate between adynamic bone disease versus other bone mineral disorders. Calcium levels should be maintained in the low normal range. Parathyroidectomy may be considered in patients with severe secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism. Excess use of calcimimetics should be discouraged. Hypogonadal patients may also benefit from hormone replacement therapy.

**Idiopathic Hypercalciuria**

Thiazide diuretics have been shown to improve calciuria in these patients. Potassium citrate, which increases urinary pH, has also been shown to improve idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis. Bisphosphonate use should be assessed on a case-by-case basis.

**Neuromuscular Disease**

Management in patients with neuromuscular disease involves addressing the underlying disease status. Also, maintaining optimal levels of calcium and vitamin D is crucial. Patients with severe bone loss or use of higher-dose glucocorticoids usually meet the criteria for osteoporosis treatment. Testosterone supplementation in case of hypogonadism will help with BMD as well.

Weight-bearing exercises and physical therapy should be provided in all these cases.

**Gastrointestinal Diseases**

General measures to prevent bone loss can help in all of these patients, with a special focus on nutrition counseling, including calcium and vitamin D supplementation. In cases of malabsorption, higher doses of supplementation are required. Patients on glucocorticoids or immunosuppressive medications may benefit from osteoporosis treatment.

**Nutritional Conditions**

Patients with bariatric surgery should have a DXA scan done. In case of low BMD, they should be on treatment for osteoporosis. These patients should never stop their nutritional supplements and continue following up with bariatric clinics. Higher doses of calcium and vitamin D levels may be required to maintain normal levels in these patients as well.

**Glucocorticoid Induced Osteoporosis**

Patients with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis who need continued treatment with steroids might need prophylaxis with bisphosphonates based on the available guidelines, which suggest prophylaxis when the prednisone is 7.5 mg or higher for more than three months duration.

**Post-transplant Osteoporosis**

Post-transplant patients should always have a baseline BMD checked. In cases of significant risk factors and low BMD, there is a documented benefit from bisphosphonates and other osteoporosis treatments, including anabolic agents. Denosumab has also been under investigation for patients with transplant osteoporosis.

**HIV/Infections**

Antiretroviral agents with decreased risk for bone loss should be preferred in patients with HIV. Also, optimal management of HIV infection and maintaining optimal general health will help with overall skeletal health and decrease the risk of osteoporosis. There should be a baseline DXA evaluation in patients with increased risk, and these patients should be treated with osteoporosis medications.

**Cancer and Bone**

Bisphosphonates have been studied and are being used in various malignancies, including multiple myeloma.

**Genetic Diseases**

Optimal levels of calcium and vitamin D should be maintained. Physical activity should be encouraged. In cases of worse bone health and decreased BMD, patients will benefit from osteoporosis treatment to prevent fragility fractures.