**Bicuspid pulmonary valve**

This valve anomaly has been reported in several case reports and may present as an isolated finding or associated with other anomalies such as pulmonary artery aneurysm, transposition of great arteries, or an atrial septal defect.

**Quadricuspid pulmonary valve**

This valve anomaly is even rarer, and on autopsy, the incidence of this anomaly varies from 1 to 5 cases per 20000 necropsies.

**Pentacuspid pulmonary valve**

To date, there are only two case reports of the pentacuspid pulmonary valve.

**Pulmonary stenosis**

This is a common congenital defect which affects 7% of children with congenital heart disorders.

**Pulmonary atresia**

This is the most severe end of the spectrum for pulmonary stenosis, and it can occur with or without VSD. Other abnormalities such as tricuspid atresia or right ventricular free wall dysplasia usually accompany this disease.

**Pulmonary regurgitation**, when it occurs as a congenital disorder, may be accompanied by a VSD. Other etiologies such as congenital anomalies (quadricuspid or bicuspid valve), hypoplasia, post-repair of tetralogy of Fallot or prolapse of the pulmonary valve may also be present. Carcinoid syndrome can also produce abnormalities due to thickening and shortening of the valve.

**Pulmonary valve endocarditis**

Pulmonic valve involvement in endocarditis accounts for 1.5 to 2% of total cases.

**Pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty:**

Pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty is a procedure to repair the stenotic pulmonary valve of the heart percutaneously. The patient groin is sterilized and draped, and the patient is anticoagulated during the procedure. A catheter is inserted to the left femoral vein and advanced to the right ventricle to monitor its pressure. An 18 gauge cannula is inserted to the left femoral artery to monitor systemic pressure. Then a wedge catheter is inserted to the right femoral vein and advanced into the pulmonary artery. A "J" guidewire is then inserted through this catheter, and once in place, the wedge catheter gets removed. The dilation catheter advanced through the guidewire and positioned across the stenotic pulmonary valve. While being stabilized by the guidewire, the balloon is dilated by hand with dilute contrast material at the pressure of 45 PSI.

**Electrocardiography**:

Based on an electrocardiography study of 100 subjects with isolated pulmonary stenosis, i.e., with an intact atrioventricular septum grouped into 4 (based on right ventricle systolic pressure), no diagnostic pattern was apparent that could aid diagnosis, irrespective of the severity of the lesion. The most common ECG finding is right ventricular hypertrophy.

**Echocardiography:**

For pulmonary stenosis, this diagnostic tool is useful in detecting the site of the stenosis, determine the cause, quantify the severity, and determine treatment strategies. The transesophageal echocardiography can visualize the pulmonary valve and right ventricular outflow tract more clearly.

On X-ray, the abnormalities that may present are right ventricular enlargement, right atrial enlargement, prominent pulmonary trunk, and signs of congestive heart failure.

**CT &****MRI**

Nowadays, these modalities are increasingly being used to evaluate the anatomy and functional assessment of the pulmonary valve and right ventricle. CT scan depicts with great detail the pulmonary valve, perivalvular structures, and pulmonary artery branches. Meanwhile, MRI is used postoperatively to evaluate the pulmonary valve function and grading of pulmonary regurgitation.