Pneumococcal vaccines are vaccines that work against the bacteria Streptococcus pneumoniae. These vaccines come in two formulations, polysaccharide vaccine, and conjugate vaccine.

**PCV13 (13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine):**PCV 13 provides active immunization against serotypes ofStreptococcus pneumoniae (1, 3, 4, 5, 6A and 6B, 7F, 9V, 14, 19A, and 19F, 18C, and 23F). Indications vary according to age.

- Children six weeks -five years of age: Prevention of IPD (invasive pneumococcal disease) caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae and for the prevention of otitis media

- Children six years through seventeen years of age: Prevention of IPD caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae

- Adults ≥18 years: Prevention of IPD and pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae.

**PCV15 (15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine):**PCV 15 provides active immunization against serotypes ofStreptococcus pneumoniae (1, 3, 4, 5, 6A and 6B, 7F, 9V, 14, 18C, 19A and 19F, 22F, 23F, and 33F). It is indicated for:

- The prevention of IPD caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae in individuals six weeks of age and older

- PCV13 and PCV15 can be used interchangeably.

**PCV20 (20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine):**PCV20 is recommended for active immunization against serotypes ofStreptococcus pneumoniae (1, 3, 4, 5, 6A, and 6B, 7F, 8, 9V, 11A, 10A, 12F, 14, 15B, 18C, 19A and 19F, 22F, 23F, and 33F).

- PCV 20 is indicated for preventing pneumonia and invasive pneumococcal diseases in adults 18 years of age and older.

**PPSV23 (23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine):**PPSV 23 is recommended for active immunization for preventing pneumococcal disease caused by the 23 serotypes of streptococcus pneumoniae (1, 2, 4, 3, 5, 6B, 7F, 8, 9N and 9V, 10A, 11A, 12F, 14, 15B, 17F, 18C, 19A and 19F, 20, 22F, 23F, and 33F).

- PPSV23 is approved in individuals≥ 50 age.

- PPSV 23 is also indicated in children≥ two years of age at high risk of pneumococcal infection.