Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis usually presents soon after birth. It has no cure, and the disorder is progressive. Treatment is primarily symptomatic and depends on the patient’s age and presentation. Physician management involves the family doctor, pediatrician, and dermatologist, as well as the NP and PA. Infants should be monitored in the intensive care setting to manage dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, and cutaneous superinfection. Sepsis should receive treatment with broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics, which should have input from the pharmacist for coverage, dosing, and monitoring for drug interactions. The nurse should educate the caregiver or parent on the use of topical emollients and protective padding for skin protection and heal denuded areas, which can also have pharmacy input. Because the skin is fragile, the nurse practitioner should also educate patients on ways to minimize mechanical trauma, which is achievable by wearing loose-fitting, comfortable clothes, and well-fitting shoes.

Because of the considerable psychosocial morbidity caused by long-term sequelae of epidermolytic hyperkeratosis, it is necessary to coordinate care with an interprofessional team including intensivists, infectious disease specialists, mental health nurse, and psychiatrists. Delays in diagnosis and management can produce negative outcomes and possible death. All these members of the interprofessional healthcare team need to collaborate and communicate to bring about positive patient outcomes.