**Growth Charts**

Isolated anthropometric measurements are not useful. The values obtained must be compared to relative standards for the appropriate population. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) charts are obtained from children raised in various nutritional conditions in the United States. The World Health Organization (WHO) charts outline the growth of healthy children under optimal nutritional and environmental conditions, providing a 'goal' standard for optimal growth.

On the CDC charts, the normal growth pattern is identified as growth between 5th and 95th percentiles. The 85th to the 95th percentile is considered the overweight category or the at-risk group. The WHO charts are considered applicable to all children from birth to five years of age regardless of ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and type of feeding.

It is essential to use the correct chart for the patient's age and gender when using growth charts. It is also important to remember that children with disorders that alter the growth pattern need specialized plots to obtain meaningful results. A number of specialized growth charts have been developed for children with Down syndrome, Turner syndrome, cerebral palsy, Williams syndrome, achondroplasia, Prader-Willi syndrome, and Rett syndrome, and should be used in place of standardized growth charts when indicated.

The recommended technique for obtaining anthropometric measurements according to the CHDP Guideline #4 are outlined below.

**Head Circumference**

For infants and toddlers less than two years of age, measure the largest circumference of the head using a non-stretchable measuring tape around the most prominent part of the head to the middle of the forehead. The tape measure should be pulled snug around the head to compress the hair and underlying soft tissue. Repeat the measurement twice to obtain two readings within 0.2 cm or 0.25 inches. The average of the two closest measurements should be recorded.

**Recumbent Length**

For infants and toddlers who cannot stand, the recumbent length should be measured. Align the infant's head against the top of the headboard of the infantometer. An assistant must straighten the infant's body and legs, ensuring the feet are parallel to the footboard. Repeat the measurement twice to obtain two readings within 0.2 cm or 0.25 inches. The average of the two closest measurements should be recorded.

**Height**

For children who can stand, a stadiometer should be used. The child should stand up straight, with buttocks, shoulder blades, and heels together touching the back of the stadiometer. The feet should face outward at a 60-degree angle. If the patient has genu valgum, separate the feet enough to avoid overlapping the knees while maintaining contact between the knees. Arms should be loosely hanging at the sides with palms facing the thighs. The horizontal bar of the stadiometer should be lowered until the hair is compressed to the crown of the head. Remove any objects on the head and hair that may obstruct the bar from compressing the hair to the crown of the head. The measurement should be read to the nearest 0.1 cm or 1/8 of an inch. Repeat the measurement twice to obtain two readings within 0.2 cm or 0.25 inches. The average of the two closest measurements should be recorded.

**Weight**

For children less than two years of age, use a calibrated beam or a digital infant scale. Ensure the infant is not wearing any clothes and remove the diaper before measuring the weight. The weight should be measured to the nearest 0.01 kg or 0.5 ounces. For children older than 24 months, a balanced floor scale or electronic floor scale can be used.

**Body Mass Index (BMI)**

BMI is a calculation based on the height and weight of the child and is recommended by the CHDP guidelines for all children older than two years of age. The formulas for the calculation of BMI in children are as follows:

- BMI = weight in pounds / [height in inches x height in inches] x 703

- BMI = weight in kilograms / [height in meters x height in meters]

In adults, BMI is used to diagnose obesity as it correlates with body fat. However, it does not directly measure body fat and has its limitations when used in isolation. Percent body fat varies with age, gender, and ethnicity. Percent body fat increases with age even if the weight stays the same, making it a less accurate measure of obesity in adults. Also, in athletes, increased muscle mass for a given height and age will increase their BMI, even though they have a very low percentage of total body fat.

**Z-Scores**

The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends the use of Z-scores to define malnutrition in children. This measurement uses standard deviations to determine the nutritional and developmental pattern of a child as compared to the average population. Z-scores are available for weight-for-height (WFH), weight-for-age (WFA), BMI for age, and head circumference measurements. Currently, z-score levels for classifying obesity in children are not well established. Consequently, they were not included in the CHDP guideline.

**Limb Measurements**

To measure upper leg length, have the patient seated with legs at a 90-degree angle. Then, run the measuring tape from the inguinal crease to the proximal aspect of the patella. To measure the upper arm length, find the superior edge of the spine of the scapula. Then, run the measuring tape down the center of the triceps to the olecranon. Immediately after measuring the upper arm length, the mid-point of the arm should be marked in preparation to measure the mid-upper arm circumference. The patient stands upright with the arm hanging freely at the side. The patient should not flex the arm muscles. Measuring tape should be placed snugly around the mid-point of the arm without compressing the skin.

**Waist Circumference**

To measure waist circumference, patients should stand with their arms crossed on the contralateral shoulders. The placement of the measuring tape should be snugly around the lateral aspect of each ilium at the mid-axillary line. It is an essential measure of anthropometry in adults and children as it directly measures central adiposity. Increasing central adiposity is associated with an increased risk of morbidity and mortality due to an increased risk of diabetes and heart disease.

**Skinfold Measurements**

Common sites for skinfold measurements include the biceps, triceps, iliac crest, thigh, calf, subscapular, abdomen, and chest. The exact technique can vary, but we will discuss one method using the triceps as an example. For the triceps skinfold, grab the skin 2 cm above the midpoint of the right upper arm with the thumb and index finger to create a skinfold. Then, place the calipers at the midpoint to obtain the measurement. Similarly, at other sites, the skinfold measurement is obtained by grabbing the skin 2 cm away from the measuring site. Despite standard measuring techniques, skinfold testing has high variability and has limited use thus far in the clinical setting.