The original purpose of the reflex is vestigial or unknown, though it can aid in diagnosing specific pathologies. It serves nothing more than a rudimentary phylogenetic function necessary for the arboreal life of newborn monkeys

Babies a few months old are unable to organize movements to grab an object voluntarily. The palmar reflex probably serves to create a basic motor pattern that lays the foundation for obtaining this voluntary ability. Furthermore, this reflection creates interaction and bonds between the infant and the adult.

From a clinical point of view, the reflex can be abnormal if the child responds with an exaggerated reflex (within six months of life) or is weak; equally, it is a clinical neurological hallmark if it persists. The reflex may be absent, and this event highlights a peripheral neurological injury or spinal cord involvement, particularly with an asymmetric response. If the lesion is central, the reflex could last longer, such as in the presence of spastic hemiplegia or quadriplegia; on the contrary, if the lesion is typical of an infantile cerebral palsy or athetoid type, the palmar grip is weak.

Spinal interneurons play an important role in modulating the periphery and upper non-motor centers during growth. As the brain matures, the higher motor centers will better control the spinal circuits, and there will be a voluntary hand-held grip. In the event of injury, the upper non-motor centers could play a role in this reflex's appearance in children and adults.

According to recent animal studies, another reason for the palmar reflex's alteration is an inadequate (minor) amount of melatonin from the female towards the fetus. This absence or decreased availability will alter the upper centers' functions, with an abnormal palmar reflex. Maternal melatonin provides the fetus with valuable information for internal rhythms (photoperiodic information) and future nervous patterns for extra-uterine development.

According to an observational study on children, the palmar reflex is stronger if the baby is hungry and could indicate the baby's need to be breastfed.