Ixekizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody (IgG) that selectively binds to interleukin 17A (IL-17A); this prevents interleukin 17A from binding to the IL-17 receptor. Thus, this attenuates an inflammatory response mediated by interleukin 17A.

Ixekizumab was the object of study in three clinical phase trials: UNCOVER-1, UNCOVER-2, and UNCOVER-3.

UNCOVER-2 compared ixekizumab treatment in 1224 patients with psoriasis. The same UNCOVER-1 treatment regimens were used, with the additional treatment group receiving etanercept 50 mg twice a week for 12 weeks. At the end of 12 weeks, the two-week, four-week, etanercept, and placebo groups had the following psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) 90 scores: 70.7%, 59.7%, 18.7%, and 0.6%, respectively, which were statistically significant when researchers compared the ixekizumab treatment groups to etanercept and placebo.

UNCOVER-3 compared ixekizumab treatment in 1346 patients with psoriasis. The study used the same treatment regimens as in UNCOVER-2. At the end of 12 weeks, the two-week, four-week, etanercept, and placebo groups had the following psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) 90 scores: 68.1%, 65.3%, 25.7%, and 3.1%, respectively, which were statistically significant when researchers compared the ixekizumab treatment groups to etanercept and placebo.

Herrera-Acosta E et al. reported on a 50-year-old man with multiple sclerosis and chronic plaque psoriasis.

Berman J. et al. conducted a clinical trial on 23 patients with psoriatic arthritis.