Typically the presence of cow's milk allergy appears within the first few months of life and usually before six months. Symptoms can present a few days or weeks after the ingestion of cow’s milk protein. The symptoms can vary from diarrhea and emesis to life-threatening anaphylaxis. In cases that involve the GI tract, the child can become dehydrated and exhibit a failure to thrive.

Cow's milk allergy reactions classify into rapid onset; usually, IgE mediated, where symptoms occur within an hour after ingestion, and slow onset, non-IgE mediated, where symptoms take hours or days to present.

Rapid onset symptoms can include:

- Urticaria/hives

- Wheezing

- Itching or a tingling feeling around the mouth or lips

- Angioedema: swelling of the lips, tongue, or throat

- Coughing or shortness of breath

- Vomiting

- Anaphylaxis

Slow onset symptoms can include:

- Diarrhea

- Hematochezia

- Abdominal cramps

- Colic

Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency requiring treatment with an epinephrine shot and evaluation in the emergency room. Signs and symptoms start soon after milk consumption and can include:

- Increased work of breathing

- Constriction of airways

- Swollen throat

- Facial flushing

- Itching

The clinician must recognize the difference between milk allergy and milk intolerance. The major difference is that intolerance does not involve the immune system. Common symptoms of milk intolerance include gas, bloating, or diarrhea after ingesting milk. The treatment of intolerances and allergies is different.