Apraxia is a neurological finding that can challenge the clinician; identification and testing are not straightforward. The symptoms can be obscured by the presence of other neurological and psychological factors. Causes of apraxia range from acute disorders like CVA or TBI to chronic conditions like neurodegenerative illness or schizophrenia. It can be mistaken for other neurological conditions such as aphasia, limb akinesia, and cataplexy. The lack of broad consensus concerning screening and diagnosis can be a point of frustration with healthcare providers. However, a careful history, physical examination, and targeted testing can help early identification and management. The role of multi-disciplinary and interprofessional teams in managing apraxia is crucial for better patient outcomes. The interprofessional team can include the patient, their family members, nurses, occupational therapist, physiotherapists, radiologists, physiatrists, psychiatrists, counselors, social workers, and case workers. All team members must maintain open communication channels with the rest of the team and are responsible for keeping accurate and detailed records of all interactions, interventions, and testing with the patient so that everyone on the interprofessional team has access to the same, up-to-date, accurate patient information. This interprofessional approach will yield optimal care and the best possible patient outcomes. [Level 5]

A Primary care physician or neurologist, on careful examination and history, can assess the presence of apraxia in an in-patient or outpatient setting. Nurses caring for the patient can identify deficiencies in patients' limb function, knowledge of tool usage, and general demeanor can assist in patient diagnosis and rehabilitation. Family members can aid in identifying deficiencies in patients and their eventual rehabilitation. Therapists can help improve limb function and help acquire newly learned skills for limb and tool usage. Psychological help during the recovery and rehabilitation phase helps the patient in the long term. Creating an accommodating environment for the patient's condition at home and work can aid their recovery. The long-term outcome depends on the etiology and duration of the illness. However, an improved prognosis can is achievable by prompt evaluation and management by an interprofessional team. [Level 4]