Ropinirole has a high affinity for and stimulates the post-synaptic dopamine receptors D2 in the central and peripheral nervous systems. The dopamine receptors (D2) are g-protein-coupled inhibitory neurons predominantly in the striatonigral, mesolimbic, and tuberoinfundibular systems. They inhibit adenylyl cyclase and calcium (Ca2+) channels and activate potassium channels leading to their physiological functions.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Ropinirole upon oral administration is rapidly absorbed and reaches peak plasma concentration in about 1 to 2 hours. About 50% of the drug is first-pass metabolized, and the absolute bioavailability is 45% - 55%. It reaches steady-state concentrations within two days of initiating ropinirole. A high-fat diet may delay absorption, and ropinirole is better absorbed in a fasting state. Food does not change the extent of absorption of ropinirole; however, the Tmax is prolonged by 2.5 hours, and the Cmax is shortened by 25% when the drug is taken with a high-fat meal.

**Distribution:**Ropinirole has an apparent volume of distribution 7.5 L/kg, and 40% of the drug is bound to plasma proteins.

**Metabolism:**The majority of ropinirole is metabolized by the liver by N-despropylation and hydroxylation process to form the inactive metabolites. Cytochrome P450 1A2 is the primary enzyme involved in the metabolism of ropinirole.

**Excretion:**The elimination half-life of the ropinirole immediate-release tablet is approximately 6 hours, and less than 10% of the orally administered drug is excreted as an unchanged drug in urine.