Studies reveal that hysterectomy, when clinically indicated, is associated with significant improvement in many quality of life indices.

While endoscopic procedures continue to replace more conventional abdominal surgeries, it remains imperative for the upcoming generation of surgeons to master the technical knowledge of the conventional abdominal hysterectomy. An abdominal hysterectomy will always be fundamental to the gynecologic oncologist, as well as the gynecologist during the management of benign gynecologic disease, which more commonly than not requires open surgery, or even during less invasive procedures where conversion to laparotomy is needed. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists published an opinion summary in 2017 recommending vaginal hysterectomy as the first option technique. In cases where the vaginal route does not seem a viable option, laparoscopic hysterectomy should be investigated, and in the event that both of these options are not viable, then abdominal hysterectomy should be performed.

It should be understood that abdominal hysterectomy is a major operation that can significantly impact a woman’s physical and mental wellbeing. It is necessary for the surgeon to help patients cope with the emotional turmoil that may accompany hysterectomy. Simple statements and open-ended questions by the physician regarding the patient’s feelings are encouraged during preoperative counseling to address anxiety and emotional distress and to provide support to the patient.