Central venous access devices have been the safest and most efficient method for long-term medication and fluid administration in hospitalized patients since the 1970s, especially those in intensive care units (ICU). Its scope of usage has since extended to into the outpatient setting. In fact, PICCs are particularly appropriate for those who require regular outpatient-based treatments.

PICCs have several advantages over other central catheters. They provide medium-term venous access for several weeks up to 6 months, whereas non-tunneled CICCs typically use for several days. They much more easily accessible due to their peripheral exit site and are capable of delivering the same caustic medications and fluids at similar flow rates compared to other central catheters. They can be easily placed and removed at the bedside by nursing staff whereas other central catheters, such as tunneled catheters and central ports, must be placed surgically. PICCs can also be used in thrombocytopenic patients (platelet count less than 50,000/mm), whereas central ports have increased the risk of hematoma with recurrent needle punctures required for access.

PICCs do have some limitations, however. They are a usually smaller bore, which is less useful for frequent blood draws (though still possible using a syringe). Additionally, for patients requiring daily access for stem cell or blood product administration, surgically inserted central catheters are preferred. Finally, tunneled central catheters and implantable ports can be used for longer than six months, whereas PICCs are not indicated for that length of time (although they have been known to be functional for more than 300 days).

In conclusion, PICCs are an excellent option for various diagnostic and therapeutic interventions and offer clinicians and nurses a safe and effective option for central access. They have been shown to be more cost-effective, have lower complication rates than CICCs and continue to gain popularity in the intensive care setting.