Management options for neonatal abstinence syndrome can broadly divide into non-pharmacological, alternative, and pharmacological treatments.

**Non-pharmacological Treatment**

Treatment should always begin with non-pharmacological care while maintaining the mother-infant dyad and should continue even after discharge from the hospital. The goal of non-pharmacological treatment is to assist the self-organization of the neonate and support the neuro-maturation. AAP has also recommended it as first-line in the management of NAS.

Since opioids are present in minute quantities in breastmilk, breastfeeding should be strongly encouraged unless the mother has other absolute contraindications such as HIV, Hepatitis B or C, polysubstance abuse, or IV drug abuse. The support for breastfeeding has also received endorsement by various organizations, including the American Academy of Pediatrics. But several barriers to breastfeeding among women in Medication-Assisted Treatment (MAT) program exist, and efforts must take place to overcome those to reap the benefits of breastfeeding that is beneficial to the infant's neurodevelopmental outcomes.

There may be a debilitation of maternal well-being in the perinatal period. Hence, multi-level professional care must be offered to the mother and maintain the mother-infant dyad. Despite many studies showing the benefits of preserving the dyad, significant barriers exist. For example, mothers report feeling guilty or having mistrust and judgmental behavior from the staff caring for their baby. Provider biases preventing the involvement of the mother in the individualized care of the infant also exist. Hence to reap the benefits of this strong relationship, physicians must support and teach the parent in a non-judgemental way to optimize the non-pharmacological care for their infant, which can be easily provided at the bedside by the parent and continued even after discharge from the hospital.

**Alternative Treatment**

Many alternative therapies have undergone evaluation for their use in NAS. Massage therapy, foot and auricular acupressure therapy, and Reiki have correlated with soothing effects and positive changes in the baby's vitals. A recent study on laser acupuncture has shown a reduction in LOS, although the LOS is comparatively longer than the national average. Besides these, ongoing studies are evaluating the effects of aromatherapy and music therapy, as well.

**Pharmacological Treatment**

Even though nonpharmacological treatment remains the first line, AAP endorses the use of pharmacotherapy when indicated, keeping in mind that it is also associated with a more extended overall stay in the hospital, which is detrimental to the mother-infant dyad.

Multiple studies, including randomized control trials, have been conducted to find the optimal medication. Still, the results have varied widely in length of stay in hospital and treatment duration. Despite these variations, opioids remain the preferred mainstay pharmacological agent in the treatment of NAS, although there is no clear consensus on the choice of opioids.

Methadone, a long-acting synthetic opioid, has been evaluated as an alternative. It has the advantage of being dosed twice daily due to its long half-life, but that also limits the dose's frequent titration. The length of stay had ranged from 16 to 44 days when using methadone. Recent evidence shows only a modest reduction of LOS with methadone compared to morphine.

Buprenorphine, a partial agonist opioid, has recently drawn attention because it correlates with shorter length of stay than morphine and methadone and its ease of use through sublingual administration. Even though the LOS range was between 12.4 days and 32 days, recent RCT showed that the median LOS was significantly shorter by 12 days compared to morphine.

Second-line pharmacotherapy for infants whose symptoms remain uncontrolled with maxed opioid treatment includes Phenobarbital and clonidine. Again, there is no clear consensus that among the two, one is more effective, but Phenobarbital is used more frequently in the US than clonidine.

Naloxone, an opioid antagonist, is not recommended in the management of NAS because it can precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Its efficacy, dosing, and safety profile in neonates have not received adequate study as well.

Pharmacotherapy can get weaned and discontinued once the NAS signs and symptoms are well-controlled based on the scoring tool used. Many institutions have used a 10 to 20% reduction in the daily dosing of the opioid as the weaning protocol. However, there is no consistency among institutions, and the necessity of longer weaning protocols is also questionable.

**Location of the Treatment**

Babies with neonatal abstinence syndrome have long received treatment in the NICU, and this has been a traditional practice than evidence-based. According to a recent Pediatric Health Information System (PHIS) database, about 87% of neonates with NAS were managed in the NICU.