Due to the rarity of IgA pemphigus, various differential diagnoses should be considered when approaching the management and treatment of the condition.

Classic subcorneal pustular dermatosis, also known as Sneddon-Wilkinson disease, is a chronic dermatosis characterized by sterile pustular lesions that erupt in cyclical patterns. Similar to the subcorneal pustular subtype of IgA pemphigus, the pustular lesions found in Sneddon-Wilkinson disease coalesce in an annular pattern and eventually burst to form crusted plaques. The two conditions even have the same area of distribution, favoring the groin, trunk, and axillae, and avoiding mucosal surfaces. Histological examination of Sneddon-Wilkinson disease demonstrates perivascular infiltration of neutrophils and mild spongiosis. However, in contrast to IgA pemphigus, direct immunofluorescence of Sneddon-Wilkinson disease will be negative for IgA deposits against adhesion molecules like desmocollin-1 that are key in the diagnosis of the SPD subtype of IgA pemphigus.

Another differential diagnosis to consider when managing a patient with suspected IgA pemphigus is pemphigus foliaceus. Pemphigus foliaceus is a condition characterized by flaccid bullae usually found on the trunk that eventually crust over much like the lesions in IgA pemphigus. It is usually considered a benign disease that responds well to topical and oral corticosteroids. Clinical differentiation between IgA pemphigus and pemphigus foliaceus is nearly impossible. Thus immunofluorescence is key in diagnosis. Direct immunofluorescence of pemphigus foliaceus demonstrates IgG autoantibodies against desmoglein-1 in contrast to the IgA deposits against desmocollin-1 found in IgA pemphigus. Thus, proper diagnosis using histology and immunofluorescence is essential in the differentiation of the two conditions.

Other differential diagnoses to consider when a patient presents with a blistering disease include pemphigus herpetiformis, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, and bacterial skin infections. It is important to take into account the patients’ age, sex, and the course of the disease. Other important features to take note of include the distribution and involvement of the blisters, in particular, whether or not there is mucosal involvement. Regardless of the presentation, careful investigation of the symptoms using histology and immunofluorescence is essential in every case.