The pressure gradient inside the thorax changes with a pneumothorax. Usually, the pressure of the pleural space is negative when compared to atmospheric pressure. When the chest wall expands outwards, the lung also expands outwards due to surface tension between the parietal and visceral pleurae. Lungs tend to collapse due to elastic recoil. When there is communication between the alveoli and the pleural space, air fills this space changing the gradient, lung collapse unit equilibrium is achieved, or the rupture is sealed. Pneumothorax enlarges, and the lung gets smaller due to this vital capacity, and oxygen partial pressure decreases. Clinical presentation of a pneumothorax can range anywhere from asymptomatic to chest pain and shortness of breath. A tension pneumothorax can cause severe hypotension (obstructive shock) and even death. Increased central venous pressure can result in distended neck veins and hypotension. Patients may have tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, and hypoxia.

Spontaneous pneumothorax in most patients occurs due to the rupture of bullae or blebs. Primary spontaneous pneumothorax is defined as occurring in patients without underlying lung disease, but these patients had asymptomatic bullae or blebs on thoracotomy. Primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in tall and thin young people due to increased shear forces or more negative pressure at the apex of the lung. Lung inflammation and oxidative stress are essential to the pathogenesis of primary spontaneous pneumothorax. Current smokers have increased inflammatory cells in small airways and are at increased risk of pneumothorax.

Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in the presence of underlying lung disease, primarily chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; others may include tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, cystic fibrosis, malignancy, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia.

Iatrogenic pneumothorax occurs due to a complication of a medical or surgical procedure. Thoracentesis is the most common cause.

Traumatic pneumothoraces can result from blunt or penetrating trauma; these often create a one-way valve in the pleural space (letting the airflow in but not flow out) and hence hemodynamic compromise. Tension pneumothorax most commonly occurs in ICU settings in positive-pressure ventilated patients.