Greater trochanteric pain syndrome (GTPS) groups several etiologies of lateral hip, buttock, and thigh pain. These etiologies include greater trochanteric bursitis, gluteal medius tendinopathy or tears, gluteal minimus tendinopathy or tears, and iliotibial band snapping. Patients may have coexisting bursitis and tendinopathy. While greater trochanteric bursitis is a self-limiting process, it can cause significant pain and functional impairment. Although conservative management with NSAIDs, activity modification, physical therapy, and weight reduction is often successful, corticosteroid injections of the trochanteric bursa are commonly performed to reduce pain and improve functionality. This activity will review the clinically relevant anatomy, indications, contraindications, technique, and complications associated with trochanteric bursa injections. The activity also highlights the role of the interprofessional team in optimizing outcomes for patients with greater trochanteric bursitis treated with intrabursal corticosteroid injection.

**Objectives:**
- Apply the clinically relevant anatomy to the differential diagnosis of greater trochanteric pain syndrome.
- Assess patient response to conservative therapy and determine the need for intrabursal corticosteroid injection.
- Employ best practices when performing a trochanteric intrabursal injection under fluoroscopic guidance.
- Coordinate follow-up care, monitoring, and additional interventions as necessary for patients receiving trochanteric bursa injections.