Prognosis is often a crucial question that providers will handle routinely in the setting of anoxic encephalopathy. However, studies regarding accurate prognosis have yet to validate a solitary evaluation or scoring system. Currently, several scoring systems based on imaging, testing, and exam findings exist and may be of more benefit in discussions of current neurologic status and potential outcomes with families. Factors such as shorter time to initiation of CPR, shorter duration of CPR, and ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation as the identified arrest rhythm are associated with improved outcomes. However, the evaluation and findings of the provider are still the choices over scoring systems for routine practice.

Several scoring systems that attempt to predict prognosis relates to post-arrest anoxic encephalopathy. The GO-FAR score is a tool that retrospectively analyzed in-hospital cardiac arrest patients and predicted the likelihood of survival with good neurologic outcomes based on 13 clinical variables.

The prognosis after resuscitation (PAR) score is another post-arrest score that aims to predict survival; it also was a retrospective analysis of in-hospital cardiac arrest patients.

The brain arrest neurological outcome scale (BrANOS) was formulated using retrospective data that incorporates radiologic findings into prognosis in addition to the Glasgow Coma Scale and duration of cardiac arrest. Combining these data, the prognosis of severe neurologic disability and mortality was estimated at up to 90% accuracy.

In addition to prognostic scales, a physical test can provide prognostic information using stimulation of the median nerve bilaterally. This testing evaluates for somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP), which are averaged electrical responses in the central nervous system to somatosensory stimulation peripherally to remove the possibility of peripheral nervous system damage confounding exam findings. This testing does require expert consultation for implementation and interpretation. SSEP evaluation aims to evaluate the presence of N20 response from the primary somatosensory cortex bilaterally.

Ultimately the area of predicting prognosis continues to develop, and at this time, there is no fully validated prognostic scale. However, the combination of initial testing, continued neurologic evaluation, and ancillary testing can provide information regarding the likelihood and assist surrogate decision-makers in determining the extent of treatment.