# Continuing Education Activity

Intracranial subdural empyema is a loculated collection of pus in the subdural space between the dura mater and the arachnoid. It is a serious condition and can lead to significant morbidity and mortality. To avoid the high morbidity and mortality associated with this condition, it must be promptly diagnosed and treated. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of subdural empyema and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of subdural empyema.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of patients with subdural empyema.
- Review the management options available for subdural empyema.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of subdural empyema and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Intracranial subdural empyema is a loculated collection of pus in the subdural space between the dura mater and the arachnoid.

# Etiology

The etiology of subdural empyema can be multifactorial; however, some of the predisposing factors associated with the development of subdural empyema include prior cranial surgery, head trauma with open skull fractures, or penetrating injury, infected hematoma or subdural effusion, and not properly treated ear and sinus infections. Of the reported literature, up to 40 to 80% of patients with subdural empyema have otorhinologic infections, especially paranasal sinuses.

The most common microorganisms are anaerobes, aerobic Streptococci, Staphylococci, Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and other gram-negative bacilli.Streptococcus milleri and Streptococcus anginosus).Staphylococcus aureus.

# Epidemiology

Intracranial subdural empyema usually affects children and young adults.

# Pathophysiology

Subdural empyema most often occurs due to the direct extension of local infection. The infection can spread to the intracranial compartment due to the valveless diploic veins of Breschet. As a result, blood may flow in either direction, causing the spread of bacterial infection intracranially.

# History and Physical

Subdural empyema usually presents with signs and symptoms of infection; however, it can also be asymptomatic.

Physical examination can show unstable vital signs, including fever, tachycardia, and respiratory compromise, which could all correlate with sepsis. Presentation in most cases is gradually progressive, and if untreated, symptoms may worsen. Some patients can become critically ill quickly, becoming drowsy, stuporous, and eventually comatose or even die.

Other physical examination findings related to the neurological exam include meningismus, contralateral hemiplegia, and cranial nerve palsies, anisocoria, and papilledema.

# Evaluation

History and physical examination should help tailor case evaluation and diagnosis; however, cranial imaging should be performed in all patients with suspected subdural empyema.

Laboratory workup can add evidence to the suspected diagnosis. Leukocytosis can be seen, indicating an active process of infection. Immunocompromised or immunosuppressed patients will not always present with elevated white blood cells on complete blood count. Depending on the patient’s immune response, bacterial infections can cause a leftward shift with associated neutrophilia. Further laboratory workup, including serum inflammation markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein, could add evidence as these are considered acute phase reactants. In cases of infections, some clinicians may recommend blood culture samples to try direct antibiotic therapy early in the disease course; however, in the case of subdural empyema, these rarely identify an organism due to the capsulated nature of the infection.

Spinal puncture is not indicated for the diagnosis and can be dangerous in those patients with increased intracranial pressure and empyemas, causing mass effect.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of cranial subdural empyema is multimodal, including both medical and surgical treatment. Infectious disease service and neurosurgery service are indispensable. The use of antibiotic therapy alone is rare; however, it can be used if the patient is essentially doing well, has no major neurological deficit, the collection is small, and an early response is documented.

A prompt and accurate diagnosis will result in a more favorable clinical outcome, and this directly depends on the level of suspicion the clinician has as a result of the patient’s history, physical examination, laboratory workup, and imaging findings. Treatment options, including multiple burr holes or a craniotomy for drainage and debridement, have been previously described in the literature. A craniotomy usually offers better results and fewer recurrences.

Intravenous antibiotic therapy, coordinated by the infectious disease team for 3 to 6 weeks, is required. Longer periods of therapy are required for those patients with osteomyelitis. In infants, subdural empyema is often secondary to meningitis, and antibiotic therapy is required for 6 to 8 weeks.

Further monitoring and follow-up can be done with laboratory workup. Imaging can be done with a repeat head computed tomography scan or brain MRI. Antiepileptic drugs should be given in view of the high incidence of preoperative and postoperative seizures.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Epidural abscess

- Brain abscess

- Brain tumor

- Leptomeningeal disease

- Subdural hematoma

- Meningitis

- Cerebritis

- Subdural hygroma

# Prognosis

The outcome is dependent on the preoperative level of consciousness, the timing of intervention, and the aggressiveness of the treatment. Awake and alert patients have a good prognosis in the majority of the cases. Stuporous and comatose patients have high mortality. Older age patients have the worst prognosis.

# Complications

Complications of subdural empyema include seizures, cerebritis, cerebral abscess, cerebral edema, cortical venous thrombosis with cerebral venous infarction, cavernous sinus thrombosis, sepsis, septic shock, electrolyte imbalances, hydrocephalus, cranial osteomyelitis in adjacent cranial bones, osteomyelitis of the craniotomy bone flap, and residual neurological deficits.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients treated for sinusitis or otitis should be warned that if they develop headaches, nausea, seizure, or disorientation, they should immediately return to their primary physician for reevaluation. Those patients who are using antiepileptic medication should not discontinue them without medical recommendations as they may experience the return of the seizures.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Subdural empyema is a medical and surgical emergency; time is of utmost importance in this type of pathology, and early recognition and management are required.

- During the evaluation and treatment process, attempts to identify the causative agent and tailor further therapy accordingly should be prioritized.

- The choice of antibiotics should be guided by the patient’s age, likely pathogen, predisposing conditions, and local resistance patterns.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of intracranial subdural empyema is complex. Most cases need emergent management and treatment to avoid complications and unfavorable prognosis. It requires an interprofessional team that includes a neurosurgeon, infectious disease specialist, critical care intensivist, neurologist, and physiatrist. Pharmacists review antibiotic and antiseizure medications to check for interactions and contraindications. Emergency, critical care, and neuroscience nurses provide care and update the interprofessional team on changes in patient status. A good level of suspicion is needed to avoid delaying treatment. Once the patient resolves the infection, many require long-term antiepileptic medications and physical therapy for further recovery. Inpatient or outpatient rehabilitation may be needed for physical, occupational, or speech therapy.