The clinical presentation of arachnoiditis is variable. Arachnoiditis often presents as a chronic, painful, and debilitating condition with an insidious onset. There is a variable, inconsistent time frame between a possible inciting event or events and the onset of symptoms. For example, it was reported the average time between the rupture of an aneurysm, and the spinal adhesive arachnoiditis was 10 months with a highly variable course described as static and progressive. Arachnoiditis also displays a variable severity of symptoms ranging from subclinical to advanced and severe. If the arachnoiditis is severe, the clinical presentation can be involvement of both the spinal cord and connecting nerve roots, often resulting in severe back pain, numbness, and tingling of the extremities, myeloradiculopathy symptoms of the lower limb, impairment of bowel, bladder, sexual functioning, difficulty sitting for long, as well as difficulties controlling limbs if an efferent motor nerve root is affected. The most common clinical presentation is that of back pain gradually followed by radicular pain and then sensory defect. Less common symptoms may involve weakness, gait imbalance, as well as possible neurogenic bowel or bladder. Urinary symptoms develop late in 23% of arachnoiditis patients and are often characterized as urgency, increased frequency, and less commonly, incontinence. Paraplegia, as well as isolated low back pain, have also been documented. Clinical symptoms vary according to the affecting spine levels and severity of the arachnoiditis. The involvement of lumbar and thoracic spine is the most common, followed by lumbosacral, with entire spine involvement being the least common.