Although Parkinson-plus syndrome is a clinical diagnosis, a full medical workup consists of detailed laboratory testing and imaging studies to help rule out other common diagnoses. Unfortunately, in most PPS conditions, laboratory and imaging findings are non-diagnostic.

**Lewy Dody Dementia**

The evaluation of LBD begins as an analysis of dementia. This consists of a cognitive assessment with a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) or Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). Laboratory testing includes a basic workup with a chemistry panel, complete blood count (CBC), thyroid function test, and vitamin B12 levels. Neuroimaging is performed with computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Imaging findings in LBD include generalized brain atrophy and white matter lesions, pronounced cortical atrophy, degeneration of the putamen, and reduced perfusion, most marked in the occipital areas.

Indicative biomarkers that contribute to the diagnosis of LBD include reduced dopamine transporter uptake in the basal ganglia evident on positron emission tomography (PET) or single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT), low uptake of 123-iodine-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy, and confirmation of REM sleep without atonia on polysomnography. Supportive biomarkers for diagnosis include relative preservation of medial temporal lobe structures on CT or MRI, low uptake on PET perfusion scans with reduced occipital activity, and posterior slow-wave activity on electroencephalogram (EEG) with periodic fluctuations in the pre-alpha and theta range.

**Multiple System Atrophy**

As in other PPS diseases, laboratory and imaging studies are non-specific, and diagnosis is based on clinical features. Neuroimaging is used to rule out other diseases but may also show atrophy of the putamen, pons, or middle cerebellar peduncle, along with signal changes in the putamen. A definite diagnosis of MSA is based on post-mortem neurodegenerative changes in the striatonigral or olivopontocerebellar structures, with pathology showing alpha-synuclein inclusions in glial cells.

**Corticobasal Degeneration**

No established biological markers exist for CBD. Routine blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analyses are all non-diagnostic, while neuroimaging studies are non-specific. Workup includes laboratory tests such as CBC, electrolytes, vitamin B12, thyroid function tests, syphilis testing (to investigate for causes of cognitive deficits), and copper and ceruloplasmin levels to rule out Wilson's disease. Workup includes erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), antinuclear antibody (ANA), and liver function tests to investigate rheumatologic disease; CSF testing for biomarkers of neurodegeneration can be performed, such as analysis for 14-3-3 protein, neuron-specific enolase, and CSF real-time quaking-induced conversion (CSF RT-QuIC) to test for prionopathies such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).

Evaluation for AD can be performed by testing for Amyloid beta-42, phosphorylated tau, and total tau. Regarding neuroimaging, CBD has been shown to have more asymmetric atrophy of the frontal and parietal lobes.

**Progressive Supranuclear Palsy**

In PSP, a medical workup is based upon eliminating other diagnoses. Although not diagnostic, neuroimaging is notable for the hummingbird sign (or penguin silhouette sign) on MRI, a name derived from predominant midbrain atrophy with preserved pons resembling a hummingbird or penguin in silhouette. PET studies have shown hypometabolism in the frontal cortex, putamen, caudate, thalamus, and brainstem. Fluorodopa (F-dopa) PET study demonstrates a lower influx of F-dopa in the caudate and putamen compared to PD.

Furthermore, sleep studies are often abnormal in PSP patients with lower total sleep time, loss of REM sleep, and increased awakenings. Histologic findings in PSP show prominent involvement in the basal ganglia (specifically the internal globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra), oculomotor complex, superior colliculi, dentate nucleus, periaqueductal gray matter, and basis pontis.