Human T-lymphotropic virus-1 is commonly implicated in two distinct diseases: adult T-cell lymphoma (ATLL) in approximately 4% of infected individuals and HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) in 2%.

Viral gene products interact with transcription factors of the host and mediate cellular transformation and, therefore, oncogenesis. Tax is one of the main viral proteins which mediates this disruption via several routes. Tax upregulates survival pathways for T cells (through IL-2 and IL-15) and promotes inhibition of apoptosis (through stimulation of Bcl-XL, which prevents caspase activation) whilst suppressing cell cycle control and DNA repair. Intracellularly NF-KB promotes inflammation, and HTLV-1 has been shown to induce class-switching of T cells to skew a T helper cell (ThC)-1 profile, which is further pro-inflammatory.in vitro the ability to transform human lymphocytes to be self-sustaining.

A humoral immune response is prompted in response to HTLV-1 infection, and antibodies are produced in response to viral Gag, Env, and Tax proteins. The cellular response is coordinated by HTLV-specific cytotoxic lymphocytes, which largely recognize epitopes from the Tax protein. They are present in high numbers in those with an asymptomatic infection and therefore appear to be important in the control of HTLV-1.

The interaction of the host immune response with HTLV-1-encoded genes has also been demonstrated to facilitate an environment of immunosuppression. Acute infection is noted to promote an IL-10-dominant cytokine profile, which is known to suppress the T cell response. CD8 T-cell exhaustion is secondary to persistent viral proliferation results in failure of virus-specific suppression: a mechanism believed to be important in both chronic viral-mediated immunosuppression and oncogenesis.