**Superficial Branch of Radial Nerve**

This nerve yields sensory cutaneous innervation to a significant portion of the hand's dorsolateral aspect. The anatomic course of this nerve follows the course of the radial nerve. Beginning lying slightly lateral to the radial artery, it runs hidden beneath the brachioradialis muscle. It continues this path until approximately 7 cm above the wrist, where it then pierces the deep fascia and divides into two branches: lateral and medial. The lateral branch yields cutaneous innervation to the thumb's radial dorsal aspect, then joining the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve's dorsal terminal branch. The median branch course is slightly more complicated, first communicating with the lateral antebrachial cutaneous, just proximal to the level of the wrist, and then communicates with the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve on the dorsal aspect of the hand distal the level of the wrist. Along this course, distal to the wrist, the superficial radial nerve gives off fibers innervating the dorsum of the hand. Around the anatomical level just described, it branches into terminal digital nerves with each innervating specific portions of the hand as follows:

- The first branch innervates the ulnar dorsal aspect of the thumb.

- The second branch innervates the radial dorsal aspect of the index finger.

- The third innervates the dorsal aspect of the joining sides of the index and middle finger,

- Finally, the fourth communicates with a filament of the dorsal ulnar nerve giving innervation to the dorsal aspect of the joining sides of the middle and ring fingers.

Aside from the thumb, the dorsal terminal aspect of the fingers discussed here can be innervated by terminal branches of the median nerve, as discussed below.

**Median Nerve**

The first branch supplying cutaneous innervation is the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve. This branch begins just proximal to the wrist and travels superficial to the flexor retinaculum, then giving off terminal fibers that supply cutaneous innervation to much of the lateral palm. After the median nerve passes through the carpal tunnel, it commonly divides into a smaller lateral branch and a thicker medial branch.  The medial branch divides into the two common palmar digital nerves. The lateral branch divides into the recurrent median nerve as well as three proper digital nerves. The recurrent median nerve supplies motor innervation to the thenar muscle group, which includes opponens pollicis, abductor pollicis brevis, and the flexor pollicis brevis; it does not supply any of the cutaneous innervations of the hand and will receive any further discussion. Starting with the three proper digital nerves off the lateral branch, two of these supply the cutaneous sensory innervation for both ventral lateral aspects of the thumb while the remaining one supplies sensory innervation for the radial ventral aspect of the index finger. Next, the two common palmar digital nerves arising from the medial division of the median nerve yield their own proper digital nerves. These proper digital nerves innervate the radial ventral aspect of the index finger, the ventral aspects of the middle finger, and the radial ventral aspect of the ring finger. These terminal branches may also innervate the terminal dorsal end of the digits just discussed.

**Ulnar Nerve**

This nerve yields sensory cutaneous innervation to the dorsomedial and ventromedial aspect of the hand as well as motor innervation to the palmar brevis muscle; this is accomplished via two nerves: the dorsal cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve and the palmar cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve. The dorsal cutaneous ulnar branch originates, on average, 5 cm proximal to the ulnar styloid process, which then travels superficially to the dorsum of the hand. Here it branches into common and proper digital nerves. The common digital nerve innervates the dorsum of the hand before splitting into more proper digital nerves. The summation of these proper digital nerves innervates the dorsum of the fifth and, most commonly, the ulnar dorsal aspect half of the fourth digit. The ulnar nerve bifurcates into the superficial and deep branches within the Guyon canal. The superficial branch goes on to become the palmar cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve within the palm. Here it gives off fibers that innervate the ulnar aspect of the palm. The nerve then branches into proper and common digital nerves that supply the cutaneous innervation to the ventral aspect of the fifth digit as well as most commonly to the ulnar ventral aspect of the fourth digit.