Various substances including many medications can be used to manipulate the beta-1 receptor. They can be used to block or potentiate the effects to treat certain conditions.

Beta-blockers, like propranolol (nonselective, beta-1 and beta-2 receptor antagonists) and atenolol and landiolol

Beta-agonists, like dopamine (a beta-1 selective agonist) and isoproterenol (a non-selective beta agonist), on the other hand, are used to mimic and potentiate the effects of sympathomimetic agents like epinephrine and norepinephrine. These agents increase heart rate and ventricular oxygen consumption thus increasing contractility and are commonly used in heart failure or cardiogenic shock.

Illicit drug use is of particular note when talking about the beta-1 receptor. Cocaine increases the plasma concentrations of catecholamines including epinephrine and norepinephrine by inhibition of peripheral re-uptake and central sympathetic system stimulation. Increased levels of these catecholamines potentiate activation of the beta-1 receptor and thus lead to increased heart rate. In some patients, and in overdose, these increased levels can contribute to the onset of ventricular fibrillation (V-fib). With the rapid onset of cocaine effects, use of this drug can quickly become a medical emergency. Although increases in beta activation can precipitate an arrhythmia, beta-blocking agents are not recommended. Instead, treatment with alpha-blocking agents to prevent hypertension and malignant arrhythmias is the recommended therapeutic course.