In current day practice, primary health care faces unprecedented challenges necessitating a more comprehensive, multi-disciplinary service delivery model. Considering the growing population of chronic musculoskeletal conditions that need more persistent and long term close involvement of medical care teams, one approach has been the implementation of physiotherapy self-referral programs. There is recent evidence that physical therapists can provide efficacious management of musculoskeletal complaints in primary care settings, and such approaches have shown high levels of patient-reported satisfaction. An interprofessional team, centered on the patient benefit is the key to success in contemporary health care systems.

The nurse is the first link, developing therapeutic contact that helps the patient to understand the disease. The nurse’s role in musculoskeletal patients covers mainly the patient education (adjusting patients and next of kin's expectations, tailoring support and information, recognizing patients' knowledge), assessing the satisfaction of care, the efficiency of care provided, psychosocial support, and promotion of self-management. The union of these factors helps the patient to feel secure and positively react to the proposed treatments.

All medical staff must be involved in the effective management of patients. Every member of the medical team plays a role in providing adequate patient care, and careful communication and coordination between physicians, therapists, nurses, and all medical staff is paramount to optimize patient outcomes. [Level V]