Visualization of glycogen molecules cannot be done through light microscopy but instead requires the implementation of electron microscopy. Histological staining and implementation of light microscopy would only allow for visualization of conglomerates of glycogen particles. Molecules of glycogen, per se, require electron microscopy. Depending on the tissue sample gathered, glycogen has s been described as rosette-like beta particles or larger alpha particles. Rosette-like beta particles are found on muscle, whereas the alpha particles, which are simply aggregates of beta particles, are found in the liver. Beta particles correspond to the typical configuration of glycogen with average chain lengths of 13 residues consisting of inner chains with branch points and outer chains without branch points. The method integrated for histological staining is Period Acid Schiff. However, certain disadvantages of this method exist, including lack of specificity and general incompatibility with immunofluorescence techniques. Therefore, a novel method for the detection of glycogen in cells is now available where a renewable, recombinant protein containing carbohydrate-binding module from starch-binding domain protein 1 (Stbd1) is subsequently employed to perform an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

Concerning testing for glycogen storage diseases, current methods using DNA mutational analysis have eliminated the need to perform liver biopsies. This diagnostic test, for instance, applies to von Gierke disease and Cori disease. Diagnostic tests for Pompe disease include analysis of acid maltase activity in leukocytes or fibroblasts. A muscle biopsy portraying vacuolated myopathy with excessive lysosomal glycogen accumulation would also serve as a diagnostic test for Pompe disease.

The rate of glycogenolysis is the difference between the rates of glucose production and absolute gluconeogenesis. Levels of gluconeogenesis are identified using techniques, including radioactive and stable isotopes. Quantification of glycogenolysis is also possible via nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.