The clinical manifestations of hypoglycemia can be classified as either neuroglycopenic or neurogenic. Neuroglycopenic signs and symptoms are signs and symptoms that result from direct central nervous system (CNS) deprivation of glucose. These include behavioral changes, confusion, dizziness, headache, fatigue, seizure, coma, and potential death if not immediately corrected. Severe hypoglycemia can cause hemophilia and aphasia, masquerading as a stroke.

A detailed history is essential in evaluating hypoglycemia. Pertinent issues that should be addressed while taking a patient's history include

- A detailed medication history

- History of alcohol and/or drug use

- History of psychiatric disorders

- Personal or family history of diabetes mellitus or multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes (MEN)

- Unintentional weight changes

- Changes in medication

- Consideration of acute kidney injury or renal failure

- Symptoms of other hormone deficiencies

- It is also important to note the context of the hypoglycemic episode relative to meals or exercise.

There is no agreed-upon lab value that defines hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia is said to be present when the patient has symptoms consistent with hypoglycemia in addition to a low serum glucose measurement (less than  70 mg/dL). This perspective reflects the idea that hypoglycemia is a clinical presentation coupled with a lab finding of low serum glucose rather than a pure chemistry finding. Typically neurogenic and neuroglycopenic symptoms of hypoglycemia occur at a glucose level of or below 50 to 55 mg/dL, but this threshold can vary from individual to individual.

Patients who have diabetes can present with symptoms of hypoglycemia at relatively higher serum glucose levels. The chronic hyperglycemia alters the "set point" in which neuroglycopenic/neurogenic symptoms become apparent. This phenomenon is referred to as "pseudohypoglycemia" because the serum glucose may be within normal range despite symptom presentation.

It is the nurse's responsibility to assess for signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia, as indicated above, and to report any abnormal findings. It is also the nurse's responsibility to assess that medications are taken as prescribed and report any possible side effects of hypoglycemia. Some medications are known to have a side effect of hypoglycemia, in addition to insulin and other antidiabetic medications. Additional medications that may cause hypoglycemia are pentamidine, disopyramide, diuretics, regular use of salicylates, and the combination of diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and beta-blockers.