Evaluation of suspected aspergillosis infection varies depending on the patient's presentation and immune state.

Initial management should include laboratory studies such as:

- Complete blood count with differential to determine eosinophil count (which is usually elevated more than 500 cells/microliters), serum IgE (elevated more than 1000 IU/mL).

- Aspergillus skin test positivity or detectable IgE against Aspergillus

- Sputum analysis Gram stain plus culture: with findings of eosinophils, Charcot-Leyden crystals, and Aspergillus in culture.

- Imaging: Aspergillus bronchopulmonary infection can be evidenced on chest x-ray with findings of mucous plugs or central bronchiectasis. Upper lobe parenchymal opacities with atelectasis secondary to bronchial obstruction are also commonly seen. Imaging can be further assessed with high-resolution CT scan which can also detect mucous plugging, tree-in-bud opacities, ground-glass attenuation, and atelectasis. In cases of early invasive aspergillosis, CT scan can provide an early diagnosis when detecting focal lesions in the presence of fever: nodules with ground glass infiltrates are seen in neutropenic patients (halo sign). CT head is warranted in cases of suspected CNS aspergillosis with evidence of ring-enhancing lesions (abscesses) and cortical or subcortical infarction.

Aspergillomas are radiologically characterized by a rounded mass (fungal ball) in a pulmonary cavity associated with a positive culture or positive IgG. Nodules can also be a form of radiological presentation after lung cancer is excluded with biopsy. Chronic cavitary/fibrosing forms present as 1 large or more than 2 cavities without a fungal ball associated with the previously mentioned chronic symptoms and positive cultures/IgG.

- In cases of severe invasive aspergillosis an emerging tool has been used especially in intensive care unit patients, beta-(1,3)-d-glucan which is a cell wall component of Aspergillus and useful in cases where the onset of treatment is essential to improve prognosis. This component is also present in other organisms such as Candida, Fusarium, and Pneumocystis.

- Serum galactomannan is another Aspergillus cell wall component released into the bloodstream during intravascular hyphal growth. However, as it is captured by a neutrophil concentration that may be falsely low which makes its sensitivity lower in non-neutropenic patients.

- The key test for chronic pulmonary aspergillosis is a positive Aspergillus immunoglobin (IgG) serum test. Only a minority of patients have positive cultures (less than 10%). Elevated galactomannan assay from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid yields higher sensitivity in these cases. Other nonspecific markers are elevated CRP and ESR.