As spinal cord injuries most often occur in the context of significant trauma, a comprehensive physical examination and clinical assessment for concurrent injuries are necessary at the time of presentation. Recognition of the above injury patterns can help localize the location and type of injury suffered. Clinical examination with a detailed and accurate examination of motor and sensory nerves is essential for classification.

SCI is graded using the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) Impairment Scale. The grading system varies based on the severity of injury from letters A to E.

- ASIA A: Complete injury with loss of motor and sensory function.

- ASIA B: Incomplete injury with preserved sensory function, but complete loss of motor function.

- ASIA C: Incomplete injury with preserved motor function below the injury level, less than half these muscles have MRC (Medical Research Council) grade 3 strength.

- ASIA D: Incomplete injury with preserved motor function below the injury level, at least half these muscles have MRC (Medical Research Council) grade 3 strength.

- ASIA E: Normal motor and sensory examination.

Imaging is vital to identify the injuries accurately. Plain radiographs have been used traditionally, however with advancing technology and poor sensitivity with plain radiographs, computerized tomography (CT or CAT scan) has been replaced as the initial screen to identify bony abnormalities like fractures. CT can reveal vertebral fractures and raise suspicion for SCI; however, it has very poor sensitivity for soft tissue injuries. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is needed to accurately assess the level of injury to the spinal cord itself.

Other associated imaging findings may include:

- Traumatic disc herniation: Seen with vertebral disc dislocations and hyperextension injuries. Nucleus pulpous herniation and annulus fibrosus herniation are seen in this condition.

- Epidural hematoma

- Pseudomeningoceles

- Extradural fluid collections

- Vascular injuries of arteries like the carotid artery, vertebral artery, etc.,

- Vertebral fractures