- Allergic contact dermatitis: may present with nummular lesions. Patch testing can help identify the causative allergen.

- Plaque psoriasis: classically presents with well-demarcated erythematous plaques with overlying silvery scale plaques involving the scalp, elbows, and knees, although any site may be involved.

- Stasis dermatitis: is often associated with findings of venous insufficiency, including edema, varicose veins, and/or atrophic hypopigmented scars (atrophie blanche). Lesions consist of erythematous patches that may progress to scaly plaques involving the ankle and distal lower leg. Plaques may be exudative, lichenified, or superimposed on varicosities.

- Asteatotic eczema (eczema craquelé): appears as diffuse erythema and fine scale, with small irregular fissures and cracks, most commonly on the bilateral lower legs.

- Lichen aureus: demonstrates small petechiae and well-defined red to brown macules or plaques symmetrically on the bilateral lower legs, or rarely on the trunk and upper extremities.

- Fixed drug eruption: presents with one or multiple well-circumscribed circular red to brown patches or edematous plaques that recur in the same location when the patient is exposed to the implicated drug.

- Erythema annulare centrifugum appears as arcuate or round plaques with central clearing with a trailing scale at the outermost edge.

- Tinea corporis: presents with one or multiple circular erythematous scaly plaques with central clearing.

- Majocchi granuloma: demonstrates multiple perifollicular pustules coalescing to form erythematous scaly plaques.

- Impetigo: presents as "honey-colored" or golden-crusted papules and plaques with an erythematous base.

- Secondary syphilis appears as diffuse pink, red, violaceous, or brown papules and plaques with an overlying scale that often also involves the palms and soles.

- Pityriasis rosea: presents with pale pink circular or oval patches or thin plaques with a collarette of fine white scale.

- Patch or plaque stage mycosis fungoides (cutaneous T-cell lymphoma): erythematous to slightly hyperpigmented patches or thin plaques with overlying fine scale. Lesions may measure 2 to 20 cm and occur primarily in areas of the body protected from sun exposure (i.e., the buttocks or axillary folds).

- Squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen disease): usually presents as a singular (rarely multiple) erythematous, scaly, well-defined thin plaque with a circular or irregular shape.