Many clinical variants of BCC exist, but the most recognized types are superficial, nodular, and morphea-like BCC. Nodular BCC is the most common.

BCC typically presents as a shiny, pink- or flesh-colored papule or nodule with surface telangiectasia. The tumor may enlarge and ulcerate, giving the borders a rolled or rodent ulcer appearance. The most common sites for nodular basal cells are the face, especially the nose, cheeks, forehead, nasolabial folds, and eyelids. Patients often give a history of crusting and recurrent bleeding, causing them to seek evaluation. Pigmented nodular BCCs are more common in dark-skinned individuals.

Superficial BCCs present as a pink-red, scaly, macule or patch, which may contain telangiectasia. They have a predilection for the shoulders, chest, or back, and multiple lesions may be present. There are also pigmented variants of superficial BCC. Clinically, superficial BCC can appear similar to inflammatory dermatoses such as eczema or psoriasis, so one should consider the diagnosis of superficial BCC when faced with a persistent, erythematous, scaly plaque. Portions of superficial basal cell carcinomas can evolve into nodular BCC over time.

The other common clinical variant of BCC is the morpheaform subtype. This tumor frequently presents as white- or flesh-colored with areas of induration and ill-defined borders. Morpheaform BCCs may resemble a scar or plaque of morphea. The lesion's surface is typically smooth, although crusts with underlying erosions or ulcerations, as well as superimposed papules, may be observed. Telangiectasias also may be present. The biologic behavior is usually more aggressive, with extensive local destruction.