The complications of Retinal traction detachment include progressive retinal ischemia and atrophy of the photoreceptor layer. Progressive retinal ischemia may result in neovascularisation of iris (NVI), neovascularisation of angle (NVA), and neovascular glaucoma (NVG). Complications of the vitrectomy for RTD include vitreous hemorrhage (VH), secondary ocular hypertension, recurrent retinal detachment, cataract formation, and NVG.

Postoperative complications:

Dispersed vitreous hemorrhage (VH):

The reported incidence of postoperative vitreous hemorrhage after TRD repair ranges from 5% to 55%.

A secondary increase in intraocular pressure (IOP):

Elevated IOP in the postoperative period may be related to inflammation, hemorrhage, and tamponade. Initially, this is managed with topical anti-glaucoma medications and steroid drops. Nonresponding cases may need glaucoma drainage devices.

Recurrent retinal detachment post PPV for RTD:

Recurrent RD after vitrectomy for diabetic RTD is reported in 5-15% cases and carries a worse prognosis.

Cataract after vitrectomy for RTD:

The intraoperative touch of the phakic lens is reported to be 1-4%. However, postoperative cataract formation and progression is very common. The type of cataract is nuclear sclerosis and posterior subcapsular cataract.

Neovascular glaucoma (NVG) after PPV for diabetic RTD:

After diabetic vitrectomy, VEGF levels increase inside the eye. This poses a risk for anterior segment neovascularisation, especially if pars plana lensectomy is combined. Studies have reported the incidence of NVG to be 1-7% after modern diabetic vitrectomies.

The risk factors include preoperative NVI, other eye NVG, ocular hypertension, and young males.