- Postoperative urinary retention (POUR) is not an uncommon problem. The incidence of reported POUR in the literature has extreme variability between 5 to 70% depending upon the study cited.

- Patient characteristics leading to increased risk of POUR include older age, male sex, renal failure, diabetes, depression, benign prostatic hyperplasia, higher IPSS. These patients should receive postoperative counsel about the risk of developing POUR and should be considered for prophylactic selective alpha blockade (tamsulosin) if they are not already on treatment.

- Intraoperative factors leading to POUR include operative time and total intravenous fluid volume given.

- In terms of anesthetic technique and the risk of POUR: spinal is greater than epidural is higher than general anesthesia.

- Pharmacologically: perioperative and prophylactic selective alpha blockade (i.e., tamsulosin) and reduction in systemic opioid use postoperatively, especially patient-controlled anesthesia, reduces the risk of POUR.

- Nonpharmacologically: early ambulation after surgery and placement of a suprapubic hot pack has been shown to reduce the risk of POUR.

- Treatment of POUR includes initiation of selective alpha blockade (i.e., tamsulosin) and bladder decompression with either an indwelling catheter or intermittent catheterization. A trial without catheterization is possible within 1 to 3 days of retention. If the initial voiding trial fails, an outpatient urology consultation should be requested while catheterization and alpha blockade continues.

- Patients should not be kept in the hospital specifically to await a trial without catheterization.

- There is no evidence for "bladder training" before performing a trial without catheterization.