**Fasting Lipid Profile**

A complete fasting lipid profile should be obtained, which reports total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides. An abnormal nonfasting profile should be subsequently confirmed with a fasting profile. Studies show that the differences between total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol between fasting and nonfasting profiles are small and clinically insignificant; triglycerides are influenced by food intake.

At least two fasting samples obtained two weeks to 3 months apart should be obtained to confirm dyslipidemia and initiate pharmacotherapy. LDL-C is calculated using the Friedewald calculator  (LDL-C = Total cholesterol - (Triglyceride / 5) - HDL-C) but can only be done if the TG levels are lower than 400 mg/dl. If the TG levels are higher than 400 mg/dl, LDL-C must be measured directly (Direct LDL-C).

Non-HDL-C is calculated by subtracting HDL cholesterol from total cholesterol and includes all atherogenic particles, including LDL-C, VLDL-C and IDL-C, and lipoprotein(a). Nonfasting non-HDL-C can also be used as a screening measure in place of a fasting lipid profile.

**Evaluation of Secondary Causes of Dyslipidemia**

- Hypothyroidism: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free thyroxine (FT4)

- Liver dysfunction: Liver function tests (ALT, AST), serum albumin

- Renal failure: BUN and creatinine

- Diabetes: Fasting blood glucose levels, hemoglobin a1c

- Screening for pregnancy (if indicated): urine or serum HCG.

- Testing for Lipoprotein(a)

**Genetic Testing**

Genetic testing is currently underutilized and helps to confirm the diagnosis along with risk stratification, clinical management, and also screening for dyslipidemia in first-degree relatives. For monogenic diseases such as FH, targeted genes like LDLR, APOB, PCSK9, and LDLRAP1 can be checked to screen for pathogenic variants. If targeted gene panels result negative, whole-exome sequencing can be performed. Below is a list of genes associated with dyslipidemia.