Treatment is focused on decreasing episodes of angina and preventing complications like myocardial injury and arrhythmia. Lifestyle modifications should be encouraged, especially smoking cessation. This is one of the critical interventions in reducing the frequency of episodes. Avoiding medications or drugs that can trigger coronary vasospasm, for example, cocaine, marijuana, and ephedrine-based products) is also important.

**Pharmacological Therapy**

- Calcium antagonist plays an important role in the management of vasospastic angina. It is a first-line treatment due to a vasodilation effect in the coronary vasculature. Calcium antagonist is effective in alleviating symptoms in 90% of patients. Moreover, one study demonstrated that the use of calcium channel blocker therapy was an independent predictor of myocardial infarct-free survival in vasospastic angina patients.

- The use of a long-acting calcium antagonist is recommended to be given at night as the episodes of vasospasm are more frequent at midnight and early in the morning. A high dose of long-acting calcium antagonists like diltiazem, amlodipine, nifedipine, or verapamil are recommended, and titration should be done on an individual basis with an adequate response and minimal side effects. In some cases, the use of a two-calcium antagonist (dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine) can be effective in patients with poor response to one agent.

- The use of long-acting nitrates are also effective in preventing vasospastic events, but chronic use is associated with tolerance. In patients on calcium antagonist without an adequate response to treatment, long-acting nitrates can be added.

- Nicorandil, a nitrate, and K-channel activator also suppress vasospastic attacks.

- The use of beta-blockers, especially those with nonselective adrenoceptor blocking effects, should be avoided because these drugs can aggravate the symptoms.

- Treatment with guanethidine, clonidine, or cilostazol has been reported to be beneficial in patients taking calcium channel antagonists. However, these drugs are not well-studied in this setting.

- The use of fluvastatin has been shown to be effective in preventing coronary spasm and may exert benefits via endothelial nitric oxide or direct effects on the vascular smooth muscle.