There are varying prognoses with changes in MCV.

Iron deficient anemia has a good prognosis with iron supplementation. However, if iron deficiency is secondary to chronic blood loss from malignancy, the prognosis is poor and often fatal. The prognosis of anemia of chronic disease varies due to underlying etiology. As stated above, chronic inflammation secondary to malignancy can have a poorer prognosis than a rheumatologic disease controlled by medication. However, sideroblastic anemia is relatively mild and easily treated with supplementation or withdrawal from the causal agent.

Furthermore, the thalassemias have ranging prognoses. Hemoglobin Bart’s disease or alpha-thalassemia major is fatal, causing hydrops fetalis and has a very poor prognosis in utero. Beta-thalassemia major also has improved with increasing treatment of iron chelation with chronic blood transfusions, and patients can live reasonably normal lives. However, the outlook is poor due to the early mortality of these patients from restrictive diseases secondary to acquired hemochromatosis. Patients with other forms of alpha- and beta-thalassemia generally live normal lives without significant complications and have excellent prognoses.

Megaloblastic anemias secondary to folate and cobalamin deficiencies tend to have good prognoses with proper supplementation therapy. However, vitamin B12 deficiency with severe subacute combined degeneration can be fatal and has a poor prognosis. This condition is preventable with appropriate supplementation via vitamins, food intake, or injections. Folate deficiency has a good prognosis in patients that are not pregnant. However, the prognosis for neonates with folate-deficient mothers is poor depending on the neural tube defect etiology. Patients with spina bifida occulta have a good prognosis and many times are unaware of their condition. However, patients with rachischisis have a very poor prognosis and happen to die in utero. Patients with orotic aciduria and Diamond Blackfan anemia can have a good prognosis depending on chronic supplementation. If these patients are not adherent to supplementation, their anemias can have a poor prognosis, can become severe, and fatal. Non-megaloblastic anemias tend to have poor prognoses. Patients with chronic alcoholism have many vitamin defects ranging from folate to thiamine. These deficiencies can also cause neurologic issues, cerebellar damage, and hepatic insufficiency. Hepatic insufficiency and cirrhosis also have a poor prognosis depending on how severe. Many of these patients suffer from portal hypertension, esophageal varices with the risk of rupture, and hemorrhage, and can, in turn, acquire hepatorenal syndrome, become encephalopathic, which can lead to their demise.

Normocytic anemias tend to have poorer prognoses due to their chronic hemolysis and declining conditions. Intravascular hemolysis such as paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria has improved prognosis with newer treatments. However, without treatment, the patient can present with pancytopenia and suffer from aplastic anemia, which can lead to their demise. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias tend to have better prognoses if treated; however, patients must be adherent to their treatments. Extravascular hemolytic diseases like sickle cell anemia have a poor prognosis and life expectancy ranging from 30 to 40 years old. These patients suffer from chronic vaso-occlusive crises, which can, in turn, lead to their deaths.