Hypothyroidism is mainly treated with levothyroxine monotherapy.

Thyroid replacement treatment can exacerbate co-existing adrenal insufficiency. Patients with known or suspected adrenal insufficiency should be tested and treated for the adrenal insufficiency while awaiting results.

Replacement levothyroxine dose is 1.6 mcg/kg per day, should be taken 60 minutes before a meal and at least 3 hours post-meal which makes before breakfast or at bedtime the practical times for most patients. Maintaining a consistent formulation or brand of levothyroxine is important.

When switching to the intravenous (IV) form, reduce the dose to 70% of the oral dose. Malabsorption syndromes, medications such as sucralfate, calcium preparations, and bile acid sequestrants can interfere with the absorption of levothyroxine.

Based on the 2012 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Hypothyroidism in Adults by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association, therapy should be monitored and titrated based on TSH measurements. Serum free T4 can also be used. Labs should be drawn every 4 to 8 weeks until target levels are achieved after starting the treatment, after any dose changes, changes in formulation or brand of levothyroxine,

For elderly patients and patients with cardiac diseases, starting at a lower dose and titrating slowly is recommended.

Effective treatment should achieve a clinical improvement of signs and symptoms, along with an improved sense of patient well-being and normal TSH (or free T4 levels as applicable).

A comprehensive differential diagnosis workup is recommended for unresolved symptoms in the presence of biochemical euthyroidism. There is a lack of strong evidence supporting the routine inclusion of triiodothyronine (T3) preparations with levothyroxine in the treatment of hypothyroidism.

If symptoms persist despite normalization of TSH/free T4 levels, then consultation with an endocrinologist should also be considered.