The administration of quinapril is via the oral route. It is available in 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, and 40 mg tablets. Plasma clearance of quinapril correlates to the creatinine clearance of a patient. The dosing range that researchers tested was between 0.625 to 80 mg orally once daily, but the most effective antihypertensive effects were noted at doses of 20 mg orally once daily.

**Hypertension:**Patients with mild to moderate hypertension should be initiated on a dose between 5 and 40 mg orally once daily. In patients with renal impairment, the dose should be reduced to 2.5 to 20 mg orally once daily.

**Chronic Heart Failure:**Patients with CHF are started on a lower dose of 5 mg twice daily. It requires higher doses to increase exercise duration for patients with CHF. Doses are titrated upwards weekly until 20 to 40 mg daily dose is reached or undesirable adverse effects precipitate(hypotension, orthostasis, or azotemia).

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**The apparent elimination half-life of quinaprilat, active metabolite of quinapril, increases as creatinine clearance decreases. Therefore dose should be adjusted based on creatinine clearance. Recommended maximum initial doses are as follows:
- 10 mg if creatinine clearance is more than 60 mL/min
- 5 mg  if creatinine clearance is 30-60 mL/min
- 2.5 mg if creatinine clearance is 10–30 mL/min
- There is no sufficient data for dose recommendation available when creatinine clearance is below 10 mL/min.

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered as pregnancy category D medicine. As per the manufacturer box warning, discontinuation of quinapril is recommended as soon as pregnancy is detected. Quinapril can cross the placenta, and any exposure to ACE inhibitor during the first trimester may lead to an increased risk of fetal malformations.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**The manufacturer recommends exercising caution for quinapril therapy in nursing mothers as the drug presents in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**Limited data is available for the use of quinapril in pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The manufacturer recommends 10 mg once daily dose followed by titration as the initial dosage of quinapril in geriatric patients.