Treatment for cardiac syncope is offered to prevent the patient's morbidity, physical injuries, and monetary costs of recurrent syncopal events and prevent sudden cardiac death. The management of cardiac syncope varies widely and is essentially based on managing the specific condition which precipitated the syncopal event. The following is a general summary of management strategies; however, this is only a limited summary as the topic is vast.

**Arrhythmias**

**Sinus Node Dysfunction**

Sinus node abnormalities will typically lead to bradyarrhythmias. When sinus bradycardia is noted, the first intervention should assess iatrogenic causes, such as medications with bradycardia as an intended or unintended effect. If such medications are in use and unnecessary to the patient, they should be terminated. Otherwise, pacemakers should be the next step sought out in management. Implantable dual-chamber pacemakers are recommended to prevent future syncopal events. Implantation of a pacemaker should theoretically circumvent this outcome.

**Atrioventricular Conduction System Dysfunction**

In cases of Mobitz type 2 second-degree or third-degree AV block, pacemaker implantation helps prevent recurrence of syncope.

**Fascicular Blocks**

Implantable permanent pacemakers are recommended for patients with concerning histories and syncope in the setting of bifascicular or trifascicular bundle branch blocks.

**Tachyarrhythmias**

Management of tachycardic syncope sources is more complex, as many cases of tachycardic arrhythmias that precipitate syncope are self-limited. Supraventricular tachycardia can occur in patients with alternative atrioventricular nodal reentrant pathways. In such circumstances, catheter ablation of the alternative pathway is the best treatment modality. Medications are often utilized as a bridge to this definitive management if catheter ablation is not immediately possible. Management of atrial fibrillation should be first attempted conservatively with a medication-based rate or rhythm control and then with ablation if such conservative therapy fails. Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia-induced syncope can be managed with beta-blockers or calcium channel blockers. If this is insufficient, antiarrhythmic agents can be employed. Amiodarone is the first-line antiarrhythmic followed by class 1A and 1B antiarrhythmics. If syncopal events are frequent and unresponsive to medications, radiofrequency catheter ablation of the foci from which the tachycardia originates can be performed. In cases of ventricular tachycardia-induced syncope in the setting of underlying structural cardiac disease, patients may benefit from an implanted cardiac defibrillator.

Acquired QT Interval abnormalities: These are commonly iatrogenic due to medications that prolong the QT interval. In such circumstances, offending drug discontinuation is sufficient therapy.

Inherited Channelopathies: In cases such as long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, and other inherited causes of arrhythmogenic syncope, implantable cardiac defibrillators are the definitive management. The decision regarding when to implant these is patient- and circumstance-dependent.

**Implanted Pacemaker Failure**

A patient with an implanted pacemaker who presents to a hospital following a syncopal event should have the pacemaker interrogated by any available electrophysiologist. Syncope in the setting of pacemaker failure is usually the result of battery depletion, lead oversensing, or lead underpacing. Such problems can be managed with a device or lead replacement.

**Structural Syncope**

The management of structural causes of syncope is specific to the structural problem. For example, In cases of aortic stenosis, aortic valve replacement is the definitive management. Atrial myxomas or other cardiac tumors should similarly be managed operatively. Heart failure or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can be managed medically with nitrates and diuretics. Coronary artery disease can be managed with antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants. Acute coronary artery occlusion, when present, can be managed with revascularization techniques such as angioplasty or cardiac bypass surgery. Pulmonary emboli are managed with anticoagulants/thrombolytics. Any patient with an unknown specific etiology of syncope but a known structural cardiac disease can and should be evaluated for an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.

All patients presenting with cardiac syncope who have not had a definitive intervention to prevent future events should be advised not to drive. Patients who have syncopized are 2 to 4 times more likely to be involved in motor vehicle collisions than the general population.