Taxane toxicity is common primarily because the drugs are extensively prescribed in oncology and have peculiar molecular structures. Paclitaxel was first separated from the bark of the tree Taxus brevifolia, although presently, synthetic and semi-synthetic forms of the compounds are increasingly used. Similarly, the motivation to identify further taxanes led to the discovery of docetaxel from the needles of the abundantly available tree Taxus baccata.

The effective delivery and distribution of paclitaxel and docetaxel require the support of solvents which include chromophore-ethanol and polysorbate 80, respectively. Natural sources and solvents are mainly responsible for infusion-related hypersensitivity reactions. Recent evidence has suggested that some of these reactions might be IgE-mediated.

Nab-paclitaxel is the nano-particle formulation of paclitaxel which is bound to the albumin during travel through the blood and therefore doesn't cause hypersensitivity during infusion.

Paclitaxel has the principal toxicity of neuropathy which presents in gloves and stocking distribution and can become permanent if left untreated. The neuropathy pattern is usually sensory and occurs due to axonal degeneration and demyelination. Neutropenia and mucositis are other side effects of paclitaxel which are dependent on the duration of exposure to the drug.

Docetaxel has a unique toxicity of fluid retention. It is cumulative and is believed to be due to increased capillary permeability. Neutropenia is docetaxel's dose-limiting toxicity, which is more common with 3-weekly regimens. The neuropathy is less severe with docetaxel than with paclitaxel, likely due to structural differences.

Nab-paclitaxel is extensively distributed in the plasma due to its unique combination with albumin. The volume of distribution and bioavailability is thus higher than paclitaxel. This results in improved drug efficacy at the cost of more prevalence of neutropenia and sensory neuropathy.