Evaluation of patients with obesity begins with a complete medical history and a careful physical examination to search for the etiology and the presence of comorbid conditions. This usually occurs during a well-child visit in the medical home but may also occur at problem-focused appointments. [American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity 2023] The clinician should first inquire if the family or patient has concerns about the child's growth and/or weight. Next, history-taking begins with reviewing prenatal factors such as maternal weight gain during pregnancy or gestational diabetes that might increase the likelihood of obesity. Birth/perinatal history-taking includes inquiring about intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) with rapid catch-up growth or a baby large for gestational age (LGA).

A non-judgmental approach should be used to probe the details of the child's nutritional intake and energy expenditure. Reviewing the family feeding patterns, meal composition, snacking, and screen time can aid in revealing the cause of excessive weight gain. A 24-hour diet recall listing the number of servings of fruits, vegetables, and high-carbohydrate and high-calorie foods in meals, snacks, and beverages can also provide valuable information. Noting the duration and type of physical activity helps assess energy expenditure.

A review of the height and weight growth charts for abrupt changes in the trajectory of weight, height, and BMI may suggest an etiology. Extreme appetite and food-seeking behaviors are seen in some genetic conditions. The family history identifies others with obesity and obesity-related comorbid conditions. Genetic susceptibility may be present, especially if there are family members with severe obesity resulting in bariatric surgery or obesity affecting multiple generations. Diabetes, hypertension, or cardiovascular disease in a family member increases the risk of a child developing similar conditions. Parental obesity is another risk factor, likely related to the interplay of genetics, shared environment, and social determinants of health. Clinicians should help the family understand that childhood obesity increases the likelihood of progression to several chronic diseases.

History may provide a vital clue to less common, secondary causes of obesity. Significant head trauma preceding the onset of sudden weight gain suggests a hypothalamic cause. Easy bruising, muscle weakness, fatigue, and central obesity may indicate Cushing syndrome. Cold intolerance, dry skin, and swelling of the anterior neck point to hypothyroidism. However, fewer than 1% of children with obesity will be diagnosed with an endocrine cause, despite many families' belief that weight gain is due to a hormone imbalance. Reviewing medications associated with obesity, including steroids, antipsychotics (risperidone), and antiepileptics (valproate), helps evaluate drug-induced obesity.

History suggestive of comorbidities includes polyuria and polydipsia (diabetes mellitus), headache and vision changes (pseudotumor cerebri), painful limp and hip/knee pain (Blount disease and slipped capital femoral epiphysis), abdominal pain, vomiting, and jaundice (gallbladder disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease), anxiety and depression, worsening school performance, bullying or being bullied (behavioral or psychological problems), shortness of breath, snoring and daytime sleepiness or fatigue (asthma and obstructive sleep apnea), irregular menses, hirsutism, and acne (polycystic ovary syndrome/PCOS). Assessing behavioral and emotional concerns with validated screening tools such as the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) can aid in diagnosing psychological comorbidities.

Physical examination begins with measuring height, weight, and blood pressure (BP) and calculating the BMI (weight (kg)/ height (m) squared). BP should be measured with an appropriately sized cuff for accuracy, followed by a head-to-toe examination to identify potential causes and complications of obesity, including

- Facial and body dysmorphism, suggestive of genetic disorders. Examples include almond-shaped eyes, hypogonadism, small hands and feet (Prader Willi syndrome), hypotonia, upward slanting eyes, short neck, transverse palmar creases (Down syndrome), round face, central obesity, excess fatty tissue of upper back between the shoulders (Cushing syndrome).

- Cognitive impairment may indicate a genetic syndrome.

- Short stature is associated with hormone deficiencies and Albright hereditary osteodystrophy.

- Eye findings such as papilledema (pseudotumor cerebri), retinal degeneration, and nystagmus (Bardet-Biedl syndrome) should be followed up by a specialist.

- Skin changes such as acanthosis nigricans (thick, darkened skin on the nape of the neck), acne, and hirsutism may indicate insulin resistance or PCOS.

- Sexual maturity rating may reveal premature adrenarche in obese girls.

- The clinician should look for dyspnea and wheezing (asthma), abdominal tenderness or hepatomegaly (non-alcoholic fatty liver disease), and hip and knee mobility restriction (slipped capital femoral epiphysis and Blount disease, respectively).