It is generally thought that renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) arise from the epithelial cells of the nephron, linking the CCRCC to the proximal tubular epithelium, PRCC to the distal tubular epithelium and chromophobe RCC (ChRCC) to intercalated cells of collecting duct. However, to the best of our literature search, reliable analysis is lacking. Based on the mice modeling study, it has been proposed that CCRCC may originate in the Bowman capsule.

Classification of most RCCs on the basis of genetic alterations and molecular signatures is imperfect. However, familial and sporadic VHL gene alterations/mutations are considered as the hallmark of CCRCC.VHL is located (3p25.3).

The genetic basis of PRCC is mainly based on the inherited form of the disease. The cytogenetic abnormalities associated with the PRCC subtype include trisomy of chromosomes 3, 7, 12, 16, 17, and 20, c-MET mutations and loss of the Y chromosome. PRCC has two main subtypes (see histopathology section). About 15% of nonhereditary PRCC and hereditary PRCC (usually type 1) are characterized by germline MET alteration or gain of chromosome 7. Type 2 PRCC is further grouped based on multiple and distinct genetic alterations in the form of activation of the NRF2-ARE pathway, CDKN2A loss, SETD2 mutations, and TFE3 fusion. A CIMP (CpG island methylator phenotype) suggests a poor prognosis. Hereditary leiomyomatosis associated PRCC have FH mutation and are aggressive tumors.

Chromophobe RCC (ChRCC) has a number of cytogenetic abnormalities associated with it that include loss of multiple chromosomes such as 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17, and 21.