**Anatomy**

The corneal tissue is composed of cellular and acellular components. The cellular components comprise epithelial cells, keratocytes, and endothelial cells. The acellular component is composed of collagenous protein and glycosaminoglycans.

Recently sixth layer has also been defined as Dua's layer, which is also labeled as the pre-descematic layer. In anterior lamellar keratoplasty, the area of focus is the anterior stroma, and in cases with posterior lamellar keratoplasty, the area of focus is Descemet and endothelium. Penetrating keratoplasty is a technique where the full thickness of the host cornea is trephine and replaced by a full-thickness donor button. All the cornea layers are transplanted. In cases with lamellar patch graft, the corneal tissue up to the anterior stroma is dissected, and the partial thickness donor button is sutured to the host rim.

**Physiology**

**Ocular Immune Privilege**

**Active**

There is an increased expression of inhibitory cell surface molecules- FAS ligands, decay accelerating factor, CD46, and CD59. The presence of an immunosuppressive microenvironment also leads to the expression of transforming growth beta (TGF-B), Alpha melanocytic stimulating hormone (a- MSH), Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and free cortisol.

**Passive**

Passive immunity contributes to the blood tissue barrier, deficient efferent lymphatics, and reduced MHC complex I and II expression.