At the initial outpatient visit, obtaining a complete medical, surgical, psychosocial, and family history, including pregnancy and contraception history, is essential. History of prior diabetes education,  monitoring of BG and ketones, use of CGM, administration of insulin, recognition/treatment of hypoglycemia, use of glucagon, diet, physical activity, smoking and alcohol use, understanding of sick-day rules, ability to problem solve and immunization history, should also be obtained. Particular attention should be paid to the date of diagnosis, prior treatment, current medications, presence of hypoglycemia unawareness, and history of acute complications (hypoglycemia including severe episodes and episodes of DKA) and chronic complications (skin disorders, dental problems, retinopathy, macular edema, neuropathy, kidney disease, cardiovascular disease, peripheral arterial disease, stroke, foot ulcers, amputations, hearing loss, sleep disorders). Since people with type 1 diabetes are at increased risk of other autoimmune disorders, including autoimmune thyroid disease and celiac disease, the history should also focus on these conditions.

Clinicians should measure height, weight, and blood pressure. The skin should be examined, especially at insulin injection or infusion sites. If lipodystrophy is evident, they should be educated on the importance of varying insulin injection/infusion sites. The thyroid, heart, chest, and abdomen should also be examined. A foot exam is performed to examine pedal pulses and detect foot deformities, pre-ulcerative lesions, ulcerations, calluses, and onychomycosis. It is also important to test vibratory and protective sensations; abnormal testing with a 10-g monofilament exam suggests an increased risk of ulceration.

When screening for psychosocial issues, a number of measures are available such as the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-2/PHQ-9) for Depression and Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7). Diabetes distress and social determinants of health should be assessed. Since eating disorders are more common in type 1 diabetes, particularly in young women, evaluation should be considered clinically indicated. Early cognitive decline is also common, so cognitive testing should be considered when impairment is suspected.

Data from CGMs, blood glucose meters, insulin pumps, and automated insulin delivery systems should be downloaded, examined, and discussed at each visit and between visits when needed to adjust treatment regimens to achieve glycemic goals.

CGMs are devices that measure glucose in interstitial fluid and are extremely useful tools for people with T1D. Sensors are inserted into the subcutaneous tissue and transmit glucose readings every 5 minutes to a receiver where they can be displayed in real-time. One can examine trends and use low and high glucose alarms to prevent serious hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia episodes. Alarms can also alert to a rapid change in glucose value. Readings from certain CGM sensors can be transmitted to smartphones and can be shared with relatives, friends, or caregivers. A less expensive CGM option uses a “reader” (a device the user scans over the site of sensor placement) or a smartphone to visualize recent glucose readings and trends. All these devices make it easier to monitor glucose values throughout the day and night. Users examine trends and are provided with important information to guide insulin therapy and food intake to help avoid wide glycemic excursions and hypoglycemia.

Data from CGMs can be uploaded and stored in cloud-based systems. These data include percent: Time in range TIR, usually 70 to 180 mg/dL; TIR targets are lower during pregnancy and higher in those who are frail and/or with complex comorbidities or limited life expectancy), time below range (TBR; <70 mg/dL; level 1 hypoglycemia is 54-69 mg/dL and level 2 hypoglycemia is <54 mg/dL); time above range (TAR; usually >180 mg/dL; level 1 hyperglycemia is 181 to 250 mg/dL and level 2 hyperglycemia is  >250 mg/dL); and glycemic variability (% CV; coefficient of variation).  These data should be reviewed with the goal of understanding factors contributing to hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia and to help guide insulin dosing, diet, and physical activity to achieve goals. A primary goal should be minimizing hypoglycemia. A higher percent TIR is associated with decreased diabetes-related complications.

When CGM data are unavailable, examination of BG data fasting, pre-meal, 1 to 3 hours postprandial (when adjusting prandial dosing), bedtime, when hypoglycemia is suspected, and occasionally in the middle of the night, should be used to direct insulin dosing. Insulin dosing data from connected insulin pens and pumps should also be discussed.