Breast cancer is the most common type of carcinoma in women (aside from skin cancers). Fulvestrant is one of the many medications employed in the treatment of breast carcinoma. All patients with breast cancer should be tested for hormone positivity to determine the role of endocrine therapy in their management. A team of healthcare professionals, which includes nurses, lab technologists, pharmacists, and physicians belonging to all related specialties, should coordinate and formulate the best treatment course appropriate for the stage of this type of cancer.

Interprofessional communication and care coordination will ensure improved patient outcomes and hence should be encouraged and optimized. An essential aspect of the management of breast cancer is the selection of appropriate treatment modalities; this can be done by clinicians working with other healthcare providers to determine the receptor positivities of the particular tumor. Administration and management/monitoring should use nurses and pharmacists with specialized oncology training. In any case, all patients should receive counseling regarding the clinical benefit and possible toxicities of any medication that the interprofessional healthcare team deems suitable. This will optimize patient results with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]

Multiple trials investigating the effect of fulvestrant in combination with other drugs in patients with hormone-positive breast carcinoma have shown promising results. There is evidence that the 500 mg dose is superior to the 250 mg dose used previously. However, more research is necessary to clarify these dosing parameters. The adverse effects reported are consistent with the side effects observed previously with other endocrine medications. Thus, the efficacy and safety of fulvestrant are well established.