Management of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis is a medical as well as surgical emergency. Reaching an early definite diagnosis is pragmatically challenging, whereas the delay in initiating the treatment will further aggravate the morbidity and mortality. Early antifungal administration and extensive surgical debridement are carried out empirically whenever the possibility of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis is suspected based on risk factors, clinical features, and/or radiologic findings. A three-pronged approach of reversal of immunosuppressive state, administration of IV antifungals, and extensive surgical debridement is usually undertaken.

The immune-suppressive factors are reversed by reversal of hyperglycemia, acidosis, hypoxemia, and dyselectrolytemia. Discussions are made with relevant experts regarding reducing or stopping of immunosuppressive agents. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor may increase white cell count and may help to improve host defenses.

IV amphotericin (liposomal) is administered in the dose of 5-10 mg per Kg body weight per day. After initial treatment with IV amphotericin for several weeks along with the achievement of clinical improvement, the amphotericin is usually stepped down to oral posaconazole or isavuconazole. In the step-down therapy, oral posaconazole (delayed-release tablet) is given at a dose of 300mg twice daily on the first day, followed by 300 mg once daily. Oral posaconazole suspensions are not advisable since their bioavailability is inadequate and requires fatty meals for better absorption. Serum trough concentration of oral posaconazole needs to be monitored after a week of treatment and has to be kept at least above 1 mcg/ml. Oral isavuconazole is given at a dose of 200 mg (2 x 100mg capsules) thrice daily for two days, followed by 200 mg once daily.

IV or oral posaconazole or isavuconazole has been used as salvage therapy in certain patients who do not tolerate amphotericin or who do not respond to it. There is no evidence for the benefit of a combination of drug therapy in the form of combining amphotericin with an echinocandin at this stage. Although echinocandins do not have an in vitro activity against mucormycosis, R.oryzae, the commonest etiology for mucormycosis, expresses the target enzyme for echinocandins raising the theoretical possibility for a potential benefit. A retrospective study had observed a potential benefit for the above combination therapy in mucormycosis patients with brain involvement, though the conclusion is debatable.

Surgical debridement includes extensive resection of infected and necrotic tissues as a part of source control and reduction of fungal load. Debridement also provides adequate tissue biopsy specimens for definite histopathologic confirmation. Dissection is usually continued until normal, well-perfused bleeding tissue is reached since mucormycotic tissues are less likely to bleed due to extensive thrombosis of vessels. Removal of the palate, nose cartilage, and orbit would cause significant disfigurement. The orbital involvement may need orbital decompression or exenteration. The role of routine orbital exenteration or the timing of exenteration is currently unclear, and cases with orbital involvement have also been successfully managed without exenteration.

Deferasirox and deferiprone are iron-chelating agents which do not act as a siderophore to the fungus. The studies have been small, and the results have been mixed. The DEFEAT mucor (Deferasirox-AmBisome Therapy) for Mucormycosis randomized trial showed increased mortality in patients who received a combination of amphotericin and deferasirox than those who received amphotericin alone.

The role of hyperbaric oxygen therapy is yet to be established, though hyperbaric oxygen is expected to alleviate severe hypoxia and acidosis, thereby inhibiting fungal multiplication.