- The coverage for cervical cancer screening in most resource-limited settings is still below 35 percent of the population.

- Women can be screened and followed up for cervical pre-malignant diseases, usually by Pap test, and also by VIA with colposcopy, HPV DNA, and biopsy.

- It is possible to do at least one cervical cancer screening method in any country in the world where cervical screening programs are not available. In 1949, Papanicolaou and Traut began doing simple cytology, and today we have evolved to the more sophisticated molecular DNA testing for HPV. There should be no excuse for not doing cervical cancer screening.

- Prioritizing and integrating cervical cancer screening in the daily management of women in primary healthcare facilities would go a long way to reducing new cases of cancer and possible elimination of deaths from invasive cervical cancer.

- ASC-US diagnosis is an abnormal finding that requires a further evaluation from 6 months after the initial result but not later than 12 months.

- An ASC-US diagnosis may mean NILM or true precancer and hence poses a management challenge, which needs to be addressed by triaging with molecular testing and histology.

- VIA (visual inspection with acetic acid), together with same-day treatment, has been shown to reduce the incidence of invasive cervical cancers.

- All patients with HIV must be prioritized to have a visual inspection with acetic acid. This is a simple and cheap procedure delivered as a screening and treating procedure or single visit approach.

- Large-scale HPV vaccination before the onset of sexual activity may hold the key to the elimination of cervical cancer.