Common side effects and complications of PCA relate to the inherent mechanism of the procedure and the medications involved. Complications of PCA pumps include “run-away” pumps, failure to use anti-reflux valves, incorrect syringe placement, PCA by proxy, and machine tampering.

Runaway pumps are a result of a mechanical error in which a pump malfunctions and delivers doses at incorrect intervals and amounts. This error can lead to a potentially fatal overdose. While this type of mechanical failure is rare, is it still essential to be aware that this type of complication exists, and patients require periodic monitoring for overdose symptoms.

Anti-reflux valves prevent the opioid medication from flowing up into the intravenous fluid infusion line instead of the intended line that goes towards the patient. Failure to use an anti-reflux valve can result in refluxed medication into the fluid infusion line. This medication could then all be delivered to the patient at once if the intravenous line is flushed, resulting in an overdose.

If the syringe containing the medication is damaged or incorrectly placed into the PCA machine, it could potentially empty by gravity and administer the entire syringe of medication to the patient at once. To prevent this from happening, lines should be cross-clamped when changing the syringe, and machines should be kept level to or below the intravenous catheter in the patient. Some devices are even equipped with anti-siphon valves to prevent this complication.

PCA by proxy is when someone besides the patient is pressing the button to administer a dose because they believe the patient is in pain and needs it. This phenomenon has been documented to lead to respiratory depression. Patients, family members, visitors, and health care providers need to understand the dangers of someone besides the patient pressing the button before PCA treatment modalities can commence.

To prevent tampering with PCA pumps, access to the medication and programming portion of the pump should only be permitted by a health care provider who has a key or code to the pump. Therefore, any tampering that occurs to the machine or medication will be evident. Devices should be routinely checked to make sure there has been no compromise to their locking mechanisms.

Complications of epidural and indwelling nerve catheter PCA include infection, catheter dislodgement, medication leakage, skin irritation, allergic reaction, and short and long term nerve damage.

Side effects of PCA administration can be related to the medications or the delivery device used and include nausea and vomiting, constipation, urinary retention, pruritus, respiratory depression, and local anesthetic toxicity.