Different treatment modalities are available for gestational trophoblastic neoplasm depending on the type and stage; these include D&C (dilation and curettage), chemotherapy, hysterectomy, or combination of these.

**D & C**

More commonly used in molar pregnancy where fertility is desired, nonetheless, post-D&C monitoring is essential to ensure no disease recurrence.

**Chemotherapy**

Some types of GTD can be well treated by chemotherapy, either single or combined. Some of the used chemotherapeutic agents include methotrexate, etoposide, actinomycin D, cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, and vincristine.

**Hysterectomy**

In cases of chemoresistance, severe disease, and desire to retain fertility, hysterectomy is the most common treatment option used.

Some controversial treatments have been presented in the last years, and these include:

**Prophylactic Chemotherapy**

The use of prophylactic chemotherapy instead of monitoring hCG levels until disease clearance criteria are met will decrease the use of intense chemotherapy regimens and boost the chance of complete healing.

**Second D & C**

The concept of this modality is to perform a second D&C after the molar pregnancy evacuation if the hCG level remains non-reassuring. However, if there is a high risk of uterine perforation or hemorrhage, a second D&C must not be performed.

**Drug-Resistant GTD**

Approximately 0.5-5% of women experience drug resistance GTD and, unfortunately, may die as a result. Pembrolizumab was one of the studied drugs to be used in this condition, and studies showed that it represents a valuable new approach for treating drug-resistant GTN.

Other more complex regimens have been proposed, yet they were found to be associated with more side effects, more designed RCT needs to be conducted to assess their efficacy.