Mortality after pulmonary sleeve resection (PSR) is about 3%. This is slightly less than the estimated mortality of 6% after pneumonectomy.

Post-operative complications require careful evaluation, with imaging playing an important part, including a chest x-ray and computed tomography (CT). Bronchoscopy and esophagoscopy may also be utilized.

In one study comparing pneumonectomy and sleeve lobectomy (SL), the SL outcomes appear to be associated with the pathologic stage of NSCLC.

Some early complications include:

- Bronchial anastomotic dehiscence

- Lung/bronchial torsion - mainly involves the RML after RUL

- Pneumonia

- Persistent air leak

- Chylothorax

- Hemothorax

- Wound infection

- Thoracic empyema

- Pulmonary embolism

- Phrenic never palsy or paralysis

- Pulmonary infarction

- Pulmonary hernia through a thoracotomy incision

- Atelectasis requiring bronchoscopy

- ARDS

- Prolonged mechanical ventilation

- Atrial fibrillation

Some late complications include:

- Local tumor recurrence (for lung cancer)

- Bronchial anastomotic stenosis

- Esophagopleural fistula

- Bronchopleural fistula

Bronchial dehiscence is an early complication, which may occur in up to 6% after SL. CT findings can show a defect in the bronchial wall and unresolving extraluminal air and fluid levels.

Bronchial anastomotic stenosis is a late complication (up to 18%) of PSR.

Local, regional recurrence of tumors was estimated to be 8% in SL than 10% after pneumonectomy; however, this did not adversely affect long-term survival, which an improved 5-year survival noted in the SL group.

For minimally invasive surgical techniques, preoperative comorbidity, older age, and surgeon's experience have been described as potential risk factors for postoperative complications.