A wide range of techniques for adenoidectomy exist, including laser ablation, coblation, endoscopic excision, and power-assisted (microdebrider) excision. Ultimately the decision rests with the operating surgeon, as similar successful outcomes have been well-documented with all of these methods.

**Monopolar Suction Diathermy**

The monopolar suction diathermy device is bent to 70 to 90 degrees approximately 2 centimeters from its tip and the stylet then removed. Under indirect visualization with an anti-fogged laryngeal mirror, suction-diathermy (current 35 to 38 W) is carried out systematically, superiorly to inferiorly, from the choanal to the velopharyngeal portion of the adenoid. Lateral adenoidal tissue can be suctioned medially before ablation, avoiding trauma and scarring of the tubal cushion or damage to the torus tubarius. The procedure is completed when a comprehensive view of the choana is achieved, the nasopharynx has a smooth contour, and hemostasis ensured. Care should be taken to leave  a small remnant of adenoid tissue at Passavant's ridge to avoid postoperative velopharyngeal insufficiency. Nasal packing is rarely required.

The steps are virtually identical if using **plasma ablation**(Coblator),**microdebrider**, or**laser**removal, with the exception that these devices do not require custom bending.

**Curettage**

An adenoid curette is introduced to the postnasal space and engages with the adenoid pad. A dental mirror can be used to facilitate indirect visualization and confirmation of positioning. The adenoids are removed superior to inferiorly in a single, firm movement, with the head stabilized by the non-dominant hand. The process may be repeated, and the nasopharynx re-examined either by palpation or with a mirror to ensure completeness of excision. The postnasal space may be packed with swabs to achieve hemostasis while a tonsillectomy is performed.  These must be removed at the end of the procedure.

On completion of adenoidectomy, it is essential to suction any clots from the postnasal space using a nasal suction catheter and to ensure that hemostasis has been achieved. Care must be taken when removing the gag to ensure that the endotracheal tube has not herniated into the blade, to prevent inadvertent extubation.