The anatomy of EOMs and their innervation is complex (Table 1). Damage to the cranial nerves at the level of the orbital apex, cavernous sinus, nuclei and fascicles of the brainstem, and supranuclear structures can cause paretic strabismus. This article is mainly concerned with EOM management distal to the orbital apex encountered during orbital and ocular trauma.

Table 1. The anatomy, actions, and innervation of EOMs.

The EOMs of the eye include the medial, inferior, lateral, and superior rectus, the superior and inferior oblique, and the levator palpebrae superioris (LPS). The rectus muscles originate from a fibrous ring termed the annulus of Zinn within the orbital apex. They insert onto the globe near the globe's equator at varying distances from the limbus: the medial rectus inserts the closest to the limbus, and the inferior rectus, lateral rectus, and superior rectus muscles each insert progressively further away, yielding an imaginary coil termed the spiral of Tillaux.

The sclera is thinnest just posterior to the insertion of the rectus muscles (averaging about 0.3 mm in thickness), providing a potential site of rupture during globe trauma.

Accessory extraocular muscles or fibrotic structures have been described and may also be encountered during eyelid or orbital procedures.

The EOMs are attached to check ligaments within an intermuscular membrane. This fibroelastic pulley system stabilizes the EOM bellies in space, preventing deep retraction of the muscle should it be disinserted or lacerated anteriorly, and may preserve muscle function on initial examination.

The oblique muscles course inferior to their corresponding rectus muscles and insert laterally onto the globe. The superior oblique muscle arises from the periosteum of the sphenoid bone body, but its functional origin is the trochlea. The trochlea acts as a pulley for the superior oblique and is situated on the superomedial aspect of the frontal bone, rendering it prone to trauma from penetrating hook injuries in the medial canthus.

EOM entrapment or flap tears may follow orbital fractures, which comprise the most common cause of traumatic strabismus.

Bony fragments can impinge surrounding EOMs, commonly the inferior rectus, inferior oblique, and medial rectus, and less commonly, the superior oblique.

Table 2. The bony walls of the orbit.

Though it does not insert onto the globe, the LPS is also considered an extraocular muscle. It indirectly facilitates eye movements by elevating and retracting the upper eyelid, allowing an unencumbered upward gaze. The LPS and the superior oblique originate from the lesser wing and body of the sphenoid bone, respectively. As it courses more anteriorly, the LPS encounters a superior transverse ligament, eponymously coined Whitnall's ligament, which pivots the path of the LPS from anterior-posterior to superior-inferior.

The location of eyelid trauma to the eyelid margin can help surgeons distinguish whether or not the LPS or the deeper superior tarsal muscle (Muller's muscle) were injured, either indirectly from tissue edema, hemorrhage, or directly from penetrating eyelid injury. In the upper eyelid, the lower 5 mm has 4 layers (from superficial to deep): skin, orbicularis, tarsus, and conjunctiva; the middle 5mm contains the skin, orbicularis, LPS aponeurosis, tarsus, and conjunctiva; and above 10 mm, the eyelid contains the skin, orbicularis, septum, preaponeurotic fat, LPS aponeurosis, Muller's muscle, and conjunctiva.