The duration of radiation exposure, distance from the radiation source, and physical shielding are the key facets in reducing exposure. The exposure duration can be minimized in several ways. When exposing a patient to radiation, the technician or physician should preplan the required images to avoid unnecessary and redundant exposure. Magnification significantly increases the exposure to the patient; therefore, magnification should be used judiciously.

Increasing the distance between the x-ray beam and the part that is being imaged is another way to minimize exposure. The image intensifier or x-ray plate should be as close to the patient as possible, with the x-ray tube positioned as far away as possible while maintaining adequate image resolution. A similar approach can be used to minimize exposure to medical professionals. Scattered radiation—the type of radiation that surgeons, interventionalists, and operating room staff commonly encounter during procedures requiring fluoroscopy—follows an inverse square law. Scattering exposure levels decrease proportionally with the inverse of the distance squared from the x-ray source. Staff can lower their exposure levels by a factor of four by doubling their distance from the source. Through this simple concept, occupational radiation exposure can be dramatically reduced.

Physical radiation shielding can be accomplished with different forms of personal protective equipment (PPE). Some fluoroscopy suites contain ceiling-suspended lead acrylic shields, which can reduce doses to the head and neck by a factor of 10. Portable rolling shields, which do not require installation, can protect staff in operating rooms and interventional settings. These mobile shields have been shown to decrease the effective radiation dose to staff by more than 90% when used correctly.

Dosimeters are devices that measure cumulative radiation exposure. These devices should be worn by all hospital staff who encounter planned ionizing radiation. Unfortunately, in a significant number of healthcare settings, there is a paucity of monitoring and, thus, a lack of reliable data. Sanchez et al. reported that as much as 50% of physicians do not wear or incorrectly wear dosimeters.