**Functional Elements of a Lawsuit**

A simple mistake or error in diagnosis or error during a procedure does not define medical malpractice. To successfully establish a medical malpractice lawsuit, the plaintiff (patient) needs to prove four elements to prevail: causation, a duty to the patient, negligence or breach of duty (derelict), and damages.

- Causation asks the question: Did the act or omission cause the poor outcome? For instance, did the missed sepsis cause the patient’s death, or was the death caused by her history of myocardial infarction from her history of diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and smoking?

- This element of medical malpractice is established by proving the physician's direct mistake led to an adverse outcome.

- Duty to the patient asks the question: Did the doctor have a responsibility for this patient's care? Did the call to the cardiologist at 3 o'clock in the morning constitute his duty to treat the patient in the emergency department? 

- This element of medical malpractice can be established in various ways, such as proving the physicians were covering the patient for a colleague, responsible provider for medical care, or covering for a clinic where patients are treated.

- Negligence or breach of duty: Was the clinician negligent in taking care of this patient?  In some states, the term used is “gross negligence." This does not mean the clinician acted perfectly, but instead, the term concerns the “standard of care” for the community. Standard of care is defined in terms of what care a reasonable physician in the community with similar training and experience would provide for the patient?

- The element of medical malpractice can be established by proving that: such as proving the physician took out an additional organ during surgery, amputation the wrong leg, or a physician who performs surgeries in a non-sterile environment leading to infection may also be derelict in their duty.

- Damages refer to compensation for loss or injury, medical bills, punitive damages, and medical malpractice. This is usually is money paid to the patient or the patient's family. The question in a medical malpractice case is: does the alleged malpractice act rise to the level where money should be paid to the patient? Sometimes, a patient wants an apology from the doctor.