The history and physical examination are really important in patients presenting with a very elevated BP or an acute rise over a previously normal baseline, even if the presenting BP is less than 180/120 mm Hg. Furthermore, the following evaluation should be performed to find the presence of end-organ damage in association with targeted clinical symptoms or signs:

- Electrocardiography

- Chest x-Ray

- Urinalysis

- Electrolytes and creatinine

- Cardiac biomarkers, when the acute coronary syndrome is suspected

- Toxicology screen

- CT/MRI of the brain, when head injury, neurologic symptoms, hypertensive retinopathy, nausea, or vomiting are present

- Contrast CT/MRI of the chest or TEE, if aortic dissection is suspected

It is often easiest to categorize hypertensive emergencies by the organ that is being damaged. The evaluation above can usually identify the at-risk target organ and direct both the target BP and the promptness with which the target is achieved.

The cardiac exam may reveal the presence of an MI, CHF, or pulmonary edema. Concentric left ventricular hypertrophy is often present, including the 4th heart sound. Always check the blood pressure in both arms to rule out aortic dissection. Patients may also have bruit in the neck and groin.

CNS exam may reveal a headache, visual changes, vomiting, confusion, and seizures. The eye exam may reveal soft exudates, flame-shaped hemorrhages, and papilledema.

The renal exam may present with oliguria, and the GI symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, and vague abdominal pain.