EPP presents with painful photosensitivity in early childhood. The clinical presentation in males and females is similar. Children with EPP may be misdiagnosed as primary angioedema and allergic reaction. Skin findings first appear in early infancy or childhood in the form of photosensitivity shortly after exposure to sunlight, which manifests as intense burning, tingling, and itching of sun-exposed skin, especially the nose, cheeks, and dorsal hands. These symptoms may be followed by redness, swelling, or blanching, lasting from minutes to days. Papulovesicles may form after prolonged sun exposure. Repeated exposure to light leads to loss of lunulae of the fingernails, ecchymoses, petechiae, and minor scarring on the face and vertical grooving of the lips. Skin manifestations vary and are primarily related to the degree of sun exposure (e.g., milder symptoms in winter). In children with EPP, the risk of gall stones is increased, and EPP must be considered as a leading cause of gall stones in children.

Protoporphyric hepatopathy, which is a cholestatic form of liver disease, is a serious and rare complication of EPP. It is more likely to occur in patients with high levels of protoporphyrins and presents acutely as jaundice, nausea, right upper quadrant pain, and vomiting. Patients with a chronic history of previously unexplained photosensitivity with severe hepatopathy may lead to a diagnosis of EPP. Skin findings become worse in hepatopathy due to increase accumulation of porphyrins. Liver function tests are persistently elevated in chronic hepatopathy. Many individuals with uncomplicated EPP have normal liver function tests. In later stages of hepatopathy, the patient may develop peripheral neuropathy that mimics peripheral neuropathy of acute porphyria and may lead to respiratory failure.

Because of sunlight avoidance, patients with EPP are more prone to develop a vitamin-D deficiency, which leads to osteoporosis. Some individuals present with mild anemia, which is microcytic and hypochromic. For some unknown reasons, pregnancy is associated with lower levels of protoporphyrin with improved photosensitivity.