The DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for paraphilia states explicitly that the patient must have experienced intense and recurrent sexual arousal from deviant fantasies for at least six months and must have acted on these impulses. A paraphilia becomes a pathology, or a paraphilic disorder, only when this behavior causes significant distress and impairment of functioning to the individual or if the paraphilia involves personal harm or risk of harm to others.

Specifiers specifically added to the exhibitionistic disorder include the exposure of one’s genitals to prepubescent children, physically mature individuals, or both. The age of onset is typically before eighteen years of age. Specifiers specifically added to the sexual masochistic disorder include asphyxiophilia or autoerotic asphyxiation. Specifiers added specifically to the fetishistic disorder include body parts, non-living parts, others. Specifiers added specifically to the transvestic disorder include fetishism if aroused by fabrics, materials, or garments, and autogynephilia if aroused by thoughts or images of himself as a female.

Other diagnostic tools, including laboratory values, tests, and imaging, should also be obtained in the early evaluation and diagnostic phases. These are particularly important in appropriately diagnosing such conditions, as well as ruling out other potential causes. Laboratory values include, but are not limited to, the following measures: lipid panel, thyroid function tests, fasting blood glucose, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), prolactin, testosterone, estrogen, luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Imaging could include ultrasonography and angiography. Studies or tests include nocturnal penile tumescence and pap smears.