Stage I indicates the tumor was completely contained within the kidney without any breaks or spillage outside the renal capsule and no vascular invasion.  This stage accounts for 40% to 45% of all Wilms tumors.

Stage II would be a tumor that has grown outside the kidney to some degree, such as into surrounding fatty tissue.  Usually, the tumor would be completely removable by surgery, and regional lymph nodes are negative. About 20% of all Wilms tumors are at this stage.

Stage III comprises about 20% to 25% of all Wilms tumors and indicates a tumor which could not be completely removed surgically such as the following:

- Cancer has spread to the regional lymph nodes but not to more distant nodes, such as in the chest

- Cancer has grown into nearby vital structures so it could not be surgically removed completely

- Deposits of the tumor (tumor implants) are found in the peritoneum, or there are positive surgical margins

- Cancer cells were accidentally “spilled” into the abdominal cavity during surgery

- The tumor was removed in separate pieces surgically; such as one piece from the kidney and another from the adrenal gland

- A renal biopsy of the tumor was done before it was surgically removed

Stage IV tumors are those that have spread through the vascular system to distant organs such as the lungs, liver, brain, or bones, or to distant lymph nodes.  These account for about 10% of all Wilms tumors.

Stage V are those cases where both kidneys are involved with tumor at the time of initial diagnosis.  About 5% of all Wilms tumors are at this stage.  Individual staging of each renal unit is needed as well.