**Arterial**

The perfusion of the postcentral gyrus is predominantly from the middle and anterior cerebral artery. The middle and anterior cerebral artery arises from the internal carotid artery. Once the internal carotid artery reaches the brain, it splits into the middle cerebral artery and the anterior cerebral artery. The middle cerebral artery ascends the brain between the temporal and the frontal lobe. This path corresponds to the perfusion territory of the middle cerebral artery. The middle cerebral artery will perfuse the inferior and lateral region of the postcentral gyrus, which corresponds to the face and hand part of the homunculus. As for the anterior cerebral artery, it will ascend between the two frontal lobes. The anterior cerebral artery will go on and perfuse the medial and superior region of the postcentral gyrus. The medial and superior part of the postcentral gyrus corresponds to the legs and the genitals respectively on the homunculus. The region of the postcentral gyrus that corresponds to the neck, shoulders, and torso is considered the watershed area. The watershed region received perfusion at the point where the distal ends of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries meet.

**Venous**

The venous blood and cerebral spinal fluid in the brain drain into the dural venous sinuses. The dural sinuses derive from the folds of the meninges. The dura sinuses are unique structures that drain venous blood similar to veins, but dura sinuses lack valves. The venous blood from the dura sinuses drains towards the internal jugular veins. Then the internal jugular veins merge with the subclavian vein to form the brachiocephalic vein. Both the left and right brachiocephalic veins join to form the superior vena cava. The venous blood from the superior vena cava empties into the right atrium of the heart.

**Lymphatics**

The lymphatic system of the brain was once believed to be nonexistent. But in recent findings, researchers found that the lymphatic system of the brain is embedded in the dura mater layer of the meninges. The lymph drains from the dura mater towards the cervical lymph nodes. The lymph from the cervical lymph nodes will either drain into the right lymphatic duct if it's on the right side of the head or the thoracic duct if it's on the left side of the head. Both the right lymphatic duct and the thoracic duct will drain back into the central circulation.