The normal epidermis can be broken down into five distinct layers: the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, stratum lucidum, and stratum corneum. The stratum basale contains the stem cells for keratinocytes that constantly regenerate and push keratinocytes further outwards. As the keratinocytes mature, they travel from stratum to stratum with alterations in key characteristics. The cells are held together with intercellular connections called desmosomes. Under certain pathologic conditions like spongiosis, the desmosomes are visible and appear as spines between cells - which is where the stratum spinosum derived its name.

As cells rise through the stratum spinosum, keratinocytes begin to flatten out, and keratohyalin granules become readily apparent, giving the next layer the stratum granulosum. Other granules are present, including the lamellar granules, which contain glucosylceramides and an assortment of lipids and proteins that are eventually used to bond cells together.

In normal skin, our epidermis contains four indigenous cell populations: keratinocytes, melanocytes, Langerhans cells, and Merkel cells.

Keratinocytes comprise the bulk of the epidermis and originate from stem cells in the basal layer. After formation, they mature as they rise through the epidermal layers. Their endpoint is the outermost layer, the stratum corneum. By the time they reach this layer, the keratinocytes will have shed their nuclei and flattened out to create the cemented outer layer of our epidermis. The differentiation of a keratinocyte from the basal layer through the flaking off of the stratum corneum takes approximately four weeks.

Melanocytes, under normal conditions, are found intermittently studded in the basal layer. Melanocytes synthesize and store melanin in organelles known as melanosomes. Melanocytes transfer melanosomes via dendrites, primarily to keratinocytes.

Langerhans cells, derived from monocytes, are the principal antigen-presenting cells found in the epidermis and the most prevalent immune cell type alongside CD8+ T cells.

Merkel cells are neuroendocrine cells of epidermal origin that are involved in sensation.