The patient’s presentation is going to depend on the type of exposure. Most topical exposures to dilute hydrogen peroxide have very mild symptoms and resolve quickly with just decontamination. Therefore, many will be unlikely to seek medical care. Higher concentration exposures may present with topical chemical burns, which can be severe. These most likely occur in occupational settings to adults who work in industrial settings, including paper and fabric industries, foam rubber, and rocket fuel.

Ophthalmic exposures will present with tearing, conjunctival injection, and pain. Depending on underlying damage, they may have some vision loss, which may be temporary or permanent.

Accidental ingestions will mostly occur in young children and present with nausea and vomiting. If a large amount of hydrogen peroxide is ingested, the patient may also present with altered mental status as the hydrogen peroxide may cross into the bloodstream and cause air embolization.

Intentional ingestions are most likely to present in adults with either involve higher concentrations or larger amounts. They are also less likely to present early after the ingestion and therefore are more likely to have more severe symptoms such as gaseous distention, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and symptoms of air emboli such as altered mental status, neurological changes, or hypotension. Gastrointestinal bleeding, secondary to the burning of the mucosa, air emboli, subsequent necrosis, or rupture from the rapid distension of the gastrointestinal tract, can also occur. Endoscopy is often required to evaluate and treat these ingestions fully.

Occasionally, patients may present after direct introduction to the bloodstream. This can occur with aggressive irrigation of wounds, accidental IV administration, irrigation of surgical wounds, or similar situations. These patients will present with symptoms of air emboli or local gas production such as subcutaneous air, pain, and swelling as well as possible local tissue injury due to topical exposure or wound beds.

Another unusual presentation is exposure to mucous membranes, such as during enemas or intraoperative irrigations. Some of these may also occur in the nasal or oral mucosa in inhalation injuries, ingestions, or gargling. Inhalation will also cause difficulty breathing and may lead to severe respiratory distress. Patients will likely present with wheezing, drooling, and/or stridor and may have subglottal narrowing on x-ray imaging.