PPS is indicated any time a pediatric patient requires a procedure that requires anxiolysis for the proper technique or intervention that will cause significant discomfort. The level of sedation is tailored to the amount of sedation needed depending on the amount of pain or anxiety that will be caused by the procedure or the necessity to keep the patient still.  For instance, a child may require anxiolysis in order to obtain CT or MRI imaging or need deeper sedation for more painful procedures such as fracture reduction or complex lacerations.

The patient's vital signs and overall stability must be taken into account in unscheduled procedures, along with consideration of the patient's history of chronic disease or genetic abnormalities (e.g., cardiovascular or respiratory disease, Down syndrome, cerebral palsy), medication history, and allergies. The physical status evaluation of the airway is based on the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classification system:

- ASA Class I: Healthy patient with no acute or chronic disease, normal BMI percentile for age

- ASA Class II: Patient with mild systemic disease without acute worsening or exacerbation.  Examples include asymptomatic congenital heart disease, well-controlled dysrhythmia, well-controlled epilepsy, asthma without exacerbation.

- ASA Class III: Patient with severe systemic disease without immediate danger of death, including uncorrected stable congenital cardiac abnormality, poorly controlled epilepsy, cystic fibrosis, morbid obesity, metabolic disease, history of organ transplantation.

- ASA Class IV: Patient with severe systemic disease that represents a constant threat to life, such as symptomatic congenital cardiac abnormality, severe trauma, sepsis, severe respiratory distress, congestive heart failure, acute hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy.

- ASA Class V: Moribound patients not expected to survive without operation, including massive trauma, a patient requiring ECMO, intracranial hemorrhage with mass effect, respiratory failure or arrest, multiple organ system dysfunction.

- ASA Class VI: Patient declared brain dead whose organs are being harvested for donor purposes.

In general, PPS in the emergency setting should be limited to ASA class I or II.  For children in ASA class III or IV or with anatomic cervical spine or airway anomalies, consultation with an anesthesiologist or appropriate subspecialist is recommended.