Advice for healthcare workers for communicating on social media

Because many healthcare workers now take to the media to write about their encounters with patients, here are some precautionary warnings:

- Some health care systems do not tolerate any communication of patient encounters on social media. Termination is the risk that health workers face when they post on social media. If you decide to post about a bad experience with a patient, co-worker or provider, you do so at your own risk.

- Never rush in replying to any negative comments on social media.

- HIPAA rules and regulations must always be in mind.

- When responding to patients, be as professional as possible.

- If as a physician you have had a negative experience with another patient, doctor, or business, remember courtesy, respect, and empathy before expressing your opinion in any forum.

- If you have facts that support your argument, support them with links to external sources. When you state something, mention that it is an opinion and not a fact.

- Rely upon publicly disclosed and valid information that can contain factual material.

- If you want to post something negative and are not sure if you will be held liable for defamation, do not post it.

- If one is accused of posting a defamatory statement, delete it. Not only will this tactic save much money, but it will also preserve one's reputation.

- Finally, when writing anything, remain on the side of truth and facts, it is the best defense to counter any defamation.