**Education and Behavior**

Once a patient is diagnosed with OSA, counseling regarding risk factors, natural history, and complications of untreated OSA should be discussed. All patients should also be alerted of the increased risk of motor vehicle collisions (MVC) in patients with OSA. The patients should also be instructed to consult with their primary physician regarding their OSA prior to undergoing anesthesia or starting sedating medications.

Appropriate behavioral modifications should be identified and discussed with all patients as these are modifiable and low-risk. For obese patients, regular exercise and a healthy diet should be encouraged. Weight loss has been shown to improve AHI/RDI, decrease daytime sleepiness, improve metabolic parameters, and improve blood pressure control.

**Positive Airway Pressure Therapy**

In positive pressure therapy, the positive transmural pharyngeal pressure so that the upper airway remains patent as the intraluminal pressure exceeds the surrounding pressure.

Positive airway pressure is the initial treatment for nearly all patients with OSA and remains the mainstay of treatment. Numerous randomized control trials and meta-analyses have concluded that positive airway pressure reduces respiratory event frequency, daytime sleepiness, and frequency of MVCs improves blood pressure control, and improves the overall quality of life.

**Alternative and Adjunctive Therapies**

Oral Appliances are an option for patients with mild to moderate OSA who fail to tolerate positive pressure therapy. In the appropriate patients, these devices decrease respiratory-related arousals, sleepiness, snoring, and oxygen desaturation.

Surgery Intervention is generally not considered first-line therapy for OSA and instead is considered when therapy from positive pressure therapy and/or oral appliance therapy is either ineffective or declines over time. In these patients, identification of the most likely contributing site or sites of obstruction is assessed in a comprehensive exam as above. In addition, some surgeons advocate performing Drug-Induced Sleep Endoscopy (DISE) to further evaluate the airway under anesthetic conditions - however, there is no current consensus on the role of DISE in assessing patients with OSA.

Depending on the sites of obstruction, numerous surgical alternatives exist, including tonsillectomy, uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (for which complications include oropharyngeal bleeding and velopharyngeal insufficiency as well as velopharyngeal stenosis), adenoidectomy, surgical correction for nasal obstruction including septoplasty and inferior turbinate reduction. Craniofacial surgery, including maxillomandibular advancement, may also be performed for maxillomandibular insufficiency with improvement in obstructive sleep apnea for moderate to severe disease but carry the risk of damage to nearby structures, including the inferior alveolar/mental nerve, provides sensation to the chin and lower lip, and marginal mandibular nerve provides motor innervation to the lateral oral aperture. This also requires inpatient hospital stay and recovery and is not a good option for older patients with multiple comorbidities.

An alternative to standard anatomic correction surgery is hypoglossal nerve stimulation, which protrudes the tongue forward via an implantable neurostimulation device that senses respiration to deliver stimulation at the appropriate time. This is indicated in patients with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea who have failed positive pressure ventilation or do not obtain enough benefit from positive pressure ventilation with a BMI of less than 32. In selected patients, these devices have shown reductions in AHI and oxygen saturation indexes and decreased subjective sleepiness.

It should also be noted that tracheostomy is another surgical treatment for obstructive sleep apnea as this bypasses the upper airway; however, this is rarely chosen for treatment of OSA alone but remains an option for patients with severe refractory disease or those with a concomitant disease for which tracheostomy may be appropriate.