There is no single test that can accurately identify biliary atresia from other causes of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with high specificity. Children undergo both serological and radiological tests along with histopathology to come to a diagnosis.

**Laboratory Studies**

In biliary atresia, the direct and indirect bilirubin levels are both elevated with the conjugated portion being more elevated. As alkaline phosphatase levels are elevated in children due to bone remodeling, the liver-specific alkaline phosphatase fraction 5' nucleotidase level should be measured. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP) is present in the canalicular bile membrane and is increased in cases of biliary obstruction. GGTP provides a diagnostic accuracy of 50% to 60% in biliary atresia.

**Imaging Studies**

**Ultrasound (US)**

Ultrasonography is an easily available, non-invasive test and can provide valuable information regarding the liver texture, vasculature patency, and ascites, and can also exclude other causes of obstructive jaundice like a choledochal cyst.

**Hepatobiliary Scintigraphy**

This study uses a technetium labeled compound diisopropyl iminodiacetic acid (DISDIA).

**Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography**

This test is not widely done due to the limited availability of neonatal scopes equipped with a side view. With an increase in expertise and availability, this modality will probably be used in situations where other tests have failed to confirm the diagnosis.

**Duodenal Intubation**

Aspiration of bile-stained fluid from the duodenum will rule out biliary atresia. This test is not widely performed as it is invasive and unreliable.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP****)**

These tests provide greater accuracy but are not readily performed due to expense and requirement of sedation and limited resolution at this young age.

**Liver Biopsy**

Liver biopsy can differentiate biliary atresia from other causes of cholestatic jaundice with a high level of accuracy. Features suggestive of biliary atresia include bile duct proliferation, bile plugging, multinucleated giant cells, focal necrosis of liver parenchyma, extramedullary hemopoiesis, and inflammatory cell infiltrate. Among these features, bile ductular proliferation is considered the most sensitive and specific feature.