The patients who sustain forearm fractures usually present to the trauma and emergency department with a history of high-velocity trauma. It is of utmost importance to rule out other life-threatening associated injuries with these fractures. A thorough examination should be carried out using the ATLS protocol, including primary and secondary surveys. A structured and systemically performed primary survey is the heart of the ATLS protocol during the initial assessment of trauma patients. The secondary survey includes eliciting a proper history, complete head-to-toe examination, and local examination of the affected parts once the patient is stabilized.

Forearm fractures should be diagnosed through a detailed history, clinical examination, and relevant radiological investigations. The patients usually complain of acute pain, swelling, local tenderness, and visible deformity at the site of trauma or fracture in the forearm. History taking should always be followed by a clinical examination to rule out open fractures and associated soft tissue injuries. A systematically performed neurological examination of peripheral nerves is necessary to rule out any neurological injury in the affected extremity. Once assessed, the patency of the radial and ulnar arteries should be well documented for further reference and treatment prognosis. Early identification of the signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome is necessary to avoid the dreaded complications of tissue necrosis and ischemia.