Data is limited to case reports and small case series, precluding definitive recommendations on the best approach. Examples of interventions that may be effective include methods to reduce inflammation inhibit ductal occlusion, or reduce sweating, as well as procedures that remove or destroy sweat glands.

**First Line**

First-line treatments include topical and oral retinoids, topical benzoyl peroxide, topical clindamycin, intralesional or topical corticosteroids (TCS), topical calcineurin inhibitors (CNIs), and oral contraceptives.

- Low potency topical corticosteroids (TCS) are best (less risk of skin atrophy, striae, fissuring), usually twice daily until symptoms improve and then may decrease to daily use two to three times per week.

- Topical clindamycin twice daily. Patients may see improvement in the first few weeks. The mechanism is unclear.

- Topical CNIs reduce inflammation akin to TCS without the risk of cutaneous atrophy. Both pimecrolimus and tacrolimus use have resulted in moderate to near-complete clearance.

- Topical retinoids - Both tretinoin and adapalene are options. These are thought to reduce follicular occlusion and secondary ductal occlusion. Skin irritation is an issue. Patients may tolerate application every other day instead of daily may be better tolerated.

- Oral isotretinoin has shown decent results in anecdotal reports.

**Second Line and Novel Treatments**

These are better for cases that are severe and/or refractory to the first-line therapies. These include:

Surgical excision, fractional lasers including 1550 nm erbium glass, pulsed dye laser, botulinum toxin, phototherapy, electrocoagulation, copper vapor, and CO laser, liposuction-assisted-curettage, and microwave technology.