There are no outright contraindications to HAART therapy; all patients clinicians determined as HIV positive should start on a treatment regimen immediately, regardless of their CD4 count. There are contraindications to specific antiretroviral medications, but healthcare providers should find a different HAART combination for patients with these specific comorbidities. HAART should be administered by, or in consultation with, a provider with specific training defined by the HIV-Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America.

- Patients with a history of hepatic dysfunction should avoid efavirenz, tenofovir-disoproxil fumarate (TDF), and maraviroc.

- Patients with a history of renal dysfunction should avoid or adjust dosages of tenofovir, maraviroc, and atazanavir.

- Patients with a history of psychiatric illnesses should avoid efavirenz and dolutegravir.

- Patients of childbearing potential, pregnant, or breastfeeding should avoid NNRTIs, dolutegravir, bictegravir, stavudine, didanosine, and ritonavir. The preferred regimen typically includes a combination of dual NRTIs (zidovudine) plus a protease or integrase inhibitor; however, dosage adjustments may be necessary to account for pharmacokinetic changes during pregnancy.

- Patients with a risk or history of torsades de pointes or cardiovascular disease should avoid efavirenz and abacavir.

- Patients with concurrent TB should be switched to rifabutin in their TB management as protease inhibitors, and NNRTIs should not be used with rifampin.

- Patients with concurrent HBV are not treatment limited; however, higher HBV DNA viral loads have correlated with a greater risk of hepatotoxicity with HAART usage.

- Patients at high risk of inconsistent medication use, or patients who have failed initial therapy, are at risk of viral resistance. These patients should avoid medications with a low barrier to resistance, such as NNRTIs, raltegravir, and elvitegravir.

- Patients who test positive for HLA-B*5701 should avoid abacavir due to the high risk for a delayed hypersensitivity reaction.