A detailed assessment is necessary before starting corticosteroids. The patient's height, weight, and blood pressure should be monitored. Regular weight record helps in monitoring the decrease or increase of edema. Physical examination is carried out to detect infections and underlying systemic disorders.

Specific treatment of nephrotic syndrome is dependent on its cause. Therefore, management varies between adult and pediatric populations. Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) issued guidance in 2012 that included recommendations for treating nephrotic syndrome.

**Specific Treatment in Children**

Corticosteroids are mainly used for children with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Alternative immunosuppressive agents are often necessary for children with frequently relapsing or steroid-dependent nephrotic syndrome. Examples of these drugs include cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), calcineurin inhibitors, and levamisole. In cases of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, the first-line choice is calcineurin inhibitors, and if there is no response, then agents such as MMF or prolonged and/or intravenous pulse corticosteroids could be used.

Rituximab, an anti-B cell antibody, has proved to be an effective steroid-sparing agent in the pediatric population. However, rituximab may fail to achieve drug-free remission in children dependent on both calcineurin inhibitors and steroids. Rituximab may also have a role in children with steroid-resistant disease.

In children with complicated steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome who respond to rituximab, Okutsu et al. observed that an additional rituximab treatment at B cell recovery may maintain prolonged remission.

**Specific Treatment in Adults**

Treatment varies by etiology, as follows:

- Minimal change nephropathy in adults usually responds to prednisone.

- In lupus nephritis, prednisone combined with cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate mofetil induces remission.

- Secondary amyloidosis with nephrotic syndrome will improve with the anti-inflammatory management of the primary disease.

**Acute Nephrotic Syndrome in Childhood**

Hospitalization is not usually necessary with close outpatient follow-up care and good parental and patient education. Hospitalization becomes helpful if any of the following are present:

- Generalized edema severe enough to result in respiratory distress

- Tense scrotal or labial edema

- Complications such as bacterial peritonitis, pneumonia, sepsis, or thromboembolism

- Failure to thrive

- Uncertainty regarding the compliance of patient or family with treatment

Diuretics are usually needed. Furosemide (1 mg/kg/day) and spironolactone (2 mg/kg/day) help when fluid retention is severe enough, provided there are no signs of kidney failure or volume contraction. Achieving a satisfactory diuresis is hard when serum albumin level is less than 1.5 g/dL, so sometimes albumin has to be given.

To prevent infections, penicillin can be started in children with overt edema. Abdominal paracentesis is recommended in patients showing signs of peritonitis, and bacterial infections should be treated sooner.

**Acute Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults**

The principles of treatment in adults with acute nephrotic syndrome are not different from those for children. Diuretics, such as furosemide, spironolactone, and even metolazone, may be needed. Diuretic use may lead to volume depletion, which should be assessed by monitoring symptoms, weight, pulse, and blood pressure.

Anticoagulation has been suggested to prevent thromboembolic complications, but its role in primary prevention is not proven. Hypolipidemic agents could be used.

In patients with secondary nephrotic syndrome, such as that secondary to diabetic nephropathy, some medications are widely used to reduce proteinuria, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and/or angiotensin 2 receptor blockers.

**Diet and Activity**

The diet in patients with nephrotic syndrome is aimed to provide sufficient caloric and protein (1 g/kg/d) intake. Supplemental dietary proteins are of no proven value. A low-salt diet helps limit fluid retention and edema.

**Long-Term Monitoring**

The patient's edema and proteinuria define the adjustment of diuretics and angiotensin antagonists. Follow-up in the nephrotic syndrome also involves immunizations and monitoring for steroid toxicity.

Routine immunizations should be deferred until there are no relapses and the patient has been off immunosuppressants for at least three months.