Complications can be divided into three time periods, i.e., intraoperative, early postoperative, and late postoperative.

**Intraoperative Complications:**The most common include posterior capsule rupture (0.5% to 5.2%), intraoperative iris floppy syndrome (0.5% to 2.0%), or iris or ciliary body injury (0.6%-1.2%).

**Early Postoperative Complications:**Some of the more common complications include transient elevated intraocular pressure, cornea edema, toxic anterior segment syndrome, and endophthalmitis.

Endophthalmitis, while rare due to intracameral antibiotics, is one of the most severe complications post-cataract surgery. The increased risk of endophthalmitis is reported in patients with Diabetes mellitus, advanced age (over 80), vitreous communication, and large incision ECCE.

**Late Postoperative Complications:**Common complications that present later include posterior capsule opacification (0.3% to 28.4%), clinical cystoid macular edema, and retinal detachment (0.1% to 1.3%).

Posterior capsule opacification is the most common late complication. It can occur as many as 1 in 5 eyes in the three years following surgery with even higher rates in the following years.

Cystoid macular edema is due to leaky perifoveal capillaries secondary to the release of proinflammatory cytokines.

Increased risk of retinal detachment is reported in patients who are younger and male. Anatomical risk factors include axial length greater than 26 mm and posterior vitreous detachment.

Common complaints after surgery: even though cataract surgery greatly improves vision and quality of life, patients may continue to have subjective visual complaints. Commonly, they will include seeing shadows, halos, glare, starburst patterns around lights, and hazy vision. These symptoms are known as dysphotopsias and can be divided into positive and negative symptoms. Positive symptoms involve starbursts and haloes, while negative symptoms include shadows or dark areas. These symptoms can be caused by acrylic IOLs, and management for intolerable symptoms can include an exchange with a PMMA or silicone IOL. Risk factors for negative symptoms include small pupils, short distance to IOL, functional nasal retina, and an IOL with a high index of refraction. Treatments can include repositioning the IOL, secondary placement of IOL, and Nd:YAG laser anterior capsulotomy.