Treatment should aim for recovery, achieving full remission of symptoms, and returning to the premorbid level of functioning. Biopsychosocial treatment plans for children and adolescent is similar to adults' plans. However, in children and adolescents, clinicians often start with psychosocial interventions.

**Psychosocial Interventions Involving the Child and Parents**

Psychosocial interventions are the first-line treatment in case of mild-to-moderate depression.

- Psycho-education including education about the illness, the importance of having a good sleep, and good nutrition

- Exercising for at least 30 minutes a day

- Cognitive and behavioral therapy to help the depressed individual identify cognitive distortions and to learn cognitive restructuring skills, problem-solving skills, and to use behavioral activation techniques

- Interpersonal therapy aimed to decrease interpersonal conflicts by helping depressed individual learning interpersonal problem-solving skills and changing dysfunctional communication and relational patterns

- Family therapy: Different family therapy modules could be of help to the depressed individual and family.

**Medication**

Different studies had shown that antidepressant efficacy is different between adults and children. The placebo effect is stronger among children and adolescents compared to adults, especially with mild-moderate depression.

It is important to discuss the effects and side-effects with the patient and parents. Typically, for the first month after prescribing an antidepressant follow-up should be weekly. This allows for close monitoring of side effects as well as supportive management.

Antidepressants that are most commonly used in this age group are fluoxetine, sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram. Fluoxetine and escitalopram are approved by the FDA for adolescent depression. Venlafaxine, a serotonin-norepinephrine repute inhibitor (SNRI), is a second-line drug due to its side effects.

**Side Effects**

One of the major side effects of antidepressants is an increase in suicidal thoughts, but not suicidal attempts. Thus, monitoring suicidal risk is required. Other side effects include gastrointestinal problems, agitation, nightmares and sleep disturbance, weight gain, and sexual dysfunction.

**Management of Comorbid Disorders**

Clinicians should monitor comorbid disorders such as sleep disorders, anxiety disorders, and other underlying medical causes of depression.