Clinical suspicion should be based on the mechanism and severity of the injury, the hemodynamic stability of the patient, and/or the presence of associated injuries. The possibility of aortic injuries should be considered and excluded in patients with a history of falls from heights or high-speed motor vehicle crashes.

**Chest Radiograph**

Although this has low sensitivity, it is used as a primary screening test and often determines whether additional imaging is required.

The following findings may be present in patients with aortic injury; but, they are not diagnostic.

- Widening of the mediastinum (this may not be evident)

- If it is greater than 8 cm at the level of the aortic arch, it requires further evaluation and imaging studies.

- Loss of the normal shadow of the aortic knob

- Left apical pleural cap of fluid, or blood

- Left pleural effusion

- Deviation/Displacement of the trachea, or esophagus to the right

Beware that it is difficult to assess these findings on a supine, portable chest radiograph.

**FAST Examination**

Although FAST examination is required to evaluate any intra-abdominal injury, it may not provide adequate information about the aortic injury, since it does not include the aorta.

**CT Scan**

The decision of whether to obtain a CT scan or angiography depends on institutional preferences, the patient's status, and the presence of associated injuries. CT scan is an initial screening modality for patients where the mechanism of injury may suggest this type of injury.  In recent years, newer generation multi-detector helical CT scans have replaced angiography.

**CTA Chest**

Currently, CT angiography is increasingly used, and it is the investigational modality of choice. Most experts agree that a negative CT-angiogram may obviate the need for angiography. It should be obtained in patients who are involved in high-speed accidents, to exclude aortic injury.

For mediastinal hematoma, the following signs may be seen:

- Abnormal soft tissue density around the mediastinal structures

- A periaortic hematoma is a sensitive finding of aortic injury.

The following signs may suggest aortic injury:

- Intraluminal filling defect due to intimal flap or clot. An intimal flap is visible in most patients with an aortic injury.

- Abnormal aortic contour due to mural hematoma.

- Pseudoaneurysm formation:  tear in the muscularis layer occurs, through which the intimal layer may protrude. This may make it susceptible to rupture.

- Extravasation of contrast: Active extravasation of injected contrast medium suggests active hemorrhage and necessitates immediate thoracotomy.

The severity of the aortic injury is classified as follows:

- Type 1: Intimal tear

- Type 2: Intramural hematoma

- Type 3: Pseudo-aneurysm

- Type 4: Rupture