Primary screening for stable ischemic heart disease starts with identifying risk factors associated with the development of atherosclerosis. Older age, male gender, smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia, as well as family history of premature coronary artery disease (defined as an occurrence in a first-degree relative at the age of less than 55 for males or less than 65 for females), are among the strongest risk factors. Obesity, limited physical activity, psychosocial factors such as stress and depression, as well as co-existing chronic kidney disease or another atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) such as stroke, or peripheral vascular disease (PVD) are also associated with ischemic heart disease.

The "2010 ACC/AHA Guideline for Assessment of Cardiovascular Risk in Asymptomatic Adults" recommended the use of global risk scores, such as the Framingham Risk Score (FRS), to risk assess all adults.

The "2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Assessment of Cardiovascular Risk” added the pooled cohort ASCVD risk equation as a reliable tool for non-Hispanic African American or non-Hispanic white patients who are 40 to 79 years of age. Both global risk score calculators (as well as several others) rely on similar risk factors known to be associated with IHD as mentioned prior, though certain risk factors like positive family history are difficult to quantify and should be accounted for by the physician for every individual patient.

The ASCVD pooled cohort equation was also used in the “2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults” to risk stratify all adults over the age of 21. Patients with known ASCVD, LDL greater than 190mg/dL, diabetes mellitus or 10-year ASCVD calculated risk estimated at greater than 20% are considered high-risk. For this group of patients, high intensity (or maximally tolerated) statin therapy is recommended.

Patients are further stratified into those with intermediate-risk if their ASCVD risk is calculated at 7.5% to 20%, or borderline if their ASCVD risk is 5% to 7.5%. For this group, it is advised to initiate a discussion with the patients regarding their individual risk factors before making a decision to start statin therapy. Further risk stratification using coronary artery calcium (CAC) score could also be helpful. In general, patients with CAC score more than 100, or higher than 75th percentile for their age-matched cohorts are considered at higher risk. Other risk enhancers include hs-CRP of at least 2.0 mg/L, ABI < 0.9 and elevated Lp(a) or apoB levels.

The newer 2017 guidelines also rely on global risk calculators such as the Reynold Risk Score or the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Atherosclerosis Study), but add an LDL-C target instead of an intensity-based approach to statin therapy and/or lipid management strategy. Amidst all of these sequential guidelines, what remains constant is an emphasis on screening for higher risk patients and beginning therapy with lifestyle modification as well as lipid-lowering agents (statins being the cornerstone) while patients are still asymptomatic.

For patients known or suspected to have stable ischemic heart disease, initial evaluation should begin with a thorough history and physical examination, along with a baseline ECG to look for signs of ischemia or previous infarction. Stress testing, as well as an assessment of functional capacity is often necessary, particularly if the patients have active symptoms or evidence of ischemia such as ST changes on ECG. All patients diagnosed with stable ischemic heart disease should have an echocardiogram to assess for ventricular dysfunction because it directly affects management. This is especially true if it shows reduced LVEF. It may also show regional wall motion abnormalities suggestive of ischemia or an old infarction within a specific coronary artery territory. Laboratory tests such as a lipid panel, HbA1c, and renal function are routinely obtained as well. Troponin enzyme levels, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or NT-proBNP are not necessary for the diagnosis but may be useful in the right clinical setting.

After the clinical history and non-invasive testing are used to define patient risk, the decision to pursue invasive testing can be made. This is done through cardiac catheterization, where a coronary angiogram can define coronary anatomy with the aim of identifying flow-limiting atherosclerotic lesions. However, the indications to perform such a procedure largely depend on whether or not the information obtained is likely to affect management. While a coronary angiogram may occasionally be used to diagnose IHD in a patient with an atypical clinical presentation or indeterminate stress test results, it is often not done for purely diagnostic reasons. The primary benefit for the majority of patients is in providing another layer of risk-stratification that can direct revascularization-eligible patients towards that route, where they may receive primary cutaneous intervention (PCI) or be referred for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.

In that respect, the 2014 ACC/AHA focused update for the diagnosis and management of stable ischemic heart disease guidelines recommend coronary angiography in patients with high-risk of severe IHD (as determined by the clinical setting and stress test results) who are amenable to revascularization (Class IIA recommendation) or patients with refractory ischemic symptoms despite goal-directed medical therapy (Class I recommendation). It is also reasonable to perform in patients with suspected stable ischemic heart disease, where diagnostic tests, including stress test results, are indeterminate.

Coronary angiography is not recommended to assess risk in asymptomatic patients or those at low-risk according to clinical criteria prior to noninvasive stress testing. It also is not recommended in patients with preserved LV function (ejection fraction greater than 50%) and low risk on non-invasive testing. Higher risk patients should also not undergo angiography if they are not candidates for revascularization because of comorbidities or individual preference since it exposes them to the risks of the procedure without affecting future management or improving outcomes.