Friedreich's ataxia, when associated with dilated cardiomyopathy, suggests greater morbidity due to the requirement for a transplant. Otherwise, in patients without cardiomyopathy, and just ataxia and diabetes, which, although debilitating, is not lethal.

On the whole, patients with Fragile X syndrome have a near-normal lifespan. The average age of death was about 12 years lower than in the general population for both men and women, but this was likely bias of ascertainment. The commonest causes of death were cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and malignant disease, similar to those in the general population. However, FMRP is a critical protein in aging in all individuals. Those with FXS may suffer from problems with aging because of the lack of FMRP. However, further research is necessary to fully explain the subgroups of patients with FXS susceptible to problems with aging and how it could benefit from treatment.

In patients with spinocerebellar ataxias, total physical dependency is not the norm. Although they are often life-shortening, it is impossible to accurately predict life expectancy, due to a great amount of variation in the presentation and severity. In some severe cases, the last stages of their illness will require continuing care by professionals in a facility.

Huntington's disease causes extensive depression that leads to a high suicide rate among these patients, up to four times the rate in the normal population.

Patients with myotonic dystrophy adult-onset have a markedly reduced survival rate from an expected rate of 78% to an observed rate of 18%. A significant weak positive correlation between the CTG repeat length and younger age at death was found. The cause of death most commonly documented was pneumonia and cardiac arrhythmias.