- Patients who are hypersensitive or allergic to bupropion or its constituents should not use the medication.

- Seizure disorder is a major contraindication for bupropion therapy. In addition, bupropion is also contraindicated for any other factors predisposing to seizures, i.e., discontinuation of alcohol or sedatives, arteriovenous malformations, severe head injury, severe stroke, brain tumor, or other significant central nervous system disease.

- Patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors should not take bupropion, nor should those taking linezolid or methylene blue. In addition, Canadian regulations prohibit use in patients taking thioridazine.

- Bupropion has had a United States boxed warning related to suicidal thoughts and behavior in children, adolescents, and young adults. All patients who have depressive symptoms and begin any new medication should be monitored closely for suicidal signs. If symptoms worsen or overt suicidality ensues, the clinician should stop therapy with the drug.

- In December 2016, researchers released a safety review. Data from a large clinical trial has convinced the FDA that the serious mood and behavior effects of bupropion are lower than previously represented. As a result, the U.S. boxed warning for bupropion for smoking cessation changed. However, the report notes that these reactions remain concerning, especially in patients with severe mood disorders or schizophrenia. This FDA report was explicitly related to the use of bupropion in smoking cessation.

- The doses and preparations of bupropion for depression demand higher levels of caution.