Because burns can occur on almost any part of the body, specific guidelines in the management of each organ system are lacking. However, there is expert evidence on managing the patient as a whole. However, there still remain several gaps in the early management of chemical burns. What solution to rinse the skin or the eye and when to debride are two issues that continue to be debated. But there is no debate that the eye should be rinsed thoroughly, and the patient must be seen by the ophthalmologist. Because burns can affect all organ systems an interprofessional approach with interaction is necessary to avoid the high morbidity of the disorder.

Since most burn patients are managed in a burn unit, the role of the nurse is vital. Often these professionals are the first to identify burn-related complications like infections, melena, difficulty swallowing, eschar formation, and declining urine output. The pharmacist should be closely involved when burns are caused by medications like podophyllotoxin, formic acid, or topical salicylic acid. Knowledge in managing topical burns, especially in children can help prevent disability.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes following a chemical burn depend on the chemical, extent of the burn, comorbidity of the patient, and time to intervention. Some chemicals are more harmful than others, but chemical burns to the eye are always serious. Because chemical burns can cause poor cosmesis and functional disability, a team approach to management is vital.