Immediate orthopedic consultation should be obtained for patients with neurovascular compromise, open fractures, tenting of the skin, severe angulation or displacement or any break in the skin near the fracture, which are absolute indications for surgery. Relative surgery indications include Neer Type II displaced distal-third fractures, fracture-shortening above 1.5 cm, or 15% of the contralateral side, floating shoulder, polytrauma, significant seizure or neuromuscular disorder, and cosmetic issues due to displacement.

In group I midshaft clavicle fractures, conservative nonoperative management is the most common approach. Treatment of these fractures consists of supportive or reductive measures. Supportive treatment involves the placement of a sling or sling and swathe, while reductive treatment includes the use of a figure-of-eight brace. Similar union rates have been achieved using either method. In uncomplicated nondisplaced midshaft fractures, patients treated nonoperatively with these conservative measures have fewer complications and a faster recovery then those treated operatively. However, in patients with a higher risk of nonunion (due to fracture displacement, clavicle shortening, or fracture comminution) surgical fixation results in improved patient outcomes relative to nonoperative management. Surgical fixation is achieved with open reduction with plate fixation or intramedullary fixation.

In group II distal clavicle fractures, patients should be immobilized with a simple sling or sling and swathe. Figure-of-eight braces should be avoided, as they may increase the displacement of the fracture. Because nonunion is seen in approximately 30% of cases, an orthopedic referral is necessary. Definitive treatment is controversial, with some studies showing improved outcomes with surgical fixation while others show similar outcomes in patients managed nonoperatively.

Nondisplaced, proximal, group III clavicle fractures are treated conservatively, with a sling used for support and comfort. Analgesics and early range of motion are encouraged. Significantly displaced proximal clavicle fractures are rare secondary to strong ligamentous support. Serious associated injuries are found in approximately 90% of displaced proximal clavicle fractures. If signs of neurovascular compromise exist, displaced proximal fractures should be immediately reduced. These patients should carefully be evaluated for severe intrathoracic injury.

Treatment for children is similar to adults. Because of the great periosteal regeneration potential in children, healing occurs more quickly than in adults. Callus formation can be prominent in children, and parents should be educated on this normal finding.