Uremic encephalopathy is a clinical syndrome with no established diagnostic criteria. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as fatigue, anorexia, nausea, and confusion. The clinical presentation is variable, and one must consider other diagnoses, such as hypertensive encephalopathy, hyperosmolar coma, metabolic encephalopathy, and drug toxicity.

While the nephrologist is almost always involved in caring for patients with uremic encephalopathy, it is essential to have an interprofessional team of specialists, including neurologists, radiologists, neuropathologists, vascular neurologists, and urologists. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group. They assist in the clinical monitoring of patients and help with initiating hemodialysis, evaluating fistula, looking for signs of complications after procedures, and providing the education necessary for the patients and families. In hemodialysis treatment, pharmacists are critical members of patient care, preventing medication-related problems and enhancing safe, effective medication use, as well as determining dosing intervals for drug effectiveness around the dialysis schedule. Radiologists also have an essential role in determining the cause, evaluating the abnormalities discovered in MRI or CT scans, and helping to correlate the clinical and imaging findings and exclude other diagnoses. Interprofessional teamwork is vital for the early identification of uremic encephalopathy, as is prompt RRT initiation to prevent complications and mortality.

The interprofessional care model, utilizing open communication between all team members (which includes accurate and updated records of all interventions and interactions with the patient), is crucial to optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]