Patients with benign salivary gland tumors should be managed by a multidisciplinary team of otolaryngologists, plastic surgeons, general surgeons, pathologists, radiation oncologists, speech-language pathologists, and primary care physicians. Salivary tumors present with varying histologies and severities requiring therapy involving surgery and occasional radiation for recurrent or invasive diseases. Close communication and collaboration between the surgeons and radiation oncologists can provide a tailored approach for each patient. Difficulties with swallowing can occur from acute radiation toxicity.

Patients may need a consultation with general surgery for gastric tube placement to ensure optimal nutrition through treatment, especially if radiation therapy is planned. Early post-treatment intervention by speech-language pathologists can help patients regain pre-treatment function to prevent malnutrition and dependence on enteric feeding. Facial nerve paralysis may occur after parotid surgery, and consultation with an otolaryngologist or plastic surgeon for facial nerve rehabilitation is recommended.

Recurrence of salivary tumors can occur after incomplete excision, and malignant transformation can occur several years after initial treatment. Thus, routine close follow-up by the otolaryngologist, radiation oncologists, and primary care physician is advocated. Finally, patients may develop depression, social anxiety, and avoidance due to visible surgical scarring and facial nerve paralysis. Formal peer support groups can aid patients in addressing their concerns.