Complications are dependent on the genetic subtype of MODY.

**MODY 1 (HNF4A):**These patients can have vascular complications. In addition, given the fact that HNF4A is also expressed in the liver, the elevation of serum lipids and metabolic syndrome can occur.

**MODY 2 (GCK):**This subtype is rarely associated with diabetes-associated complications such as microvascular and macrovascular complications.

**MODY 3 (HNF1A):**It carries a high risk of microvascular and macrovascular complications, similar to DM1 and DM2.HNF1A than in other forms of DM, thereby making it a potential biomarker. This is despite the fact that these patients have high HDL-C and low hsCRP levels; they are particularly prone to cardiovascular disease. Thus it is imperative to start a statin in these patients by the time they are 40 years old. Pancreatic exocrine dysfunction has also been reported in this genetic subtype.

**MODY 4 (PDX1):**This rare defect has been associated with pancreatic agenesis, neonatal DM, and pancreatic exocrine dysfunction.

**MODY 5 (HNF1B):**These patients, in addition to MODY, develop congenital urogenital anomalies.HNF1B mutation has also been associated with genital abnormalities, including a bicornate uterus, Rokitanski syndrome, agenesis of the vas deferens, and hypospadias.[9] Additionally, it has been associated with hypomagnesemia due to renal wasting, hyperuricemic nephropathy with gout, and primary hyperparathyroidism.[9] These patients can also develop pancreatic atrophy, genital tract abnormalities, abnormal liver enzyme levels, and neuropsychiatric abnormalities, including intellectual disability and autism. Patients with HNFIB can have low birth rates due to decreased insulin secretion in utero. Interestingly, these patients may demonstrate insulin resistance in some cases, and microvascular complications can also be common.

**MODY 6 (NEUROD1):**Heterozygotes cause diabetes in children, neurological abnormalities, and learning disabilities.