Surgical interventions commonly indicated in the femoral region involve the repair and fixation of femur fractures. Performed by orthopedic surgeons, several important notes merit consideration within the perioperative setting which involves the complex neuro-vasculature present around the proximal femur as outlined above.

- Femoral neck fractures – in most cases, the femoral head loses its only blood supply from the foveal artery found within the ligamentum teres of the acetabulum, which gets damaged as the femoral head becomes displaced within the joint capsule and undergoes avascular osteonecrosis. This injury sometimes can result in a hematoma that remains contained within the joint capsule and so imposes the lowest risk of damage to surrounding structures. Repair and fixation are done via hemiarthroplasty, performed through a posterior approach which minimizes blood loss and fixes a prosthesis that can articulate with the native acetabulum.

- Intertrochanteric fractures of the hip – have a high risk of blood loss due to the proximity of the lateral circumflex arteries and, depending on extent and severity of the mechanism of action of the fracture, the proximal perforating branches of the profunda femoris. Taking a lateral approach for repair and internal fixation via a sliding hip screw, one must consider the locations of above-mentioned arteries and lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh, and the location of the sciatic nerve while dissecting through tissues involved.

- Subtrochanteric/Femoral shaft fractures of the hip – heavy blood loss can occur with these cases, the most commonly damaged vessel in femur shaft fractures specifically being the profunda femoris, which can eventually result in a severe neurovascular emergency known as compartment syndrome.