Initial evaluation for a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma starts with a thorough complete history and a physical exam. Lab work should include complete blood counts, comprehensive metabolic panel, and urinalysis. Imaging studies are usually obtained depending on the suspicion of the primary site of adenocarcinoma as well as metastatic disease.

Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast and in some instances magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are usually helpful in evaluation for a primary site of cancer. Gender-specific screening, for example, prostate exam as well as levels of PSA levels in a patient suspicious for prostatic adenocarcinoma and a complete breast and pelvis exam including a pap smear and mammogram in females suspicious for breast cancer. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan can be helpful in identifying a primary site in 40 percent of the cases in a retrospective study and is also used for appropriate staging.

Patients with concern for a gastrointestinal tumor should be evaluated with a colonoscopy, upper endoscopy with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography(ERCP) depending on the suspicion for the origin of the primary tumor. Colonoscopy is also recommended for a colorectal origin tumor when an intra-abdominal metastasis has CK20/ CK7 negative on the IHC staining pattern. Once a biopsy is obtained, further microscopic examination, as well as IHC staining, will help accurately diagnose the type of adenocarcinoma.

Biomarkers like the CEA, CA 19-9, CA 125, etc are not sensitive for diagnostic purposes but can be used to monitor response to therapy as well as an indicator of the activity of disease at the time of diagnosis.