# Introduction

Myoglobin is a dark red cytoplasmic hemoprotein found only in cardiac myocytes and oxidative skeletal muscle fibers.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Due to its low molecular weight, myoglobin is released quickly following muscle injury; it is the earliest marker of myocardial infarction and rhabdomyolysis.

Myoglobinuria in adults is most often encountered in cases of alcohol and drug abuse or trauma; muscle necrosis with subsequent myoglobin release also commonly occurs due to prolonged immobilization or pressure from the weight of the body.

Contrastingly, rhabdomyolysis or myoglobinuria in children is often associated with viral myositis, trauma, excessive muscular exertion, drug overdose, seizures, connective tissue disease, or metabolic disorders.

The incidence of myoglobinuria in the United States varies depending on the incidence of traumas or natural disasters. An increased incidence of viral myositis, such as that caused by a regional epidemic, may cause a temporary increase in the incidence of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria.

# Pathophysiology

Under normal conditions, myoglobin circulates in the blood bound to plasma globulins which are maintained between 0 to 0.003 mg/dL.

Myoglobin release from muscle tissues occurs due to damage to muscle cells and a change in skeletal muscle cell membrane permeability.

In health, myoglobin is easily filtered by the glomerulus and quickly excreted in the urine. However, large amounts of myoglobin in renal tubules can lead to an interaction of the hemoprotein with Tamm-Horsfall proteins, subsequent precipitation, and tubular obstruction.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

The preferred specimen is non-hemolyzed, non-lipemic serum. One study found no significant difference between heparinized plasma and serum, although results from EDTA plasma samples were significantly lower than serum samples.

Urine samples should be collected without preservatives and assayed within 24 hours of sample collection. If the test is not performed immediately after sample collection, the urine sample should be kept at 2^oC to 8^oC and centrifuged to remove any debris before the assay.

# Diagnostic Tests

The diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis requires a high index of suspicion, given that the classic clinical symptoms may not be present.

Although myoglobin is the first enzyme to be elevated in rhabdomyolysis, levels often return to normal within 24 hours after the onset of symptoms.

Though myoglobinuria is pathognomonic for rhabdomyolysis, it is important to note that rhabdomyoglobinuria is not always present or visible.****

Urinalysis should be employed to evaluate for myoglobinuria and assess the presence or severity of renal damage or acute kidney injury.

A thorough history and physical examination are critical to diagnosing rhabdomyolysis, though they are not always helpful in determining the underlying cause.

Though imaging is not generally indicated in cases of rhabdomyolysis, given that it is a clinical syndrome often diagnosed with supportive laboratory tests, MRI, bone scintigraphy, ultrasound, or CT can be used to demonstrate some changes in muscle tissue.

# Testing Procedures

Qualitative and semiquantitative immunological methods have been used for the detection of myoglobin.

A rapid, qualitative latex agglutination test for detecting increased concentrations of myoglobin in serum has been reported.

Red blood cell agglutination techniques are reported to be sensitive in the 50 to 100 mg/L range. A disadvantage of this technique is that some sera containing a high concentration of rheumatoid factor gave positive agglutination reactions.

A quantitative microcomplement fixation assay has been developed to detect myoglobin in the serum and urine of patients with acute coronary syndrome or myopathies.

Currently, the determination of serum myoglobin for diagnosing AMI and other muscle disorders is performed almost exclusively by immunoassay techniques because of their high analytical sensitivity, specificity, precision, and rapid turnaround time.

Qualitative and quantitative methods for serum myoglobin have also been developed for point-of-care (POC) use.

International guidelines such as those from the National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry have suggested that results of cardiac markers should be reported within one hour of blood collection.

# Interfering Factors

The use of collection tubes with separator gels has been reported to both increase and decrease myoglobin results.

# Clinical Significance

Myoglobin is a relatively small globular protein composed of a single polypeptide chain of 154 amino acids and an iron-containing heme prosthetic group identical to that of hemoglobin.

Due to its relatively low molecular mass, myoglobin may leak from muscle tissue into the bloodstream due to skeletal or cardiac muscle injury and then show up in the urine.

Since myoglobin is also present in skeletal muscle and is cleared almost exclusively through glomerular filtration, myoglobin will increase after acute muscle trauma, acute or chronic kidney injury, severe heart failure, prolonged shock, and in patients with myopathies of a variety of causes.

In addition, serum myoglobin levels have been used to evaluate neuromuscular diseases such as muscular dystrophy, muscular atrophy, and polymyositis.

In studies conducted on myopathies in children, serum myoglobin concentrations for subjects 0.6 to 20 years were lower than in adults, so using assays with a high sensitivity of 2 µg/L or less is necessary.

Investigations in children with muscle diseases, however, have been somewhat disappointing. Only 2 out of 14 patients studied had increased serum myoglobin concentrations. The patients evaluated in this study were relatively young, ranging from 0.3 to 16 years of age, and were presumably in the relatively early stages of the disease.

Myoglobin measurements are also used for the diagnosis of patients with rhabdomyolysis.

Other symptoms seen with rhabdomyolysis include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, tachycardia, fever or chills, dehydration, confusion, or an altered level of consciousness which may present as a coma.

Although myoglobin is easily filtered by the glomerulus and rapidly excreted into the urine in health, it is important to recognize the presence and severity of myoglobinuria and intervene as early as possible. Aggressive hydration or alkalinization of urine may facilitate the excretion of myoglobin and prevent acute kidney injury.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours.

The laboratory must participate in the external quality control or proficiency testing (PT) program because it is a regulatory requirement published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) regulations.

Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious. Exercise the normal precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines.