There are four histologic layers of the GI tract. From the lumen outward:

**Mucosa**

The mucosa consists of a single layer of epithelium, which is highly folded to increase its surface area for absorption. The mucosa contains invaginations, which form tubular exocrine glands that secrete mucus, electrolytes, water, and digestive enzymes. It also houses endocrine glands, which release Gi hormones such as cholecystokinin (CCK). The lamina propria, a connective tissue layer, supports the epithelium.

**Submucosa**

The submucosa, a connective tissue layer, houses blood and lymphatic vessels that support the GI tract. The submucosal (Meissner) plexus is found in this layer.

**Muscularis Externa**

The muscularis externa comprises two major smooth muscle layers: an inner circular and an outer longitudinal muscular layer. Between these two layers is where the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus is found. The coordinated contraction of the muscular layers via the myenteric plexus controls peristalsis. Of note, the stomach contains a third muscular layer, the inner oblique, which assists in churning the stomach contents.

**Serosa and A****dventitia**

The serosa is a smooth membrane comprising a thin layer of connective tissue and a thin layer of cells that secrete serous fluid to lubricate internal structures. This lubricating fluid aids in reducing friction during movement. The serosa covers intraperitoneal organs, while the adventitia covers retroperitoneal organs and functions to hold structures together instead of reducing friction between them.