When presenting as a component of the severe forms of the BEEC, the diagnosis is usually apparent at birth and does not require additional investigations. Similarly, the majority of newborns with isolated male epispadias can be diagnosed by the pediatrician or neonatologist involved in immediate post-natal care. However, glandular epispadias and female epispadias are difficult to diagnose and require careful identification of the external genitalia. In the former, the diagnosis can be missed if the child is continent, and is usually identified at the time of circumcision when the foreskin is retracted. Female epispadias also poses a diagnostic challenge to the pediatric surgeon because of the rarity of the disease and are often noticed only on precise perineal examination when the toilet training is delayed.

Urinary incontinence in isolated epispadias needs a special mention. In males, it is variable and was earlier believed to depend only on the position of the meatus, with the majority of the penopubic defects being incontinent due to invariable involvement of the bladder neck in these cases. However, recent reports mentioning total incontinence in distal epispadias have initiated discussions regarding other factors also contributing to the continence mechanism in these cases. In females, the continence mechanism is invariably involved, and incontinence is a usual symptom.

Males: Short and stubby phallus with dorsal meatus, dorsal chordee, and ventrally hooded prepuce are classical features on examination. Splaying and shortening of the corpora is another feature universally found in male epispadias. Splaying is seen due to pubic diastasis. The total corporal length is short due to the foreshortened anterior corporal segment (the posterior segment is normal). Other factors contributing to the smaller appearance of the phallus include the short urethral plate and dorsal chordee. All of these have to be addressed during epispadias repair for penile lengthening. The vas and ejaculatory ducts are normal in these children but have a risk of getting injured during the reconstructive procedure.

Females: Bifid clitoris, anteriorly placed vaginal orifice, absent mons, and patulous urethral orifice with visible bladder neck are classical features on perineal examination of girls with an epispadias.