In the last decade, the treatment paradigm has changed with the detection of new driver mutations and a better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of the MPNs. Mutations are divided into “restricted” which are found only in MPNs and “unrestricted” which are also detected in other myeloid malignancies; these mutations in hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) result in the clonal expansion of all myeloid cells, B cell, and natural killer cells, leading to MPNs.

Cytogenetics of CML is characterized by a reciprocal translocation between long arms of chromosomes 22 and 9, leading to the shortening of the length of the chromosome 22, also known as Philadelphia chromosomes, which is diagnostic of CML. The translocation involves the fusion of breakpoint cluster gene (BCR) on chromosome 22 with oncogene Abelson murine leukemia virus (ABL) on the long arm of chromosome 9 resulting in BCR-ABL fusion gene. The tyrosine kinase activity of the ABL oncogene is further enhanced with the fusion of BCR gene due to an encoding of a chimeric protein from BCR-ABL fusion gene.

In BCR-ABL1 negative MPNs, the restricted driver mutations are JAK2, myeloproliferative leukemia virus proto-oncogene (MPL), CALR, and CSF3R, which encodes for various tyrosine kinases.

Janus kinase (JAK) 2 gene mutation: Janus kinase gene is a type of protein kinase that phosphorylates signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) in the JAK-STAT pathway, and activation of this pathway results in the pathogenesis of the MPNs.JAK2 mutation is found in about 70% of MPNs. It is a somatic mutation that involves the substitution of valine to phenylalanine at codon 617 (JAK2 V617F) in the pseudokinase domain. The frequency of JAK2 V617F mutation is 95% in patients with PV, about 50% to 70% in ET, and 40% to 50% in PMF, respectively.

In 5% of PV with JAK2 V617F negative individuals, JAK2 exon 12 mutation is found; however, no such mutation was found in ET and PMF.

MPL proto-oncogene mutation:  The MPL gene codes the thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor which regulates megakaryopoiesis through a JAK-STAT pathway. The most common somatic MPL mutations are MPL W515L and MPL W515K which cause spontaneous activation of the JAK-STAT pathway, resulting in abnormal hematopoietic cell proliferation.JAK2 V617F mutation and Philadelphia chromosome MPN. MPL mutations increase the risk of thrombotic complications as compared to JAK2 V617F mutation patients and are associated with low hemoglobin, low bone marrow (BM) cellularity, high platelets, and high serum erythropoietin levels.

Calreticulin (CALR) gene mutation: The CALR gene is located in chromosome 19 (exon 9) which encodes calreticulin, a calcium-binding endoplasmic reticulum chaperone protein that regulates cellular proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis; this protein also plays a role in immune system function and wound healing. In 2013, the somatic mutation (usually frameshift mutation) of the CALR gene was discovered in patients with ET and PMF who were negative for JAK2 and MPL mutation. CALR exon 9 mutations are found in approximately 50% to 75% of patients with ET and PMF.

About 10% to 15% of ET and PMF patients lack all three driver mutations (JAK2 V617F, MPL
W515L/K, and CALR exon 9), which are also known as triple-negative MPN.

Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) is one of the myeloproliferative neoplasms which is characterized by peripheral leukocytosis with neutrophilia, hypercellularity of the BM with less than 5% myeloblasts, and normal neutrophil maturation. The JAK2
V617F mutation is common in CNL; however, detection of mutation in colony-stimulating factor 3 receptor (CSF3R) gene is one of the WHO diagnostic criteria for CNL and commonly occurs at a CSF3R T618I location in the gene.