There are six main dysfunctions for which this section will discuss diagnosis and treatment. The first step in diagnosis is determining laterality. There are two possible tests, the Standing Flexion Test and the ASIS Compression Test. For the Standing Flexion Test, the patient must be standing and facing away from the physician. The physician then places both their thumbs on the patient's posterior superior iliac spines (PSIS) and then asks the patient to bend forward slowly. Laterality is determined by whichever PSIS travels a greater distance relative to its original position. That side's sacroiliac (SI) joint is dysfunctional. It is important to ask the patient to stretch their hamstrings before doing this test because tight hamstrings could lead to a false negative and not allow the dysfunctional SI joint to rise.

The ASIS compression test is done while the patient is supine, and the physician places both hands on the patient's anterior superior iliac spines (ASIS). The physician then applies pressure to each ASIS in a rocking motion, one side at a time. The side that shows greater resistance is positive. Next in diagnosis, the physician must determine the orientation of two different landmarks, the ASIS and PSIS, on the side that had the positive test of laterality relative to the other side. We will now discuss how to treat somatic dysfunctions of the pelvis. For the following examples, we will use the left side of the pelvis, but the treatments are the same for the right side, and when treating, you must use the corresponding side's muscles.

In patients that have a left anterior rotation, the test of laterality will have been positive on the left, and the left ASIS would be lower than the right ASIS, and the left PSIS would be higher than the right PSIS. To treat a left anterior rotation, the patient is supine on the table, and the physician flexes the patient's left knee and hip until it is to a barrier. The physician will then hold this position and provide isometric force while the patient uses their hip extensors to push against the physician for three to five seconds. Once the patient has finished pushing, the physician will flex the hip again to a new restrictive barrier and repeat the process for another two to four times or until there is no more restrictive barrier. After completing this process, the physician will check the ASIS and PSIS heights to determine if there is a resolution of the somatic dysfunction.

In patients that have a left posterior rotation, the test of laterality will have been positive on the left, and the left ASIS would be higher than the right ASIS, and the left PSIS would be lower than the right PSIS. To treat a left posterior rotation, the patient is supine, and the physician will drop the patient's left leg off the table and push down the knee until it is at a barrier. The physician will then hold this position and provide isometric force while the patient uses their hip flexors to push against the physician for three to five seconds. Once the patient has finished pushing, the physician will extend the patient's hip more to a new restrictive barrier using the knee and repeat the whole process for another two to four times or until there is no more restrictive barrier. After completing this process, the physician will check the ASIS and PSIS heights to determine if there is a resolution of the somatic dysfunction.

Physicians should use the umbilicus as a landmark to determine how far the ASIS and PSIS are from the midline. In patients that have a left inflare, the test of laterality will have been positive on the left, and the left ASIS would be closer to the midline than the right ASIS, and the left PSIS is farther from midline than the right PSIS. To treat a left inflare, the patient is supine and must arrange their left lower extremity into a "figure four" position. The physician then pushes towards the ground on the patient's knee until they feel a restrictive barrier. Then the patient will use their adductors and push upwards against the physician for three to five seconds. Once the patient has finished pushing, the physician will push down on the patient's knee again until it is at a new restrictive barrier and repeat the whole process for another two to four times or until there is no more restrictive barrier. After completing this process, the physician will check the ASIS and PSIS heights to determine if there is a resolution of the somatic dysfunction.

In patients that have a left outflare, the test of laterality will have been positive on the left, and the left ASIS would be farther from midline than the right ASIS, and the left PSIS would be closer to the midline than the right PSIS. To treat a left outflare, the patient is supine and must flex their hip to 90 degrees. The physician will then push the patient's knee medially until they feel a restrictive barrier. Then the patient will use their abductors to push laterally against the physician for three to five seconds. Once the patient has finished pushing, the physician will flex the patient's hip to 90 degrees again and push the patient's knee medially to the new restrictive barrier and repeat the whole process for another two to four times or until there is no more restrictive barrier. After completing this process, the physician will check the ASIS and PSIS heights to determine if there is a resolution of the somatic dysfunction.

For the next two somatic dysfunctions, there are no ME techniques. Instead, we will include how to treat them for completeness' sake. In patients that have a left superior shear, the test of laterality will have been positive on the left, and the left ASIS would be higher than the right ASIS, and the left PSIS will be higher than the right ASIS. To treat a left superior shear, the patient is supine and holding firmly onto the table. The physician grasps the patient's left ankle with both hands while adding traction and slight internal rotation. Next, the patient takes a deep breath in, and on exhalation, the physician pulls quickly and firmly on the ankle in the caudad direction. This technique is called high velocity, low amplitude (HVLA). After completing this process, the physician will check the ASIS and PSIS heights to determine if there is a resolution of the somatic dysfunction.

In patients that have a left inferior shear, the test of laterality will have been positive on the left, and the left ASIS would be lower than the right ASIS, and the left PSIS would be lower than the right PSIS. To treat a left inferior shear, the patient must hop on their left leg for 10 to 15 seconds. After completing this process, the physician will check the ASIS and PSIS heights to determine if there is a resolution of the somatic dysfunction.