The rate of discharge from the SA node may slowdown, giving subsidiary pacemakers along with the conduction system preference, leading to non-sinus rhythms and dissociation in the atria and ventricle. Causes of this may include:

- Sinus bradycardia

- High vagal tone

- Heart rate control medications, such as beta-adrenergic blockers and calcium channel blockers

Conversely, some insults lead to an accelerated rate of the subsidiary pacemakers, causing them to conduct preferentially. For instance:

- Myocardial ischemia

- High catecholamine state

- Digitalis toxicity

Various arrhythmias with disorganized conduction can lead to AV dissociation. Examples of which are:

- Wide complex ventricular tachycardia
- AV dissociation with capture and fusion beats are diagnostic characteristics of ventricular tachycardia. 
- It stands as a prevalent cause of AV dissociation.

- Bundle branch reentrant ventricular tachycardia (BBRVT)
- It is a form of ventricular tachycardia that uses both bundle branches in its reentrant circuit. These circular circuits do not involve the atria, thus leading to an AV dissociation

- Junctional tachycardia

- The AV node can become autonomous and exceed the sinus rate. Often in the setting of digoxin toxicity, cardiac surgery, or myocardial infarction.

There is debate regarding the inclusion of a complete heart block in the definition of AV dissociation. Nevertheless, complete heart block causes significant AV dissociation as the impulses from the SA node do not conduct to the ventricles. A distinction has to be made, as very often, any case of AV dissociation is assumed as a complete heart block. However, though all cases of complete heart block include AV dissociation, not all cases of AV dissociation are complete heart block.