Cetirizine is safe and relatively well-tolerated for treating allergic rhinitis and urticaria. Although uncommon, its primary adverse effects in adults include somnolence, fatigue, pharyngitis, dizziness, and dry mouth.

Somnolence, as a result of cetirizine, appears to be dose-related. Research indicates that in some patients, cetirizine contributes to daytime sleepiness.

Children taking cetirizine most commonly experience similar side effects as adults taking cetirizine (somnolence, fatigue, and dry mouth). Children, in particular, are more likely than adults to experience headaches while taking cetirizine.

In pediatric patients aged 2 to 11 years, the majority of adverse reactions reported with cetirizine were mild or moderate. Among all, somnolence appeared to be dose-related and abdominal pain was considered treatment-related.

Common adverse drug reactions of cetirizine ophthalmic solution are conjunctival hyperemia and instillation site pain.

While on cetirizine therapy, few cases of transient, reversible hepatic transaminase elevations have been reported in the literature. Some reports exist of hepatitis with elevated bilirubin too. In postmarketing studies, rare, potentially severe adverse events like severe hypotension, anaphylaxis, hemolytic anemia, cholestasis, orofacial dyskinesia, glomerulonephritis, hepatitis, stillbirth, and thrombocytopenia are reported.

Ophthalmic formulation's common adverse reactions are local pain at the instillation site, ocular hyperemia, and decreased visual acuity.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Patients should be advised not to use cetirizine concurrently with alcohol or other CNS depressants, such as benzodiazepines or opioids, as it may cause dose-related sedation.

- Pitolisant is a histamine-3 receptor competitive antagonist and inverse agonist used in patients with narcolepsy. Concurrent use of pitolisant with antihistamines like cetirizine may diminish the therapeutic efficacy of pitolisant. Avoid combination.

- Cetirizine decreases gabapentin plasma concentrations and reduces systemic exposure to gabapentin. However, gabapentin is a CNS depressant; hence the pharmacodynamic synergism leading to additional CNS depression may also be observed.

- Cetirizine is a substrate of P-glycoprotein, and verapamil is an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein. Concurrent administration of both drugs prevents the efflux of cetirizine from the CNS and increases antihistaminic activity.

- Cetirizine should not be administered with erdafitinib as erdatifinib is also an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein(ABCB1, MDR1).