Whenever managing patients with polytrauma, especially for the regions around the pelvis, the presence of a Morel-Lavallee lesion should be keenly checked, this lesion is usually diagnosed as an incidental finding during the surgical intervention of the fractures, but they can be retrospectively identified on the imaging which was done at the time of admission.

The diagnosis is generally made on the physical examination. However, radiological investigations can help when clinical suspicion arises. The investigation of choice for this lesion is Magnetic Resonance Imaging, as it defines various parameters of the injury, including size, shape, contents, and its chronicity, but it is rarely required for the diagnosis. Various types of appearances can be seen depending on the chronicity and content of the lesion. Few studies had reported the appearance of a chronic lesion as homogenous and smooth and acute lesion as heterogeneous and irregular. In the chronic lesion, the formation of the capsule is inevitable, which results in its appearance as a hypointense ring of haemosiderin with fibrous tissue components. The edges of the lesion are tapering in nature and eventually fusing with the surrounding fascial layers.

Ultrasonography is of less value, but it may support the clinical suspicion of this lesion by confirming the location of the lesion as deep to the hypodermis and superficial to the muscle fascia. It can also demonstrate the lesion’s compressibility nature and helps rule out the presence of flow using Doppler imaging, thus ruling out other differentials. Computed tomography has a very limited role in these lesions, especially in refining the differential diagnosis.

Mellado and Bercandino proposed a comprehensive classification system for Morel-Lavallee lesions. According to this classification, this lesion can be divided into six types based on the shape of the lesion, characteristics of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, and the presence of the capsule.