There are two major theories of the development of craniopharyngioma: the embryonic theory and the metaplastic theory. These two theories correlate with the two histologic subtypes of craniopharyngiomas; adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (ACP) and papillary craniopharyngioma (PCP).

The embryonic theory is related to the development of ACP, which is a more common subtype and can affect all age groups but especially the pediatric population. During embryogenesis, there is an outpouching of the ectodermal roof of the stomodeum. This outpouching, known as Rathke pouch, extends cranially towards the floor of the diencephalon to later form the adenohypophysis or anterior pituitary gland. While migrating cranially, its extension forms the craniopharyngeal duct which later involutes. On some occasions, involution is not total, and remnants of ectodermal cells can be present. These embryonic cells can proliferate around the extension of the craniopharyngeal duct and develop into a craniopharyngioma. Somatic mutation in the CTNNB1 is proposed to be responsible for ACP development. CTNNb1 mutation is a point mutation in exon 3 leading to excessive β-catenin protein thus activating the WNT signaling pathway leading to cell proliferation, invasion, and development of a tumor.

The metaplastic theory is related to the development of PCP, which is primarily seen in adults. There have been cases reported in the literature of papillary squamous and mixed subtypes presenting in children. The adenohypophyseal cells of the pars tuberalis can undergo metaplasia and result in the formation of squamous cell nests; which further proliferates and leads to PCP. Somatic mutation in BRAF has been associated with PCP. BRAF activated the mitogen-activated protein kinase(MAPK) pathways; which are usually upregulated in cancer.