Retinal blood vessels have distinct features, which differentiate them from other blood vessels

-  The absence of sympathetic nerve supply

-  Autoregulation of blood flow

-  Presence of blood-retinal barrier

Thus, an increase in blood pressure (BP) is transferred directly to the vessels which initially constrict. However, a further increase in BP overcomes this compensatory tone and damage to the muscle layer and endothelium ensues.

Hypertensive retinopathy has the following phases

**Vasoconstrictive Phase**

In this phase, the local autoregulatory mechanisms come into play. This causes vasospasm and retinal arteriole narrowing, which is evident by the decrease in the arteriole to venule ratio (Normal = 2:3). In older patients with arteriosclerosis, focal arteriolar narrowing develops, as affected vascular segments cannot undergo narrowing.

**Sclerotic Phase**

Persistent increase in BP causes certain changes in vessel wall:

- Intima layer: Thickening

- Media layer: Hyperplasia

- Arteriolar wall: Hyaline degeneration

This leads to a severe form of arteriolar narrowing, arteriovenous (AV) crossing changes, and widening and accentuation of light reflex (silver and copper wiring). AV crossing changes occur when a thickened arteriole crosses over a venule and subsequently compresses it as the vessels share a common adventitious sheath. The vein, in turn, appears dilated and torturous distal to the AV crossing.

**Exudative Phase**

Seen in patients with severely increased BP; characterized by the disruption of the blood-brain barrier and leakage of blood and plasma into the vessel wall disrupting the autoregulatory mechanisms. In this stage, retinal signs occur such as retinal hemorrhage (flame-shaped and dot blot), hard exudate formation, necrosis of smooth muscle cells and retinal ischemia (cotton-wool spots).

**Malignant Hypertension**

Severe intracranial hypertension leads to optic nerve ischemia and edema (papilledema). Also, fibrinoid necrosis of choroidal arterioles occurs leading to segmental infarction of choriocapillaries. This gives rise to:

- Elschnig's spots: Where the overlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) appears yellow

- Siegrist's streak: RPE hyperplasia over choroidal infarcts

- Neurosensory RPE detachments

These signs are termed as choroidopathy.