Standard radiographs: AP radiographs can reveal coccyx scoliotic (lateral deviation) deformity. Lateral views are always indicated as coccyx curvature can be classified into four different types:

- Type I: coccyx is slightly curved forward.

- Type II: coccyx is pointed straight forward.

- Type III: coccyx has a sharp forward angulation.

- Type IV: coccyx shows subluxation at the sacrococcygeal or the intercoccygeal joint.

From the lateral radiographs, the examiner can assess the intercoccygeal angle, which is the measured angle between the first and last segment of the coccyx, as proposed by Drs. Kim and Suk. It is used to assess the anterior angulation deformity of the coccyx. An increased intercoccygeal angle (increased forward angulation) has been reported as a possible etiology of coccydynia.

Dynamic radiographs (sitting and standing): Dr. Maigne, in France, invented the idea of seated X-rays of the coccyx to see the coccyx position while the coccydynia patient was most symptomatic, which typically occurs while sitting. By comparing the coccyx position while sitting versus the position while standing, the clinician can objectively measure the amount of change. These coccygeal movements are measured as changes in the coccygeal angle (amount of flexion) and luxation (amount of listhesis at each of the coccygeal joints). These studies allow the classification of patients with coccydynia into groups based on coccygeal luxation and mobility (hypomobile, hypermobile, and normal mobility). The normal range of coccygeal mobility is between 5 and 20 degrees.

The patients responding best to manual treatments are those with normal coccyx mobility, while those with immobile coccyxes had poor results with manual therapies.

A computed tomography scan (CT) of a normal adult coccyx shows variability in the fusion of the sacrococcygeal and intercoccygeal joints. Female coccyges are more often shorter, straighter, and more retroverted.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)****can be used to assess the anterior curvature of the coccyx, the fusion of the sacrococcygeal and intercoccygeal joints, as well as the presence of a distal coccyx bone spicule (spur).

Coccygeal discogram: This involves injecting contrast and local anesthetic into the sacrococcygeal region to determine the specific site of pain.

Nuclear medicine bone scan:****This is typically only used in patients with coccydynia in whom a search for malignancy or infection (e.g., osteomyelitis) is warranted.

Routine blood tests: These studies may help in rare cases, such as when suspected etiologies include infection, malignancy, gastrointestinal or urogenital problems.