Nerve blocks are commonly used in this region to promote pain management for chronic pain or limb surgery. This is especially useful in situations where patients cannot tolerate a general anesthetic. Nerve blocks are frequently carried out under ultrasound guidance, but anatomical landmarks have been proven useful in confirming correct anesthetic placement. One such block is the obturator nerve block, where the anesthetic is injected inferiorly to the pubic tubercle and lateral to the adductor longus muscle. Another is the femoral nerve block. While performing a femoral nerve block, it is imperative that clinicians are aware of surrounding structures during their procedure. From lateral to medial, the structures are the femoral nerve, then artery, and subsequently the vein. This is commonly remembered by the pneumonic NAVY, with the Y signifying the midline of the patient. This knowledge is also essential if arterial or venous sampling is required from a femoral vessel.

The literature has shown that the sciatic nerve has been at risk during a total hip arthroplasty. The total injury risk is between 0.5% and 2.0%, with an increased risk during revision procedures of 1.7% to 7.6%.

Compartment syndrome of the thigh is an important consideration following trauma to the lower limb. Compartment syndrome occurs when the pressure inside of any compartment increases to the point where it reduces the ability of arteries to supply the muscles and nerves within that compartment Compartment syndrome of the thigh can affect the any of the three major nerves to the thigh. Following the clinical symptoms, pain out of proportion, sensory deficits, and clinical signs of swelling can all point to the compartment or compartments affected. Treatment is immediate fasciotomy.