**Structure**

The extensor carpi ulnaris muscle has two heads, i.e., a humeral head and an ulnar head. The humeral head originates from the common extensor tendon and is attached to the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The ulnar head derives from the common aponeurosis attached to the posterior border of the ulna. This common extensor tendon is shared by the flexor carpi ulnaris, flexor digitorum profundus, and deep fascia of the forearm. Distally, just proximal to the wrist, the extensor carpi ulnaris tendon, within the tendinous sheath of the extensor carpi ulnaris, runs beneath the extensor retinaculum in a groove between the posterior surface of the head and the styloid process of the ulna, which forms a separate compartment of the extensor retinaculum.

**Relations**

The extensor carpi ulnaris is the most medial muscle of the extensor compartment of the forearm; however, only a small triangular shape muscle called anconeus lies medially to the superior fibers of the extensor carpi ulnaris. Laterally, the extensor carpi ulnaris is related to the extensor digiti minimi and the extensor digitorum muscles. Distally, the cutaneous branch of the ulnar artery arises from between the tendons of the extensor carpi ulnaris and the flexor carpi ulnaris.

**Functions**

The extensor carpi ulnaris serves two functions. It extends the hand at the wrist joint by acting along extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis. Along with the flexor carpi ulnaris, the extensor carpi ulnaris adducts the hand at the wrist. The simultaneous action of extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis along with extensor carpi ulnaris helps to provide medial stability to the wrist while clenching the fist (tight flexion of the medial four digits).