Losartan use is contraindicated with the use of aliskiren in diabetes mellitus.

It is also contraindicated in hypersensitivity to losartan or any of its components.

**Pregnancy**

Losartan is contraindicated in pregnancy: As losartan acts on the renin-angiotensin system, it causes oligohydramnios, thus resulting in fetal lung hypoplasia and skeletal deformities. Potential neonatal adverse effects are skull hypoplasia, hypotension, anuria, renal failure, and death. Therefore therapy with the drug should immediately stop when pregnancy is detected.

**Breastfeeding**

It is not known if losartan gets excreted in the milk. Hence, its use is not recommended while breastfeeding.

**Precautions**

- Angioedema: The incidence of angioedema and cough with ARBs is less as compared to ACEI. However, it may involve the airway and intestine, causing abdominal pain. Patients with previous episodes of angioedema associated with the use of ACEI, hereditary angioedema, or idiopathic angioedema may be at an augmented risk. Frequent monitoring is necessary for such patients. Discontinue losartan if any episode of angioedema occurs and manage the patient aggressively with intramuscular epinephrine. Do not restart the patients on losartan after they had angioedema.

- Hyperkalemia: Risk factors include the use of potassium-sparing diuretics, potassium supplements, potassium salts. In such cases, monitor potassium levels closely.

- Hypotension: correct salt or volume depletion before administration as it may increase the risk of hypotension.

- Renal function: It may decline the renal function resulting in elevated serum creatinine levels, oliguria, azotemia, and acute renal failure. Discontinue losartan if there is a critical decrease in renal function.

- Use losartan with caution in renal artery stenosis and avoid using it in bilateral renal artery stenosis.

- Hepatic and renal impairment: Use with caution in patients with previous or current hepatic and renal impairment.