The absorption of most dietary iron occurs in the duodenum and proximal jejunum and depends heavily on the physical state of the iron atom. At physiological pH, iron exists in the oxidized, ferric (Fe3+) state. To be absorbed, iron must be in the ferrous (Fe2+) state or bound by a protein such as heme. The low pH of gastric acid in the proximal duodenum allows a ferric reductase enzyme, duodenal cytochrome B (Dcytb), on the brush border of the enterocytes to convert the insoluble ferric (Fe3+) to absorbable ferrous (Fe2+) ions. Gastric acid production plays a key role in plasma iron homeostasis. When proton-pump inhibiting drugs such as omeprazole are used, iron absorption is greatly reduced. Once ferric iron is reduced to ferrous iron in the intestinal lumen, a protein on the apical membrane of enterocytes called divalent metal cation transporter 1 (DMT1) transports iron across the apical membrane and into the cell. Levels of DMT1 and Dcytb are upregulated in the hypoxic environment of the intestinal mucosa by hypoxia-inducible factor-2 (HIF-2α).

The duodenal pH-dependent process of iron absorption is inhibited or enhanced by certain dietary compounds.

- Inhibitors of iron absorption include phytate, which is a compound found in plant-based diets that demonstrate a dose-dependent effect on iron absorption. Polyphenols are found in black and herbal tea, coffee, wine, legumes, cereals, fruit, and vegetables and have been demonstrated to inhibit iron absorption. Unlike other inhibitors such as polyphenols and phytates, which prevent only non-heme iron absorption, calcium inhibits both heme and non-heme iron at the point of initial uptake into enterocytes. Animal proteins such as casein, whey, egg whites, and proteins from plants (soy protein) have been shown to inhibit iron absorption in humans. Oxalic acid is found in spinach, chard, beans, and nuts and acts to bind and inhibit iron absorption.

- Enhancers of iron absorption are dominated by the effect of ascorbic acid (vitamin C), which can overcome the effects of all dietary inhibitors when it is included in a diet with high non-heme iron availability (usually a meal heavy in vegetables).  Ascorbic acid forms a chelate with ferric (Fe3+) iron in the low pH of the stomach, which persists and remains soluble in the alkaline environment of the duodenum.