Most antiarrhythmic medications may be administered intravenously and orally, depending on the acuity of the condition. Among class I antiarrhythmic agents, procainamide and lidocaine are administered intravenously since their primary use is acute treatment. Mexiletine is an oral analog of lidocaine. Quinidine is available in both intravenous and oral forms. Disopyramide is administered in capsules and controlled-release capsules. Oral administration of flecainide or propafenone is feasible and safe and effectively converts recent-onset atrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm. Adenosine should be administered via proximal IV as a rapid bolus infusion, followed by a saline flush. Digoxin administration may be via the oral or intravenous route and as an intramuscular injection. Administration of antiarrhythmic drugs like amiodarone, disopyramide, dofetilide, ibutilide, and sotalol with an established risk for TdP requires continuous cardiac monitoring.

**Hepatic Impairment:**Hepatic impairment reduces the elimination of many antiarrhythmics, so dosage reductions are recommended, especially in patients with cirrhosis. For drugs such as carvedilol, lidocaine, propafenone, and verapamil, a decrease in systemic clearance and substantial prolongation of the elimination of half-life have been documented. Consequently, a two to three-fold dosage reduction in patients with moderate to severe liver cirrhosis is recommended. For disopyramide, sotalol, and procainamide, the renal route is the major route of elimination; consequently, those dosage reductions are probably unnecessary in patients with liver disease, given that renal function is normal.

**Renal Impairment:**The risk of digoxin toxicity is increased with impaired renal function, hypokalemia, or hypomagnesemia. Hence, digoxin should be prescribed cautiously in patients with preexisting renal disease.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**In women with preexisting cardiac arrhythmias, recurrence during pregnancy is a concern. Due to the risk of teratogenicity, clinicians should choose the lowest effective dose for antiarrhythmic therapy. As of 2015, the FDA pregnancy letter category system (A, B, C, D, X) has been substituted with a new rule that provides reasoning about the potential risk and benefits for the mother and fetus. Quinidine has been used successfully for maternal and fetal ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias due to the ease of placental transfer. Reports show that procainamide use in pregnancy results in no apparent complications to the fetus.

Given the potential increased risk for preterm labor and limited data regarding the drug's safety in pregnancy, disopyramide should be avoided. Intravenous lidocaine during pregnancy is efficacious without evident fetal complications. Further, it is typically utilized as an anesthetic during the peripartum. Lidocaine is a suitable option for intravenous treatment of ventricular arrhythmias. Mexiletine use may be safe in pregnancy, but it should be used cautiously, given the lack of data. Clinical experience with propafenone is limited to flecainide; hence flecainide use is favored over propafenone during pregnancy in patients without structural heart disease.

Beta-blockers are used commonly in pregnancy for managing hypertension and tachycardia. The concern associated with β-blocker is reduced birth weight. Specifically, atenolol has an increased risk of reduced birth weight. All β-blockers are former FDA category C, excluding atenolol (category D) and pindolol (category B). The most commonly reported adverse event with amiodarone is fetal hypothyroidism. However, most hypothyroidism is temporary and resolves after replacement therapy. There are reports of symptomatic fetal bradycardia and rare congenital abnormalities associated with amiodarone. Hence, amiodarone should be administered when treatment for life-threatening arrhythmias is needed and other therapies are ineffective or contraindicated. As usual, clinicians must consider the amiodarone benefits against the risks ( category D).

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Clinicians should discuss the risk vs. benefit with the patient to make a shared decision regarding particular drugs during pregnancy and lactation. According to the American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists (ACOG) guidelines, antiarrhythmic drugs such as lidocaine, procainamide, adenosine, digoxin, verapamil, diltiazem, atenolol, and esmolol are probably compatible with breastfeeding. Amiodarone and sotalol may be unsafe during breastfeeding.