**Electrode Placement**

Recording Electrodes

- Depending on the type of electrode, the recording electrode is placed on the corneal surface, on the bulbar conjunctiva adjacent to the inferior limbus of the cornea.

- The International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) recommends that skin (surface) recording electrodes should not regularly be used for recording the standard pattern electroretinogram (PERG).

- Topical anesthesia is applied to minimize ocular surface discomfort with corneal contact electrodes.

Reference Electrodes

- Place separate surface electrodes on the skin close to the outer canthus of each ipsilateral eye.

- For monocular PERG recordings, the contralateral occluded eye may be used for placement of the reference electrode.

- Forehead, earlobe, or mastoid are not recommended for placement as this may contaminate the PERG with potentials generated by the fellow eye.

Ground Electrodes

Typically placed on the forehead and connected to the "ground input" of the recording system.

**Patient Preparation**

Per the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) guidelines:

- Electrically isolated recording environment

- Record without pupil dilation to maximize image quality

- Minimum 30-minutes of recovery time in normal room lighting is required for patients exposed to strong light stimuli from alternative imaging techniques (i.e., fundus photography or fluorescein angiography)

- Instruct patients to fixate on a target within the stimulator while minimizing eye movement. Patients who are unable to see the fixation point may be advised to look straight ahead while maintaining a steady gaze.

- The binocular recording is recommended as this improves fixation stability and reduced examination time.

- A monocular recording is recommended in individuals with ocular misalignment.