The use of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), also known as ursodiol, in treating liver disease dates back more than a hundred years, when it was first employed in traditional Chinese medicine by herbalists and physicians alike. Before discovering its effectiveness in dissolving gallstones, its primary use was as a liver tonic.

Gallstone disease is a common and exceedingly costly digestive disorder if considering the number of hospital admissions and cholecystectomies performed in the United States annually. It is a complex disorder where both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the susceptibility to the disease. The primary non-invasive treatment for cholesterol gallstones is oral litholysis with bile acids. UDCA has been shown to decrease the biliary cholesterol saturation markedly and has found use as an alternative to cholecystectomy in patients with gallstone disease.

Biliary sludge is considered to be another therapeutic target of UDCA therapy. It’s an occurrence commonly precipitated by rapid weight loss, pregnancy, and total parenteral nutrition. A clinical study in which patients with idiopathic acute pancreatitis attributed to microscopic gallstones or biliary sludge showed complete resolution of gallbladder microlithiasis after UDCA treatment, demonstrating its therapeutic effect.

UDCA is commonly used to treat patients with primary biliary cholangitis (formerly known as primary biliary cirrhosis), an immune-mediated cholestatic liver disease characterized by the destruction of intrahepatic bile ducts. UDCA is the only drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat primary biliary cholangitis. Studies suggest that UDCA can significantly delay the progression of liver cirrhosis in patients with early stages of PBC.

UDCA may have a role in treating patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. However, its use in PSC has not come without controversy. Primary biliary cirrhosis is a rare, progressive, immuno-mediated hepatobiliary disease. Currently, there is no proven medical therapy for patients with PSC, but UDCA has been established as therapy for those with the condition.  The most significant two clinical trials of UDCA in PSC had somewhat disappointing results.  One trial only showed a minimal trend toward statistically significant benefit with moderate doses of UDCA, and researchers terminated the other trial where high dose UDCA was used due to excessive adverse effects. Despite the lack of data regarding long-term efficacy, many experts still recommend moderate doses of UDCA in PSC. The lack of sufficient data regarding long-term efficacy might explain why PSC is not an FDA-approved indication for UDCA treatment.

Current data also supports UDCA treatment in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, a unique pregnancy-related disorder that can manifest during the late third trimester of pregnancy. In a recent meta-analysis that looked at 12 RCTs involving 662 patients with ICP, UDCA was associated with the resolution of pruritus, reduced serum levels of bile acids, and decreased serum levels of alanine aminotransferase. The same meta-analysis also demonstrated reduced adverse maternal and fetal outcomes among pregnant women with ICP.

UDCA has also found use in the treatment of cystic fibrosis, graft vs. host disease involving the liver, liver allograft rejection, bile duct-paucity syndromes such as biliary atresia, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. However, more studies are needed to determine the therapeutic potential of UDCA in these disorders, and the FDA has not approved the drug for treating these liver conditions.