In genome-wide association studies done so far, most subjects have European ancestry. However, 47% or the vast majority of patients grappling with the burden of obesity in the United States are of African-American and Hispanic/Latino descent. The African Ancestry Anthropometry Genetics Consortium (AAAGC) and the Hispanic and Latino Consortium (HISLA) were created to study specific alleles related to obesity in these populations. The Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study performed large-scale genotyping involving 54,000 participants of African-American, Hispanic/Latino, East Asian, Native Hawaiian, and Native American descent to study specific genetic variants associated with obesity.

The future of genetic and epigenetics is promising, especially in the area of obesity and metabolic disease. Epigenetic studies form the basis of precision medicine with distinct targets for gene modulation. The reversible nature of epigenetic marks gives geneticists and clinicians a chance to suggest changes in lifestyle with dietary modification and exercise and avoidance of tobacco, alcohol, and potential obesogens before patients and their offspring suffer the consequences. The use of histone deacetylators is now being suggested beyond the boundaries of Hematology/Oncology for its use in lifestyle medicine, and research in this field is ongoing. Methylation Quantitative Trait Locus (meQTL) studies are now being used to further epigenetic studies. New Nutri-pharmacogenomic studies are expanding our understanding of how nutrition affects genetics.