The majority of infections are asymptomatic (60%), and when symptoms do occur, the presentation can be confused with community-acquired bacterial pneumonia.

Symptoms appear seven to 21 days post-exposure. Fever, cough, shortness of breath (SOB), and chest pain are most frequent. The clinical presentation may be acute or sub-acute based on the inoculum size. A headache, weight loss, and rash are often seen. The rash is faint, maculopapular, transient, occurs early during disease, and is, therefore, often missed. Erythema nodosum or erythema multiforme occurs more frequently in women. Migratory arthralgias are also common. The triad of fever, erythema nodosum, and arthralgias (especially of the knees and ankles) has been termed desert rheumatism. Laboratory findings include elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and eosinophilia. Chest x-ray (CXR) shows unilateral infiltrates. Hilar and peritracheal adenopathy suggests the extrathoracic spread of the disease. Lung cavities are present in only 8% of adults but are more frequent in children.

Other pulmonary manifestations are nodules and cavities in the early phase and fibrocavitary disease in the chronic phase. Cavities are peripheral, often solitary, and with time develop a distinctive thin wall. If the cavity is diagnosed early, surgical resection of the cavity and closure of the pulmonary leak is the preferred treatment. The pleural disease may occur in one-third of patients.

Dissemination is frequent in the immunocompromised host, pregnant patients, and in patients who have African and Filipino ancestry. Skin lesions are common. Often, there are no pulmonary infiltrates on CXR. Vertebral osteomyelitis is common, and the pattern of disease mimics vertebral osteomyelitis due to Staphylococcus aureus including findings such as the presence of psoas abscess and epidural abscess. Joint involvement is common with knee joints being most frequently involved. Central nervous system (CNS) involvement occurs in 90% of these cases. If untreated, CNS disease is always fatal. Eosinophil predominance is found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Basilar meninges are often affected, and hydrocephalus is a common complication.