Corals are invertebrates that fall within the class Anthozoa of the phylum Cnidaria. They are mostly marine inhabitants and typically live in compact colonies of numerous polyps. They are one of the important reef builders in tropical oceans. Many corals, like Zoanthid corals, also known as soft corals, are a very popular component of aquariums (home or public) due to their beauty and low maintenance. Species of Zoanthid corals like Palythoa and Zoanthus species can contain a highly toxic and potentially lethal chemical compound known as palytoxin. Coral toxicity, therefore, is palytoxin toxicity. Aquarium shop workers and home aquarium hobbyists may be at increased risk of exposure. So these corals have important implications in human health, but the health risks associated with such corals are often unrecognized or underestimated due to the low volume of cases documented.

Palytoxin (PTX) is a polyhydroxylated and partially desaturated non-proteinaceous substance that is highly toxic. It is one of the largest naturally occurring polymeric product with a molecular weight of 2680 kilodaltons. Its lethal dose (LD) in mice, when administered intravenously, is 150 ng/kg body weight. PTX has also been found in certain fishes,  phytoplanktons, and in certain marine bacteria. Toxicity from sources other than corals has also been routinely reported.

In recent years the toxicological implications of PTX on human health due to the exposure to soft corals have been on the rise. The number of human poisonings, mostly in aquarium enthusiasts after the manipulation of PTX-contaminated soft corals, is continuously increasing. It is due mainly to the lack of sufficient control over coral trade, and also underestimation and limited understanding about the entity.