**Laboratory Evaluation**

- A complete blood count to check for infection and anemia. Coagulopathy (PT, INR, aPTT) and lipid profile are essential in all patients, along with daily electrolytes, creatinine, and liver function tests. As patients may develop hyperglycemia as a complication of intracerebral hemorrhage, it is essential to establish the baseline blood glucose and HbA1c levels and monitor them closely. Blood culture and sensitivity are necessary for patients with suspected systematic infections.

- Cardiac-specific troponins are associated with worse outcomes in these patients.

- A urine toxicology screen must be ordered as drugs such as cocaine are risk factors for intracerebral hemorrhage.

- Lumbar puncture, only to rule out infection in patients with clinical suspicion or patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage and look for hemolysis where the diagnosis is unclear.

**Radiographic Evaluation**

- Non-contrast CT head is the first line for diagnosing intracerebral hemorrhage. The findings on the non-contrast CT can be staged based on the timing from the onset of initial symptoms. In the hyperacute state, the hematoma shows as smooth and hyperdense. Over 48 hours, the hematoma begins to show some fluid collection alongside the hyperintensity. Blood-fluid volumes have high specificity for coagulopathies. Next, over 72 hours, a mass effect with midline shift and a hypodensity due to edema surrounding the hematoma becomes visible. Finally, 3 to 20 days later, the hypodense region shrinks and has uneven borders with a ring-like appearance. A repeat CT scan is required with signs of neurological deterioration to diagnose complications. The spot sign is visible in a contrast-enhanced CT in patients with hematoma expansion.

- Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) MRI of the brain with gradient-echo can be used to more accurately detect microhemorrhages that appear as hyperintense areas surround by hypointense boundaries. However, to distinguish an acute bleed from a chronic bleed, a non-contrast CT head is performed.

- Cerebral angiography is useful to diagnose secondary causes of intracerebral hemorrhages, such as microaneurysms and arteriovenous malformations.

**Electroencephalography**

- Electroencephalography is indicated for patients with unexplained neurological deterioration or suspected seizures.

**Electrocardiogram**

- To assess cardiac events and arrhythmias.