It is essential to inquire if the patient has a history of periodontal treatment, including any current debridement or antimicrobials. Evidence suggests that contributing factors include residual calculus, introducing bacteria into the gingival pockets during debridement, and bacterial superinfection due to antibiotic treatment.

Periodontal abscesses secondary to foreign body impaction are identifiable through a history taking from the patient.

While taking the patient's medical history, extra emphasis should focus on diagnosed or undiagnosed diabetes mellitus due to the increased predisposition to developing periodontal abscesses in these patients.

The most prevalent presenting complaint is an intra-oral swelling with or without pain.

Clinical examination is paramount in aiding the diagnosis. Typically, signs include those of periodontal diseases: increased probing depths (usually greater than 6 mm), suppuration, tooth mobility, and furcation involvement. Other findings include tenderness to palpation and lateral percussion. Looking at the lateral portion of the root, clinicians may notice an ovoid elevation of the gingivae

**Classification**

Periodontal abscesses are classified depending on the location, duration of the infection, and their number. According to the location, they are divided into gingival and periodontal; gingival abscesses are restricted to the gingival margin and interdental papillae, caused mainly by an object impaction

According to the duration of the infection, they are classified into chronic and acute, featuring different symptoms. An acute periodontal abscess’s symptoms include pain, tenderness on palpation, and the presence of pus. In contrast, a chronic abscess is more associated with a sinus tract and mild or absent pain

According to the number, they are divided into single, usually caused by a local obstruction, and multiple abscesses: associated with systemic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, and patients taking antibiotic treatment for non-oral issues with untreated, periodontal disease.