The WHO classification of gliomas is used to guide glioma treatment.  As indicated in the classification, most patients require surgical intervention via gross total resection or biopsy.

**2016 WHO Grades of Gliomas**

1. Diffuse astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumors

- Diffuse astrocytoma, IDH-mutant  (Grade II)

- Anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH- mutant (Grade III)

- Glioblastoma, IDH wild-type (Grade IV)

- Glioblastoma, IDH wild-type (Grade IV)

- Oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant, and 1p/19q-co-deleted (Grade II)

- Anaplastic Oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant, and 1p/19q-co-deleted (Grade II)

2. Other astrocytic tumors

- Pilocytic astrocytoma (Grade I)

- Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (Grade I)

- Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (Grade II)

- Anaplastic pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (III)

3. Ependymal tumors

- Subependymoma (Grade I)

- Myxopapillary ependymoma (Grade I)

- Ependymoma (Grade II)

- Ependymoma, RELA fusion-positive ( Grade II or III)

- Anaplastic ependymoma  (Grade III)

4. Other gliomas

- Angiocentric glioma (Grade I)

- Chordoid glioma of the third ventricle (Grade II)

**Treatment of Gliomas**

1. Surgery:

- Grade I: These gliomas are surgically curable.

- Grade II: A safe gross total resection and radiographic follow-up are acceptable current practices.

- Grade III: A safe gross total resection, concomitant chemoradiation, and radiographic follow-up for recurrence are an acceptable treatment.

- Grade IV (glioblastoma): A safe gross total resection, concomitant chemoradiation, and radiographic follow-up for recurrence are an acceptable treatment.

2.  Chemoradiation: Currently, Stupp protocol is a standard of care for Grade III-IV gliomas. The protocol consists of radiotherapy and concomitant chemoradiation using a total of 60 Gray to 2 Gray per daily fraction over 6 weeks and temozolomide.

3. Treatments for Recurrence: Options for recurrent gliomas include re-operation with Gliadel wafers and targeted therapy such as angiogenesis inhibitors or immunotherapy. The effectiveness of all these adjuvants therapies is in development.

4. Others Treatments:****High-grade glioma patients are prone to seizures, malignant edema, and complication related immobility. Therefore, these patients need antiepileptic medications, deep venous thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis, and steroids before, during, and after the course of treatments to avoid cerebral edema.