**Cellulitis**

Odontogenic cellulitis is characteristically polymicrobial, consisting of gram-positive and -negative anaerobes and aerobes. As such, antibiosis should be broad-spectrum; commonly, these infections are effectively treated with amoxicillin-clavulanate or clindamycin in penicillin-allergic patients.

**Abscess**

If treatment is delayed, cellulitis can progress to suppuration and abscess formation. Pus will often collect alongside the lingual or buccal cortex of the mandible or maxilla, depending on the tooth affected. An abscess clinically appears similar to cellulitis with tenderness, induration, and erythema. Physical exam findings more suggestive of an abscess include fluctuance, significant mass effect, and suppurative dental sockets. Most minor abscesses do not require a CT scan and can be identified with POCUS; an abscess will appear as an anechoic, occasionally loculated mass commonly along the cortex of its corresponding bone.

Drainage of an abscess is recommended both for source control and palliation.

A culture swab of the abscess cavity should be taken, although due to the aforementioned polymicrobial nature of these infections, it rarely affects management. Many patients with odontogenic abscesses can be treated as an outpatient with oral antibiotics, but those with more extensive infections, immunodeficiency, or comorbid medical conditions should be given intravenous antibiotics and resuscitated and monitored as an inpatient.

**Ludwig Angina**

Many of the anatomic spaces contain a boundary that does not physically separate two spaces, allowing for the uninhibited spread to that space.

Ludwig angina is an emergency given the mass effect of the infection on the upper airway. The infection promotes edema of the six spaces as well as the tongue, which can drastically decrease the distance between the base of the tongue to the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall leading to a potential airway catastrophe. A classic clinical appearance of the patient with Ludwig’s angina is respiratory distress, drooling, and a “bullfrog” appearance of the anterior neck.

Management should prioritize airway assessment and stability with the simultaneous implementation of both short- and long-term airway stabilizing strategies. After securing the airway, these patients warrant prompt, broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics and inpatient admission. Surgical intervention may be necessary for either airway concerns or infectious drainage, or debridement.

**Odontogenic Sinusitis**

Dental infections (or normal oral flora) can spread superiorly along the maxilla, causing sinusitis. Sinusitis of odontogenic origin is common, accounting for nearly 40% of all acute bacterial maxillary sinusitis.

The maxillary teeth, particularly the molars and pre-molars, are closely associated with the maxillary sinus. Rarely on CT imaging or endoscopy, tooth roots and dental implants can be seen within the maxillary sinus. While this is often an incidental finding, occasionally, poor dental hygiene or a malpositioned implant can allow for the spread of infection into the maxillary sinus. In some patients with a history of oral or maxillofacial surgery, persistent oroantral fistulas can occur, serving as a conduit for opportunistic infection.

Patients with odontogenic sinusitis often present with facial pain and pressure, fever, and malaise. Imaging often shows unilateral isolated maxillary sinusitis, whereas non-odontogenic rhinosinusitis is often bilateral and involves other sinuses.

Treatment consists similarly of dental or implant extraction, antibiosis, and possible surgical intervention of the sinuses (endoscopic sinus surgery).