The brachial plexus carries the majority of the innervation to the forearm; however, a small amount of sensory innervation comes from the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve.

**Medial Antebrachial Cutaneous Nerve**

The medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve forms as a branch of the medial cord from nerve roots C8-T1. This nerve travels anterior to the medial epicondyle subcutaneously and provides sensation to the medial forearm.

**Musculocutaneous Nerve**

The musculocutaneous nerve forms from the C5-C7 nerve roots.

**Radial Nerve**

The radial nerve forms from the C5-T1 nerve roots. It provides motor innervation to the anconeus, brachioradialis, and extensor carpi radialis longus muscles.

**Median Nerve**

The median nerve forms from the C5-T1 nerve roots. The median nerve travels under the biceps aponeurosis between the two heads of the pronator teres.  There is no sensory component provided by the median nerve. The median nerve provides motor innervation to the pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus, and flexor digitorum superficialis. The only muscle in the anterior compartment not innervated by the median nerve is the flexor digitorum profundus. This muscle receives innervation from the ulnar nerve.

**Ulnar Nerve**

The ulnar nerve forms from the C8-T1 nerve roots. It travels down the arm and over the medial epicondyle. There is no sensory distribution provided by the ulnar nerve in the forearm. The ulnar nerve delivers motor innervation to the flexor carpi ulnaris and the ulnar half of the flexor digitorum profundus.