In the treatment of a variety of malignancies, clinicians use cyclophosphamide in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents. It is often included in standard treatment regimens for Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma as a component of CHOP along with hydroxydaunorubicin, oncovin, and prednisone. If the malignancy has B-cell involvement, rituximab, and an anti-CD-20 monoclonal antibody, it is added to the CHOP regimen (called R-CHOP).

Cyclophosphamide is often orally administered, and the length of treatment and dosage depends upon individual factors such as metabolism, drug interactions, body mass, and age of the patient. There are standard guidelines available for the appropriate dosage and indications depending upon the goal of treatment. The general recommendation for patients without hematological deficiencies is an induction dose of IV cyclophosphamide of 40 to 50 mg/kg divided into dosages over 2 to 5 days. The maintenance dosage is dependent upon individual tolerance but is generally 1 to 5 mg/kg taken orally every day. A daily oral dose of 2 to 3 mg/kg is recommended for pediatric patients. It should not be taken for more than 90 days to avoid hemorrhagic cystitis and sterility risk in males. The recommendation for the oral formulation is that it be taken at the same time every day, usually in the morning, with liquid. If GI irritation is noted, the tablet can be taken with food.

Mesna is a prophylactic cytoprotective drug administered orally or by IV to reduce the effects of hemorrhagic cystitis in patients treated with high-dose cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide. The recommended dosage of Mesna is generally as a fractionated dosing schedule of three IV bolus injections of 240 mg per meter cubed every 4 hours.