Patient evaluation for sarcopenia includes several modalities and screening tools, some of which are more readily available and practical than others. Evaluation ranges from screening questionnaires to radiographic imaging to the assessment of muscle mass cross-sectional area (CSA).

Screening Tools to Identify Probable Sarcopenia

- Strength, assistance with walking, rising from a chair, climbing stairs, and falls (SARC-F) questionnaire: The****SARC-F questionnaire is a screening tool that can be rapidly implemented by clinicians to identify probable sarcopenic patients. The questionnaire screens patients for self-reported signs suggestive of sarcopenia, which include deficiencies in strength, walking, rising from a chair, climbing stairs, and experiencing falls.

Assessing sarcopenia: muscle strength

- Handgrip test: Generally, handgrip strength is one of the two methods utilized to quantify muscle strength in patients with suspected sarcopenia. Handgrip strength correlates with strength in other muscles and is therefore used as a surrogate to detect deficits in overall strength.

- Chair stand test: The chair stand test may be used as a proxy to gauge lower extremity strength, particularly the quadriceps muscles. The chair stand test measures the number of times a patient can stand and sit from a chair, without the use of their arms, over 30 seconds.

Confirming sarcopenia: Muscle quantity or quality

To date, there is no consensus on the most effective modality for confirming sarcopenia. Each comes with their strengths and weaknesses, and often, greater accuracy presents with the cost of inconvenience. Ultimately the goal of these modalities is to determine whether patients meet the requirement of sarcopenia through quantifying total body skeletal muscle mass (SMM), appendicular skeletal muscle mass (ASM), or the cross-sectional area of a specific muscle. Because overall body mass is correlated with SMM, SMM, or ASM, it may be adjusted for height or BMI, yielding ratios in the format of (ASM/height^2), (ASM/weight), or (ASM/BMI). The recommended cutoff for ASM is <20 kg and <15 kg, for males and females, respectively.

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): Considered a "gold standard" modality for confirming sarcopenia, MRI can provide highly accurate measurements of total body muscle mass.

- Computed tomography (CT): Also considered a "gold standard" for accurate lean muscle mass measurement, CT is rarely used in the primary care setting for similar reasons than MRI.

- Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA): While not as accurate as either CT or MRI, DEXA presents with greater convenience, and is, therefore, a more widely available and practical modality for confirmation of sarcopenia.

- Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA): Perhaps the most widely available and portable modality of muscle mass quantification, BIA may also be used to confirm sarcopenia.

Measuring physical performance to identify sarcopenia severity:

Once sarcopenia is confirmed through body composition assessment, the severity of the condition is determined by measuring physical performance. Suggested tests and their respective cutoff points for sarcopenia severity as recommended by the EWGSOP2 are listed below.

- Gait speed test: Gait speed tests are simple to use in practice and predict adverse effects associated with sarcopenia.

- Short physical performance battery (SPPB): The SPPB test is composed of 3 timed tasks: chair stand tests, standing balance, and walking speed. The minimal and maximal achievable scores are 0 (low performance) and 12 (high performance), respectively. A score of ≤8 is an indicator of poor physical performance and may be indicative of greater sarcopenia severity.

- Timed-up and go test (TUG): The TUG test observes the time taken for a patient to rise from a chair, walk 3 meters away from, and 3 meters back to the chair, terminating the test in a sitting position. Time ≥20 seconds is indicative of physical deficits, though the study used to support this recommendation failed to assess male populations and therefore, may only apply to elderly female populations.

- The 400-meter walk test: In the 400-meter walk test, a patient attempts to walk in a series of 20, 20-meter laps as quickly as possible, with a maximum of 2 minutes rest between each lap. The inability to complete or requiring ≥6 min to complete the entire 400-meters is concerning and may suggest greater sarcopenia severity.