Preparation for epidural anesthesia should initially include obtaining a medical history and physical exam. Patients should be asked about their medical conditions, prior anesthesia exposures, current medications, other drug and supplement use, family medical history, including reactions to anesthesia, and allergies. A thorough physical exam should be performed focusing on the patients’ airway, neurologic functioning, and the structure and function of the back and spine. Vitals and laboratory values should be reviewed, with an emphasis on coagulopathy indicators. Given a variety of anticoagulation medications, clinicians should stay up to date with the recommended parameters before administering any form of neuraxial anesthesia. For example, for patients receiving unfractionated heparin doses of 7,500 to 10,000 units twice daily, neuraxial anesthesia should be delayed four to twelve hours. Meanwhile, patients taking warfarin must be reversed or withheld from taking the medication for five days and have a documented international normalized ratio (INR) of less than or equal to 1.4. The procedure, indications, complications, potential risks, and alternatives should all be discussed with the patient, and an informed consent document completed upon patient comprehension and agreement.

A time-out confirming patient identity, allergies, the indicated procedure, consent, and coagulation status should be performed before proceeding. The patient can be positioned in either the sitting or lateral decubitus position subject to provider preference and procedure indication. A position of spinal flexion and neutral rotation should be achieved to establish a straight path for needle insertion between the spinous processes.

In the sitting position, the patient should have the back of their knees as close to the edge of the table as possible. The patient should then be instructed to touch their chin to their chest with their hands resting on their thighs and then slouch, pushing the belly button back towards the administering provider. A supporting staff member should be present to safely assist and stabilize the patient, preventing a forward lean, and possible fall from the table. Positional aids such as pillows and stands may also be used as needed if available.

In the lateral decubitus position, laterality is chosen based comfort of the patient and on having adequate room for support personnel and the proceduralist. Similar to when in the sitting position, the patient should be positioned with their back closest to the administering provider. The patient should be instructed to draw their thighs towards their mid-section while pushing their belly button out towards the administering provider, thus producing spinal flexion. With the help of a supporting staff member, a neutral rotational position should be maintained, and the patient stabilized once properly positioned.

Standard ASA monitoring equipment should be placed on the patient prior to positioning. This includes noninvasive blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and A-line, as indicated. Procedure equipment should be opened and prepared in a sterile fashion according to the Practice Advisory for the Prevention, Diagnosis, and Management of Infectious Complications Associated with Neuraxial Techniques, published by the ASA in 2017. The equipment tray should be positioned to administering provider preference for ease of access and maintenance of sterility.

Patient pre-medication can be titrated as needed for patient anxiety. Caution should be taken to achieve minimal sedation, given the need for patient positioning, cooperation, and feedback throughout the procedure.

As described in the Practice Advisory for the Prevention, Diagnosis, and Management of Infectious Complications Associated with Neuraxial Techniques, the administering provider should practice aseptic technique. This includes washing hands, removing all jewelry, and wearing a cap, mask, and sterile gloves.