Various methods of pancreatic transplantation are

- Pancreatic transplant alone (PTA)

- Simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplant (SPK)

- Pancreas after kidney transplant (PAK)

- Simultaneous deceased pancreatic donor and live kidney donor transplant

Indications for pancreas transplant alone are severe complications of diabetes mellitus with frequent and severe hypoglycemia or ketoacidosis. Poor quality of life in spite of insulin therapy. These patients have an adequate renal function and no uremia. Patients who have a glomerular filtration rate of 80 to 100 mL/min/1.73 m^2 are unlikely to need a kidney transplant. For the simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplant, the organs come from the same deceased donor. According to UK Transplant Kidney and Pancreas, Advisory Group indication for SPK is the patients with type 1 diabetes with end-stage renal failure on dialysis or requiring dialysis within six months. In the pancreas after kidney transplant, pancreas transplant is performed after a previous kidney transplant, from a different, living or deceased donor. Indication for PAK is in patients who match the criteria for pancreas-alone transplant and also have previously working kidney transplants. It is also noted that the waiting time and mortality rate is reduced as compared to simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplant patients. The main benefit of a simultaneous deceased donor pancreas and live donor kidney is having a lower rate of delayed graft function than an SPK and significantly reduced waiting times, which results in improved outcomes when compared to patients waiting for a simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplant.

SPK is now the first choice of treatment in a patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus and related end-stage renal disease. pancreas alone transplant can be done in patients with preserved kidney function and hypoglycemic unawareness.

SPKs are being increasingly performed in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients and in patients of advanced age, with excellent results.or significant impairment of quality of life due to diabetes. PAK is done in patients with insulin-treated diabetes having a stable function of previous renal allograft and who meet criteria for PTA.

The number of pancreas transplants has been decreasing in the past decade, but the outcomes have improved for all groups of a pancreas transplant mainly due to improvements in immunosuppression, surgical technique, and donor-recipient selection. The decrease in the number of the pancreas transplant in the past decade can be due to improved insulin delivery systems, concerns about outcomes after solitary pancreas transplant, and a renewed interest in islet transplant. The most noticeable decrease is noted in the PAK and PTA groups, which could be due to a decrease in the number of donors.

The need for chronic immunosuppression and the risk of surgical complications make pancreas transplant an option only for a selected group of diabetic patients who have chronic renal failure, extrarenal complications, or struggle against difficult metabolic indices control.