**Tolerance and Physical Dependence**

Issues of concern regarding the MOR agonists lie in their ability to cause opioid tolerance and physical dependence. Consistent stimulation of the MORs can ultimately result in drug tolerance, requiring higher doses to achieve the same effect. However, the phenomenon of opioid tolerance usually is of limited occurrence in cancer patients receiving treatment for pain as the need for increasing doses in those patients is mostly due to an increasing level of pain. The knowledge of the precise mechanisms underlying tolerance and dependence phenomena is of fundamental importance for the accurate management of opioid therapy and the development of new pharmacological strategies. For example, a lot of research has recently focused on the role of particular domains and amino acid residues of the MOR for proper receptor function. This research is usually carried out through the methodology of in vitro mutagenesis and the analysis of receptor chimeras.

Furthermore, the effects linked to the timing of opioid administration require a better explanation. Studies on tolerance mechanisms demonstrated that high doses of exogenous opioids might produce MOR (and DOR) internalization. Thus an increased opioid intake is necessary to generate the same effect on a reduced number of receptors. Again, upon removal of the exogenous opioids from the system (e.g., through an opioid antagonist), the endogenous opioids are not able to activate the small number of remaining receptors. Physical dependence can develop after 2 to 10 days of continuous use when the drug gets stopped abruptly. The effect is the withdrawal syndrome, which according to the ICD-10 Clinical description, represents 'a group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative withdrawal of a substance after repeated, and usually prolonged and/or high-dose, use of that substance.' The withdrawal syndrome is usually accompanied by signs of physiological disturbance whereas the onset and duration of clinical manifestations including pain (e.g., abdominal cramping, bone pain, and diffuse muscle aching), autonomic symptoms such as diarrhea, rhinorrhea, diaphoresis, lacrimation, shivering, nausea, emesis, piloerection, central nervous system (arousal, sleeplessness, restlessness, tremors), and craving for the medication depend on the drug used. The addiction phenomenon is a potential consequence of drug dependence and is characterized by psychological and behavioral symptoms with a drug craving, compulsive use, and a strong tendency to relapse after withdrawal.

**Research Perspectives**

The changes produced by the use of opioids occur on a large scale and are documentable on the morphological level. Gray matter changes in patients with chronic pain are apparent after only one month of morphine administration, and these alterations can persist for up to 5 months after the end of the therapy.

The genetic aspects represent an important variable to interpret the effects linked to the use/misuse of opioids. Genetic variations in the OPRM1 gene can influence the response to opioids, including the dose of medications needed to obtain pain relief. Interestingly, research has shown that these variations (single nucleotide polymorphism Asn40 -> Asp) can be associated with the risk of opioid addiction.

**Opioid Addiction: Receptors and Strategies**

Another challenge concerns the choice of opioid for replacing more destructive opioids via maintenance therapy in case of opioid addiction. This condition is a chronic disease that can cause major health, social, and economic problems. In this context, as MOR agonists with rapid onset of action and short half-lives such as heroin induce immediate reward followed by noticeable withdrawal symptoms, clinicians must be aware that these drugs have the greatest potential for destructive addictive behaviors. MOR agonists with delayed onset of action and longer half-lives, such as methadone, can induce dependence without necessarily destructive behaviors and reduced impact on mood, judgment, and psychomotor skills. Furthermore, buprenorphine is a partial MOR agonist that induces all the typical opioid effects, although only up to a certain limit called the ceiling effect. By increasing the dose, that is, a significant increase in the effect such as additional euphoria is not obtained, limiting cravings and withdrawal symptoms. The ceiling effect of buprenorphine means that there is also a limit on respiratory depression. Moreover, because buprenorphine has a very high affinity for the opioid receptors, other full agonists such as heroin have strong difficulties to displace it. However, the use of buprenorphine, while heroin, or other opioids, are already on the MORs can induce an antagonist effect with a sudden drop in receptors activation, which, in turn, can be experienced as withdrawal. The introduction of buprenorphine must occur when the strong opioid has dissipated from the receptor. Several tools, such as the Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale, can guide the replacing process for addiction treatment.