The technique for harvesting a split-thickness skin graft with an air-powered dermatome will be described as it is a common harvesting method.

**Preparation of Wound Bed and Split-thickness Skin Graft Harvest**

- Debride the recipient bed with a scalpel, Norsen debrider, dermatome, or hydrosurgery device until the wound bed has healthy bleeding tissue at the base. Freshen up the edges as necessary.

- Measure the recipient's wound bed. These measurements will equate to the size of the skin graft harvested.

- Connect the dermatome to the air-source. Temporarily turn the dermatome on to ensure appropriate power, indicated by a high pitched hum.

- Apply a fresh dermatome blade into the dermatome and choose the desired guard plate width. Widths span 1-inch to 4-inches. Once assembled, select the thickness of the split-thickness skin graft by turning the dial on the side of the dermatome.

- Based on the width of the guard, calculate the length of the graft to be harvested based on the total size of the skin graft desired. Mark the length on the donor site with a surgical marker.

- Apply mineral oil to the dermatome and donor site to optimize gliding.

- In conjunction with your assistant, use a towel or towel clamps to pull the donor site in opposite directions parallel to the path of the dermatome, making the donor site taught.

- Turn the dermatome on and bring it into contact with the skin at a 45-degree angle. After making skin contact, flatten the dermatome to be nearly parallel with the skin.

- Apply firm downward pressure as the dermatome smoothly pushes forward.

- Upon achieving the desired length of the graft, angle the dermatome upwards at a 45-degree angle off of the skin.

- Turn the dermatome off and a use surgical scalpel or scissors to cut the skin graft from the donor site.

- Pull the skin graft from the dermatome using tissue forceps.

- Place the split-thickness skin graft in normal saline until it is to be used.

- Apply an epinephrine-soaked to the donor site to reduce blood loss.

**Meshing and Securing the Graft**

- Mesh the split-thickness skin graft if desired. The surgeon can perform this process with a scalpel (fenestrating or "pie-crusting") or a skin graft mesher. If using a mesher, spread the skin graft out before entrance into the mesher to ensure appropriately spaced slits. Gently guide the skin graft out of the mesher

- Carefully transfer the skin graft to the donor site, placing the graft onto the recipient bed dermis side down. If the skin graft is placed epidermis side down, the skin graft will fail. Typically the dermis is a lighter shade than the epidermis; however, it can be challenging to differentiate on lighter shade skin. The skin graft will always curl down toward the dermis, so use this to orient the graft correctly.

- Secure the graft with skin staples or suture.

- Apply a tie-over bolster; negative pressure wound vacuum, or dressings as indicated by the recipient site.

- Dress the donor site, as indicated above.