The first and most widely accepted diagnostic criteria for cirrhotic cardiomyopathy were proposed during the 2005 World Congress of Gastroenterology (WCG) in Montreal. This criterion includes evidence of systolic dysfunction (blunted increase in cardiac output with physiologic or pharmacologic stimuli and left ventricular ejection fraction less than 55%), evidence of diastolic dysfunction (ratio of early to atrial flow velocities (E/A) less than 1, mitral deceleration time over 200 milliseconds, and isovolumetric relaxation time over 80 milliseconds), and the presence of various supportive criteria (electrophysiological abnormalities, enlarged left atrium, increased left ventricular wall thickness, increased brain-type natriuretic peptide, and increased troponins).

Initial lab work should confirm cardiac involvement and include atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), or its prohormone N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP), and troponin I. If available, a galectin-3 level can be obtained as a marker of cardiac fibrosis.

QT prolongation on electrocardiogram (EKG) is often the first sign of CCM. This has been noted to vary between daytime and nighttime due to diurnal variations in the autonomic nervous and circulatory systems.

The chest x-ray is typically normal but may show cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema.

Echocardiography showing diastolic and/or systolic dysfunction is essential for diagnosis. Speckle tracking can be used to analyze the ventricular function further.

As CCM manifests under conditions of stress, a chemical or exercise stress test demonstrating a blunted cardiac response can be useful in confirming this diagnosis.