Denervation of the long thoracic nerve results in weakness of the serratus anterior and winging of the scapula. Any dysfunction/weakness affecting any muscle that stabilizes the scapula may lead to scapula winging. A weakness of the serratus anterior muscle is the most prevalent cause of winging due to the weak protraction of the scapula and unopposed medial scapula retraction by the rhomboid muscles and elevation by the trapezius, resulting in medial winging of the scapula. This condition is easily differentiated from the much less common lateral winging due to weakness of the trapezius muscle which is supplied by the spinal accessory nerve.

Compared to other nerves of the brachial plexus, the long thoracic nerve has a comparatively smaller diameter which, when coupled with its minimal connective tissue and superficial course along the surface of the serratus anterior muscle, increases its susceptibility to damage both operatively or non-operatively with subsequent development of scapular winging. The long thoracic nerve travels to the level of the eighth or ninth rib and is relatively unprotected from the axilla down. As such, the nerve may suffer exposure to external injury, including compression from a cast, use of crutches, anesthesia, or Saturday night palsy.

Passive extension of the arm and uncoordinated scapular movements during sports, such as sudden jerking of the shoulder, may stretch the long thoracic nerve and its blood vessels, resulting in scapular winging. It has been noted that with increasing proximity of the long thoracic nerve to the lower angle of the scapula, the less scapular motion is required to compress or stretch the nerve. Individual differences in the distance between the nerve and the scapula may account for the variable incidence of serratus anterior paralysis.