Culture and gram stain from body fluids and blood must be obtained ideally before antibiotic treatment is initiated. Chest X-ray, echocardiogram, CT scan of the abdomen, or colonoscopy may be necessary as per the infection's clinical context.

- Enterococci are gram-positive, non-spore-forming cocci, usually appearing as short chains, diplococci, or single ovoid cells. They are facultative anaerobes that grow on culture media tolerating high 6.5% salt concentration and a wide range of temperatures. Although mostly non-hemolytic, some enterococci show alpha and beta hemolysis.

- They are bench diagnosed as catalase-negative, urease negative, Lancefield group D antigen-positive, esculin hydrolyzing in 40% bile salts, and PYR hydrolyzing, distinguishing it from Streptococcus gallolyticus.

- Genetic methods have replaced traditional biochemical tests. They include gene probes, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 16s rRNA sequencing, nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT), Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF), and other new technologies.

- Enterococcus should be routinely tested for sensitivity to penicillin, vancomycin, and high-level aminoglycoside resistance (HLAR).

- The DENOVA tool can be used to predict endocarditis in patients with enterococcal bacteremia (based on Duration of symptoms, Embolizations, Number of positive cultures, Origin, valve disease, and Auscultation murmurs). Some authors recommend transthoracic echocardiograms for all community-acquired and nosocomial enterococcal bacteremia.

- As a part of the evaluation, reports have proposed routine colonoscopies for cases of enterococcal bacteremia or IE of unclear source, given the high prevalence of new colonic neoplasms found in this population, similar to the guidelines for Streptococcus bovis and Clostridium septicum.