Brain trauma foundation guidelines recommend monitoring ICP in patients with severe TBI [Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 3 to 8] and have either (1) abnormalities in CT of the head or (2) meet at least two of the following three criteria: age over 40 years; systolic blood pressure under 90 mmHg; or abnormal posturing.

The genesis for this approach is the changes in ICP being evident 6 hours before clinical signs and symptoms are observable in patients following herniation syndrome.

There is still no level I evidence for any strategies targeted for managing refractory intracranial hypertension, with only level IIA evidence for the role of decompressive hemicraniectomy and level IIB evidence for the role of ICP monitoring. Thresholds for ICP and cerebral perfusion pressure guided therapies are 22 mm Hg and 60 to 70 mm Hg, respectively.

Proposed tiers in the management of refractory intracranial hypertension and resultant brain herniation.

- Evacuation of mass lesions (hematoma, contusion, infarction, edema, tumors)

- Physiological neuroprotection

- Sedation, analgesics, and ventilation

- CSF drainage

- Osmotherapy

- Hyperventilation

- Hypothermia

- Barbiturate coma

- Decompressive hemicraniectomy

**General Measures**

- Most patients require mechanical ventilation and need to be paralyzed to avoid straining or agitation. Sedatives should be used to calm the patient.

- Hyperventilation is known to cause vasoconstriction and helps lower the intracranial pressure.

- Fluids should be restricted, but the patient must not be dehydrated.

- Diuretics like mannitol can be administered to lower the ICP.

- Blood pressure control is vital but needs to be adequate to perfuse the brain.

- In some patients with malignancies and abscesses, corticosteroids may reduce vasogenic edema.

- Hypothermia is widely used today as it slows down brain metabolism, but it also makes the patient prone to infections and arrhythmias.

- Pentobarbital coma can lower cerebral blood flow, but it can also cause hypotension.