Neurolysis is an alternative to allow patients the ability to control their pain with less systemic medication, significantly improving their QoL. Peripheral neurolytic blocks are advocated to treat severe malignant intractable pain caused primarily by advanced terminal cancer. Rarely, some forms of nonmalignant pain can be treated with neurolysis (for example, intractable postherpetic neuralgia and chronic pancreatitis). Nevertheless, the role of these non-pharmacological approaches for the management of chronic, nonmalignant painful conditions is debated and often discouraged.

In the literature currently, there are large-scale controlled studies on the use and beneficial effects of the peripheral neurolytic block in the treatment of malignant and nonmalignant pain. These investigations include randomized controlled trials (RCTs), observational trials, and many case series.

To evaluate the efficacy of cryoneurolysis for reduction of pain associated with knee osteoarthritis (OA), a randomized, double-blind, sham-controlled, multicenter trial with a 6-month follow-up in patients demonstrated that patients randomized to cryoneurolysis targeting the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve (IPBSN) had a statistically significant greater change from baseline in the WOMAC (Western Ontario and McMaster Osteoarthritis Index) pain subscale score at day 30, day 60, and day 90 after cryoneurolysis.

RFA for the lumbar medial branch has been most studied. It is an emerging treatment option for chronic low back pain (LBP). In a recent study, the authors investigated long-term treatment outcomes of patients selected (n=85) for zygapophyseal joint (z-joint)-mediated LBP.

As to the long-term effectiveness of the RFA for chronic LBP, controversies exist, for example, in RCTs including 681 participants with chronic LBP originating from the facet joints, sacroiliac joints, or a combination of these or the intervertebral disks, radiofrequency denervation combined with exercise compared with exercise alone resulted in either no significant difference in pain intensity after 3 months.

Endoscopic ultrasound-guided neurolytic celiac plexus block (NCPB) should be considered as the adjunct method to standard pain management because it may reduce pain in pancreatic cancer. In a systematic review, 27 RCTs were considered.

Of all peripheral nerve neurectomies, ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric neurectomy have been most extensively studied. Inguinal neurectomy at the time of hernia repair may reduce the risk of postoperative pain. In a meta-analysis, 11 studies on 1031 patients included performed Lichtenstein hernia repair and showed a significant reduction in pain with neurectomy for short and midterm.

Interventional techniques to manage pain may be efficient treatment modalities in patients unable to tolerate systemic opioids or patients who have limited life expectancy with localized pain. Outcomes data for pain relief remains inconsistent due to variable patient prognosis, so the selection of appropriate patients, pain location, and prognosis are mandatory. However, indication and selection of the right technique demand knowledge, which is still incipient among clinicians. Peripheral neurolytic blocks should be considered only after a failure of other modalities, including pharmacologic, physical, psychiatric, and non-destructive interventional therapy. In selected cases, for example, in case of severe pain from pancreatic neoplasia, minimally invasive techniques (e.g., NCPB) must be considered at the beginning of the treatment path.