A 24-hour urine collection test needs to be done for 24 hours. While this seems obvious, some patients misinterpret the instructions, so it is worth taking the time to make sure they collect, store and process the specimen correctly. It is customary to discard the first voided specimen in the morning, then collect all other specimens, including the first voided specimen, the following morning. It is important to stress to patients the correct collection technique and procedures to avoid inadequate, under-collected specimens and over-collection. Many patients find it most convenient to do the collection on a Sunday so it can be mailed or delivered to the laboratory early on Monday morning.

It is advisable to use a reference laboratory that routinely performs many 24-hour urine chemistry tests as quality control measures tend to be better, turnover time is reduced, and incomplete results are less likely. Using a single reference laboratory for all of the 24-hour urinary chemistries is recommended as it avoids incomplete test reports and reduces the lead time from specimen submission to receipt of the complete results.

One way to estimate the reliability of the collection is to measure the 24-hour total creatinine in the specimen. Normal 24-hour urine total creatinine excretion is 955 mg to 2,936 mg in men and 601 mg to 1,689 mg in women. This can also be written as 13 to 29 mg/kg of body weight per 24 hours in men and 9 to 26 mg/kg of body weight per 24 hours in women. Insufficient total creatinine for a 24-hour urine test should raise the question of a possible inadequate collection.

Several studies have suggested that two 24-hour urine tests provide substantially more reliable results than a single collection.

To paraphrase Dr. Fredric Coe, widely regarded as the world's leading expert in medical stone disease, a properly collected and performed 24-hour urine test is the cornerstone of preventive therapy. If the test results are incomplete or unreliable due to improper collection, poor handling, or substandard laboratory testing procedures, the resulting analysis and treatment recommendations will be erroneous, ultimately harming patients. No degree of medical expertise or experience can overcome the problems created by an improperly collected, poorly stored, incomplete, or otherwise badly performed 24-hour urine chemistry profile.