Treprostinil is available in three formulations: intravenous or continuous subcutaneous, oral, and inhaled. Each formulation is beneficial to patients with PAH. Different routes have different adverse effects, and the knowledge of these effects will facilitate transitioning between these formulations. For example, patients receiving the infusion form experienced infusion site pain, patients receiving the oral form experienced abdominal discomfort, which this activity will discuss in more detail in the “Adverse Effects” section. The subcutaneous (SQ) route is preferred as the drug will rapidly and completely absorb and is administered via an infusion pump. If the patient is not tolerant of the SQ infusion route, they can change to IV infusion. In this case, the solution must be diluted and administered through an indwelling central catheter, which can increase the risk of sepsis and bacteremia. Patients receiving inhaled treprostinil should be able to care for the system and the accessories. They should also have backup devices to avoid interruption of the treatment.

Treprostinil should not be mixed with any other medications. The oral form can be administered with food and should not be crushed or chewed. The absorption of the oral treprostinil increases when administered following a high-fat, high-calorie meal. Dosing requires adjustment in hepatic impairment due to decreased hepatic clearance and increased systemic exposure.

The metabolism of this medication is hepatic via CYP2C8 to form several inactive metabolites, which then get excreted through urine and feces.

It has not undergone testing in other types of PH.

SQ absorption is almost immediate, whereas orally, the time to peak is 4 to 6 hours. The half-life is 4 hours.