COVID-19 has wreaked havoc across the world and has overwhelmed many healthcare systems and economies of many countries. Currently, two vaccines have been authorized for use in the general population by the US FDA under an Emergency Use Authorization(EUA) after clinical trials demonstrated more than 90% efficacy. Until the majority of the world’s population gets vaccinated against this illness, COVID-19 will remain a threat to global public health. Prevention and management of this highly contagious viral illness require a holistic and interprofessional approach that includes physicians across specialties, nurses, pharmacists, public health experts, and governmental authorities. Clinical providers managing COVID-19 patients on the frontlines should consider assessing for GI symptoms while evaluating patients suspected of COVID-19. Clinicians should maintain a high index of suspicion in patients from a high risk of exposure area or recent travel to a high exposure area who present with isolated GI symptoms even in the absence of pulmonary symptoms and should be appropriately triaged and tested for COVID-19. Gastroenterology and Hepatology teams must be consulted when clinically indicated. Resources for contact tracing and testing must be enhanced to limit the spread of this virus. Patients must be educated and encouraged to adhere to social distancing guidelines and use of facemasks as per CDC guidelines and COVID-19 protocols of state and local authorities. Given the concern of possible fecal-oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the presence of live virus in feces of COVID-19 patients who tested negative by nasopharyngeal swab and had continued fecal shedding in COVID-19 patients days after clinical recovery is detrimental to the containment of this virus