Skin subjected to flea bites, as with all insect bites, should be washed with soap and water. Local edema, erythema, and pruritus are symptoms of a hypersensitivity reaction caused by the bites and are treatable with cold packs and topical creams. Calamine or pramoxine-containing lotions and topical corticosteroids are effective at reducing local inflammation and pruritus. Oral antihistamines such as cetirizine or loratadine may also combat pruritus. Note that the application of topical antihistamines over large areas of skin should be avoided when oral H1 antihistamines are in use; such a combination can result in systemic anticholinergic toxicity. Oral steroids may be an option for severe swelling. The rash can take several weeks to resolve. Elimination of fleas from the patient’s surroundings is also imperative to stop the continuation of the rash.

Tungarisis is usually benign and self-limited, especially in returning travelers. However, patients with extensive infestations may have complications including loss of nails, toe deformities and difficulty ambulating. Due to the high risk of secondary infection, patients with extensive infections should receive treatment with prophylactic antibiotics. In unvaccinated patients, tetanus risk is increased, and the practitioner should query all patients regarding their tetanus status.  Conventional therapy is surgical extraction of the parasite under sterile conditions. No oral or topical therapy is entirely effective; however, in mild infections even without treatment the flea will die within 5 weeks and will be sloughed off with the skin. Basic hygiene as well as paving roads and floors can prevent infestation.