For a traveler going to an at-risk altitude, the most significant modifiable risk factor is the rate of ascent. More gradual ascent allows the body’s physiological processes to adjust to the reduced partial pressure of oxygen at the new altitude. Planning the trip to allow for such acclimation is the most natural method of prevention and, when possible within the parameters of the patient’s overall travel plans, is preferred to eliminate the risk of side-effects from pharmacologic management. This method will also reduce the risk of worsening or triggering any oxygen-sensitive underlying conditions which are present (discussed above). Because of the change in respiratory pattern during sleep, the altitude at which the traveler sleeps is more important for AMS risk than the maximal altitude reached during the day. The optimal rate of ascent (sleep altitude) should be no more than 500 m per day at levels greater than 2500 m. Also, allowing at least one day to acclimate around 2500 m before further ascent, and then again for every additional 1000 m ascent, will reduce risk. Avoiding exercise and alcohol for the first 48 hours until acclimated may also minimize the risk of symptoms. If Acute Mountain Sickness does occur, further ascent is not advisable until acclimated. Having the patient descend is also curative when symptoms are persistent and should be considered when possible in the rare cases when symptoms are progressive despite treatment.

Dexamethasone use is less frequent for Acute Mountain Sickness, and it is used primarily as a treatment, though occasionally may be considered for prophylaxis in certain settings. Ibuprofen may also be effective as a non-prescription option, and some travelers may be more comfortable using ibuprofen since they are familiar with it. All three treatments may cause gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, which may overlap with those seen in some instances of Acute Mountain Sickness. Assuming the medications are tolerated, use should continue until the traveler has at least one to two days at the highest altitude reached to acclimate.