**Needs Assessment**

The first step to building a curriculum that meets the desired learning objectives is identifying the problems or needs in a particular group that will receive education; this is a "needs assessment." In a medical simulation, the need assessment focuses on finding the clinical or procedural skills that need to be reinforced and identifying those where the simulated setting is more valuable in acquiring specific knowledge or skills.

**Learners Analysis**

To provide valuable educational resources, the learners' characteristics must be analyzed before curriculum implementation. Knowing the audience or participants helps the teacher in the development and educational plan capable of covering the learners' needs. Some of the important characteristics are level of education, skills, limitation, and motivation level.

**Stablishment of Learning Objectives**

Learning objectives in the context of medical education refer to the expected result after the educational experience. For instance, during peripheral intravenous catheter insertion training with a task trainer, one learning one of the learning objectives is: Upon completion of the theoretical and practical training for peripheral intravenous catheter placement, 4th-year medical students will be able to demonstrate the technique to the instructor using an IV-arm task trainer. Learning objectives have to be specific and utilize appropriate verbs. Benjamin Bloom designed a taxonomy of measurable verbs based on the assumption that some observable actions correlate with cognitive activity. Bloom's work helps the educational institution design learning objectives that aim for critical thinking, knowledge, comprehension, etc.

Goals and learning objectives are commonly confused terms. Goals are results to the expected at the end of an educational experience, and it usually refers to a long-term target. On the other hand, objectives are specific actions of results that occur as an immediate consequence of the educational activity.

**Selection of Instructional Methods**

The instructional method refers to the educational activity that allows students to achieve the learning objective. Simulation per se is an instructional method, but it has different components and/or enhancing activities that can be combined to create an educational experience to complete specific learning goals. In general, simulation-based training offers active learning activities over passive learning. For example, simulated scenarios require the participant to be fully engaged with the situation to be able to analyze, make decisions, and take action. Likewise, debriefing after simulated scenarios is a versatile and active learning activity that can allow students to meet several learning objectives after one educational experience.

The concept of debriefing has been widely used in the military to learn from past missions. Debriefing refers to the reconstruction of elements from past experience and identifying those elements that are considered appropriate or detrimental to each particular situation. The goal of debriefing in healthcare simulation is that participants identify their mistakes and appropriate actions during a clinical scenario. Also, it provides the opportunity to reflect, summarize, and analyze better actions and discover new insights applicable to future clinical practice.

Educators can include other instructional methods in the curriculum, such as debates, discussions, task trainers, and virtual reality.

**Assessing Learning**

Tracking the learning progress is essential to evaluate the students and the simulation curriculum. There are several assessment methods with different values. In simulations, the most common assessing tools include confidence and performance self-perception, checklists, pre, and post-tests, knowledge tests, and group evaluation.

Evaluation of simulation activities:

**Formative evaluation**occurs during the educational activity and allows the teacher to assess the learner's knowledge, skills, and critical thinking. Formative assessment allows the teachers to evaluate the effectiveness of the instructional method used to achieve the learning objectives.

**Summative evaluation:**It occurs after completing the educational activity. The goal of summative assessment is to evaluate the extent to which learning objectives were met, and it is presented as an assigned grade or score. One of the main disadvantages of summative assessment is that it doesn't allow modification of the instructional methods because it is obtained after the end of the program, course, or educational activity.