The ankle can be dislocated in five directions: anteriorly, posteriorly, laterally, medially or superiorly. These descriptions describe the position of the talus when compared to the distal tibia. The first four dislocations can often be easily reduced while in the emergency department with procedural sedation. A superior dislocation usually results in a pilon fracture and, as stated above, requires orthopedic consultation. Both procedural sedation and intra-articular hematoma block (IAHB) are excellent options for reduction and in ankle fracture-dislocations IAHB can be considered as a first-line agent.

The treatment goal is to obtain anatomic alignment of the distal tibia and fibula, with a congruent tibiotalar joint on the AP, lateral and mortise views of the ankle. When properly reduced, the wider portion of the talar dome should be located back within the ankle mortise. The foot should be at neutral dorsiflexion on the lateral view with a fully congruent talar dome-distal tibia relationship.

Reduction of an ankle dislocation ideally requires two practitioners for the reduction and a single practitioner for the procedural sedation if available, however, a modified Quigley maneuver has been described which allows for single-provider reduction and splinting.

Reduction of an anterior dislocation is performed in the following manner:

- Slightly flex the knee.

- While grasping the forefoot with one hand and the heel with the other, dorsiflex the foot to accentuate the deformity to disengage the talus.

- While an assistant provides counter-traction on the leg, apply direct traction to the foot and heel to extend the leg and move the foot and talus to drop back into location between the tibia and fibula.

Reduction of a posterior dislocation is accomplished in the following manner:

- Flex the knee.

- While an assistant provides counter traction on the leg, grasp the heel with one hand and the dorsal metatarsals with the other.

- Slightly plantar-flex the foot to disengage the talus.

- Follow this by pulling on the foot with both the dorsum and heel (elongating the leg) while sliding the talus anteriorly into position. It may be necessary to have a second assistant putting downward pressure on the tibia and fibula while the foot is pulled forward into position.

Reduction of a lateral or medial fracture-dislocation utilizes these same principals but will require manipulation of the foot by rotating the toes medially or laterally, respectively, into anatomic position so that the patella and foot are pointing in the same direction. Again, verify sensation, palpable pulses, movement of the toes, and capillary refill.

When the foot is properly reduced, apply a posterior splint and associated U-shaped splint (stirrup). Make sure to verify movement of the toes, palpable pulses, capillary refill, and sensation of the foot after manipulation and splinting as well as confirming correct anatomic alignment using post-reduction radiographs. Be sure that your orthopedic consultant is aware of any manipulation that has been performed and is available to definitively manage the fractures associated with the dislocation.

Simple ankle dislocations that have a concentric reduction can often be managed nonoperatively.  Initial management in terms of the type of immobilization and weight-bearing status is controversial and often dependent on ankle stability noted on the exam.  There have been reports ranging from early weight-bearing in a CAM walker to immobilization in a cast for 6 weeks followed by progressive weight-bearing.

Wight et al.

Ankle fracture-dislocations are often treated operatively as they result in unstable bimalleolar and trimalleolar fractures.  After a concentric reduction, these injuries can be approached in a similar way to unstable ankle fractures that did not result in a dislocation.  The main principals of surgical fixation are to obtain an anatomic reduction of the articular surface, restore fibular length, and use rigid fixation.

The surgical approach is dependent on the nature of the fracture.  Bimalleolar fractures are often approached with a 2-incision technique with fixation of the fibula through a lateral approach and fixation of the medial malleolus with a medial approach.  Trimalleolar fractures are also treated through a 2-incision approach with either a combined posterolateral and medial or posteromedial and lateral approach to gain access to the fibula, medial malleolus, and posterior malleolus.

Percutaneous techniques have been described for fixation of the medial malleolus, however, open approaches offer direct visualization of fracture reduction.  The medial approach can be done with either a longitudinal incision or via the approach described by Colonna and Ralston in 1951.

The medial malleolus fixation involves anatomic reduction using a reduction clamp, followed by an assessment of reduction by direct visualization and fluoroscopic imaging.  The mode of fixation of the medial malleolus depends on fracture orientation.  Supination-external rotation, pronation-abduction, and pronation-external rotation type injuries often result in a transverse medial malleolar fracture.

The fibula can be approached via a straight lateral or posterolateral approach.  The posterolateral approach has the advantage of the ability to access both the fibula and posterior malleolus if needed.   The lateral incision is placed midway between the anterior and posterior borders of the fibula and starts distal to the tip of the fibula and extends proximally.  The length of the incision is dependent on the location and pattern of the fracture.  Dissection is taken down to the bone and the fibula is exposed by sharp dissection.

There is no consensus on the treatment of posterior malleolar fractures.  For most orthopedic surgeons, the decision to fix the posterior malleolus is dependent on the size of the fracture.  Small avulsion fractures typically do not need fixation, however, large displaced fragments often do.  Many authors advocate for fixation of the posterior malleolus if it involves more than 25-30% of the articular surface.

After the malleoli have been addressed, the last structure to evaluate is the tibiofibular syndesmosis.  Precise diagnosis of syndesmosis injury intra-operatively is difficult, and surgical indications for fixation remain controversial.  Syndesmosis injuries occur in 10 to 13% of all ankle fractures.

Syndesmosis fixation has classically been accomplished by compressive reduction with either a reduction clamp or manual reduction by the surgeon followed by fixation with one or two screws placed from the fibula into the tibia parallel with the tibiotalar joint.  More recently, there has been enthusiasm for the use of a dynamic suture button instead of screws, with the thought that these devices prevent diastasis while allowing tibiofibular rotational motion.  A recent randomized control trial found improved patient outcome scores and less radiographic syndesmotic widening when using a suture button, however, concern remains about the increased cost of these devices.

Postoperatively, patients are placed in a non-circumferential splint and made non-weight-bearing with crutches for at least six weeks.  Patients who are diabetic may be kept without weight-bearing for longer periods depending on radiographic healing and surgeon postoperative protocol preferences.