Healthcare workers who prescribe opiates should be familiar with the recent changes in their state laws. Liberal prescribing of these agents is no longer recommended and can lead to legal difficulties with the DEA. Patients with pain should receive pain management with alternative means, and a pain consultant should be involved. Healthcare providers are recommended to follow REMS guidelines to ensure proper prescribing of opioids. Currently, the DEA scans all healthcare workers who frequently write opiate prescriptions, and any mortality in a patient can lead to loss of the DEA certificate and even license to practice medicine.

Nurses, pharmacists, and physicians should educate patients about the dangers of opioids and their misuse. All interprofessional healthcare team members should be familiar and knowledgeable about the signs of opioid misuse and overdose and report any concerns to the prescribing clinician. Pharmacists can report "doctor shopping" when they see it. They can also recommend alternative agents for pain control, as many trials are underway to seek different means to control pain that has historically been treated with opioid drugs. Nursing will also inform the prescriber of any concerns about the misuse, is a source of counsel for the patient, and is often the point of contact for the pharmacist. The entire interprofessional healthcare team needs to function collaboratively to control the patient's pain and prevent potential misuse and dependence on opioid medications like oxycodone. [Level 5]