Healthcare providers should contact the patient ahead of imaging and instruct them to arrive well hydrated, in clothes without metallic objects, and plan for the procedure to last 3 to 6 hours.

The intravenously-injected, bone-seeking agent is usually a diphosphonate, most commonly methyl diphosphonate (MDP) or hydroxydiphosphonate (HDP) with initial deposition thought attributable to chemisorption on the bone surface. The agent is complexed with Technetium 99m, a relatively short-lived radiotracer with good spatial resolution, a good target to background ratio, and favorable imaging characteristics. The typical patient dose is 20 to 30 millicuries (mCi) or 740 to 1110 megabecquerel (MBq) for adults and 0.2 to 0.3 mCi/kg or 9 to 11 MBq/kg for children with the maximum dose not exceeding the administered activity for an adult. The minimum dose for pediatric patients is 0.05 to 1.0 mCi or 20 to 40 MBq.

Before injection of the radiotracer, the patient is positioned on the gamma camera so the area of interest can be imaged. The technologist starts imaging and injects the patient. Images are obtained at 1 to 3 seconds per frame (when using digital images) for a video clip lasting 60 seconds which is referred to as "dynamic imaging." Each frame is a summation of the radioactivity counts for the obtained image.  This dynamic imaging demonstrates and characterizes relative perfusion to a particular area and is called the "flow phase" or "angiographic phase."

Following this step, a second image is obtained in the same field of view and is termed the "blood pool" phase. This characterizes blood pool accumulation in the soft tissues and bone (or lack thereof) as a result of flow and capillary dilatation.

Two to 3 hours after initial injection, the third phase, termed "delayed," includes images of the same location as the earlier phases and will also include either the whole body or the lower half of the body. There will be anterior and posterior projections of the whole body or lower body images while the body part imaged in the earlier phases likely contains views from different projections to characterize the accumulation (or lack thereof) of radiotracer in the osseous structures. The clearing of the radiotracer from the soft tissues (or lack thereof) can be assessed as well. If there are any areas with abnormal radiotracer activity, they can also obtain "spot" images of the area of interest. Multiple projections of the spot images may be useful to improve anatomic localization. In areas of complex anatomy, newer gamma cameras have an advanced rotating imaging capability called single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT).  This is a 3-dimensional compilation of images and can be viewed alone or fused to conventional computed tomography (CT) scan.  Often, SPECT and CT imaging capabilities are combined in a single machine. The fusion of these 2 datasets allows for precise anatomic localization.