The care of nose bleeding is best performed by an interprofessional team. Most patients initially present to the emergency room and the triage nurse should be fully aware of the importance of admitting patients with a significant bleed. While most anterior nosebleeds can be arrested with digital pressure, a follow-up appointment is recommended in patients with repeat episodes. Even though nurses may not perform invasive procedures to stop the bleeding, they can be very effective in instructing patients how to properly compress the nose with fingers, which in most cases can arrest the bleeding.

Nasal packing is another option but the packing must be in place for three to five days, and repeated insertions and removals of various packs will only exacerbate the bleeding. Drug-induced nosebleeds may require a reversal of the INR and admission. The pharmacist should ensure that the patient does not restart the NSAID or other anticoagulant while the bleeding is active. A hematologist consult is recommended to deal with patients with coagulopathy. In rare cases, embolization or cauterization may be required to stop a nose bleed. If the bleeding is posterior and/or severe, an ENT consultation is necessary. In some cases, the invasive radiologist may be required to perform embolization to stop the bleeding. Nurses should monitor the oxygen and hemodynamic status of all patients with moderate to severe nose bleeds. These patients should have intravenous access with the transfusion of crystalloids. The team members should communicate with each other to ensure that the patient is receiving the acceptable standard of care treatment.