In all patients with bacterial pneumonia, empirical therapy should be started as soon as possible. The first step in treatment is a risk assessment to know whether the patient should be treated in an outpatient or inpatient setting. Cardiopulmonary conditions, age, and severity of symptoms affect risk for bacterial pneumonia, especially CAP.

An expanded CURB-65 or CURB-65 pneumonia severity score can be used for risk quantification. It includes C = Confusion, U = Uremia (BUN greater than 20 mg/dL), R = Respiratory rate (greater than 30 per min), B = B.P (BP less than 90/60 mmHg) and age greater than 65 years. One point is scored for each previously mentioned risk factor. If the total of the score is 2 or more than 2, it indicates hospital admission. If the total is 4 or more than 4, it indicates ICU admission. Recommended therapy for different settings are as follows:

- **Outpatient Setting:**For patients having comorbid conditions ( e.g., diabetes, malignancy, etc.) the regimen is "fluoroquinolone" or "beta-lactams + macrolide." For patients with no comorbid conditions, we can use "macrolide" or "doxycycline" empirically. Testing is usually not performed as the empiric regimen is almost always successful.

- **Inpatient Setting (non-ICU):**Recommended therapy is fluoroquinolone or macrolide + beta-lactam.

- **Inpatient setting (ICU):**Recommended therapy is beta-lactam + macrolide or beta-lactam + fluoroquinolone.

After getting a culture-positive lab result, therapies should be directed to the culture-specific pathogen.

The patient also can benefit from smoking cessation counseling and influenza and pneumococcal vaccination.

All patients treated at home should be scheduled for a follow-up visit within 2 days to assess any complication of pneumonia.