The exact pathophysiology of furrow degeneration is largely unknown. There is a predominating theory to explain the clinical presentation of FD. To better understand the theory, one should be familiar with the basic structural anatomy of the cornea. At the center, the cornea is about 0.5 mm thick, with a gradual increase in thickness from the center to the periphery. The cornea is an aspheric optical system caused by being steeper centrally and flatter peripherally, also known as having a prolate shape. The very sophisticated anatomical structure of the cornea allows it to perform the function of optimally refracting light into the retina. The corneal shape is simple yet elegant, with any alterations of the corneal shape causing changes in vision as well as an increase in the risk of corneal perforation. The cornea consists of 3 cellular layers and 2 interface layers, each having an individual function in allowing the cornea to act as a barrier and maintain its shape, among other characteristics.

The nature of FD is noninflammatory and non-progressive, subsequently leading to an asymptomatic presentation. The corneal topography in patients who have FD reveals that the entirety of the circumference of the cornea is peripherally thinned. This finding has led to the theory that patients with furrow degeneration do not have irregular astigmatism (commonly seen in other corneal degenerations) because the tensile strength caused by the thinning is evenly distributed in the cornea leading to central sphericity allowing the complex anatomical structure to keep its morphology. Thus, patients will not present with any vision loss since the cornea’s refraction function remains intact. In contrast, other corneal thinning pathologies consist of segmental thinning, which places uneven tensile strength on the cornea causing changes in the corneal shape. Given the morphology is altered in more malignant corneal degenerations, patients typically present with vision loss in the form of irregular astigmatism.