Laboratory studies useful in assessing T-PLL patients include a CBC with smear evaluation, routine chemistries with liver and renal function and electrolytes, alkaline phosphatase, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Imaging studies to assess the extent of the disease include chest X-ray, computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis.

Peripheral blood smear assessment helps assess T-PLL morphology. There are three reported morphologic variants observed in T-PLL. The typical variant is common and accounts for up to 75% of cases. In this variant, cells are usually small to medium in size. It is also lymphoid cells with non-granular basophilic cytoplasm; round, oval, or markedly irregular nuclei. It shows clumped chromatin. It usually has visible, punched-out nucleoli. The “small cell variant” (20%) shows cells that are relatively small in size; cells show condensed chromatin and small nucleolus (oft invisible to light microscopy). The “cerebriform (Sezary cell-like) variant” (5%) shows cells with an irregular nuclear outline. There are no differences, clinically, between these variants. T-PLL cannot be diagnosed definitively based on cell morphology alone.

Bone marrow aspirate/bone marrow biopsy in T-PLL cases usually shows diffuse interstitial infiltrates. Tissue biopsy is sometimes necessary for assessing patients with unusual presentation. Spleen biopsy shows red pulp infiltration. Skin biopsy shows perivascular, peri-adnexal, or more diffuse dermal infiltrate without epidermotropism.

Flow cytometry is a useful tool often necessary to confirm T-PLL diagnosis. Cells are negative for TdT, CD1a, CD16, CD30, and CD20. The cells are positive for CD3 (weak), CD2, CD5, CD7, and CD52. There is some variation amongst CD4 and CD8 positivity; the majority (60%) of cases are CD4+ and CD8-.  Twenty-five percent are positive for both CD4 and CD8, and 15% are positive for CD8 but CD4-.

Clonal T-cell receptor gene testing is obligatory for the initial evaluation. TCL1 protein testing using flow cytometry or immunohistochemistry is thought to be more sensitive than cytogenetics and is considered a diagnostic objective. In extremely rare cases where patients have no TCL1A, TCL1B, or MTCP1 rearrangement/overexpression, the diagnosis of TCL1- T-PLL is made. Genetic studies are usually necessary to confirm the T-PLL diagnosis. TCR gene rearrangement is positive for clonal rearrangement. Complex chromosomal abnormalities are very common. Rearrangements involving TCL1 is specific for T-PLL, these include: inv(14) (80%), t(14;14)(q11;q32) (10%) and t(X;14)(q28;q11). Other genetic co-abnormalities can include defects in chromosome 8, del(12p13),  chromosome 6 (33%)  chromosome 17 (26%) and (rarely) deletion of TP53 gene (17p13).

Diagnostic Criteria For T-PLL as composed by the TPLL International Study Group.

**Major Criteria**

- > 5 x 10(9) /L cells with TPLL phenotype in the peripheral blood or bone marrow

- T-cell clonality [determined by TRB/TRG (T-cell receptor beta/gamma) or flow cytometry]

- Abnormalities of 14q32 or Xq28 or expression of TCL 1a/b OR MTCP1

**Minor Criteria**

- Chromosome 11 abnormalities (11q22.3), as in ATM

- Chromosome 8 abnormalities [idic (8)(p11), t(8;8), trisomy 8]

- Chromosome 5,12,13, and 22 abnormalities or a complex karyotype

- Involvement of a TPLL specific site (e.g., splenomegaly, effusions)