Ultrasound guidance can facilitate the cannulation of superficial peripheral vessels that are typically used during palpation-based PIV placement. They also allow the visualization and guidance to cannulate deeper vessels. A good habit is to try to keep any attempts at the most peripheral vein available to save proximal veins for subsequent attempts. Placing PIVs in larger and superficial vessels has been associated with longer vessel functionality.

When visualizing the arm with ultrasound, blood vessels will show up as black, or anechoic, circles when viewed in cross-section. Muscle tissue is characteristically grey with a feather appearance of lighter grey striations cutting through them. Bone shows up as a bright white line on ultrasound. Ultrasound is unable to penetrate bone, so no grey echoes typically appear deep to the bone.

Although there are multiple variations in anatomy, the forearm cephalic, antebrachial, median cubital, and basilic veins are all common targets for USGIVs. With the patient’s palm facing the ceiling, the cephalic vein will run along the lateral side of their forearm. The median antebrachial will run in the middle of the forearm, while the basilic vein will run along the medial side of the forearm.

If no forearm veins are adequate targets, the probe can be advanced to the patient’s upper arm. In the upper arm, the cephalic vein will course along the anterior portion of the bicep. Its superficial course makes it an ideal target for ultrasound guidance. The next vessel to visualize is the basilic vein which runs along the medial edge of the upper arm. The basilic vein is an ideal target for USGIVs because it is typically deep enough that it cannot be cannulated via palpation and there is not an artery associated with it. As the basilic vein is traced proximally, it often becomes a larger caliber vessel. Ideally, try to cannulate the vessel as far distal, or close to the elbow, as is practical.

If the basilic vein is not available, the deep brachial veins are a possibility for USGIVs. The deep brachial veins are often paired vessels on either side of the brachial artery. They are also adjacent to major nerves of the arm. For these reasons, it is essential to have a good understanding of the anatomy and have perfected the technique before attempting to cannulate these vessels. Consequently, the deep brachial vein should be lower on the priority list of vessels to cannulate.  The deep brachial and basilic vessels will converge to form the axillary vessel as they are traced proximally towards the axilla.