Functional constipation is a clinical diagnosis based on history and physical exam. History should include information about the frequency and consistency of stools, associated issues, and the duration of symptoms. Parents will often describe stools that are small and hard “like little pebbles,” while others describe infrequent, large bowel movements that are “so big I can’t believe it came out of him.” A history of bright red blood in the stool associated with large, hard bowel movements may indicate rectal fissures from passing hard bowel movements. A history of additional symptoms, including weakness, abdominal pain, vomiting, and urinary symptoms, can suggest organic causes for constipation. Lower extremity weakness should raise concerns of a neurologic cause. Abdominal pain, vomiting, enuresis, and encopresis can accompany functional constipation but should prompt additional questions and close attention to the examination of the abdomen. The past medical history should include questions about neurologic abnormalities, surgeries, and any chronic conditions like hypothyroidism, Hirschsprung disease, or cystic fibrosis that may contribute to difficulty passing stool. Social and developmental history may suggest concerns about lead intoxication.

A thorough head-to-toe physical exam is necessary. General examination should include growth parameters and vitals. Exophthalmos, lid lag, and abnormalities on the thyroid exam may suggest hypothyroidism. The abdominal exam may reveal a palpable fecal mass, indicating fecal impaction. Look for abdominal distention as it could indicate prune belly syndrome, an abdominal mass, or other significant abnormality. Significant pain with palpation of the abdomen may require additional evaluation for appendicitis, ovarian torsion, or other acute abdominal processes. The back, especially the lumbar region, should be evaluated closely for midline defects, hair tufts, hemangiomas, dimples, or other abnormalities that could suggest underlying myelomeningocele. The anus should undergo an evaluation to assure it is patent and normally placed. A rectal exam, although not routinely indicated - may be helpful to confirm hard stool in the rectal vault, rule out presacral masses, and assess rectal tone. Abnormal strength, reflexes, sensation, or muscle mass of either or both lower extremities.