During head injury or following cranial surgeries, the dura may be opened or torn with or without injury to the arachnoid. In all these cases, air can get inside the cranial cavity.

**Mechanism Theories For the Development of Pneumocephalus**

Several theories exist for the etiology of pneumocephalus.

- Ball valve theory of Dandy: Unidirectional movement of air from the outside environment into the cranial cavity. This is the mechanism behind pneumocephalus following positive pressure ventilation.

- Inverted-soda-bottle effect of Horowitz and Lunsford: Excessive loss of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) due to drainage in a physiological way during Valsalva or via lumbar drain leads to low intracranial pressure (ICP) and trapping of air in the vacuum created inside the cranium.

- A sudden increase in the pressure in the air sinuses due to blowing the nose, coughing, or sneezing causes the air to be sucked into the brain through the defects in the skull base.

- The development of pneumocephalus during epidural injections can be due to a loss of resistance technique used to identify the epidural space.

- The entry of air through the meninges can be due to accidental injection, inadvertent dural puncture, or the differential pressures between the cranial cavity and atmosphere.

- The cause of pneumocephalus during anesthesia can be attributed to the use of nitrous oxide. The blood–gas partition coefficient of nitrous oxide is 34 times greater than that of nitrogen. This causes nitrous oxide to diffuse into the cranial cavity faster than nitrogen or air.

- Boyle's law states that if the temperature remains fixed in a confined space, the absolute pressure and volume are inversely proportional. Thus, when absolute pressure decreases inside the cranial cavity, the volume of air increases accordingly. This explains the expansion of pneumocephalus during flights.

The presence of air is a source of infection, which can lead to the development of meningitis. Also, it can cause seizures by irritating the cerebral cortex.