Niemann-Pick disease has negative repercussions for many organs, and with or without treatment, it has high morbidity and mortality. The condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a hepatologist or gastroenterologist, endocrinologist, neurologist, and genetic counselor. Also, family care, nursing support, and social support are an integral part of the management. A lead consultant should be in charge of patient care, and a nurse specialist, along with other specialists in the respective fields, should be involved to cover all the aspects of the disease. Patient education is crucial, and social worker involvement, including a geneticist, is essential. In some parts of the world, preventive strategies include prenatal screening, restrictions on issuing marriage licenses to two people with the same disease. The screening of children and pregnant women who visit clinicians is an effective strategy to limit the disease but is not cost-effective yet. The social worker should ensure that the caregivers and patients have adequate support and financial resources to continue with treatment. Nurses should educate patients on the importance of treatment compliance to avoid or halt serious complications and monitor treatment progress. Pharmacists may soon play a greater role as new drug products assist in gene therapy or enzyme replacement therapy that can theoretically cure the disease.

Active collaboration and discussion between interprofessional team members will lead to a better understanding of the progression and control of the disease. [Level 5]