The EPS is polysynaptic in nature. It is composed of several tracts and nuclei. The tracts include reticulospinal, vestibulospinal, rubrospinal, and tectospinal tracts.

**Reticulospinal Tract**

This tract transmits motor commands from the reticular formation. The medial (pontine) reticulospinal tract originates in the pontine reticular formation and projects down to the ventromedial spinal cord via the ipsilateral anterior funiculus, which contains alpha and gamma motor neurons of the extensor muscles. The ascending spinothalamic tracts also stimulate the medial reticulospinal tract. The lateral (medullary) reticulospinal tract ordinates in the medullary reticular formation and projects to motor neurons in the spinal cord via the bilateral lateral funiculus.

**Vestibulospinal Tract**

The medial vestibulospinal tract originates in the medial vestibular nuclei, or Schwalbe's nucleus, in the medulla and terminates in the limb motor neurons. They are responsible for innervating upper-body musculature, especially muscles of the neck and forelimbs. The lateral vestibulospinal tract originates in the lateral vestibular nuclei, or Deiter's nucleus of the pons, and ipsilaterally courses down to the Rexed's laminae VII and VIII. These laminae contain premotor interneurons and other alpha and gamma motor neurons that are responsible for innervating the extensor muscles that oppose gravity as well as inhibiting the flexor muscles. The vestibulospinal tract plays a crucial role in maintaining an erect posture.

**Rubrospinal tract**

The rubrospinal tract originates from the red nucleus of the midbrain tegmentum and crosses the midline in ventral tegmental decussation located in the caudal midbrain. The tract forms a contralateral tract in the dorsolateral part of the lateral funiculus and lies in the ventrolateral part of the spinal cord. The rubrospinal tract mainly transmits signals into the red nucleus from the motor cortex and cerebellum to the spinal cord and ventral horn lamina V, VI, and VII.

**Tectospinal Tract**

The tectospinal tract originates from the superior colliculus of the midbrain and receives stimulation from the retina and cortical visual association areas, courses ventromedial to the periaqueductal gray (PAG) matter, and terminates in the contralateral anterior gray horn lamina VI, VII, and VIII of cervical and upper thoracic segments of the spinal cord. It serves a critical function in the orientation of the head, neck, eyes, and upper extremities in response to sudden movement, loud noises, and bright lights.