The ABCA4 gene encodes for Rim Protein (RmP), which is a retinal adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette protein. The protein is present on the membrane of the discs in the outer segment of the photoreceptors (rods and cones). It participates in the visual cycle-related vitamin A metabolism. The light photons lead to isomerization of the 11-cis retinal to the all-trans retinal form. The all-trans-retinal form then enters the intradiscal space, where some of its molecules combine with a phospholipid (phosphatidylethanolamine, PE) normally present in the disc membranes to form a complex called N-retinylidene-PE (N-RPE).

The RmP protein breaks the N-RPE complex and transports it out of the intradiscal space. The absence of the RmP protein leads to the accumulation of the N-RPE complexes. The high levels of N-RPE lead to the formation of N-retinylidene-N-retinyl-PE (A2PE) by combining N-RPE and all-trans-retinal. A2PE is then hydrolyzed to form N-retinylidene-N-retinyl-ethanolamine (A2E). The A2E produced during these reactions leads to lipofuscin formation, accumulating in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells. The accumulation of lipofuscin leads to the formation of flecks. In vivo studies have shown that patients with STGD1 have 2-5 times the amount of lipofuscin compared to the age-matched controls.

Lipofuscin is resistant to lysosomal enzymatic degradation. High levels of A2E slow the phagocytic ability of the RPE cells, ultimately leading to RPE and photoreceptor cell death.

Multimodal imaging studies have suggested that the degeneration of the photoreceptors’ inner and outer segments leads to the formation of hyper-reflective debris on the apical surface of the RPE cells. These are seen clinically as flecks. These flecks cause gradual disruption of the interdigitation zone (IZ), the ellipsoid zones (EZ), the external limiting membrane (ELM), and, eventually, thinning of the outer nuclear layer (ONL).

Light microscopy studies have shown the presence of abnormal RPE cells and loss of photoreceptors and RPE cells in eyes with STGD1. In addition, the RPE cells are heterogeneous in size and contain numerous PAS-positive intracytoplasmic material, which has been determined to be lipofuscin.