Besides a gynecologist, an emergency physician, and primary care providers, nurses also play a vital role in the care of patients with PID. The major focus today is on patient education and preventing PID and sexually transmitted infections. Nurses should educate the patients about safe sex, the use of condoms,  and reducing the number of sexual partners. Teenagers and adolescents should be asked to delay sexual activity until 16 or older. The pharmacist who usually dispenses the medication should ask the female to bring in the partner, who also needs to be assessed and treated for a sexually transmitted infection; otherwise, the cycle of infection will continue. [Level 1] Only through an integrated approach with emphasis on public health can the burden of PID be lowered.

**Outcomes**

Patients with PID may develop chronic pain, an ectopic pregnancy, or infertility. About 25% will have chronic pelvic pain, usually due to adhesions. Impaired fertility affects 10-50% of females and is usually due to scarring and adhesions within the fallopian tubes. The rates of infertility usually increase with the number of infection episodes. The final problem is an ectopic pregnancy which may occur in 15-60% of women and is usually due to damage to the fallopian tubes. Some women may develop the Fitz Hugh Curtis Syndrome. Each year there are over 150,000 admissions related to PID. The complication rates in parts of Africa, Asia, and South America where health care is not readily accessible are very high. There are also reports that PID may be associated with a higher risk of stroke and ovarian cancer.