Relevant literature has shown that upwards of 10% of the adult population suffers from ”frequent” episodes of neck pain, described as at least three instances of pain in a year. While this number alone would constitute far-reaching prevalence, it may be a conservative estimate.  Other studies have found the prevalence of neck pain to be the fourth leading cause of global disability, with an annual prevalence rate of neck pain as high as 30%. As such, neck pain presents as a significant socioeconomic burden. It is often classified based on duration (acute, subacute, or chronic) or mechanistically (mechanical, neuropathic, or referred). Neck pain may also come about secondary to rheumatologic conditions.

Acute neck pain often arises from trauma or sports injury. Ensuring the stability of the cervical spine is paramount to prevent any further deleterious consequences. A wide range of pathology in the upper cervical spine can result, including fractures of the occipital condyle, the atlas, and the dens or atlas of C2. Other diagnoses include dislocations involving the craniocervical and atlantoaxial junctions. Likewise, in the subaxial cervical spine, there is a similarly wide variety of acute-injury pathology. Regardless of location, the specific characteristics of cervical spine injury dictate its management and treatment. Missed or incorrect diagnoses can have serious long-term costs, given the high neurological stakes. Thus, cross-table radiography and computed tomography (CT) scans are invaluable tools for assessing fractures or altered spatial relationships between vertebrae, whereas MRI is preferable in cases involving the potential spinal cord and soft tissue injury.

Subacute and chronic neck pain also share diverse etiology. Arthritis of cervical facet joints is a common cause of mechanical neck pain.  Meanwhile, nerve root compression, intervertebral disk herniation, and spinal stenosis are the most frequent originators of peripheral neuropathic neck pain. A comprehensive history and physical examination can assist in differentiating between neuropathic and mechanical neck pain. In some cases, patients may benefit from diagnostic imaging and further workup to generate a proper diagnosis and treatment plan.