**H&E staining**is the most common way to observe lung tissue. Samples are fixed and embedded in paraffin, then cut at 4 to 5 micrometers and mounted on glass slides. Sections are deparaffinized by two successive xylene baths, hydrated through decreasing alcohol concentrations, stained in Mayer’s hematoxylin solution, counterstained in 1% eosin Y solution, and finally observed under an optical microscope.

- Cytoplasm stains pink

- Nuclei stains blue

**Trichrome staining**can be useful to visualize collagen deposition in lung tissue. Samples are deparaffinized and rehydrated as the initial process of H&E staining described above. Then the tissue is stained in Weigert’s iron hematoxylin.

- Collagen appears blue

- Cytoplasm appears pink

- Nuclei are dark brown to black.

**Immunofluorescent staining**using antibodies specifically binding to their target proteins is a way to visualize the expression and localization of specific proteins of interest. In this method, the lungs are filled with optimum cutting temperature compound and frozen. They are cut at 5 to 10 micrometers, mounted on slides, and stored in a freezer at -70 degrees Celsius. Cells are covered with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 minutes to permeabilize them if staining for proteins intracellularly.

- Incubation with diluted primary antibodies for 60 minutes at room temperature

- Fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies are added for 60 minutes at room temperature.

- DAPI (4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) added to stain DNA blue

**Carbon staining**may help to visualize alveolar macrophages. Carbon is injected into the specimen and then engulfed by alveolar macrophages, which can be visible as a dark accumulation within the cytoplasm of the alveolar macrophages.