As with every invasive procedure, there are inherent complications that should be known and described to the patient before proceeding. Generic complications such as reactions to anesthesia, including stroke, heart attack, respiratory distress, and death, are always associated with sedating procedures and should be described during consent. Specific to colonoscopies, patients should be notified that there are risks of rectal tears, bleeding, pain, bloating, and infection. A more serious complication that can occur, although rare, includes intestinal perforation. The risk of perforation has been described at around 0.14% (or 1 in 1000 colonoscopies). Generally speaking, the risk of perforation with colonoscopy is particularly low, and the procedure relatively safe. This makes it an excellent screening modality for colon cancer with low risk, respectfully.

Another complication, although rare, that the clinician should be aware of includes post polypectomy electrocoagulation syndrome (PPES). When a polyp is removed, electrocautery is used to fulgurate any remaining cells that may have been left behind. While the risk of transmural burn is low, it can occur if the clinician does not lift the tissue away from the colonic wall while applying electrocautery. Patients may present with severe abdominal pain several hours following a colonoscopy in which polypectomy with electrocautery was performed. Labs may demonstrate a leukocytosis with left shift and a CT that shows distended bowel and inflammatory changes, but no signs of pneumoperitoneum. It is treated with bowel rest, supportive care, antibiotics, and resolves without any need for surgical intervention. To help reduce the chances of developing PPES, the clinician can lift the polyp away from the colonic wall during electrocautery. In addition, normal saline can be injected beneath the polyp to elevate the mucosa away from the colonic wall creating an insulating type layer.