G-cells are neuroendocrine cells responsible for the synthesis and secretion of gastrin. They are primarily found in the pyloric antrum but can also be found in the duodenum and the pancreas. They secrete gastrin when stimulated directly by vagal efferent neurons as well as GRP neurons. GRP neurons are stimulated by the presence of amino acids in the stomach, gastric distention, and vagal efferent stimulation. Gastrin secreted by these cells primarily acts on parietal cells and enterochromaffin-like cells (ECL cells) in the gastric pits of the stomach but also interacts with gastric smooth muscle cells, acinar cells of the pancreas, lymphocytes, PMNs, and endothelial cells. Hence, gastrin stimulates acid secretion directly via parietal cells and activates the ECL cells to secrete histamine, resulting in acid production.

Parietal cells, found in the pits of the gastric fundus and cardia, secrete hydrochloric acid into the lumen of the stomach via K/H ATPase on the apical (luminal) membrane. Gastrin binds cholecystokinin (CCK) B receptors on the basal membrane of parietal cells to induce expression of K/H ATPase. Increased expression and activity of the K/H ATPase results in increased secretion of hydrogen ions (gastric acid) into the stomach.

Enterochromaffin-like cells, found in the gastric pits of the fundus and cardia of the stomach, secrete histamine, which then binds H2 receptors on the neighboring parietal cells and further potentiates the secretion of gastric acid by parietal cells. Acinar cells, found in the pancreas, are responsible for the synthesis, storage, and secretion of pancreatic digestive enzymes. Gastrin binds CCK2 receptors on the acinar cells, inducing the secretion of the cell’s stored digestive enzymes.