Acetaminophen is responsible for an estimated 500 deaths and 50000 emergency department visits in the United States annually.

Normally, NAPQI is neutralized by glutathione to nontoxic metabolites. However, with excessive doses of acetaminophen, the normal phase II drug metabolism pathways become depleted, and the CYP450 pathway metabolizes a higher portion of the acetaminophen taken, resulting in high concentrations of NAPQI formation, and the limited glutathione stores can become depleted. Without glutathione, NAPQI concentrations build up, and NAPQI, as a reactive intermediate, can react with cellular macromolecules, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. This phenomenon can lead to centrilobular (Zone 3) hepatic injury and hepatocellular death. There can also be nephrotoxicity.

The only approved antidote for acetaminophen overdose and toxicity is N-acetylcysteine (NAC).

An important thing to remember is that most patients do not have symptoms in the first few hours of ingestion of toxic doses of acetaminophen and may only have abdominal pain and nausea as symptoms for the first 12 to 24 hours. These symptoms may dissipate between 24 and 72 hours, although AST/ALT concentrations may be abnormal. Patients who present more than 24 hours following ingestion of toxic doses of acetaminophen may have symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, jaundice, abdominal pain, and hypotension. These patients may require airway management, intravenous fluids, vasopressors, hemodialysis, or management of cerebral edema or other symptoms as they arise.