A chalazion usually presents as a painless swelling on the eyelid for weeks or months before the patient seeks medical treatment. Often a chalazion causes impaired vision or discomfort or becomes inflamed, painful, or infected. Frequently, the patient will have a history of previous similar lesions, as chalazia tend to recur in predisposed individuals.

Because chalazion is largely a clinical diagnosis, the chief complaint must be examined thoroughly to exclude other possible diagnoses, requiring a more involved workup. Typical history questions should cover the character of the lesion, the speed of onset, progression of the lesion, aggravating/alleviating factors, associated symptoms, and history of similar lesions. Lesions that recur in a particular location require workup to exclude carcinoma. Travel history is important to obtain as well, particularly patient visits to regions endemic for tuberculosis and leishmaniasis. Case reports have identified these as etiologies mistaken for chalazion.

Physical findings consistent with chalazion include a palpable, usually non-tender (though in acute inflammation there may be some associated tenderness), non-fluctuant, non-erythematous nodule on the eyelid. The chalazion would be expected to be less than 1 cm in size. It presents more often on the upper lid as a single lesion, though multiple lesions are possible. Chalazia tend to be deeper within the lid than hordeolum. Hordeolum are usually tender, superficial, and centered on an eyelash. The eyelid should be everted as part of the examination to evaluate for an internal chalazion. Visual acuity should be assessed. If there is a pain of the globe, fluorescein staining can evaluate for an associated corneal abrasion.