Over 85 to 90% of patients with an acute herniated disc experience relief of symptoms within 6 to 12 weeks without any treatments. Patients without radiculopathy notice an improvement in even less time. Due to the high prevalence of disc herniation in routine neuroimaging of asymptomatic individuals, the recommendation is to avoid ordering imaging studies during this period as the study results will not alter the management. However, further evaluation and imaging are warranted if there is a clinical suspicion of severe underlying pathology or neurological compromise. Imaging and laboratory tests are indicated in patients who exhibit red flag symptoms. In patients who are unresponsive to conservative treatment after two to three months, imaging is also recommended.

**Laboratory tests:**Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein are inflammatory markers, and they are requested if suspicious for a chronic inflammatory condition or infectious cause as the etiology. A complete blood count is useful when suspecting infection or malignancy.

**X-rays:**Lumbar X-ray films are the first-line imaging test performed in low back pain settings. The standard examination includes three views (AP, lateral, and oblique) to evaluate the overall alignment of the spine, detecting fractures, as well as degenerative or spondylotic changes. Lateral flexion and extension views are useful in assessing spinal instability. Narrowed intervertebral space, traction osteophytes, and compensatory scoliosis on X-ray are findings that usually suggest lumbar disc herniation. If an acute fracture is detected, further investigation with computed tomographic (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is required.

**CT:**This is the most sensitive imaging modality to examine the bony structures of the spine. CT imaging allows for the evaluation of calcified herniated discs or any pathological process that may result in bone loss or destruction. It is deficient for the visualization of nerve roots, making it unsuitable in the diagnoses of radiculopathy. CT myelography is the imaging modality of choice to visualize herniated discs in patients with contraindications for an MRI. However, due to its invasiveness, the assistance of a trained radiologist is required. Myelography is associated with risks like post-spinal headache, meningeal infection, and radiation exposure. Recent advances with a multidetector CT scan have made the diagnostic level of it nearly equal to the MRI.

**MRI:**Is the gold standard study for confirming a suspected LDH. With a diagnostic accuracy of 97%, it is the most sensitive study to visualize a herniated disc due to its significant ability in soft tissue visualization. MRI also has higher inter-observer reliability than other imaging modalities. It suggests disc herniation when it shows an increased T2-weighted signal at the posterior 10% of the disc. Degenerative disc diseases have shown a correlation with Modic type 1 changes.