The treatment approach in secondary polycythemia depends on the etiology involved. The general approach is the correction of the precipitating factors that will, in turn, lead to the correction of the hematologic abnormality.

Patients who smoke should be advised to quit and be offered the appropriate supportive, psychological, and pharmacological intervention.

The prescription of diuretics should be reviewed as they are associated with a contraction in the plasma volume. These should be discontinued and replaced with an appropriate alternative or dose adjusted if possible. The use of androgens is discouraged, and they should be either discontinued or the dosage should be decreased. These patients have a higher than normal requirement for iron in order to produce red cells that are normocytic and normochromic and can carry out oxygen delivery as required. Iron should be replaced in order to avoid any iron-deficient state that leads to the production of microcytic hypochromic red blood cells that are associated with a hyperviscosity state.

Low flow oxygen therapy can correct hypoxia and hence the secondary polycythemia, especially in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The use of oxygen should be judicious and closely monitored in accordance with the pulse oximetry in order to avoid any oxygen toxicity and respiratory depression in COPD patients.

For patients with obesity hypoventilation syndrome, weight loss is a corrective measure that can be achieved through lifestyle modifications, pharmacological therapy, and bariatric surgery.

Surgical removal of erythropoietin producing tumors is therapeutic in patients with this etiology. Treating benign renal lesions is also curative. In some patients with secondary polycythemia, phlebotomy can be performed for temporary relief as well.

The management approach of secondary polycythemia also varies with the development of complications. Low-dose aspirin may be useful in preventing thromboembolic episodes.

In contrast to patients with secondary polycythemia due to physiologically appropriate erythrocytosis who benefit from the elevated red cell mass, patients with physiologically inappropriate erythrocytosis do not. In these patients, phlebotomy is therapeutic with goals to maintain hematocrit values of 42% to 46%. Phlebotomy should be performed in any patient with secondary polycythemia prior to any elective surgery. In patients with physiologically appropriate erythrocytosis, as the increased red cell mass is a compensatory mechanism of the body, phlebotomy should not be performed in order to maintain proper tissue oxygenation. In these patients, the therapeutic goal is the fine balance between adequate tissue oxygenation and hyperviscosity.

The underlying diseases and individual responses are the determining factors for the therapeutic goal for the hematocrit. For a general idea, the goal should be to maintain hematocrit values of less than 60%.

- In patients with COPD, phlebotomy has shown a reduction in pulmonary arterial resistance and arteriovenous oxygen content difference, as well as an improved right ventricular function and hemodynamic response to exertion. These improvements are notable with hematocrits between 50% to 55 %.

- The goal hematocrit should be carefully tailored to the patients underlying etiology and on a case-to-case basis. Isovolumic phlebotomy has the advantage of preventing acute hemodynamic effects due to a reduction in blood volume.

- In patients with cyanotic heart disease, isovolumetric venesections have been recommended to be helpful in reducing viscosity. However, it should be kept in mind that excessive venesections are associated with iron deficiency.

- In patients diagnosed with idiopathic erythrocytosis, if the hematocrit is above 54%, then reduced to a target of 50% may be considered. For patients with comorbid conditions predisposing to a thrombotic risk and ischemia, a lower target of 45% may also be considered if already greater than 54%. In this specific group of patients, cytoreductive therapy is contraindicated.

- Avoiding a secondary factor that predisposes to dehydration and usage of ACE inhibitors is recommended in patients with erythrocytosis secondary to post-renal transplant. The target hematocrit for this subset of patients is less than 45%.

**Guidelines for the Management of Secondary Polycythemia**

- Determination of the underlying etiology, if possible

- Recognizing and eliminating all aggravating factors

- Avoiding severe iron deficiency

- Applying specific measures in accordance with the etiology and therapeutic goal

- Considering phlebotomy for hematocrit maintenance

- Avoiding any myelosuppressive therapy

**Factors to Consider Before Phlebotomy**

- Physiologically appropriate or inappropriate

- Adverse effects of increased red cell mass

- Presence of symptoms including dizziness, dyspnea, angina

- Previous thrombotic episodes