**Radiation Alone**

In the context of patients with chest wall recurrence and no prior radiation therapy, NCCN guidelines recommend definitive doses of chest wall and nodal irradiation. Adjuvant radiation has been shown to improve outcomes in multiple trials described in Table 1, where overall survival rates ranging from 57% to 86% have been reported. In Halverson’s study of 224 previously non-irradiated patients with isolated local-regional recurrence, improved outcomes were associated with treatment with larger radiation fields (entire chest wall), higher doses (greater than or equal to 6000 Gy), isolated recurrences, and smaller recurrent tumor size (less than 3 cm). The addition of prophylactic supraclavicular fossa radiation also improved supraclavicular failure rates (16% versus 6%, p < 0.05)

**Radiation and Chemotherapy**

There are at least 6 small prospective trials with 29 to 44 patients, that reported that neoadjuvant or concurrent chemotherapy and radiation in either the locally advanced setting or recurrent setting, can result in a 16% to 47% complete pathologic response rate, as described in Table 2. Additionally, there is an ongoing phase II trial studying the impact of pembrolizumab, an anti-PD (Programmed Cell Death)-1 antibody, in combination with carboplatin compared to carboplatin alone for unresectable chest wall disease (NCT03393858).

**Radiation with Hyperthermia**

The addition of hyperthermia to radiation therapy has been shown to achieve complete response rates ranging from 55% to 66%, much higher than the 16% to 47% seen with chemoRT, as shown in Table 3. In breast cancer patients who develop unresectable and chemorefractory breast or chest wall recurrences, the combination of radiation and hyperthermia may offer the most robust local response, which may also translate to improved overall survival. Hyperthermia combined with radiation permits the advantage of lower radiation doses due to its radiosensitizing properties

In a meta-analysis of 5 randomized control trials (1988 through 1991), 306 patients with unresectable advanced primary or recurrent breast cancer received either RT alone versus RT and hyperthermia and achieved a complete response rate of 41% versus 59%, respectively. The greatest benefit was observed in patients with recurrent lesions in previously irradiated areas, where the dose of radiation was lowered due to prior radiation treatment and concern of toxicity to nearby normal tissues, thus showing that the synergy of hyperthermia helped the lower doses of radiation reach a higher therapeutic ratio leading to local control. Even more, the addition of hyperthermia achieved a more prolonged complete response rate versus radiation alone

A more recent randomized trial of 109 patients all treated with chemotherapy, plus RT and HT or RT alone, was able to achieve a 66% CR rate in the dual therapy group versus only 42% for RT alone. Local control was also more durable with the addition of HT (48% versus 25% at death and last follow up) . Similar to seen in the Vernon study, this trial also found that previously irradiated patients benefited the most from the addition of hyperthermia: 23.5% in the no-HT arm versus 68.2% in the HT arm.

Wahl and colleagues analyzed clinical outcomes in 81 patients who underwent re-irradiation to the breast or chest wall. The median dose of the first course 60 Gy and 48 Gy for the second course, a total dose of 106 Gy (range 74.4 to 137.5 Gy). Patients additionally received concurrent hyperthermia, and/or chemotherapy. The authors found an overall complete response rate of 57% (67% with concurrent hyperthermia, and 39% without), a 1-year disease free survival of 53% for gross disease versus 100% without gross disease (P<0.001). Four patients developed late grade 3 or 4 toxicities, and no treatment related deaths occurred

In another study by Muller et al on 44 patients with recurrent breast cancer, repeat macroscopically complete resection and re-irradiation to a total median dose of 54 Gy, plus hyperthermia (69% of patients), resulted in an estimated 5 year overall survival of 59%, a 5 year local control rate of 62% and no higher late toxicity greater than grade 3 was observed

**Hyperthermia, Chemotherapy, and Radiation (Triple Therapy)**

Small, retrospective, and phase I/II studies have shown the beneficial outcomes of this triple therapy with local complete response rates ranging from 44% to 80%, as shown in **Table 4**. Acute toxicities associated with triple therapy have been reported as persistent ulceration seen in patients with prior radiation, blisters, second and third-degree burns, infection, and as expected with chemotherapy, bone marrow toxicity

Lee et al. performed a prospective study from 1977 to 1990, on 151 patients with 196 subcutaneous/superficial lesions (179 measurable, 17 microscopic). The patients were treated with superficial 915-MHz microwave hyperthermia and irradiation. In patients without prior radiation, the radiation field encompassed the ipsilateral chest wall and supraclavicular area. Elective areas were treated to 46 to 50 Gy, followed by a boost to areas of gross disease, giving a total dose of 60 to 70 Gy. For previously radiated patients, the investigators extended the fields where normal tissue tolerance permitted, with a margin of 2 to 3 cm around all gross tumors, to a minimum dose of 30 to 40 Gy. The hyperthermia was delivered immediately after radiation, once or twice a week, separated by at least 72 hours, to a tumor temperature of at least 43 C. At the time of maximum tumor regression, there was a 63% CR rate, 19% PR rate, and 16% stable disease. There was a 50% LC rate at last follow up (median follow up 11 months), and 2 and 3 year LC control rates of 42% and 33%, respectively

Vujoskovic et al. evaluated the efficacy of neoadjuvant liposomal doxorubicin (30 to 75 mg/m), paclitaxel (100 to 175 mg/m), and hyperthermia, followed by resection and radiation therapy and then 8 cycles of CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil) chemotherapy, in 47 patients with stage IIB-III locally advanced breast cancer. The authors found a combined (partial plus complete) clinical response of 72% and pathological response of 60% (4 patients achieved a pathologically complete response) 4-year DFS and OS were 63% and 75%, respectively

**Hyperthermia and Immunotherapy**

There is growing interest in the use of hyperthermia as an adjunct to immunotherapy in cancer treatment. Tumor cell release of heat shock proteins in response to hyperthermia allows the proteins to be endocytosed by dendritic cells, increasing cell surface expression of MHC class II molecules, and augmenting dendritic cell priming against those tumor antigens. Tumors treated with hyperthermia have been shown to exhibit improved dendritic cell priming and enhancement of systemic immunity to tumor cells. In one study by Takeda et al., the addition of hyperthermia to immunotherapy increased clinical benefit (CR, PR, and stable disease for more than 6 months) and the effective rate of immunotherapy from 7.7% to 26.0%