Postpartum “blues,” though not formally recognized as a diagnosis by the DSM-5, is a phenomenon that is extremely prevalent in the immediate time period after delivery. As postpartum blues are, by definition, mild, transient, and self-limited, they do not cause significant distress or disability in an individual’s life. However, the need for prompt identification and intervention, namely the access to social support systems and other mental health resources like counseling, is underscored by the significant risk of developing postpartum depression or psychosis in those with postpartum blues.

As with most mental health disorders, the primary care setting is usually the predominant location in which these symptoms are brought to healthcare providers' attention. Therefore, primary care providers, including obstetricians, must be knowledgeable in the symptoms of postpartum blues and adept in its diagnosis and treatment. Obstetric nurses should watch for signs and symptoms of the disorder and provide patient education. If the patient requires antidepressant therapy, a pharmacist consult is to verify agent selection, appropriate dosing, and medication reconciliation to preclude drug-drug interactions. Both nursing and pharmacy need to report any concerns to the prescriber/treating clinician. Employing these interprofessional strategies will optimize patient outcomes. [Level 5]

It is also of extreme importance that individuals diagnosed with postpartum blues are screened for suicidal ideation, paranoia, para- or pre-psychotic thoughts, or homicidal ideation towards the infant.

Though all mental health diagnoses are most effectively managed through a comprehensive and inter-disciplinary model, peripartum mood disorders are naturally predisposed to this modality of management. According to a review article published in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, a combination of various hormonal, biologic, and psychologic factors are responsible for many perinatal and postnatal complications, including preterm delivery, low birth weight in the infant, and mood disorders. Therefore, an interprofessional process that allows healthcare providers to collaborate on mitigating these interrelated risk factors would be most effective in reducing the rates of these outcomes.