# Introduction

The brain receives vascular supply from a network of arteries that anastomose to form the circle of Willis. Because the brain has a constant high metabolic demand and no energy supply of its own, it requires a significant blood supply, consuming 15% of total cardiac output, and any blockage of blood flow leads to severe damage and a host of neurological pathologies.

The brain is supplied by the internal carotid arteries (ICA), which branch from the common carotid arteries, and the vertebral arteries, which branch from the subclavian. The ICA gives rise to the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and the middle cerebral artery (MCA). The two vertebral arteries unite to form the basilar artery, terminating in the two posterior cerebral arteries (PCA). The circle of Willis is the combination of these anterior and posterior divisions.

# Structure and Function

The internal carotid arteries first penetrate the temporal bone through the carotid canal before giving off branches supplying the eyes via the ophthalmic artery and its daughter central retinal artery.

There are several small branches of the ACA that branch at or near its junction with the ACoA. These include the recurrent artery of Heubner (RAH), the orbitofrontal artery, and the frontopolar artery. Identification of these arteries is essential, particularly the RAH, as their location places them at risk of injury in surgery of aneurysms and tumors.

The vertebral arteries arise from the corresponding subclavian arteries and course via the transverse foramina of the cervical spine into the foramen magnum.

Occlusion of each arterial territory causes damage to different functional areas of the brain. As a result, each branch has a unique constellation of symptoms that may present when affected.

# Embryology

The proximal ICA has its origin from the third aortic arch, and the distal portions come from the dorsal aorta. At roughly 28 to 30 days, the ICA has fully divided into cranial and caudal segments. The cranial segment includes the primitive olfactory artery (POA) that eventually forms the anterior choroidal and MCA. Together with the median artery of the corpus callosum (MACC), the POA involutes as part of the normal development of the ACA. Failure of the MACC to regress can lead to a variant called azygos ACA, described below. The MCA develops later, beginning around 32 to 40 days, and develops together with the cerebral hemispheres. There are initially numerous anastomoses between the carotid and vertebrobasilar systems, most of which regress. Occasionally, the hypoglossal artery or the trigeminal artery may persist into adulthood. The PCA develops from the caudal segments of the ICA; it is initially a continuation of the posterior communicating artery, which regresses in most individuals.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Vasa vasorum, the microscopic vessel networks supplying large blood vessels, are rarely found in the brain and, when present, are usually related to intracranial cardiovascular pathologies such as atherosclerosis. Rather than through vasa vasorum, intracranial vessels likely get their blood supplied by simple diffusion with the CSF.

The brain does not have a lymphatic system as peripheral tissues do; instead, it has a similar system by which cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) enters the brain parenchyma, known as the glymphatic system. CSF initially travels through the pial arteries into the perivascular Virchow-Robin space, where it enters brain cells via aquaporin channels found on astrocytes. Eventually, it exits into lymphatics running along the spinal and cranial nerves, as well as through the arachnoid granulations.

# Physiologic Variants

The ACA is divided into five segments, denoted A1 through A5. Its distal part runs along the corpus callosum and is sometimes called the pericallosal artery. The largest branch of this pericallosal segment is the callosomarginal artery, which can be present in more than half of individuals. Most branches of the ACA serving the cortex branch either from the callosomarginal artery or, if it is not present, directly from the pericallosal artery. There are numerous additional variants, of which significant examples are the azygos ACA, in which the A2 segments of the two ACAs fuse before dividing again; bihemispheric, in which the A2 segment of one ACA diminishes and the other divides to feed both hemispheres; and medial ACA, in which a third ACA appears and feeds the distal territories.

The MCA is divided into four parts, denoted M1, from the ICA bifurcation, through M4, to the lateral cerebral cortex. Corresponding with their relative locations, they are alternatively called the sphenoidal, insular, opercular, and cortical segments, respectively.

The PCA divides into four sections, P1, P2A (anterior) and P (posterior), P3, and P4. The anastomosis with the posterior communicating artery separates P1 and P2.

# Surgical Considerations

As above, it is vital to know cerebral branches and variants during surgery for intracranial aneurysms and neoplasms. For example, it is important to avoid occlusion of the fetal PCA, as it provides much of the posterior circulation, during the treatment of aneurysms of the posterior communicating artery.

# Clinical Significance

Occlusion of the cerebral arteries can lead to stroke, leading to significant morbidity and mortality. Understanding of cerebral arterial anatomy is also significant in the diagnosis and management of intracranial aneurysms and tumors.

Ischemic occlusion of branches of the ICA results in anterior circulation strokes. Occlusion of cortical (pial) branches of the anterior circulation results in cortical stroke syndromes with clinical findings of aphasia, apraxia, cortical sensory impairment such as neglect or agraphesthesia, and contralateral hemiparesis. Occlusion of deep perforating branches, most commonly the lenticulostriate arteries, results in lacunar infarcts with the most common type of pure motor hemiparesis. Cortical infarction of the posterior cerebral artery will result in homonymous hemianopia. Occlusion of the perforators from the PCA (thalamic perforators) may result in the lacunar syndrome of pure sensory hemianesthesia.

The ophthalmic artery arises from the ICA. A transient ischemic attack presenting with transient monocular blindness indicates a transient ischemic attack (TIA) in the ipsilateral ICA territory. The imaging modality of choice will be a carotid duplex ultrasound or computed tomogram (CT) angiogram.

The anterior circulation supplies 80% of the brain and posterior circulation 20% of the brain. Logically, 80% of strokes occur in the anterior circulation and 20% in the posterior circulation.

Moyamoya disease is an occlusive condition resulting from blockage of the terminal ICA bilaterally and the development of abnormal collateral vessels in the region of the basal ganglia and internal capsule. These tiny collaterals give rise to the radiological appearance of a "puff of smoke," which is the literal meaning of Moyamoya in Japanese. It is a major cause of both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes in childhood and early adulthood and is often treated with surgical bypass to revascularize the MCA distribution.