An acute and subacute cough require no diagnostic studies and should be treated symptomatically unless there is suspicion of an insidious pathology. A chest x-ray may be appropriate if a cough is determined to be severe or if the patient appears extremely ill.

A chronic cough may require diagnostic measures to include a chest x-ray and complete pulmonary function testing. Patients without specific clues on history and physical examination who have a normal chest x-ray and spirometry may require referral to a pulmonologist for more intense evaluation. Often, a single etiology cannot be elucidated, and chronic cough is the result of a spectrum of multiple disease processes. Bronchoscopy with direct visualization of vocal cords, trachea, and other airways may be required to rule out any vocal cord mass or lesion and or endotracheal and or endobronchial mass. Accordingly, one may require biopsy and or bronchoalveolar lavage to obtain samples for microbiological and cytological analysis. An echocardiogram may be indicated for cardiac function testing. CT scan of the chest may be indicated for anatomical analysis. Gastroesophageal studies may be indicated including speech and swallow evaluations, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, or pH-probe monitoring of the stomach may be indicated for aspiration and gastroesophageal reflux analysis. If a cough is mostly in the night and patient has signs and symptoms suggestive of obstructive sleep apnea then one may order a sleep study to confirm the diagnosis and treat sleep apnea accordingly.

Criteria for diagnosis of a neurogenic cough are the almost constant presence of cough during the day, non-productive cough, unilateral or bilateral vocal fold paresis on the laryngeal exam, laryngeal electromyographic confirmation of paresis, and complete resolution of symptoms with appropriate treatment.