Microdiscectomy is a safe and effective treatment modality for disc herniations. The landmark study of the Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial used a large, multicenter, prospective, randomized controlled trial to compare open discectomy with nonoperative management. It has demonstrated that while both treatment groups did achieve good clinical outcomes, patients who underwent discectomy had greater improvement than those who had nonoperative management.

In a survey study among spine surgeons for surgical management of symptomatic LDH:

- 63% preferred MLD

- 53% percent preferred early mobilization (first postoperative day).

- 59% preferred to follow up with patients clinically.

**Comparative study between SD, MLD, MED, and fully endoscopic discectomy (FE):**

**A comparison between SD and MLD-**A meta-analysis found no benefit.

**Comparison between SD and MED-**Mean hospital stay, bleeding, and time to return to work were lower in MED, but long-term pain results were equivalent.

**Comparison between MLD and FE-**No significant difference in clinical results in terms of pain, complications, or recurrence. Endoscopy and MED only reduced hospital stay and intraoperative bleeding.

**In a meta-analysis from 1997 to 2020**,**SD, MLD, MED, and FE**were associated with:

- **Recurrence**in 4.1%, 5.1%, 3.9% and 3.5%;

- **Re-operations**in 5.2%, 7.5%, 4.9% and 4%;

- **Wound complications**in 3.5%, 3.5%, 1.2% and 2%;

- **Durotomy**in 6.6%, 2.3%, 4.4% and 1.1% ;

- **Neurological complications**in 1.8%, 2.8%, 4.5% and 4.9% respectively; and

- **Nerve root injury**in 0.3% for MLD, 0.8% for MED, and 1.2% for FE.