Complications increases with the duration and intensity of exposure. Following complications occur in patients having exposure to asbestos:

**Respiratory Failure**

Asbestosis is a restrictive lung disease characterized by the restricted filling of the lung. Total lung capacity and forced vital capacity reduce significantly. Patients complain of progressive dyspnea on exertion and cough. Deterioration of diffusing capacity and oxygenation is common. Pleural fibrosis prevents the expansion of the lung. Carbon dioxide retention is another hazard that leads to respiratory acidosis.

**Malignancy**

Patients with asbestosis have a high risk of developing pleural malignancy. Patients who have low exposure to asbestos fibers have sequelae of asbestosis followed by malignancy, but those with intermediate or high-intensity exposure have high chances of lung cancer even in the absence of asbestosis. Lung cancer has more propensity to develop when the smoker is exposed to asbestos due to the additive effect of asbestos and cigarette smoke. Studies show that adenocarcinoma (primary bronchogenic carcinoma) is the major type of cancer that accounts for about 45%, followed by squamous cell carcinoma in about 42% of cases, and 13% is undifferentiated. Unlike fibrosis, the majority of tumors are present in the upper lobes (69%) and only 13% in the lower lobes.

**Heart and Other Organs**

It was found that heart weight is increased due to hypertrophy of right ventricle pumping against high pulmonary vascular resistance. More commonly, left auricle hypertrophy has been appreciated. Pulmonary and tricuspid valves are generally normal, but the mitral valve is fibrosed and fused with thickening chordae tendineae. Advanced asbestosis causes right heart failure leading to cor pulmonale. The liver is congested in the centrilobular pattern due to the right-sided damming of blood.

**Cancers of Other Organs**

Cohort's study has unveiled that asbestosis is related to cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, ovaries, adrenals, larynx, and kidney. Gastrointestinal tract cancer is mainly due to exposure to asbestos through asbestos-lined cement water pipes.