# Introduction

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a powerful qualitative and quantitative analytical technique used to identify and quantify a wide range of clinically relevant analytes.

Most mass spectrometry data are presented in units of the mass-to-charge ratio, or m/z, where m is the molecular weight of the ion (in daltons) and z is the number of charges present on the measured molecule.

Sample preparation is critical to successful MS, particularly when dealing with complex matrices, such as are commonly encountered in clinical chemistry. This typically involves one or more of the following steps: (1) protein precipitation followed by centrifugation or filtration, (2) solid-phase extraction, (3) liquid-liquid extraction, (4) affinity enrichment, or (5) derivatization.

Mass spectrometers convert molecules into ions which are then manipulated by electric and magnetic fields.

- **Ion source**: a sample is put into the mass spectrometer, which is then ionized by the apparatus.

- **Mass analyzer**: ions are sorted in the device based on their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z).

- **Detector**: ions are measured and displayed on the mass spectrum chart.

Atoms and molecules must first be ionized before they can be accelerated through the mass spectrometer and detected.

A chart will be generated to analyze the mass spectrometer's results. The mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) is on the "x-axis," while the relative intensity is on the "y-axis."

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Prior to using the mass spectrometer, a sample must be prepared for it to be ionized. Thus, samples are either in the liquid or gaseous phase by utilizing chromatography techniques. The two types of chromatography procedures that are used to prepare the sample are gas chromatography and liquid chromatography.

**Gas Chromatography**

Gas chromatography separates components of a mixture of gases and filters the passage of these molecules based on physical characteristics like shape, size, molecular weight, and boiling point. A sample is diluted and vaporized in the chromatograph, where it is separated. After separation, the gases enter the mass spectrometer for analysis. Notably, a gas chromatography sample must be volatile, meaning it must enter the gas phase so it does not break down while in the mass spectrometer apparatus.

**Liquid Chromatography**

Liquid chromatography separates samples based on interactions with the mobile and stationary phases. This can be based on polarities, meaning that if a component of the specimen has a different polarity compared to the mobile phase, it will migrate down the chromatograph column faster. The sample is separated into bands into individual components that can be further analyzed in mass spectrometry.

Other techniques used for sample preparation include electrospray ionization, which uses high voltages to separate out components, and fast atom bombardment, which uses a beam to generate ions from a solid phase.

The types of samples that can be analyzed within mass spectrometry include proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and fatty acids, to name a few.

# Testing Procedures

In mass spectrometry, the following components are used to test the sample for analysis.

**Ionization**

During ionization, the atoms are ionized by removing an electron to give off a positive ion known as a cation. Mass spectrometers only work with positive ions. Cations are formed regardless of the present state of the atoms. For example, this is true even if there is initially a negative ion in the sample, such as fluoride, or an element that does not form ions, such as neon.

The most common form of ionization used in GC/MS is electron ionization (EI). This method requires a source of electrons in the form of a filament to which an electric potential is applied, typically at 70 eV.

Unlike electron ionization (EI) in GC/MS, most LC/MS ionization techniques are conducted at atmospheric pressure. Electrospray ionization (ESI) and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) are “soft” ionization techniques that leave the molecular ion largely intact in the source.

Electrospray ionization uses a combination of voltage, heat, and air to produce successively smaller droplets from the liquid, eluting off a chromatographic column.

Atmospheric pressure chemical ionization produces ions by using a combination of heat to completely vaporize the sample and plasma produced by an electrical discharge, commonly referred to as a corona discharge.

**Acceleration**

All ions will undergo acceleration to have the same amount of kinetic energy. Cations will pass through slits in the mass spectrometer apparatus and accelerate into the ion beam. This allows the mass analyzer to start separating the ions based on the mass-to-charge ratio.

**Deflection**

A magnetic field will deflect cations based on their mass and charge. Mass and deflection are inversely proportional, while charge and deflection are directly proportional. Therefore, if an ion is of lesser mass, it will get deflected more in the apparatus. If an ion has a greater positive charge compared to its counterparts, then it will get deflected more, as well.

Thus, the deflection principles will allow the mass-to-charge ratio to be determined by the apparatus. The mass-to-charge ratio is denoted by m/z. If an ion has a mass of 120 and a charge of 3+, the ratio would be 40. Of note, it is important to remember that most ions that pass through the mass spectrometer have a charge of 1+, so almost all the ions will have a mass (or molecular weight) equivalent to the m/z value.

**Detection**

A detector in the mass spectrometer apparatus will quantify the ions and remove certain ones. Positive ions are detected by the apparatus, while neutral ions will be removed by the vacuum.

**Vacuum**

Mass spectrometers operate at low pressure, which creates a vacuum effect as there is less probability that ions will collide with one another in the apparatus. This then allows for the proper separation of cations with the neutral ions as the vacuum extracts the neutral molecules.

# Interfering Factors

The main interference factors that can arise with mass spectrometry occur during sample preparation and measuring separated ions in the spectrometer. Interference can occur due to inaccurate sample handling when acquiring from patients or improper quality control.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

Mass spectrometry produces results for the mass-to-charge ratio of ions in a compound.

It is important to analyze the graph to deduce the structural quality of the compound based on the mass spectrometer. The graph has three main components and an additional component depending on the isotopes present in the sample, which are relevant in figuring out the structure:

- Molecular Ion Peak (or Parent Peak): This is the second-highest peak that corresponds directly to the compound in question. The m/z ratio directly correlates to the molecular weight. For example, if hexane is the compound, then the m/z ratio is 86 since that is the molecular weight.

- Base Peak: This is the ion with the highest relative abundance in the compound out of all the ions in the given sample. The relative intensity of this ion is set to 100%, and all other ion peaks are set relative to this value.

- M+1 Peak: This is a smaller peak that directly corresponds to an isotope in the sample. If the molecular weight of the specimen is 96 g/mol, the m/z ratio is 96. Thus, the m+1 peak is at an m/z of 97. It might be confusing how it is possible for an ion to have a mass greater than the compound in question, but this is because there are many isotopes of elements, such as carbon and hydrogen, which can result in an m+1 peak.

- M+2 Peak: This is another small peak similar to the m+1 peak. Certain elements, such as chlorine and oxygen, have multiple isotopes, which is why these elements in a given compound can result in an m+2 peak.

# Clinical Significance

Mass spectrometry is applicable across diverse fields, including forensic toxicology, metabolomics, proteomics, pharma/biopharma, and clinical research. Specific applications of mass spectrometry include drug testing and discovery, food contamination detection, pesticide residue analysis, isotope ratio determination, protein identification, and carbon dating.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in the Diagnosis of Disease**

Mass spectrometers are primarily used in clinical settings to diagnose diseases due to biomarkers. Biomarkers are utilized in diagnoses, prognoses, and treatment.

Mass spectrometers can measure biomarkers, ranging in size from small molecules to large macromolecules.

To diagnose disease, mass spectrometers focus on analyzing a sample and its biomarker profile. Of note, two critical biomarkers are proteins and lipids.

If the biomarker is a protein, we can use the principles of proteomics and apply them to mass spectrometry.

If the biomarker is a lipid, we can use the principles of lipidomics to generate a clinical profile for the patient using mass spectrometry, as well.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in COVID-19**

During the peak of the coronavirus pandemic, many countries were hindered by inadequate testing due to supply chain shortages and inconsistencies in mass-produced testing kits. Clinical laboratories thus created a method to use mass spectrometry. Nasal swab samples of patients were applied to mass spectrometers, and the pattern generated by the spectrum was used to categorize patients if they were COVID-19 positive or COVID-19 negative.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in Pharmaceuticals**

Mass spectrometry is relevant in analyzing pharmaceutical drugs. The ionization that is performed in the apparatus helps differentiate the molecules that create the drugs. This is essential because it enables faster and more accurate screenings in the clinical analysis of patient samples.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in the Analysis of Glycans**

Oligosaccharides are molecules formed by the association of several monosaccharides linked through glycosidic bonds. Determining the complete structure of oligosaccharides is more complex than that of proteins or oligonucleotides. It involves the determination of additional components as a consequence of the isomeric nature of monosaccharides and their capacity to form linear or branched oligosaccharides.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in the Analysis of Oligonucleotides**

Oligonucleotides (DNA or RNA) are linear polymers of nucleotides. These are composed of a nitrogenous base, a ribose sugar, and a phosphate group.

**Applications of Mass spectrometry in Environmental Analysis**

Drinking water testing, pesticide screening and quantitation, soil contamination assessment, carbon dioxide, and pollution monitoring, and trace elemental analysis of heavy metals leaching.

**Applications of Mass Spectrometry in Forensic Analysis**

Analysis of trace evidence (e.g., fibers in carpet, polymers in paint), arson investigation (e.g., fire accelerant), confirmation of drug abuse, and identification of explosive residues (bombing investigation).

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

When in the lab, it is important to use caution during the process of sample preparation before placing the compound in the mass spectrometer for analysis. For example, using the proper measuring tools for accuracy during chromatography is essential.

Operating the mass spectrometer requires safety to be taken into consideration. The mass spectrometer apparatus can have high temperatures, which can result in burns. Thus, it is important not to touch any part of the apparatus while the spectral data is generated. Additionally, ionization occurs within the device, so it is essential to be cautious when running a mass spectrometer. Lastly, the samples placed in the spectrometer could be hazardous upon exposure to the skin or inhalation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional communication is required when using mass spectrometers. For example, if a patient has ingested a certain unknown compound and presents it to the emergency department, lab technicians and pathologists can take the patient's sample and acquire results for the components present in the compound. This allows for support from individuals in laboratory settings to healthcare workers, such as nurses and other physicians, who may be present in the hospital or clinic settings. Physicians in the emergency room can contribute to the interprofessional environment by discussing the patient's history and physical examination outcomes to help further narrow down the compounds in the patient's sample.