HIV prevention and treatment are the responsibility of an integrated, interprofessional health team comprised of primary care physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, specialty care physicians, nurses, office staff, pharmacists, and laboratory technicians. HIV prevention begins with health education on safer sex practices from the patient’s primary care physician. The primary care providers need to be non-judgmental and well-versed in taking a detailed sexual history using open-ended questions, as well as asking all aspects of the social history, including alcohol and drug use.

For high-risk individuals, the benefits of protection from daily pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) can be discussed with patients. The daily PrEP recommended is a combination once-daily pill with emtricitabine and tenofovir. The patient should receive proper education from the primary providers, nurses, and pharmacists before prescribing and using PrEP. These guidelines include using PrEP consistently for one week before sexual activity to allow for adequate drug levels to build in rectal, penile, and vaginal tissue. Patients should also receive reminders to continue PrEP for one week after the last sexual encounter if wanting to discontinue this medication.

Every patient should receive an HIV test at least once in their lives, with specific populations needing more frequent testing. Men having sex with men, transgender women, and intravenous drug users should have HIV testing at least one time per year and as frequently as every three months. Patients who present with sexually transmitted infections and HCV should be screened for HIV more often.

Finally, it is the responsibility of health care providers to advertise the short-term use of drugs like emtricitabine in combination with other HIV medications as post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP).