ADH is the primary hormone responsible for tonicity homeostasis. Hyperosmolar states most strongly trigger its release. ADH is stored in neurons within the hypothalamus. These neurons express osmoreceptors that are exquisitely responsive to blood osmolarity and respond to changes as little as two mOsm/L.

ADH secretion also occurs during states of hypovolemia or volume depletion. In these states, decreased baroreceptors sense arterial blood volume in the left atrium, carotid artery, and aortic arch. Information about low blood pressure sensed by these receptors is transmitted to the vagus nerve, which directly stimulates the release of ADH. ADH then promotes water reabsorption in the kidneys and, at high concentrations, will also cause vasoconstriction. These two mechanisms together serve to increase effective arterial blood volume and increase blood pressure to maintain tissue perfusion. It is also important to note that in states of hypovolemia, ADH will be secreted even in hypoosmotic states. Conversely, hypervolemia inhibits ADH secretion; therefore, in hyperosmotic hypervolemic states, ADH secretion will be reduced.

Osmolarity and volume status are the two greatest factors that affect ADH secretion. However, a variety of other factors promote ADH secretion as well. These include angiotensin II, pain, nausea, hypoglycemia, nicotine, opiates, and certain medications. ADH secretion is also negatively affected by ethanol, alpha-adrenergic agonists, and atrial natriuretic peptide. Ethanol’s inhibitory effect helps to explain the increased diuresis experienced during intoxicated states as well as increased free water loss; without appropriate ADH secretion, the kidneys excrete more water.