Two things that constantly affect the body include physical activity and diet. A diet needs to be nutritionally balanced, including the proper type and amount of carbohydrates. An increase or decrease in carbohydrates beyond the desired amount can affect both physiological and metabolic processes. An increase in simple carbohydrates may contribute to obesity, a disease that puts individuals at an even greater risk for further disorders such as cardiovascular disease. Carbohydrate intake also contributes to non-insulin-dependent diabetes (type 2 diabetes), a growing epidemic. However, foods rich in non-starch polysaccharides and low-glycemic foods protect against diabetes. Increased sugar consumption also contributes to the development of dental caries.

Carbohydrate malabsorption can present with symptoms of constipation, diarrhea, flatulence, and abdominal pain. It may occur as a result of congenital or acquired defects in enzyme metabolism or intestinal mucosa. Celiac and Crohn's disease are examples of secondary malabsorption. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) can occur as a result of gastric bypass or gastric dysmotility disorders (chronic diabetes, scleroderma), resulting in a compromise of the absorptive interface and severe malabsorption. On the other hand, lactose intolerance is a primary lactase deficiency. Lactase is the enzyme that breaks down lactose, a disaccharide, into monosaccharides glucose and galactose in the brush border of enterocytes. Lactase deficiency is the most common enzyme deficiency in the world.