Diagnosis of uterine leiomyomas is generally made by comprehensive physical examination and clinical history. On physical exam, the most common finding is an enlarged uterus that is often irregular in shape. Confirmation of clinical diagnosis is most easily accomplished with ultrasonography. A pelvic sonogram is a cost-effective method that allows for rapid diagnosis

Further imaging, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), can be useful for determining the extent of vascularization or degeneration of the leiomyomas. MRI can also better define the relationship of the leiomyomas to the serosal and mucosal surfaces. The proximity to these surfaces often dictates the type of intervention recommended

The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) has developed a classification system that allows for the determination of the extent of invasion into the endometrial cavity. The FIGO scale ranges from 0 to 8, with the lower number indicating closer proximity to the endometrium

If bleeding is the predominant symptom and there is a concern for anemia or other sequelae of recurrent blood loss, a complete blood count (CBC) is indicated. Further evaluation of blood work should include a thyroid-stimulating hormone level to rule out thyroid disease as the cause of abnormal bleeding if the index of suspicion is low for leiomyomata as the etiology

At this time, there is no recommendation for surveillance imaging. While the growth of the leiomyoma can be surveyed, there is no current basis for a set time interval or current guidelines on how the growth should be monitored. Interval reassessment is usually based on a change in clinical symptoms