There is no clear consensus on the precise boundaries of the anterolateral abdominal wall.

The anterolateral abdominal wall, from superficial to deep, consists of skin, subcutaneous fat and fascia (including Camper's and Scarpa's fascia), abdominal wall muscles and their associated fascias, transversalis fascia, and parietal peritoneum.

The thoracoabdominal nerves originate as branches of the ventral rami of the T7 to T12 spinal nerves.

The seventh through eleventh intercostal (T7-T11) and subcostal (T12) nerves give off lateral cutaneous nerve branches approximately at the mid-axillary line. The lateral cutaneous nerves arising from T7 and T8 predominantly return sensation from the inferior portion of the lateral thoracic wall, and the nerves arising from T9 to T12 predominantly return sensation from the lateral portion of the anterolateral abdominal wall. After crossing the subcostal line, intercostal nerves 7 to 12 and the subcostal nerve enter the abdominal wall and are referred to as the T7 to T12 thoracoabdominal nerves. The thoracoabdominal nerves travel within a neurovascular plane between the transversus abdominis and internal oblique muscles before piercing the posterior rectus sheath. They then travel anteriorly through openings in the linea semilunaris to return sensation from the skin overlying the rectus abdominis muscle.

The iliohypogastric nerve originates from the superior branch of the ventral ramus of the L1 spinal nerve, which commonly receives communicating branches from T12.

The ilioinguinal nerve originates from the superior branch of the ventral ramus of the L1 spinal nerve.