First, clinicians and patients should agree on the primary goals of treatment before initiating therapy. Protecting renal function, improving patient safety, and optimizing the quality of life are the three typical goals that need to be prioritized. In general, the specific goals of initiating treatment for DSD are achieving adequate storage and bladder emptying without high intravesical pressures, preserving the upper urinary tracts, controlling infections, and achieving social acceptability. After treatment is initiated, patients should be followed with frequent clinical assessments and repeat urodynamic studies to evaluate continuing treatment efficacy. Educating the patient and family by providing them with a clear, basic understanding of the anatomy and physiology of the condition can greatly assist in improving outcomes.

Type 1 DSD is usually managed conservatively (watchful waiting), with the exception of those patients complicated by hydronephrosis, renal cortical loss, vesicoureteric reflux, or autonomic dysreflexia. Types 2 and 3 DSD should be treated when diagnosed to avoid complications.

Pharmacotherapy alone has a relatively limited role in the management of DSD.

Other pharmacotherapies have also been tried, including nitric oxide donors (glyceryl trinitrate), benzodiazepines, and dantrolene sodium, but none are currently recommended. Intravesical oxybutynin has also been used for DSD. It would theoretically reduce uninhibited contractions while increasing bladder storage capacity. There is currently insufficient clinical data or trials to support its use intravescially, although it appears to a helpful adjunct when taken orally.

Sacral neuromodulation may be very useful in treating DSD, although randomized and long term studies are lacking. It appears able to improve bladder function while lowering average detrusor voiding pressures and avoids the development of detrusor sphincter dyssynergia in some experimental spinal cord injury animal models.

Clean intermittent self-catheterization (CISC), combined optimally with antimuscarinics as needed to reduce detrusor contractions and pressures, is the most successful and commonly used treatment for DSD. But this modality might not be suitable for all patients. CISC treatment permits the bladder to be drained and emptied of urine despite the dyssynergic sphincter, while antimuscarinic therapy lowers the detrusor pressure and minimizes contractions.

There are three methods of self-catheterization. "Clean" technique is typically used at home as the other two methods are primarily used in hospitals, nursing homes, and rehab centers during early management. Then, patients are taught the clean technique. No therapy is exempt from complications. When done without proper care, attention, and manual dexterity, self-catheterization carries the risk of a urethral injury as well as the always present risk of infection.

When conservative treatments fail, botulinum toxin injections to the urethra or bladder appears to be a reasonable primary treatment strategy. Botulinum toxin cleaves synaptosomal-associated proteins, which normally move these vesicles to the presynaptic membrane resulting in inhibition of acetylcholine release. Botulinum toxin administration causes flaccid paralysis of the affected muscle. When injected directly into the sphincter muscle, either cystoscopically or via transperineal ultrasonography, the treatment appears to be effective with a reported duration from 2 to 13 months.

Historically, external sphincterotomy (therapeutic destruction of the external sphincter at the 12 o'clock position) was the standard treatment, but this may be associated with significant complications such as uncontrollable incontinence, recurrent infections and epididymitis, stones, urethral diverticula, bladder neck stenosis, strictures, hemorrhage, erectile dysfunction, persistent hydronephrosis, and recurrent epididymitis. Minimally invasive techniques such as balloon dilatation and urethral stents (temporary and permanent) seem to be safe and efficacious, but long-term data are lacking. One obvious advantage of the urethral stent is potential reversibility, but it can migrate or cause bladder neck obstruction.