Investigations aimed at diagnosing the etiology of jugular foramen syndrome:

- Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast: This is the investigation of choice if one encounters a patient with the clinical diagnosis of JFS. Magnetic Resonance Angiogram (MRA) and Venogram (MRV) may provide added information regarding tumor vascularization and local venous anatomy.

- Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA): This is mandatory in patients with highly vascular lesions. Such cases may benefit from preoperative embolization.

- Computed Tomogram (CT) of the skull base with angiogram: This imaging will detect the extent of bony erosion and vascular invasion or infiltration, and is needed to plan for surgery.

- Indirect laryngoscopy: This modality assesses the extent of vocal cord palsy, as it may suggest the need for post-operative tracheostomy.

- Laboratory tests: Total blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), extractable-nuclear antigen antibodies, antineutrophil-cytoplasmatic antibodies (ANCA)

- Serum-protein electrophoresis

- Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and Herpes Simplex Virus: Immunoglobulins M and G

- Cerebrospinal fluid analysis for any hyperproteinorrachia, pleocytosis, or oligoclonal bands. Polymerase chain reaction to detect VZV.

- Nerve conduction studies and electromyography for the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles if there is a doubt regarding the diagnosis.

The finding characteristic of glomus jugulare tumors is ‘‘moth-eaten’’ pattern of destruction of the temporal bone (in CT), ‘‘salt-and-pepper’’ pattern on long TR–long TE images (in MRI), and ‘‘dropout’’ phenomenon in time-intensity curves on contrast MRA.