There are two clinical presentations encountered in hypothalamic hamartomas:

- Epilepsy and related neurobehavioral symptoms

- Central precocious puberty

Patients with epilepsy present with gelastic seizures as their most common symptom, usually starting during infancy. Associated findings are developmental delay, cognitive decline, and psychiatric symptoms associated with lesions attached to the posterior hypothalamus near the mamillary bodies. Almost 40% of patients that present with gelastic seizures also demonstrate precocious puberty. When both symptoms appear simultaneously, they tend to be associated with more extensive lesions on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), involving both the anterior and posterior hypothalamus. Gelastic seizure is the most common symptom in patients with hypothalamic hamartomas, and it is usually the first seizure type. The diagnosis is generally made by the unusual presence of laughing spells, characteristically starting at one year of age and eventually disappearing by ten years of age.

Cognitive deficits are prevalent in patients with hypothalamic hamartomas and epilepsy. Difficulty in short-term memory, processing speed, and diminished intellectual disability have been found with neuropsychological testing in nearly 50% of cases.

Patients also can present with isolated precocious puberty with lesions attached mainly to the anterior portion of the hypothalamus near the tuber cinereum, which appears pedunculated below the third ventricle.