**Rural and Underserved Area Disparities**

Disparities of rural and underserved healthcare go even further than just patient demographics and supply chain disruption. The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a swift increase in virtual connections the world over. Removal of interpersonal physical contact has been a primary and effective approach to minimize transmission of COVID-19. The spatial or social distancing approach has led to virtual connection as the preferred method of meeting for businesses, with many workers choosing to work remotely and many companies choosing to meet virtually. Remote work does not equate to a specific distance but rather refers to a site that is not the traditional office or worksite.

Telehealth systems have also been slowly implemented for many years and are helping to provide access for many patients unable to visit a traditional medical clinic for evaluation. Rural and underserved areas can be severely limited in providing timely, stable, and uninterrupted telehealth access. The existing grid and infrastructure often cannot provide high-speed network access in a reliable, consistent manner, or network access is simply unavailable.

Local health departments continue expansion as technology becomes available and infrastructure is built. These same rural and underserved local health departments rely more on state and federal funding. Unfortunately, this reliance on state and federal funding is vulnerable to state and federal policy change following local, regional, and federal election cycles. Recently several elected officials in states with significant rural populations have highlighted what was termed the "Netflix standard," meaning that if residents can watch their favorite football team or Netflix on-demand in their homes, then we should be able to connect these same residents with healthcare providers. Further complicating the issue of funding is that many times a locale's public health funding is determined by an area's overall wealth and tax base, with rural areas generally lacking a significant tax base as the population density is low and/or much of the land is designated farmland with subsequent tax relief for property in the agricultural designation.

In rural areas, the crisis of the COVID-19 pandemic has been exacerbated by the generally poor patient demographics, as discussed. Residents of these areas have a higher prevalence of comorbidities such as hypertension, obesity, diabetes, and chronic lower respiratory diseases—all of which increase their risk of death from COVID-19. With less funding and staffing, a sicker general population, and, often, a larger geographical area in which to provide services, rural health systems are often not equipped nor staffed to deal with the extreme demands of a global pandemic. COVID-19 has highlighted many areas of inequity and several fundamental flaws in how rural public health is funded and delivered.

Perhaps as germane to the other disparities of rural and underserved communities is the disparate educational levels of the people living in these areas. According to the department of education, in 2019, 39% of residents described as living in an urban community had attained a college degree of bachelor's equivalent versus 21% for those living in rural areas. Further, median household income was 25% higher for those living in urban areas.

And, As the cost of education continues to rise, those living in more urban areas are able to partially mitigate higher educational costs by living at home. With geographically favorable access to many colleges and universities, the cost is even further defrayed. Compared to rural counterparts who often have to travel non-commutable distances and live on/near campus, the overall cost of attendance of higher education can be a significant hurdle for rural students.

Overall, decreased rural educational levels are also associated with a reduced understanding of fundamental physical, mental and sexual health principles and the benefits of healthy food choices and regular physical activity. Succinctly, health literacy is often lacking in these vulnerable populations, contributing to the vicious cycle of poor outcomes associated with public health crises and the COVID-19 pandemic. Educational limitations continue to limit our vulnerable population's ability to gain a substantive understanding of vaccination benefits and monoclonal antibody use, further challenging rural communities in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic.

Additional elements contributing to the disparate rural and underserved health problems identified include:

- Declining population

- Economic stagnation

- Provider shortages

- A disproportionate number of elderly residents

- A disproportionate number of impoverished residents

- Significant numbers of un/underinsured residents

- Higher rates of chronic illness

Simply put, the less healthy the affected population, the more likely SARS COV-2 is to have fatal consequences. Additionally, with a weaker or less developed health system, the more difficult viral containment becomes.

Conceivably though, healthcare costs may still be the most significant issue rural and underserved residents face with a general lack of public health care in these communities. Even with the passage of the Patient Protection & Affordable Care Act, 30 million US residents lacked health insurance in the first half of 2020, according to estimates from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The US Census estimates that uninsured rates of residents in rural or primarily rural counties outpace urban areas by several percentage points.

Secondarily, there is growing concern that many hospitals, in particular rural hospitals, may not have the financial reserves to remain fiscally viable. As of this writing, more than 100 rural hospitals have closed since 2010, with over 400 more hospitals at risk of closure.

Even at baseline, rural areas have a much more significant shortage of subspecialist physicians, including critical care trained clinicians to staff intensive care units. Additionally, The Patient Protection & Affordable Care Act (PPACA) of 2010 drastically reshaped healthcare delivery in the United States. The spirit of providing healthcare to all residents in the United States was the driving force for the passage of the PPACA. As has been studied, there have been some unintended consequences of Hospital Value-Based Purchasing (HVBP) and the Hospital Readmission Reduction Program (HRRP) sections of the PPACA. For instance, as has well been established, rural resident demographics fall in several high-risk categories, and those vulnerable patients have a higher likelihood of morbidity and subsequent hospital readmission for their chronic high-risk disease. All hospitals are financially penalized under the HRRP; however, the effect on rural hospitals is greater, given the already slim operating financial margins. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has implemented programs to monitor quality with the goal of quality driving improvement in care. However, many of these programs have some blind spots when applied to rural areas.

**Concerns With Monoclonal Antibody Use**

Although generally well-tolerated, monoclonal antibody administration carries a risk of immune-mediated reactions, including anaphylaxis, serum sickness, and antibody generation. Besides these immune-mediated reactions, the adverse effects of monoclonal antibodies are also related to their specific targets and are largely unknown due to the limited availability of published literature. Safety data from clinical trials evaluating monoclonal antibodies reported are summarized below.

- The most frequently reported adverse effects with the use of sotrovimab include infusion-related hypersensitivity reactions, rash, and diarrhea.

- Clinical worsening of COVID-19 after monoclonal antibody administration may include but is not limited to fever, fatigue, hypoxia or increased respiratory difficulty, arrhythmias, and altered mental status.

Further, in instances where a patient may experience an adverse side effect, the likelihood of advanced subspecialty care or intensive care in rural areas would also be lacking. As the COVID-19 pandemic runs its course, we must use this opportunity to address public health disparities for our underserved and remote communities. This approach will include audience-appropriate health education, developing clinician-patient relationships in these communities, and addressing concerns and fears, whether real or imagined, in a compassionate and caring manner. Developing relationships with community leaders who can assist with outreach and education is another potential way to address the hesitancy to accept monoclonal antibody therapy in these communities.