The CST originates from the cerebral cortex in layer V cells (Betz cells). Sixty percent of fibers are from the primary motor area, premotor area, and supplementary motor area. Other fibers originate primary sensory area, parietal cortex, and parietal operculum. The CST descends through the internal capsule and brainstem (forming the pyramids in the medulla). At the medullary spinal junction, 75% to 90% of fibers decussate and forms the lateral CST (contralateral), and the remainder form the anterior/ventral CST (ipsilateral). The lateral CST synapses directly with IX neurons (anterior horn cells) or on interneurons in Layers V to VIII. The CST is the upper motor neuron (UMN), and the alpha motor neuron is the lower motor neuron (LMN). Together, the UMN and LMN control motor function.

When the lateral aspect of the foot is stroked with a dull instrument, this triggers afferents which mediate nociception stimulation of the S1 dermatome. The sensory input travels up the tibial and sciatic nerve to the S1 nerve root and triggers an efferent response at that spinal level causing downward contraction of the toes. The CST normally prevents the spread of this reflex to other nerve roots. When there is a pathological process that leads to dysfunction of the CST, there is spread of this sensory stimulation to adjacent nerve roots L5, L4, L3, L2, which leads progressively to increase in flexion (shortening) of LE.  One observes deviation (dorsiflexion) of the big toe upward and fanning of the other toes. This is a positive Chaddock reflex.