**Chronic Phase**

The peripheral blood smear will show a leukocytosis due to granulocytes in various stages of maturation. There will be a bimodal distribution with higher proportions of mature segmented neutrophils and myelocytes. Blast cells will account for less than 2% of the white blood cells. Increased basophils and eosinophils are common. Significant dysplasia affecting greater than 10% of the granulocyte population is absent. Monocytosis may be present; however, it is usually less than 3% of the white blood cells. Platelets usually range from the normal range to a significant increase. Thrombocytopenia is an uncommon finding.

Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy will show hypercellularity with marked granulocytic proliferation and significantly increased myelocytes, although significant dysplasia should be absent. Blasts are usually less than 5%. Erythroid precursors are decreased considerably, and there is an increased myeloid to erythroid ratio. Megakaryocytes may be reduced, normal, or increased. About half of the cases show a megakaryocytic proliferation. The megakaryocytes in CML show a small, hypo-lobate “dwarf” morphology. The biopsy will show immature granulocytes in a thickened band of 5 to 10 cells along bone trabeculae. Adjacent to bone trabeculae is the normal distribution site of immature granulocytes; however, it is usually 2 to 3 cells thick. The bone marrow may also show increased reticulin fibrosis.

**Accelerated Phase**

The peripheral smear may or may not show increased blasts (10% to 19%). The bone marrow aspirate and biopsy will show similar changes to chronic phase CML with increased blasts (10% to 19%), possibly dysplastic changes in granulocytes, and increased reticulin and collagen fibrosis.

**Blast Phase**

The peripheral smear and/or bone marrow aspirate will show greater than 20% blasts, or there will be an extramedullary proliferation of blasts. Most cases will show blasts with myeloid differentiation; however, other lineages or combinations may be present, including lymphoblasts. Extramedullary proliferation is most commonly seen in the skin, lymph nodes, bone, and the central nervous system (CNS).