Fc epsilon RI acts as an activator of several signaling complexes such as the SRC-family kinases, which include FYN, LYN, ZAP-70, and SYK, all essential for proper receptor function and downstream activation of other molecules. Following cross-linking of Fc epsilon RI by antigen, the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) of its gamma chain become phosphorylated. This tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor, executed by SRC-family kinase LYN, is the initial step that launches the antigen stimulation of mast cells and basophils. Following their phosphorylation, ITAMs bind spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK). SYK is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase with two SRC homology 2 (SH2)-domains and a molecular weight of 72 kDa. Upon binding to the activated ITAMs, SYK is phosphorylated by Lyn, which enables it to in-turn transphosphorylase to other SYK and other target molecules.

SYK plays a crucial role in the augmentation of the IgE downstream signaling process. Any disruption in its activity or expression leads to a discernible malfunction in the mast cell response mechanism. This discovery has made SYK an ideal therapeutic target for inflammatory and allergic conditions. Several clinical trials for asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus focus on developing drugs to directly or indirectly target SYK.

Role of IgE in exerting anti-parasite function: Anti-parasitic IgE and IgE expressed on effector cells such as eosinophils have been shown to confer defense against different parasites (e.g., Schistosoma mansoni). Furthermore, IgE engaged with FcεRI or CD23 can improve parasite clearance by human eosinophils, platelets, and macrophages through antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis (ADCP). Besides, elevated serum titers of parasite antigen-specific IgE have been associated with resistance to parasitic infection.