Generally, two methods for HIPEC are described: open abdomen technique and closed abdomen technique.

**Open abdomen technique**: as described by Sugarbaker, at the end of the surgical cytoreduction, a Tenckhoff catheter and four closed suction drains are sutured to the skin and placed through the abdominal wall. The temperature probes are attached to the skin edge for intraperitoneal temperature monitoring. The skin edges at the level of the abdominal incisions are suspended until the Thompson self-retaining retractor by a monofilament to maintain open space in the abdominal cavity. For preventing the leakage of the chemotherapy solution, a plastic sheet is inserted into this suture.

Continuous manipulation by the surgeon of the perfusion allows the uniform exposure of all anatomical structures to heat and chemotherapy during the procedure. A pumping system injects the chemotherapy infusion into the abdomen through the Tenckhoff catheter and pulls it through the drains with a constant flow. The heat exchanger keeps the intraperitoneal fluid temperature at 41 to 43 degrees, the drug is then administered in the circuit, and the timer for the perfusion is started. The duration varies from 30 min to 1 hour, depending on the type of cancer.

A disadvantage of the open technique is the heat dissipation, making it more difficult to have a hyperthermic state.

**Closed abdomen technique:**Thermal catheters and probes are placed in the same way, but the skin edges of the laparotomy are tightly sutured to allow perfusion in a closed circuit. The abdominal wall is shaken manually by the surgeon during the infusion for uniform heat distribution. The volume of perfusate is greater in this technique to establish the circuit, and higher abdominal pressure is obtained during the perfusion, which facilitates tissue penetration of the drug. After infusion, the abdomen is reopened to remove the perfusate and the preparation of the anastomosis. This technique allows maintaining rapid attainment of hyperthermia because there is minimal heat loss.