Pes cavus is an orthopedic condition that manifests in both children and adults. Pes cavus and pes cavovarus are often used interchangeably as the most common manifestation of the cavus foot is the cavovarus presentation. Pes cavus is a deformity that is typically characterized by cavus (elevation of the longitudinal plantar arch of the foot), plantar flexion of the first ray, forefoot pronation, and valgus, hindfoot varus, and forefoot adduction. Pes cavus is frequently a manifestation of an underlying neurological process, but there has been literature that discusses a subset of patients in whom a more subtle form of the cavus foot may present without an underlying disease process.

**Anatomy**

The cavovarus foot can be the result of forefoot driven pathology (a flexed first ray), a deformity of the hindfoot, or some combination of both pathologies.

Forefoot driven pes cavus is most often caused by neurological diseases and is the result of muscular imbalances. A weak tibialis anterior, intrinsic foot muscles, and peroneus brevis are overpowered by a stronger peroneus longus and posterior tibialis. Later these muscles may also weaken but remain in a state of contracture, producing the same effect. The attachment of the peroneus longus at the metatarsals and medial cuneiform results in plantar flexion of the first ray and forefoot pronation. When a foot with fixed forefoot pronation bears weight, the hindfoot is forced to counter-correct into supination, or varus, in order to restore the tripod.

As the deformity develops, the Achilles tendon may eventually act as an invertor of the foot and will shorten over time.

Hindfoot driven cavovarus deformity is commonly the result of trauma.

Cock-up deformities are also common at the metatarsophalangeal joints (MTP).

**Natural History**

Prognosis highly depends on deformity severity, underlying etiology, & age at presentation. The deformity is typically slow to develop and begins before puberty. In children, the deformity is initially compensated but may become more rigid over time, leading to possible alterations in bone growth, effects on the further development of bones, and alteration of the shape and morphology of the developing foot.

The lateral soft tissue structures may suffer from overload leading to instability in both the typical pes cavovarus.

**Patterns of Spread**

The pattern of the spread of pes cavus is dependent on the underlying etiology.

HMSNs subtypes have a heritable transmission in autosomal-dominant, autosomal recessive, and x-linked recessive patterns.