Several imaging modalities are available for establishing the diagnosis of osteoblastoma. They include:

- Plain radiographs

- Computed tomography (CT)

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

On imaging, osteoblastoma may be challenging to distinguish from osteoid osteoma.

**Radiographs (X-ray)**

Plain film radiography is generally the basis for the diagnosis of osteoblastoma, although the radiographic appearance can vary slightly, with four distinctive radiographic presentations having been described.

- A similar radiographic appearance to osteoid osteoma but larger in size (>2 cm), with less reactive surrounding sclerosis and more overlying periostitis.

- Blown-out expansile lesion mimicking an aneurysmal bone cyst - this pattern is most commonly appreciated in lesions of the axial skeleton.

- Aggressive appearing lesions mimicking a malignant process with cortical expansion, thinning, or disruption, as well as extensive periostitis and large size (often greater than 4 cm); aggressive osteoblastomas generally fall into this category; however, some authors believe aggressive osteoblastomas to be a distinct entity as opposed to a subtype of osteoblastoma.

- Juxtacorticl (periosteal) lesions are exceedingly rare, comprising 8 of 62 osteoblastoma cases in the literature.

**Computed Tomography Scan**

CT imaging serves a complementary role to plain-film radiography. The imaging appearance, not surprisingly, is similar to those described for radiography; however, CT can help further characterize the lesions, specifically the size, exact location, presence, or extent of cortical disruption and presence of a soft tissue component.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

MRI, like CT, can characterize the extent of the lesion and presence of aggressive imaging features, although CT better identifies the type of internal matrix (chondroid, fibrotic, or osteoid) of the lesions as well as the presence and extent of endosteal scalloping and cortical disruption. The exquisite contrast resolution on MRI allows for identifying reactive soft tissue edema and often better evaluates the soft tissue component if present. As previously described, perilesional edema (osseous or soft tissue) and extension into the surrounding soft tissues are rare with osteoblastoma. However, there have been case reports of lesions exhibiting these unusual imaging features leading to a misdiagnosis of more aggressive processes such as lymphoma or Ewing sarcoma.

While not the primary modality for imaging evaluation of osteoblastoma, it is important to be aware of its imaging appearance on MRI, given that lesions of the spine can present with back pain, which is commonly evaluated with MRI. Generally, osteoblastomas have low to intermediate T1 signal intensity and intermediate to high T2 signal intensity. The areas of sclerosis will present as T1 and T2 hypointense regions. Areas of peritumoral edema will be T2 hyperintense and T1 hypointense. These imaging features are common findings in the majority of osseous neoplasms.

**Nuclear Medicine Imaging**

Although not generally employed to evaluate osteoblastomas, studies using technetium-99m will demonstrate increased uptake in the mass corresponding to the osteoid formation within the lesion, and FDG-PET studies have revealed a high uptake in the tumor despite its pathologically benign features.