The spinal cord is arranged anatomically with a central gray matter surrounded by peripheral white matter. The gray matter comprises of cell bodies divided into the dorsal (posterior), lateral, and ventral (anterior) “horns.” These are the primary receivers of the incoming sensory information. The white matter is composed of tracts that are ascending and descending to their respective destinations. The white matter divides into the dorsal, lateral, and ventral columns. The dorsal columns carry ascending sensory information from somatic mechanoreceptors. The lateral columns contain axons that carry motor commands from the cerebral cortex to the spinal motor neurons. These are known as the corticospinal tracts. The ventral columns carry ascending pain and temperature information and descending motor information. These are known as the spinothalamic tracts.

At each level of the spinal cord, there is a bilateral set of afferent nerves and efferent nerves. These nerves travel through the intervertebral foramina to their perspective dermatome and myotome. The afferent signals arrive at the spinal cord via the dorsal nerve roots which are made up of sensory fibers. As they near the ventral aspect of the spinal cord, they encounter a dilation known as the dorsal root ganglion (DRG). A ganglion is a set of neuronal cell bodies that are processed before continuing to their destination. The DRGs are located in the intervertebral foramina at each level of the spinal cord except for the sacral DRGs which are located in the vertebral canal and the coccygeal DRGs which are intradural.

The nerve synapses onto the interneurons within the gray matter which synapses onto the efferent neurons. Most interneurons are primarily inhibitory and use the neurotransmitters GABA or glycine to achieve this response. The efferent neurons are also known as the lower motor neurons, which exit through the intervertebral foramina and synapse onto their target organ.

There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves, one on either side of the vertebral column. These are divided into the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal regions. The cervical region gives rise to 8 cervical nerves (C1-C8) which exit above the corresponding vertebrae. The thoracic region gives rise to 12 thoracic nerves (T1-T12), which exit that exit below the vertebral levels. The sacral region gives rise to 5 sacral nerves, and the coccygeal region gives rise to 1 nerve. The sacral and coccygeal regions are fused, and they exit the spinal cord by the cauda equina. The cauda equina is a bundle of nerves that originate from the L2 level and carries all the nerves below it in a tail-like fashion.