The initial evaluation of Foster Kennedy syndrome is usually via a funduscopy, preferably dilated. Ophthalmoscopy, slit-lamp biomicroscopy with an accessory lens or fundus imagery allows the examiner to visualize the back of the eye. Visualization of optic atrophy and damage to the retinal nerve fiber layer is enhanced with a red-free filter. Papilledema is best assessed by directly viewing the optic disc using a slit aperture during ophthalmoscope, which is a typical feature in FKS.

Radiologic imaging may precede or follow ocular examination depending on the flow of patient care. Standard X-rays are not very useful in detecting brain tumors because the skull absorbs the radiation, thus preventing deeper tissue viewing.

Literature shows a positive correlation between raised intracranial pressure and increased intraocular pressure. Intraocular pressure can be measured by contact or non–contact tonometry.

Computerized tomography (CT) scans use X-rays emitted through different body parts combined with a computer algorithm to generate scans of slices of the part of the body being imaged. The patient should be advised to minimize movement during the procedure for optimum image quality. Metals, reflective objects, and clothing should also be removed from the head before imaging. The patient usually lies prone on an electronic bed while the equipment takes multiple scans as it rotates around the body. An iodine-based contrast agent may be injected into the patient’s vein to give even better scan images.

It is important to ensure an appropriate kidney function testing is done to ensure the patient can eliminate the agent after administration.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides more enhanced images than a CT scan. In addition, it does use ionizing radiation and is therefore safer. MRI uses a magnetic field to disrupt the random arrangement of atoms in the body into a systematic arrangement.

An embedded algorithm in the MRI equipment then converts these emitted signals into a two-dimensional image of the part of the body being observed.

This type of testing takes longer than CT scans, which can seldom be performed in emergency patients in most hospitals; thus needs to be booked and tends to come after the acquisition of CT scans in most patients with FKS.