Hazardous materials management principles apply with initial decontamination by copious irrigation first to both treat the victim and prevent responders and healthcare professionals from becoming contaminated. It is unlikely but possible depending on the setting that workers could be exposed to riot control agents and become symptomatic. Providers will need to exercise reasonable judgment unless other traumatic injuries demand immediate resuscitation, the patient needs decontamination before entering the healthcare environment. After initial stabilization, decontamination may be considered depending on the setting; this can initially start in the field if a patient is presenting via EMS. Aerosolized gases are heavier than the surrounding air, which is why an incapacitated patient should get lifted off of the ground, EMS vehicles should also try to park in higher areas than where the dispersion of gases occurred. Initial on-scene irrigation of the eyes especially is important. The use of topical ophthalmic anesthetic drops, such as proparacaine, helps with the ability to perform adequate eye irrigation.

Hospital workers can use customary personal protective equipment. Removal of contaminated clothing and prompt decontamination may be performed, including flushing the eyes and skin with copious amounts of water. If explosive devices were used to disperse agents, a close inspection of the skin and eyes should be performed to evaluate for foreign bodies, lesions, and shrapnel. Depending on the extent of ocular symptoms, a more detailed ophthalmologic exam with corneal fluorescein staining could be an option.