The diagnosis is established by demonstrating low cortisol and aldosterone levels, high renin level, and a blunt cortisol response with ACTH stimulation. The approach for the evaluation s as follows;

- An inappropriately low cortisol level.

- Assessing the adrenal cortex's functional capacity to synthesize cortisol and determine whether the cortisol deficiency is related to a corticotropin (ACTH) deficiency. This will help to classify whether the adrenal insufficiency as primary or secondary.

- Determining whether a treatable cause is present. Further evaluation should be directed to determine its underlying cause.

**Cortisol Level**

Typically, a low random cortisol level is seen. Cortisol follows a diurnal pattern; it is highest in the early morning; therefore, an early morning level should be obtained. However, it is not practical to obtain an early morning cortisol level in the emergency department (ED). Also, these results are not readily available at the time of ED presentation. A single determination of serum cortisol level is not sufficient to assess adrenal function. However, a morning cortisol level over 18 micrograms/dL is considered normal and may exclude the diagnosis. A low cortisol level (< 3 mcg/dL) is sufficient to diagnose adrenal insufficiency.

- >18 microgram/dL = Normal

- <3 microgram/dL = Adrenal insufficiency

-  3-19 microgram/dL /dL = Equivocal and further evaluation is suggested.

**ACTH Level and Corticotropin Stimulation Test**

The ACTH level is markedly elevated in primary adrenal insufficiency. However, the level is not elevated or within the reference range in patients with central adrenal insufficiency. In equivocal cases, the diagnosis is confirmed by an ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation test. It causes rapid stimulation of cortisol and aldosterone secretion. This is a first-line diagnostic test for the evaluation of adrenal insufficiency. Plasma cortisol levels should be measured at 0 and 30 to 60 minutes after administration of ACTH. CRH stimulates ACTH release from the pituitary. In primary adrenal insufficiency, a high ACTH level is present, which rises further after CRH stimulation but unable to stimulate serum cortisol secretion. However, in secondary adrenal insufficiency, a low ACTH level is seen, failing to respond to CRH.

- Primary adrenal insufficiency: elevated ACTH

- Central adrenal insufficiency: abnormally normal or low ACTH

With ACTH stimulation

- Normal response = Adequate response (peak cortisol level >18 mcg/dL)

- Adrenal insufficiency = Less or no response

**Aldosterone and Renin Level**

Serum renin and aldosterone levels should be obtained to determine whether a mineralocorticoid deficiency is present. Both cortisol and aldosterone are missing in primary adrenal insufficiency. A low aldosterone concentration is present despite markedly increased plasma renin activity. In secondary adrenal insufficiency, the aldosterone level will be normal.  Increased plasma renin activity can be seen; this indicates that there is adrenal cortex dysfunction. A high level occurs when there is a low level of serum aldosterone.

**Serum Chemistry**

Typical laboratory findings include hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and hypoglycemia. Hyponatremia is due to cortisol and aldosterone deficiency. Aldosterone deficiency causes sodium wasting, and cortisol deficiency results in the increased antidiuretic hormone. This causes increased water absorption. Hypovolemia also triggers ADH secretion. Hyperkalemia is secondary to low aldosterone levels, which causes natriuresis and potassium retention. Hyperkalemia****does not occur****in secondary disease; this helps to distinguish from primary adrenal insufficiency. Hypoglycemia is multifactorial, including decreased oral intake and lack of glucocorticoids, which are essential for gluconeogenesis. Hypoglycemia is multifactorial, including decreased oral intake and lack of glucocorticoids, which are essential for gluconeogenesis. Hypercalcemia may be present, which reflects extracellular fluid loss.

**TSH Level**

Slight elevation of TSH level can occur in adrenal insufficiency. This occurs due to a decrease in cortisol level and abnormal TSH circadian rhythm.

**Anti–21-hydroxylase Antibodies**

Anti-adrenal antibodies (such as 21-hydroxylase antibodies) serve as the markers of autoimmune destruction of the adrenal gland. The 21-hydroxylase enzyme is essential for cortisol synthesis in the adrenal cortex. This may be helpful to determine the cause of Addison disease. It is also important to evaluate other organ-specific autoimmune conditions.

**Imaging Studies**

A chest radiograph may reveal a small heart; this may be due to a decrease in the cardiac workload. In suspected cases of adrenal hemorrhage, an abdominal CT scan may provide useful information in determining the cause. For example, bilateral enlargement of the adrenal glands may be seen with adrenal hemorrhage.

- Autoimmune adrenal destruction-- i.e., small adrenals.

- Tuberculosis-- i.e., calcification or hemorrhage.

A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hypothalamic-pituitary region should be obtained if ACTH is inappropriately low in the presence of cortisol deficiency. A pituitary baseline profile should also be obtained. The radiographic findings are non-specific. A biochemical diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency should be made before obtaining radiographic studies.

**Additional Studies**

Additional studies should be directed to determine the underlying cause. A PPD test should be performed to evaluate for tuberculosis. Plasma very-long-chain fatty acid profile should be obtained in cases where adrenal leukodystrophy is suspected. Complete blood count (CBC) may reveal neutropenia, lymphocytosis, and eosinophilia. ECG may show tall and peaked T waves if hyperkalemia is present. Histology is useful to investigate infiltrative causes of adrenal insufficiency. The finding of caseating granulomas may suggest tuberculosis, whereas a non-caseating granuloma may be due to sarcoidosis.