# Continuing Education Activity

This activity reviews the FDA-class 1 drug 3,4 - methylenedioxymethamphetamine, also known as MDMA, ecstasy, or molly. The drug is known to promote a sense of euphoria and facilitate empathy and communication. Unfortunately, it can have dangerous effects on the cardiovascular, neurologic, renal, and hepatic systems and can lead to devastating consequences, including death. This activity reviews the potential for 3,4 -methylenedioxymethamphetamine toxicity, treatment approaches to patients who have overdosed on it, and the role of the interprofessional care team in improving outcomes for patients that use 3,4 -methylenedioxymethamphetamine.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the signs and symptoms that a patient with 3,4 -methylenedioxymethamphetamine toxicity might exhibit.
- Outline the treatment strategy for a patient with 3,4 -methylenedioxymethamphetamine toxicity. 
- Identify rapid sequence intubation agents that should be avoided if a patient with 3,4 -methylenedioxymethamphetamine toxicity presents in a hyper-adrenergic state or if rhabdomyolysis is a consideration. 
- Explain why 3,4 -methylenedioxymethamphetamine toxicity requires an interprofessional team approach.

# Introduction

MDMA (3,4 - methylenedioxymethamphetamine), or more commonly known as Molly or Ecstasy, is a synthetic substance first developed in 1912 as a precursor to the synthesis of hemostatic agents (not as an appetite suppressant as incorrectly reported).

# Etiology

The potential for MDMA toxicity exists with every ingestion. MDMA is commonly ingested orally through tablet form; however, the powder itself can be snorted.  Recreational doses of the drug can vary significantly. During the 1990s and early 2000s, doses ranged between 73 mg to 103 mg, while doses have also been reported to be as low as 50 mg to as high as 150 mg per tablet. Analysis of compounds sold as ecstasy/molly has also revealed the variability of composition with other substances aside from MDMA, including MDEA, MDA, ephedrine, ketamine, paracetamol, and other inactive substitutes and others that may have profound hemodynamic effects.

Ecstasy is also often taken with other illicit drugs, which can potentially compound each drug’s individual effects on the neurologic and cardiovascular system.

# Epidemiology

Trends in MDMA use have been well documented throughout the years, with user age ranging from the 8th grade all the way to the college level and adulthood. A review of epidemiological data revealed a significant increase in usage between the 1990s to early 2000s.  For example, lifetime ecstasy use on one college campus was found to increase from 16% to 24% between the years 1986 to 1990, while a national sample of college students saw a 69% increase between the years 1997 to 1999.

While the number of users increased significantly from the early 1990s and 2000s, the number of new users was variable from the period of 2002 to 2007.  Surveys found a decrease in users from 1.2 million in 2002 down to 642000 in 2003 then up to 860000 from 2006 to 2007.

# Pathophysiology

MDMA differs from other amphetamines due to the attachment of the methylenedioxy group, which is structurally similar to the psychedelic hallucinogen mescaline. Because of this, MDMA is a chemical compound that shares properties of both amphetamines and hallucinogens.

Desired effects of the drug include sympathomimetic arousal, sensual enhancement, feelings of euphoria, and emotional closeness to others.  Other effects include nausea, trismus, and bruxism. These effects are attributable to the increase in circulation of the neurotransmitters mentioned above, dopamine and serotonin. Blood pressure and heart rate elevations are secondary to the adrenergic effects of an increase in circulating norepinephrine acting on alpha, beta-1, and beta-2 receptors.

In addition to its effects on neurotransmitters, MDMA has also been found to increase the blood levels of arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone), leading to fluid retention. This effect, coupled with excessive water intake, has been implicated in the development of life-threatening hyponatremia and coma.

# Toxicokinetics

MDMA is absorbed via the GI tract with an onset of effect between 20 minutes and 1 hour after consumption. Peak concentrations occur 2 hours after oral ingestion, and it is broken down in the liver by the enzyme CYP2D6. MDMA has a half-life of about 8 hours, taking approximately 40 hours to clear 95% of the drug from the body. Thus, continued effects of the drug will continue to linger for several hours after ingestion.

# History and Physical

Presentation of MDMA toxicity is variable due to the common practice of co-ingestion with other illicit substances. Even self-reported mono-ingestion of Ecstasy/Molly is not reliable due to the varying composition of the synthesized drug. Patients may present tachycardic, hypertensive, hyperthermic, and agitated.  Even at minor recreational doses, adverse effects include increased muscle activity (such as bruxism, restless legs, and jaw clenching), hyperactivity, insomnia, difficulty concentrating, and feelings of restlessness.

Because Ecstasy is a popular rave drug, the dangerous combination of intense physical activity (such as dancing) along with the heightened sympathomimetic effects of the drug lead to an increase in body temperature that resembles heat stroke and resulting in rhabdomyolysis.

# Evaluation

- Obtain finger stick for blood sugar levels

- Chemistry for sodium levels and other electrolyte abnormalities such as hyper or hypokalemia

- Urine, potassium, BUN/Cr, CK levels, and myoglobin levels for the evaluation of rhabdomyolysis and renal injury

- LFTs for hepatoxicity

- Aspirin, alcohol, acetaminophen levels, and urine drug screening

- EKG

- Head CT, LP may be necessary for the undifferentiated altered and febrile patient.

# Treatment / Management

Emphasis should be on maintaining the airway along with stabilization of breathing and circulation. Patients may present obtunded due to hyponatremia requiring endotracheal intubation. Though no formal contraindication to specific RSI agents exists, caution is necessary with ketamine which could potentiate the hyperadrenergic state of the already hypertensive and tachycardic patient. If rhabdomyolysis is a consideration, avoiding succinylcholine due to hyperkalemia should be considered in favor of rocuronium or vecuronium. Patients who present in severe toxicity within one hour of ingestion can receive activated charcoal PO or via an NG tube. Agitation should be controlled with benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam.  For the hyperthermic patient, evaporative cooling along with ice packs to the groin and axilla are beneficial.  More invasive measures may be necessary in extreme cases. If treatment fails, dantrolene is a consideration. Antipyretics, such as acetaminophen, have no role and can worsen an already compromised liver.

Patients with MDMA toxicity can present with seizures and hyponatremia. Those with seizures should receive benzodiazepines. If hyponatremia is the cause, patients should be free water restricted and treated with hypertonic saline. Urine output should be closely monitored with a foley. Caution is necessary with the judicious administration of IV fluids.

The undifferentiated tachycardic, hypertensive, hyperthermic, and altered patient necessitates a broad approach to treatment and evaluation since this constellation of findings are not specific to MDMA toxicity. Hence, patients may require a head CT, LP, and coverage with broad-spectrum antibiotics.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Anticholinergic toxicity

- Cholinergic toxicity

- Neuroleptic malignant syndrome

- Malignant hyperthermia

- Serotonin syndrome

- MAOI inhibitor toxicity

- Meningitis/encephalitis

- Heatstroke/exhaustion

- Rhabdomyolysis

- Amphetamine toxicity

- Cocaine toxicity

# Prognosis

The two most frequently reported causes of death include hyperthermia and hyponatremia. While toxicity can be severe, a literature review reveals deaths related to MDMA toxicity to be rare. Confounding factors in some reports are that other drugs were co-ingested, thus making it difficult to find MDMA as the sole cause of death. One study found that in the 10 years to 2006, ecstasy-related deaths numbered approximately 50 per year though they were not purely ecstasy-related. When it was the sole drug implicated, this number dropped to 10 per year. A retrospective case review of ED admissions related to ecstasy revealed a death rate of 0 to 2%.

Though deaths are rare, the potential for long-term side effects has been demonstrated through animal and radiological studies. Serotonin plays a role in emotion, memory, and high-order cognitive processes. Previous animal studies revealed a loss of serotonin axon terminal markers. These losses were found to be extremely long-lasting in MDMA-treated monkeys. PET scans in baboons showed significant decreases in radioactivity levels in various areas of the brain. Human volunteers with a history of MDMA use underwent PET scanning and were found to have a global dose-related reduction in a structural element of serotonin. Further studies of PET scans in volunteers with a history of MDMA abuse yielded similar findings, however, with additional alterations to the amygdala and areas of the neocortex. Deficits in short-term memory,  visual memory, and verbal memory and reasoning seem to be associated. Cerebrovascular systems may also be affected, manifesting down the line as a decline in cognitive potential akin to dementia.

# Complications

- Neurologic complications include delirium, seizures.

- Cardiovascular complications include cardiac dysrhythmias, myocardial infarction, aortic dissection, and intracranial hemorrhages.

- GI complications include severe hepatotoxicity, which can lead to fulminant liver failure.

- Renal complications include rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure.

- Endocrine complications include SIADH resulting in life-threatening hyponatremia. Patients can also present with hyperpyrexia mimicking heat stroke.

- Minor complications include increased muscle activity (such as bruxism, restless legs, and jaw clenching), hyperactivity, insomnia, difficulty concentrating, and feelings of restlessness.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education is crucial in getting patients to understand both the short- and long-term risks of using MDMA. Many users incorrectly perceive MDMA to be a safe drug with few adverse effects. The truth is that tolerance develops rapidly, and those who respond by ingesting larger doses are at risk for complications that include sympathetic hyperactivity, potentially resulting in hyperthermia, arrhythmias, and hemodynamic instability.

Patients must also understand the long-term psychiatric implications that accompany regular use. There are reports of depression, paranoia, anxiety, and insomnia lasting years following cessation of MDMA use. Additionally, research shows correlations between impaired concentration and memory and using MDMA.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

MDMA toxicity can be life-threatening and involve multiple organ system dysfunctions necessitating the need for an interprofessional approach. Thus, providers need to be aware of the potential toxicities that may arise and be ready to treat aggressively as treatment is mainly supportive. This requires an interprofessional team approach to managing such toxicity, including education, interventions, monitoring, and follow-up from all disciplines, including clinicians, toxicology specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and mental health professionals. By coordinating activity and sharing information, the patient is more likely to achieve successful short- and long-term outcomes. [Level 5]

Ultimately, the primary remedy to the problem is prevention. Peters and Kok performed a literature review to identify reasons for ecstasy use and found reasons varied widely from curiosity to achieve the same level of intoxication as friends, availability/pricing, enhance mood and social interaction, and social influence.