The infection starts in the nasal cavity and extends to adjoining paranasal sinuses. It gets implanted and grows in the nasal cavity and sinuses. The humid environment of the nose and paranasal sinuses favors the growth and invasion of fungi. Invasion of mucosa and bone depends upon the duration, host immunity, and severity of the disease. Early implantation of fungi is common in maxillary sinus with a mass of fungal growth called a fungal ball and no bone erosion. The most common site involved in mucor is middle turbinate, followed by middle meatus and septum. In undiagnosed or untreated cases, the infiltration of bone is common. It almost extends in all surrounding tissues. It then progresses to the brain via either ethmoid sinuses, orbital apex, and through bone erosion or through angioinvasion.

Rapid progression of mucormycosis is due to its unique pathogenesis. Invasion of blood vessels by fungal hyphae damages the endothelium causing blood clots that occlude the blood vessels leading to ischemia and necrosis of surrounding tissue. This necrotic tissue is the nidus for organism growth, and it thrives there and subsequently invades the surrounding tissues through blood vessels. In Rhinocerebral mucormycosis, invasion of brain and orbit is through the involvement of sphenopalatine and internal maxillary arteries. The involvement of the internal carotid artery and cavernous sinus thrombosis is common only in long-standing cases.

There is an increased incidence of infection in diabetic patients, especially diabetic ketoacidosis. Hyperglycemia depletes the immunity of the body. Phagocytosis of leukocytes, neutrophils chemotaxis, and local inflammatory response is depressed in patients with diabetes mellitus. Rhizopus is found to thrive in the ketone-reductase system, glucose-rich medium, and low oxygen tension typical of diabetes. Iron is required for the growth of bacteria and fungi. The use of iron chelator (deferoxamine) makes the iron available in an appropriate form for fungal growth, thus increases fungal virulence.