# Continuing Education Activity

The third cranial nerve is also known as oculomotor nerve and has two major components, the outer parasympathetic fibers that supply the ciliary muscles and the sphincter pupillae
Inner somatic fibers that supply the levator palpebrae superioris in the eyelid (which retracts the upper eyelid) and the four extraocular muscles (superior, middle, inferior recti, and inferior oblique). Third nerve palsy has a variety of etiologies and can be a harbinger of serious pathology. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of CN III palsy and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the various etiologies that can manifest with CN III palsy.
- Describe the examination and evaluation procedure for a patient that presents with third cranial nerve palsy.
- Summarize the treatment and management option for CN III palsy based on specific etiology.
- Explain strategies to optimize care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by cranial nerve III palsy.

# Introduction

The third cranial nerve is also known as oculomotor nerve and has 2 major components:

- Outer parasympathetic fibers that supply the ciliary muscles and the sphincter pupillae

- Inner somatic fibers that supply the levator palpebrae superioris in the eyelid (which retracts the upper eyelid) and the 4 extraocular muscles (superior, middle, inferior recti, and inferior oblique).

LR6(SO4)3 is a simple mnemonic representing the innervation of the extraocular muscles. It stands for:

- LR6: Lateral rectus muscle which is supplied by the sixth cranial nerve

- SO4: Superior oblique muscle which is supplied by the fourth cranial nerve

- 3: The third cranial nerve supplies other extraocular muscles

# Etiology

**Third-Nerve Palsy (TNP) Causes**

- Vascular ischemia

- Trauma

- Intracranial neoplasm

- Hemorrhage

- Congenital

- Idiopathic

Diabetes mellitus and hypertension cause ischemic changes in the nerve and are the most common systemic causes of acquired nerve palsy.

The etiology and presentation of acquired third-nerve lesions at various levels are different

- Supranuclear lesions: Lesions at the level of the cerebral cortex or the supranuclear pathway cause conjugate paresis of both the eyes.

- Nuclear lesions: Vascular diseases, demyelination, and tumors are the main cause of third-nerve palsy.

- Fascicular lesions: The etiology is similar to the nuclear lesions.

- Basilar portion: In this region, isolated third-nerve palsy is very common. The primary causes of isolated palsy include aneurysms, diabetes mellitus,

- Intracavernous portion: As there are other nerves present in the vicinity of the third-nerve, any lesion in the cavernous sinus will result in multiple nerve palsies of the cranial nerve IV, cranial nerve VI, and the first division of cranial nerve V. The common etiology is diabetes, pituitary apoplexy, aneurysm, or carotid-cavernous fistula.

- Intraorbital portion: Trauma, tumors, and Tolosa-Hunt syndrome are the main causes of intraorbital third-nerve palsy.

**Third-Nerve Palsy in Children**

All acquired third-nerve palsy cases should be investigated thoroughly to exclude any space-occupying lesion. Other common causes include

- Congenital: 43%

- Local inflammation: 13%

- Trauma: 20%

- Aneurysm: 7%

- Myasthenia gravis

- Migraine

Also, all pediatric patients with strabismus should be checked for uncorrected refractive error after administering cycloplegics.

Congenital causes: Development aplasia or hypoplasia of the oculomotor nucleus, birth trauma due to molding forces acting on the skull during labor, intrauterine trauma, and rarely infections such as meningitis.

# Epidemiology

third-nerve palsy is an important sign of life-threatening aneurysms. Keane et al. studied the causes of TN and found the incidence of aneurysm to be 10%,

# Pathophysiology

The oculomotor nucleus complex present in the midbrain, at the level of the superior colliculus, consist of:

- Main motor nucleus

- Accessory parasympathetic nucleus (Edinger-Westphal nucleus)

As shown in the figure below, fibers pass through the interpeduncular fossa before passing between the posterior cerebral artery and the superior cerebellar artery to reach the cavernous sinus. During this course, the oculomotor nerve lies lateral to the posterior communicating artery. The nerve then divides into a superior and inferior division and enters the orbit through the superior orbital fissure.

Lesions such as an aneurysm, uncal herniation, or tumor, which compress the nerve from outside will involve the superficial pupillomotor fibers and their blood supply. On the other hand, medical lesion such as diabetes mellitus or hypertension microangiopathy will affect the vasa vasorum and thus spare the pupillary fibers. This results in pupil-sparing third nerve palsy.

# History and Physical

**Clinical Features**

- Ptosis: Due to paralysis of LPS (levator palpebrae superioris) muscle

- Ocular deviation: In case of third-nerve palsy, the lateral rectus and superior oblique are spared, and their unopposed action brings the eye in a “down and out” position.

- Pupil: In compressive third-nerve palsy, the pupil becomes fixed and dilated due to paralysis of sphincter pupillae. Ciliary muscle paralysis also leads to loss of accommodation. However, in ischemic lesions, the pupil is spared, and there is no loss of accommodation.

- Diplopia: This occurs due deviation of the affected eye resulting in the image falling on an extrafoveal point. However, due to ptosis the patient usually doesn’t complain of double vision as ptosis acts as a barrier to diplopia.

**Four Distinct Syndromes**

- Benedikt syndrome: Ipsilateral third-nerve palsy and contralateral tremors

- Weber syndrome: Ipsilateral third-nerve palsy and contralateral hemiplegia

- Nothnagel syndrome: Ipsilateral third-nerve palsy and cerebellar ataxia

- Claude syndrome: Combined features of both Benedikt and Nothnagel syndromes

# Evaluation

**Investigations**

Patients with pupil-sparing third-nerve palsy should be evaluated to exclude any vascular cause. Lab workup includes blood pressure recording, complete blood count (CBC), blood sugar including Hb1AC and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).

If the palsy is non-pupil-sparing, prompt neuro-ophthalmic evaluation should be undertaken. MRI is a more sensitive imaging modality for detecting intracranial anomaly than CT scan.

# Treatment / Management

**Conservative Treatment
**

It is advocated as a short-term measure in acute palsy and for patients who are over 50 years of age having a history of diabetes or hypertension.

**Surgical Treatment
**

In pupil-sparing cases, surgical treatment is advised after 6 months in acquired palsies, if there is no improvement in symptoms. Surgery for third-nerve palsy is nevertheless challenging, and the goals are to provide alignment of the eye in primary gaze and to provide binocular single vision. Before operating on the lid to correct ptosis, the eye should be aligned to prevent diplopia. Surgical options for TNP depend on the degree of the palsy: complete or partial. Surgery for complete third-nerve palsy includes resection of the medial rectus and recession of the lateral rectus muscle for correction of horizontal deviation.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Ophthalmoplegic migraine

- Internuclear ophthalmoplegia

- Ptosis in adults or congenital ptosis

- Anisocoria

- Myasthenia gravis

- Thyroid ophthalmopathy

# Prognosis

The prognosis in most cases of third-nerve palsy is usually good, as spontaneous regression of the symptoms occurs within a few months; however, the degree of recovery depends on the etiology and management.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cosmetic, as well as functional outcome, should be kept in mind while formulating treatment strategies. Surgical treatment is often required in case of complete oculomotor palsy. The surgery often results in a cosmetically acceptable alignment of the eyes.