Given higher soft-tissue contrast of MRI, MRI is superior to CT in hyperacute and acute phases. MRI of the brain is performed with and without gadolinium IV contrast, and it is used to evaluate acute ischemic stroke, transient ischemic attack (TIA), and hemorrhagic brain lesions. MRI was previously contraindicated in a patient who had pacemakers, metallic foreign bodies, aneurysm clips, implantable devices, and claustrophobia to MRI. But recently many of the medical devices are MR compatible or MR conditional (they are safe by MR scanners using low magnetic fields and under certain conditions). It is also challenging to perform MRI in morbidly obese patients. IV gadolinium contrast requires caution in a patient with renal impairment or contrast allergy.

**Conventional MRI sequences**

Findings of conventional MRI sequences such as fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), T2-Weighted imaging (T2WI), and T1-Weighted imaging (T1WI) are subtle in acute ischemic stroke in the first few hours. FLAIR images may show abnormal signal earlier than other conventional sequences and demonstrate signal changes within 3 hours after stroke onset.

**Diffusion-weighted imaging**

Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is now the best sequence to detect brain infarction earlier than CT or other MR sequences. It is one of the most sensitive (88% to 100%) and specific (95% to 100%) and accurate (95%) imaging modalities to detect ischemic core within minutes after onset (while conventional MRI and CT images are still normal at this stage).

The basic mechanism of DWI is beyond this text, but DWI works by measuring the Brownian motion of water molecules within a voxel of tissue. In the brain, infarction and hypoxia cause impairment of mitochondrial function. Secondary depletion of ATP causes malfunction of Na-K pumps and cellular welling by shifting the extracellular water to the intracellular space where the higher concentration of proteins and cell membrane reduces the Brownian motion of water molecules. The final result will be the diffusion restriction of water molecules in the infarcted tissue, which can be detected by the DW sequence. The diffusion restriction is depicted on DWI as hyper signal intensity.

It merits noting that not every hyper signal intensity on DWI is “true” diffusion restriction. The DWI is basically a T2 sequence and sometimes a T2 hypersignaling lesion (e.g., brain edema) will appear as a hypersignal on DWI a phenomenon called "T2 shine-effect”. To differentiate the “true” diffusion restriction (infarction) versus “T2 shine effect,” another sequence called apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) is necessary. To generate the ADC map, we repeat the DW sequences with different parameters and directions. The true diffusion restriction has a lower signal on the ADC map than the T2 shine effect (Figure 4 C and D).

**Magnetic resonance angiography**

Like CTA, MRA can be performed in stroke patients to evaluate large vessel occlusions and atherosclerotic lesions. It is useful in patients with allergy to IV CT iodinated contrast and could not receive these contrasts.