**Hydrocephalus**is a pathological condition in which CSF abnormally accumulates due to increased CSF production, blockage of flow, or decreased absorption. The ventricles distend to accommodate elevated CSF volumes, potentially causing damage to the brain by pressing its tissue against the boney skull. Hydrocephalus may be congenital or acquired. Blocked CSF flow throughout the ventricles is classified as non-communicating, or obstructive, hydrocephalus. The blockage is often a mass such as a tumor or an abscess located within a foramen. Because CSF secretion is constant, obstruction of flow will lead to CSF build up in front of the blockage. For example, stenosis of the cerebral aqueduct, one of the most common causes of obstructive hydrocephalus, leads to enlargement of both lateral ventricles as well as the third ventricle. If the flow of CSF becomes obstructed outside the ventricles, in either the subarachnoid space or site of absorption, it classifies as communicating, or non-obstructive, hydrocephalus.

Hydrocephalus can be caused by genetic defects, infections, bleeding in the brain, trauma, or CNS tumors. Symptoms include headaches, convulsions, nausea, vomiting, disturbances of vision, and mental deterioration. The diagnosis is determined through imaging techniques such as ultrasound, computed tomogram (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. The most common treatment is shunt insertion, which diverts CSF away from the ventricles to an area of the body where it can be absorbed into circulation. Endoscopic third ventriculostomy, a procedure in which a hole is created in the floor of the third ventricle allowing CSF to bypass an obstruction, and cauterization of CP sections which decreases CSF production are other treatment options.  If left untreated, hydrocephalus yields a risk of cognitive disturbances, physical disturbances, and death.

**CSF Leak**is a condition in which CSF is able to escape from the subarachnoid space through a hole in the surrounding dura. The volume of CSF lost in a leak varies, ranging from minute to very substantial amounts. If the loss of CSF is great enough, spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH) may occur. SIH most often presents with a positional headache caused by downward displacement of the brain due to loss of buoyancy previously provided by the CSF. Posterior neck stiffness, nausea, and vomiting are also common symptoms. The incidence of SIH is estimated to be 5/100,000 annually. Women are twice as likely to be affected and have a peak age at around 40 years.

Diagnosis is aided by typical MRI findings, such as an increase of intracranial venous volume, pituitary hyperemia, enhanced pachymeninges, and descent of the brain. Many cases of SIH resolve without treatment. Conservative approaches such as bed rest, hydration, and increased caffeine intake may also be effective; however, more drastic measures may be necessary. An epidural blood patch, where blood is injected into the spinal epidural space, may relieve CSF hypovolemic symptoms by replacing lost CSF volume with blood volume. Surgical repair of the CSF leak via a suture or metal aneurysm clip is relatively safe and effective in providing relief.

**Meningitis**is a condition in which the coverings of the brain become inflamed. There are two classifications of meningitis: aseptic and bacterial. Aseptic meningitis can result from agents such as fungi, medications, and cancer metastasis, but viruses cause the majority of aseptic meningitis cases. Fever, nuchal rigidity, and photophobia are classically presenting symptoms. Diagnosis is via an analysis of CSF obtained through LP. Viral PCR analysis of CSF is helpful in diagnosing viral meningitis. Treatment is often supportive, controlling fever and pain. Bacterial meningitis has a much lower incidence than aseptic meningitis, but is more serious. However, the incidence of bacterial meningitis has substantially dropped due to routine vaccination.

Symptoms are similar to aseptic meningitis, but clinical presentation is more severe. Additional symptoms include altered mental status, seizures, and focal neurologic signs. Diagnosis is also possible via LP. CSF is usually cloudy in appearance with a low glucose level and potential positive gram stain and culture. Patients presumed to have bacterial meningitis should immediately receive broad-spectrum antibiotics to prevent clinical deterioration. After culture results return, the clinician can make adjustments to the antibiotics. Patients should additionally be admitted to the intensive care unit for close monitoring. Most patients with bacterial meningitis who receive appropriate treatment recover without complications.

**Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**(SAH) is the leakage of blood into the subarachnoid space where it mixes with CSF. Trauma is the most common cause of SAH with 80% of nontraumatic SAHs resulting from aneurysm rupture. Other nontraumatic causes of SAH include arteriovenous malformations and vasculitis. Spontaneous SAH has a low incidence, with only 30,000 cases worldwide annually. Ninety-seven percent of patients with SAH present with a sudden onset headache, described as a thunderclap headache or the worst headache of the patient's life. Other symptoms include vomiting, seizures, loss of consciousness, and death. Non-contrast head CT is useful in diagnosis. CT has high sensitivity after hemorrhage, but sensitivity decreases as time passes. After a negative CT, an LP should follow to rule out SAH. An LP is positive when erythrocytes are present in tubes 1 and 4, or xanthochromia is visible. Management of SAH consists of reducing risks of re-bleeding and avoiding any secondary brain injuries.

**Pseudotumor Cerebri Syndrome**(PTCS) is a rare medical condition in which intracranial pressure is raised without the occurrence of ventriculomegaly or intracranial masses. The pathogenesis is not well understood. The most widely accepted theory proposes decreased absorption of CSF at the arachnoid granulations or the olfactory lymphatics as the cause. This condition has an annual incidence rate of 0.9/100,000 in the general population. Before puberty, both females and males are equally affected, but after puberty, women are affected nine times more often.

PTCS most commonly affects obese women of childbearing age. Women between the ages of 20 to 44 years and who weigh 20% more than their ideal body weight have an incidence rate of 19.3/100,000. A spinal fluid examination is critical in the diagnosis of PTCS. CSF pressure is greater than 250 mm CSF in adults and 280 mm CSF in children. Adolescents are the accepted values for diagnosis of PTCS. Headache is the most common presenting symptom, though there are no specific distinguishing characteristics of a PTCS headache. Occasionally asymptomatic patients present with papilledema detected during routine eye exams. Pulsatile tinnitus, transient visual obscurations, visual field defects, and visual loss are other symptoms of PTCS.

Traditional therapy includes medications to decrease CSF secretion from the choroid plexus. Surgery is indicated for patients with worsening vision caused by papilledema. Surgical options include optic nerve sheath fenestration and CSF shunting. Most patients with PTCS have a good outcome, although a small percentage of patients continue to experience persistent headaches or blindness.