**Stimulus Type:**A white stimulus can be displayed on a white background. This is the most commonly used stimulus type (standard achromatic perimetry or SAP).

SWAP test stimulus is said to target a subset of retinal ganglion cells that are affected earlier in glaucoma, though this is debatable.

**Stimulus size:**There are five different sizes of stimulus that can be used. The smallest stimulus size (0.0625 square mm or 1/16 square mm) subtends an arc of 6 min, whereas the largest size (64 square mm) subtends an arc of 1.7 degrees. The most commonly used size is type 3 or 4 mm, which subtends an angle of 0.43 degrees on the retina.

**Stimulus duration:**The duration of stimulus conventionally used in the Humphrey field analyzer is 0.2 seconds.

**Background illumination:**The uniform background illumination is 31.4 apostilb. At this luminance, the eye is minimally stimulated, and the visibility of the stimulus depends on the change in the contrast than brightness.

**To Ensure a Good Visual Field Result**

- The examiner conducting the test has a significant role to play. The patient should receive a careful explanation regarding what must be done during the test.

- The examiner must carefully monitor the patient's gaze throughout the test.

- It is better if the examiner has himself taken the perimetry test as they can share their experience and help the patient in better understanding of the test.

- The patient should be comfortably seated during the exam.

- It is always better if the patient understands what the stimulus will look like and how they need to respond.

- The results will be reliable if the patient is calm when taking the test and knows that it can be paused whenever they want.

- The fields should never be interpreted in isolation. A structure-function correlation is always advised. The field defect on the printout should correlate with the changes in the optic nerve or retina.