In children and young adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes, infectious diseases and disorders of the respiratory, circulatory, and genitourinary systems can cause HHS. Obesity and incessant consumption of carbohydrate-rich beverages have led to an increase in the incidence of HHS.

This is particularly true in the pediatric population, where the incidence of type 2 diabetes is on the rise.

As stated earlier, HHS is most commonly seen in patients with type 2 diabetes. If diabetes mellitus is well controlled, the chance of developing HHS is minimal. However, under certain conditions, some factors might initiate the development of HHS. The most frequent reason for this complication is infection. The infectious process in the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary systems can act as the causative factor. The reason for this is the insensible water loss and the release of endogenous catecholamines. Approximately 50% to 60% of HHS is attributable to an infectious etiology.

Some medications for the treatment of other ailments and conditions in elderly patients with type 2 diabetes can trigger HHS. Examples of such medications are thiazide diuretics, beta-blockers, glucocorticoids, and some atypical antipsychotics.

A cardiovascular insult like stroke, angina pectoris, and myocardial infarction can also trigger a stress response. This leads to the release of counterregulatory hormones with the resultant effect of an increased level of blood glucose, causing osmotic diuresis and dehydration, with the final result being HHS.