Carotidynia has conventionally been a diagnosis of exclusion. Complete blood count (CBC), thyroid function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are normal.

The diagnosis requires imaging evidence of the exclusion of other vascular and nonvascular causes of neck pain. Neck ultrasound (US) is recommended as the initial screening test and shows hypoechoic thickening, mild luminal narrowing, and outward extension of the carotid wall in the region of tenderness.

Computed tomography (CT) scan, digital subtraction arteriography, positron emission tomography (PET) scans, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are not recommended for routine evaluation, as these confer little additional benefit, and expose the patient to harmful radiation, magnetic field, and IV contrast agents.

Recently, PET scan has been utilized for the diagnosis of carotidynia, if the diagnosis remains elusive despite Doppler US, CT, and MRI of the neck. The PET scan demonstrates a focus of hypermetabolism of glucose in the region of carotid bifurcation in the absence of systemic vasculitis or pathologic changes in the carotid lumen. Although the finding of hypermetabolism of glucose is non-specific, the absence of a neck mass (ruling out cervical neoplasia as a cause of neck pain), the self-limiting clinical course of each episode, and immediate response to steroid treatment provide sufficient proof to diagnose carotidynia.

One of the characteristic features of carotidynia is the resolution of these changes on the follow-up imaging. A continued regression of the hypoechoic lesion of the carotid wall is appreciated on serial ultrasounds over the next few days. Other studies confirm a decrease in the maximum standard uptake volume (SUV) of 18F fluorodeoxyglucose activity in the repeat PET / CT after six months.

Other potential tests to evaluate a patient for carotidynia include serum amyloid A and soluble intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) levels, but their routine use is not recommended due to the lack of sufficient evidence of their utility from studies.****is aimed at excluding important differential diagnoses. A raised neutrophil count on CBC points towards possible infection such as sialadenitis, lymphadenitis, or peritonsillar abscess as a cause of the neck pain.