Diagnosing, managing, and treating overlap syndrome can be a difficult task to undertake and would not be possible without the coordinated effort between clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and lab technicians, operating as an interprofessional healthcare team, as well as the patients themselves. A patient's first interaction with the healthcare team is often with the nursing staff. Patients will often express their reason for visiting with the nursing staff before the physician can see the patient. At this point, screening questionnaires, as mentioned above, are a crucial first step in evaluation. The physician can then analyze these questionnaires. Next, a primary care clinician may refer the patient to a specialist, such as a pulmonologist or sleep medicine clinician.

When further workup is necessary, for example, in a formal sleep study with polysomnography, there is coordination between physicians to set up the appropriate screening, lab technicians to run and maintain necessary equipment, and nursing staff to further help with patient care and coordinating appointments. Lab titrations of PAP therapy are critical to providing patients with treatment tailored to their specific needs based on the severity of the disease and anatomical variations between individuals.

Nursing care goes beyond their role in clinic visits or the inpatient setting. Home nursing care also provides an essential role, particularly in patients who may have difficulties performing activities of daily living on their own. Home visits from skilled nurses can help identify deficiencies in the patient's care, whether equipment malfunction, noncompliance, or misuse of therapies. In addition, the nursing staff is necessary when educating patients to help them understand how to use medications and medical devices appropriately.

Pharmacists play a vital role in the interdisciplinary team when pharmacological therapy is involved. They can provide patients with the necessary respiratory medications and are also available to help answer patients' questions regarding pharmacologic interventions when the physician or nursing staff is not immediately available. Each component of the interprofessional healthcare system is crucial to provide patients with the best care and education to improve each patient's quality of life and clinical outcomes. [Level 5]