The equipment needed to perform anesthesia care during eye surgeries is the standard equipment normally present in modern-day operating rooms in the United States. Standard anesthesia monitors should always be present when providing any type of anesthesia to evaluate the patient, focusing on oxygenation, ventilation, circulation, and temperature monitoring when significant changes are anticipated. Oxygenation can be assessed via pulse oximetry, ventilation can be assessed via capnography, and circulation can be evaluated via continuous electrocardiogram and blood pressure readings every 5 minutes. An anesthesia machine may be required as well to assist in the delivery of positive pressure ventilation, fresh oxygen gas flows, and volatile anesthetics. These anesthesia machines will typically include gas analyzers as well.

In terms of pharmacotherapy, there should be easy access to emergency drugs such as epinephrine and atropine. A ready supply of neuromuscular blocking agents and airway equipment to rapidly secure an airway in the event of adverse events should be present. The anesthesia provider should also have ready access to lipid emulsification if an inadvertent intravascular injection occurs, resulting in local anesthetic systemic toxicity. Other medications needed to provide anesthesia, if regional anesthesia is selected, are local anesthetics as well as a medication called hyaluronidase, which may assist in the spread of local anesthetic to accomplish akinesia while reducing the volume of infiltration of the local anesthetic. Equipment for surgical blocks with local anesthetic involves small gauge needles (25 to 27 mm) that can be either sharp or blunt depending on the block technique.