Retinoblastoma (RB) has a survival rate of 90% to 95% with a good prognosis, although the affected eye might lose vision. Poor prognostic signs of retinoblastoma are optic nerve/extra-scleral/uveal invasion, multifocal tumors, delayed diagnosis, and degree of differentiation. Bilateral involvement doesn’t worsen the prognosis, while the degree of necrosis and calcification does not influence the prognosis. The prognosis of RB depends on the status of the tumor in the worst eye. High-risk features for recurrence are optic nerve invasion, massive choroidal involvement, orbital spread, and involvement of anterior segment and uveal tissue.

Congenital cataract has a good prognosis if diagnosed early and operated on before six weeks. Developmental cataract has a better prognosis than congenital cataract. Bilateral cataracts have a better prognosis than unilateral cataracts. Even a mild opacity can cause significant amblyopia. Unilateral cataracts also pose a higher risk of anisometropia.

Endogenous endophthalmitis doesn’t have a favorable prognosis. Most cases result in retinal detachment and uncontrolled infection, eventually requiring enucleation or evisceration.

FEVR is a lifelong disease and can reactivate at any time. Following treatment, patients with FEVR should be followed up every six months with fundus examination and fluorescein angiography. The prognosis of retinal detachment surgery is very poor because children often present with poor visual acuity with a higher percentage of macular involvement. Besides these, the child possesses a lifelong risk of cataracts, glaucoma, and recurrence in retinal detachment.

Medulloepithelioma, which is confined to the globe, has an excellent prognosis with a 5-year survival rate of 90-95% after enucleation.

The prognosis for retinochoroidal coloboma is reasonably good if amblyopia is managed in time and if the prophylactic laser is done to prevent retinal detachment. Foveal involvement in coloboma causes severe loss of vision.