The clinical manifestations of hypocalcemia can range from no symptoms if it is mild to life-threatening symptoms like seizures, heart failure, or laryngospasm if it is severe. Also, the clinical manifestation depends on the rate of development of hypocalcemia and its chronicity. The history and physical exam of patients with hypocalcemia should focus on identifying the symptoms present, as these may not be apparent in some patients, and also conducting provocation exams. Symptoms of hypocalcemia include:

- Seizures: Usually present in very severe hypocalcemia. It can be the sole manifestation or a part of the myriad of clinical presentations.

- Tetany: Is generally induced by a rapid decline in serum ionized calcium. Tetany is usually more dangerous and most commonly seen in the presence of respiratory alkalosis causing hypocalcemia.

- Paresthesias: Can be perioral or in the extremities.

- Psychiatric manifestations such as anxiety, depression, or emotional lability: can occasionally present in some cases of hypocalcemia.

- Carpopedal spasm: This is also referred to as Trousseau's sign. It represents increased neuromuscular excitability which may be related to the gating function of calcium ions for ion channels at a cellular level (particularly in neurons). It manifests as a spasm of the hand characterized by adduction of the thumb, flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joints, an extension of the interphalangeal joints, and flexion of the wrist when a sphygmomanometer is inflated above systolic blood pressure for three minutes.

- Chvostek's sign: This is another manifestation of heightened neuromuscular excitability. Tapping of the facial nerve in front of the ear causes ipsilateral contraction of the facial muscles.

- QTc prolongation: This can lead to Torsades de pointes that, although extremely rare, can be fatal.

The second part of the history and physical exam should focus on determining the cause of hypocalcemia such as recent head and neck surgery, family history of similar problems, history of kidney disease, alcohol abuse (hypomagnesemia), psychiatric history, etc.