- Psychosis is a constellation of symptoms resulting in a loss of touch with reality.

- 1.5 from 3.5% of people will meet the criteria for a primary psychiatric disorder in their lifetime, while many more will experience some variation of psychotic symptoms.

- Abnormalities of temporal grey matter have a link to first-episode psychosis.

- Initial psychotic episodes correlate epigenetic or environmental stressors.

- A psychotic episode or disorder will result in the presence of one or more of the following five categories: Delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thought, disorganized behavior, negative symptoms.

- The incidence of a psychotic episode is around 50 in 10,000 people.

- The peak onset of a psychotic disorder is earlier in males than females.

- Dopamine, glutamate, GABA, and acetylcholine are all neurotransmitters implicated in psychosis.

- "Bizarre" delusions are not plausible. "Non-bizarre" delusions are often extraordinarily unlikely, but possible.

- A detailed history and mental status exam (MSE) are critical for arriving at a diagnosis.

- A urine toxicology screen, along with standard medical workup, can help to rule out the non-psychiatric cause of psychosis. Remember, not all drugs will show up on screening.

- Differentiating between primary psychotic disorders, and psychotic disorders associated with another medical or neurologic condition: Age of onset, the pattern of onset, genetics, presentation, hallucinations.

- The prodromal phase of schizophrenia is often confused with major depressive disorder.

- A psychiatrist should always evaluate a patient experiencing a psychotic episode.

- Antipsychotic medications are the gold-standard treatment for psychotic episodes and disorders.

- Antipsychotics have demonstrated greater efficacy in treating positive symptoms.

- Antipsychotics can have significant side effects (QTc prolongation, EPS, metabolic syndrome, sexual side effects, tardive dyskinesia, etc.).

- Clozapine and olanzapine are the only antipsychotics shown to decrease suicidality in psychotic patients.

- A safe and therapeutic environment, with calm, empathetic patient interactions, are essential for treating psychotic symptoms.

- There is potential for positive outcomes in patients with psychotic disorders.

- Early intervention is essential for long term outcomes.

- Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate increased risk for suicide compared to the general population.