**Aneurysms**

Of all pathologies that may involve the AchA, aneurysms are the most common lesions involving this artery. Although only 2 to 4% of all intracranial aneurysms involve the AchA, understanding the clinical features is essential in establishing a diagnosis. Most etiologies of AchA aneurysms coincide with that involve the ICA; increased risk with diseases such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), Ehler-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, and other connective tissue diseases. Other risk factors include advanced age, smoking, and hypertension. Because most AchA aneurysms are undetected until they rupture, a ruptured aneurysm may present with subarachnoid hemorrhage.

**Infarction**

Infarct involving the AchA is a rare occurrence, but when it does, it is most commonly due to cardioembolic occlusion of the ICA. Because the AchA has numerous anastomoses with the posterior cerebral artery and the posterior choroidal artery, complete infarct of the AchA is usually not seen.  However, the branches of the AchA that supply the posterior limb of the internal capsule do not have a collateral supply and can result in an isolated infarction. In such cases, patients may present with contralateral paralysis due to the involvement of the fibers of the corticospinal tract; this is distinguishable from an ACA or MCA infarct due to the absence of cortical signs such as neglect or aphasia.

**Brain Tumors**

Tumors that may affect the AchA include choroid papillomas, meningiomas, and gliomas due to their proximity to the lateral ventricle.

Any damage or occlusion of AChA produces the classic AChA syndrome, which is often rare and incomplete. The features include contralateral hemiplegia, hemisensory loss, and homonymous hemianopia.