There is no specific test to detect cow's milk allergy. The basis of diagnosis is primarily on the history of symptoms and physical exam. It is important to detail the timeline of symptoms and when they occur. Carrying out a diagnostic protocol in infants for suspected cow's milk allergy may help to rule in or out the disease.

Primary tests, if used, include a skin prick test and serum-specific IgE. Both tests show high sensitivity but low specificity and can be positive in non-allergic subjects.

Serum-specific IgE to cow’s milk allergy: This can aid in the diagnosis of IgE mediated cow's milk allergy and cut-off values are multifactorial and should be set by each allergist.

Skin prick test: This is performable by an allergy specialist.

Diet elimination: If suspected, an infant should receive a diet free of cow's milk protein for a month. If symptoms improve following elimination of the suspected food, then an oral food challenge is the gold standard test.

Algorithm:

1: If there are signs of anaphylaxis or immediate reaction, then diet elimination is recommended, and testing for serum IgE should follow. If serum-specific IgE is positive, then the child is diagnosed with a cow's milk allergy. If IgE is negative and symptoms improve after diet elimination, an oral challenge should be next. If the symptoms reoccur, the diagnosis is confirmed. If the symptoms do not reoccur, then the diagnosis of cow's milk allergy is excluded.

2: If the symptoms are not consistent with anaphylaxis or immediate reaction, then an elimination diet is recommended. If symptoms improve, then an oral challenge should be done, and if symptoms reoccur, the diagnosis is confirmed. If the symptoms do not reoccur, it excludes the diagnosis of cow's milk allergy.

3: If symptoms do not improve after the elimination diet, this eliminates the diagnosis of cow's milk allergy, and further evaluation should be done to assess the patient.