Complications of surgery are multiple and include bleeding, infection, and orocutaneous fistula. When a free or pedicled flap is employed, complications include donor site infection, bleeding, and partial or complete flap loss or infection. Depending on the extent of resection and adequacy of reconstruction, there may be function-related complications such as impaired speech, dysphagia, and odynophagia. A gastrostomy is frequently needed at the time of surgery if speech and swallow rehabilitation are anticipated to be problematic or prolonged. A tracheostomy is also frequently employed if significant oral cavity and pharyngeal airway edema are anticipated in the immediate postoperative period.

Radiation therapy complications include oral/pharyngeal mucositis, skin damage, cellulitis, dysgeusia, xerostomia, fibrosis, and oral mucosal neuropathy. One of the most troublesome complications of radiation therapy in this region is mandibular osteoradionecrosis (ORN). This may require surgical intervention for curettage, and in severe cases, segmental mandibulectomy of the affected region and reconstruction. Although hyperbaric oxygen therapy is sometimes given to treat mandibular ORN, some surgeons argue this may increase the probability of malignancy recurrence or may catalyze the growth of microscopic persistent disease. No high-level evidence studies to date have conclusively demonstrated this correlation, but anecdotal evidence exists, and the decision remains clinician-dependent.

Common radiation side effects in the neck region include post-radiation fibrosis, frozen neck, neuropathy, and hypothyroidism, among others. Symptomatic esophageal stenosis due to post-radiation fibrosis is not uncommon and may manifest even years after radiation therapy.

One of the most feared complications of advanced-stage head and neck cancer is carotid blowout. This usually presents with life-threatening hemorrhage and used to be almost uniformly fatal. However, mortality today is close to 60% due to major surgical and endovascular advances. Nonetheless, periprocedural morbidity is high and may include re-bleeding and stroke.