Current recommendations are to obtain diagnostic testing for the workup of OSA in patients with excessive daytime sleepiness on most days as well as two or more of the following symptoms: diagnosed hypertension, loud snoring, witnessed apneas or gasping/choking episodes during sleep. In the absence of these symptoms, some recommend pursuing diagnostic testing for excessive daytime sleepiness alone if there is a concern for obstructive sleep apnea given the overall clinical presentation or if an evaluation for OSA must be ruled out during the workup for another disorder.

A widely used, validated tool that helps differentiate sleepiness from fatigue used in diagnosing OSA, which evaluates daytime sleepiness, is the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. This survey asks the patient to rate the likelihood of falling asleep from 0-3 (0 would never fall asleep to 3-a high chance of dozing off) in various situations. A total score of greater than 10 is suspicious for OSA.

The gold standard for the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea is an in-laboratory polysomnogram. This is preferred for all patients, but in certain populations/situations, an at-home polysomnogram is an acceptable alternative to an in-laboratory study. Patients in whom an at-home sleep study may be an appropriate alternative include those with no suspicion of another sleep-related diagnosis, an adequate device is available for at-home testing, and a sleep expert is available to interpret the data. If the study is inconclusive or suspicion of OSA remains despite a negative at-home polysomnogram result, an in-laboratory polysomnogram should be completed.

An understanding of key indexes of sleep-disordered breathing is required to understand the data of a polysomnogram and diagnose obstructive sleep apnea. The Apnea Index (AI) refers to the total number of apneas per hour of sleep. The Hypopnea Index (HI) is the total number of apneas per hour of sleep. The AI and HI are used to calculate the Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI), which is the total apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep. This calculation serves as one of the important determinants in the diagnosis of OSA. The RERA Index refers to the total number of RERAs that occur per hour of sleep. The Respiratory Disturbance Index (RDI) is an index that is calculated as the total number of apneas, hypopneas, and RERAs per hour of sleep. The Central Apnea Intex is another useful index calculated by the total number of central apneas per hour of sleep. Similarly, the Mixed Apnea Index may be calculated to find the total number of mixed apneas per hour of sleep.

The diagnosis of OSA is confirmed on polysomnogram if there are five or more predominantly obstructive respiratory events per hour (which refers to an AHI or RDI 5 or greater) in a patient who has one or more sleep-associated symptoms or conditions (which include sleepiness, fatigue, sleep that is unrestful, insomnia, apneas, gasping or choking, consistent snoring breathing interruptions witnessed by a bed partner, mood disorder, diagnosed hypertension, cognitive dysfunction, cerebrovascular accident, coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation, congestive heart disease, or diabetes mellitus type II). Alternatively, the diagnosis of OSA is also confirmed if there are fifteen or more predominantly obstructive respiratory events per hour (referring to an AHI or RDI of 15 or greater), regardless of associated symptoms or conditions. OSA is generally classified as mild, moderate, or severe. Mild OSA refers to an AHI or RDI between 5 and 14 on a polysomnogram. Moderate OSA refers to an AHI or RDI between 15 and 30. Patients with an AHI or RDI greater than 30 on a polysomnogram are categorized as having severe OSA.