Branchial cleft cysts result from elements of the cervical sinus of His becoming entrapped without an external or internal opening, forming an epithelial lined cyst. They have also been proposed to develop from epithelial rests of tissue from Waldeyer’s ring. Pure branchial cleft cysts/sinuses are relatively rare, and often there is a combination of the 2.

**Embryology**

Branchial cleft cysts develop early during gestation. During week 4 of embryonic development, four branchial (pharyngeal) clefts form five ridges. These ridges contribute to the formation of portions of the head, neck, and thorax. These mesodermal ridges form the 6 branchial (pharyngeal) arches. The branchial arches form grooves or clefts externally and pouch internally. A pouch is associated with a ventral or dorsal wing and is lined by endoderm. The branchial arch derivatives are lined with mesoderm. Ectoderm lines the branchial cleft derivatives. Each arch is associated with a cartilaginous bar, carotid artery derivative,  cranial nerve, and vein. The nerves run anterior to the artery associated with each arch, except for in the case of the sixth arch where the nerve runs posterior to the artery.

The first branchial arch also known as the mandibular arch is associated with the trigeminal (V) nerve while the artery degenerates. The second arch is associated with the facial (VII) nerve and the second aortic arch degenerates. If this artery does not degenerate, then a stapedial artery persists. The third branchial arch is associated with cranial nerve IX, the glossopharyngeal nerve. The common and internal carotid arteries are associated with the third arch. The fourth arch is associated with the superior laryngeal nerve, a branch of the vagus (X) nerve. On the left, the fourth arch gives rise to the aorta, while on the right the fourth arch gives rise to the proximal subclavian artery. The fifth branchial arch degenerates. The sixth branchial arch gives rise to the pulmonary artery on both the left and right in addition the ductus arteriosus on the left. The sixth arch also gives rise to a branch of the vagus (X) nerve, the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The 12th cranial nerve lies caudal to all arches.