The clinical presentation varies based on age, underlying immune status, and geography. Acute Q fever is more common and is a systemic illness, whereas chronic Q fever is seen in less than 5% as a persistent, localized infection of a specific organ system.

**Acute Q Fever**

The most common presentation is a self-limiting acute febrile illness lasting 1 to 3 weeks and an incubation period of approximately 20 days (range 14 to 39).

Atypical or rapidly progressive pneumonia is the next common clinical presentation, especially in older adults. It may be associated with chills, sweats, myalgia, pleuritic chest pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Pleural effusion is uncommon but not absent. Symptoms typically last from 10 to 90 days. Mortality rates are low when compared to the symptoms (ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 percent).

A rash is commonly seen in children. Acute hepatitis is also common in younger adults and can be complicated as cholestatic jaundice or acalculous cholecystitis. Along with transaminitis, patients can present with prolonged fever of unknown origin with characteristic granulomas on liver biopsy. The granulomas are "doughnut-like" because of the presence of a lipidic vacuole surrounded by a fibrinoid ring.

Aseptic meningitis or encephalitis has also been reported with neurological complications such as cerebellar dysfunction, cranial nerve palsies, extrapyramidal disease, and demyelinating polyradiculoneuritis.

Hematological involvement results in hemolytic anemia and histiocytic hemophagocytosis. Infection during the first trimester of pregnancy carries a high risk of abortion.

A small number of patients may also develop acute endocarditis, which appears to be an autoimmune complication of early infection, and is associated with the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.

**Chronic Q Fever**

Persistent, localized infections occur in approximately 1 to 5 percent of patients infected with C. burnetii.

**Q Fever In Pregnant Patients**

Although the infection is usually asymptomatic in pregnant patients, it can result in obstetrical complications such as spontaneous abortion, oligohydramnios, fetal growth restriction, fetal death, and preterm birth.

**Post-Q Fever Fatigue Syndrome**

About 20% of patients develop a post-Q fever fatigue syndrome after an episode of acute Q fever. Symptoms include severe fatigue, nausea, headache, night sweats, myalgias, arthralgia, lymphadenopathy, decreased concentration, depression, difficulty sleeping, and impaired short-term memory. It can occur in patients who had spontaneous resolution of their symptoms and also in those who were treated with antibiotics. Moreover, the risk varies according to geographical location. For instance, compared with France, post-Q fever fatigue syndrome occurs at a higher rate in the United Kingdom.