Delirium is a common disorder seen in hospitalized and clinic-based patients and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. The diagnosis and management of delirium are complex and best done with an interprofessional team that could include a geriatrician, neurologist, psychiatrist, internist, intensivist, nurses, and physical and occupational therapists. Nurses are often the first to detect the presence of delirium and should communicate their concerns as soon as possible with the interprofessional healthcare team. All providers should maximize efforts to maintain a quiet environment for the patient, maximize sleep at night, encourage mobility, and nutrition, ensure patient safety and communicate with the patient and family.

Pharmacists and clinicians (including MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs) should ensure the patient is not receiving medications that precipitate delirium whenever possible, including psychoactive medications or anticholinergic effects. The pharmacist can perform medication reconciliation and verify appropriate dosing, reporting concerns to the nursing staff and/or the prescribing/ordering clinician. Nurses can monitor for signs of pain, encourage consistent use of hearing and visual aids, and minimize nighttime disturbances. Physical and occupational therapists can optimize patient mobility. These are a few examples of how interprofessional teamwork can optimize patient outcomes and minimize adverse events in managing patients with delirium.

The primary treatment for delirium is based on prevention and non-pharmacologic interventions because there are no FDA-approved medications for the treatment or prevention of delirium.

The Hospital Elder Life Program (HELP) has been shown to reduce the incidence of delirium in elderly patients and reduce falls and overall health care costs. These interventions include identifying at-risk patients, decreasing environmental disturbances, increasing re-orientation interventions, and maximizing mobility.

Pharmacological agents are used in cases of substance withdrawal-associated delirium, delirium at the end of life, and cases of hyperactive delirium where the patient's behavior is a threat to themselves or others. There should be open communication between the interprofessional team members to ensure that the patient is receiving goal-directed treatment. [Level 5]