# Continuing Education Activity

The FDA-approved indications for desflurane are induction or maintenance of anesthesia in adults. It may also be used to maintain anesthesia in pediatric patients following induction with agents other than desflurane. Desflurane is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers. Desflurane is very resistant to defluorination. For this reason, it is not associated with nephrotoxicity, as is the case with other inhalational anesthetic agents. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, pharmacology, monitoring, and relevant interactions of desflurane, pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the treatment of patients where anesthesia is appropriate.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for using desflurane for anesthesia.
- Describe the possible adverse effects of desflurane.
- Outline the anesthetic mechanism of action of desflurane.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care delivery for patients when using desflurane as an anesthesia agent.

# Indications

The FDA-approved indications for desflurane are induction or maintenance of anesthesia in adults. It may also be used to maintain anesthesia in pediatric patients following induction with agents other than desflurane. Desflurane is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers. Desflurane (1,2,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl difluoromethyl ether) was first synthesized in the 1970s; it is halogenated exclusively with fluorine and is very resistant to defluorination.

# Mechanism of Action

The mechanism of action of the inhalational agents is still unclear. Inhalational anesthetics are thought to work via interaction with different ion channels present throughout the central and peripheral nervous system by blocking excitatory channels and enhancing the activity of inhibitory channels. Other proposed mechanisms are that these agents work by affecting the membrane bilayer. The structure of desflurane is similar to that of isoflurane except for the addition of a fluorine atom. This addition changes the physical properties of desflurane compared to other inhalational agents. The vapor pressure of desflurane at 20 degrees Celsius is 681 mm Hg, with a boiling point of 22.8 degrees Celsius. Desflurane requires the use of a temperature-controlled, pressure-regulated vaporizer, as opposed to a variable bypass vaporizer. The molecular weight of desflurane is 168 grams, and a very small percentage of the anesthetic is metabolized by the body compared to other inhalational agents.

# Administration

Desflurane administration is via the inhalational route. It has a pungent odor, making it difficult to use for the induction of general anesthesia. It is used most commonly for maintaining general anesthesia after induction with an IV or another inhalational agent. Minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) of desflurane is 6.0% in the 31 to 65 year age group and 7.25% in the 18 to 30 year age group. The blood/gas partition coefficient of desflurane is 0.42, making it even less soluble than nitrous oxide, which has a blood/gas partition coefficient of 0.47. Desflurane can cause very rapid induction and emergence from anesthesia, given its low blood solubility. This quality allows the alveolar concentration to approach the inspired concentration of desflurane much more quickly, permitting rapid titration of anesthetic levels. Emergence from desflurane after an hour-long case can take around six minutes, in contrast to sevoflurane which can take up to 18 minutes. Desflurane's vapor pressure, 681 mm Hg at sea level, is significantly higher than the other inhalational anesthetics and leads to a boiling point near room temperature. Its high vapor pressure and low boiling point led to the creation of a special desflurane vaporizer. This vaporizer pressurizes desflurane to 1500 mm Hg, which is roughly two atmospheres of pressure, and warms it to 40 degrees Celsius, allowing optimal control of the concentration of anesthetic delivered to the patient. Desflurane vaporizers are electrically powered heat devices.

# Adverse Effects

Desflurane, along with the other inhalational agents, sevoflurane and isoflurane, is a potent vasodilator and can cause a decrease in blood pressure by decreasing systemic vascular resistance (SVR). A concomitant increase in heart rate sometimes occurs. Cardiac output is typically preserved with the use of this agent. Desflurane dilates cerebral arteries and causes a decrease in cerebral metabolic rate. Desflurane also causes an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP), like other inhalational anesthetics. This increase in ICP can be targeted by hyperventilation and hypocapnia in a patient as carbon dioxide (CO2) autoregulation is maintained with use. There is also a dose-related depression in electroencephalogram (EEG) activity with the use of desflurane.  When used to maintain anesthesia in the pediatric population, after induction with another inhalational agent, desflurane was associated with an increased rate of emergence delirium.

Rapid increases in desflurane concentration can cause a transient but clinically significant elevation in heart rate and blood pressure. These effects are secondary to catecholamine release, which is more pronounced with desflurane than isoflurane or sevoflurane. This resulting sympathetic response is controllable by concurrent administration of esmolol, clonidine, or the use of an opioid. Slowing the rate of increase in the concentration of desflurane can also decrease the catecholamine release. Volatile anesthetics promote skeletal muscle relaxation and enhance the effects of neuromuscular blocking agents. Desflurane enhances the effects of rocuronium, greater than either sevoflurane, isoflurane, or intravenous anesthetics. As with all inhaled anesthetics, there is a decrease in the ventilatory response to CO2.

# Contraindications

Desflurane contraindications include induction of anesthesia in nonintubated pediatric patients because of a high incidence of moderate to severe upper airway adverse events. Pediatric patients are at high risk of laryngospasm

# Monitoring

Neurologic monitoring has been used to assess for depth of anesthesia in the operating room setting. Electroencephalogram (EEG) is infrequently used during cerebrovascular surgery to monitor anesthesia and cerebral oxygenation. Most commonly used is a bispectral index (BIS) to indicate wakefulness in a patient.

# Toxicity

Desflurane is the most likely inhaled anesthetic to result in carbon monoxide (CO) production, compared with isoflurane and sevoflurane. The mechanism of production of CO is through degradation of desflurane by desiccated CO2 absorbent, barium hydroxide lime. It can produce clinically significant levels of carbon monoxide, stressing the importance of replacing dried CO2 absorbents. Although rare, severe hepatic injury can follow anesthesia with desflurane, along with other inhalational agents, and may include massive hepatic necrosis. The mechanism is immunologic. Desflurane undergoes metabolism by cytochrome P-450 to produce trifluoroacetate, which binds to hepatocyte proteins, forming complexes that stimulate antibody formation. Exposures after antibody formation can lead to hepatic necrosis. This is much less common than with other agents such as halothane but is still possible, given the metabolite. There is currently no treatment for hepatic effects of desflurane; the use of desflurane or similar inhalational anesthetics should be avoided in the future if any hepatic impairment is suspected.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional communication and teamwork are vital in preventing any untoward effects from desflurane. The earlier identification of the signs and symptoms of a complication occurs, the better is the prognosis and outcome. The anesthesiologist/nurse anesthetist must make the surgeon aware and all other staff in the operating room if any complication is suspected. OR nurses can assist with patient monitoring. One particular example is in the case of malignant hyperthermia; given the high-risk outcome of patients with suspected malignant hyperthermia, corrective action must take place immediately. Offending agents must be discontinued, and immediate enactment of treatment algorithms for malignant hyperthermia should supersede the continuation of the surgical procedure until the restoration of hemodynamic stability. Such an event will also require intervention from clinicians and nursing staff should it occur. This is why the interprofessional model is the best approach for all anesthesia agents, including desflurane. [Level 5]