Brain and spinal MRI should be included in the initial workup if spontaneous intracranial hypotension is suspected. CSF pressure measurement can also provide a major hint. The temporal relation of postural headache with trauma or surgery also points to the diagnosis of spontaneous intracranial hypotension. Brain MRI, both with and without contrast, is useful. The presence of dispersed uniform pachymeningeal enhancement is diagnostic in most cases.

A retrospective study of 165 patients with spontaneous intracranial hypotension showed that 31 had a subdural hematoma, and 103 had imaging findings of pachymeningeal enhancement on MRI. Brain MRI, CT myelography, and MR myelography can help in localizing the CSF leaks in the patients. MRI localized the leaks in 152 of 165 patients, MR myelography localized the leaks in 111 of 117 patients, and CT myelography was able to identify CSF leaks in 43 of 48 patients with spontaneous intracranial hypotension. Moreover, 149 of 165 patients had CSF leaks at multiple levels, with the majority (63.9 %) present in the cervicothoracic region.

Spinal MRI can play a big role in spotting the point where CSF leakage is occurring. Moreover, it can help in establishing the diagnosis. The findings on spine MRI might include the epidural leakage of the fluid, presence of meningeal diverticula, fluid collection in the extra-meningeal cavity, and the shrinking of the dural sac in addition to distended epidural venous plexus.

The diagnostic criteria for spontaneous intracranial hypotension in the International Classification of Headache Disorders (3rd Edition) include the following points:

1) Headache that can fulfill criterion number 3

2) Presence of low CSF pressure

3) A chronological relation of headache with CSF leakage or low CSF pressure

4) Findings are not explained by any other disease or phenomenon