Topical corticosteroids are administered topically; however, successful administration depends upon obtaining an accurate diagnosis, choosing the correct drug, selecting the appropriate vehicle and potency, and the frequency of application.

The vehicle is the carrier of the drug. The vehicle selection depends on the region affected and the type of lesion present. It also functions to hydrate the skin and increase absorption. The vehicle options include the following

- Ointments - administered for thick hyper-keratotic lesions; the most potent vehicle since they are the most occlusive and should not be administered on hair-bearing regions because it may result in folliculitis

- Creams - less potent than ointment but cosmetically more appealing since they leave no residue; the drying, non-occlusive nature leads to their administration for acute exudative inflammation and dermatitis within the intertriginous areas.

- Lotions - less occlusive and greasy; work well in hair-bearing regions

- Gels - like lotions, less occlusive and greasy; work well in hair-bearing regions; more beneficial for the scalp as they do not cause matting of thleast occlusive and greasye hair

- Foams - highly effective for steroid delivery to the scalp but are costly

The potency of topical corticosteroids is the amount of drug needed to produce a desired therapeutic effect. The gold standard for determining potency is the vasoconstrictor assay which measures the vasoconstrictive properties based upon cutaneous vasoconstriction.

Class I
superpotent corticosteroids include clobetasol propionate 0.05% in any vehicle, augmented betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% gel or ointment, diflorasone diacetate 0.05% ointment, fluocinonide 0.1% cream, and halobetasol propionate 0.05% cream or ointment.

Class II
high-potency corticosteroids include amcinonide 0.1% ointment, augmented betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% cream or lotion, betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% ointment, desoximetasone cream or gel or ointment, diflorasone diacetate 0.05% cream, fluocinonide 0.05% cream or gel or ointment, and halcinonide 0.1% cream or ointment or solution.

Class III
medium- to high-potency corticosteroids include amcinonide 0.1% cream, betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% cream, fluticasone propionate 0.005% ointment, and triamcinolone acetonide 0.5% cream or ointment.

Class IV and V medium-potency corticosteroids include betamethasone valerate 0.1% cream or lotion or foam, desoximetasone 0.05% cream, Fluocinolone acetonide 0.025% cream or ointment, fluticasone propionate 0.05% cream, hydrocortisone butyrate 0.1% ointment, hydrocortisone probutate 0.1% cream, hydrocortisone valerate 0.2% cream or ointment,   mometasone furoate 0.1% cream or lotion or ointment, triamcinolone acetonide 0.025% cream or lotion or ointment, and triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% cream or lotion or ointment.

Class VI low-potency corticosteroids include alclometasone dipropionate 0.05% cream or ointment, desonide 0.05% in any vehicle, fluocinolone 0.01% cream, and hydrocortisone butyrate 0.1% cream.

Class VII least-potent corticosteroids include hydrocortisone 1% and 2.5% cream or lotion or ointment.

Corticosteroids are better absorbed and more permeable in regions of thin epidermis, such as the eyelid, compared to thicker regions of epidermis, such as the sole. The penetration difference between the two varies by 300 fold.

The amount of steroid used plays a great part in the efficacy of treatment but also in avoiding adverse effects from overuse. One fingertip unit (FTU) is equal to 0.5 grams. The suggested dose of FTU is dependent upon the body region being treated. Topical corticosteroids are recommended for once to twice daily use.