Patients with thyrotoxicosis most commonly present with signs and symptoms related to excess thyroid hormone including: weight loss with a normal or increased appetite, heat intolerance with increased sweating, palpitations, tremor, anxiety, proximal muscle weakness, alopecia and increased fatigability. Sinus tachycardia is the most common cardiac rhythm problem, but atrial fibrillation may occur and is frequently seen with advanced patient age, valvular disease, and coronary artery disease. Women may present with amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea. Men may present with gynecomastia rarely. It is common for older patients to manifest fewer of the typical clinical manifestations and instead present with depression, fatigue, and weight loss, also known as apathetic thyrotoxicosis.

On physical exam, patients are often cachectic, hyperthermic, diaphoretic, and anxious appearing. They may have goiter, tachycardia or atrial fibrillation, dyspnea, abdominal tenderness, hyperreflexia, proximal muscle weakness, tremor, and gynecomastia. Patients with Graves' disease present with pretibial myxoedema, thyroid acropachy, and onycholysis.[

In rare cases, patients present in thyroid storm with tachycardia, fever, altered mental status, agitation, features of cardiac failure, and impaired liver function.

Findings specific to Graves’ disease include ophthalmopathy resulting in proptosis, chemosis, conjunctival injection and lid lag, exposure keratitis and extra-ocular muscle dysfunction, pretibial myxedema and thyroid acropachy (clubbing).

In subacute thyroiditis, patients have a history of recent upper respiratory illness and generally present with fever, neck pain and swelling with a firm and tender thyroid gland. Painless thyroiditis often presents in the postpartum period, and patients frequently have a personal or family history of autoimmune or thyroid disease. Suppurative thyroiditis presents with a tender, erythematous mass in the anterior neck and patients often complain of fever, dysphagia, and dysphonia.

Occasionally, patients may present with acute muscle paralysis and severe hypokalemia, termed thyrotoxic periodic paralysis.