Excess natural or synthetic vitamin A levels may result in a wide array of adverse effects. Vitamin A toxicity, also known as hypervitaminosis A, is more commonly associated with abuse of vitamin A supplements than with health intervention programs. Toxic reactions may also be provoked by consuming liver products rich in vitamin A or excess administration of vitamin A preparations. The amount of vitamin A required to cause toxicity among individuals varies depending on age and hepatic function.

Acute vitamin A toxicity may occur with a single ingestion of 25,000 IU/kg or more. Signs and symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, lethargy, drowsiness, increased intracranial pressure, and skin changes such as erythema, pruritus, or desquamation.

Chronic vitamin A toxicity may occur with excessive ingestion of 4000 IU/kg or more daily for 6 to 15 months. Signs and symptoms include low-grade fever, headache, fatigue, anorexia, intestinal disturbances, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, hypercalcemia, subcutaneous swelling, nocturia, joint and bone pain, and skin changes like yellowing, dryness, alopecia, and photosensitivity.

Vitamin A is highly teratogenic if taken during pregnancy. Retinoids affect the expression of the homeobox gene Hoxb-1, which regulates the axial patterning of the embryo. Birth abnormalities include craniofacial, cardiac, and central nervous system malformations. Therefore, treatment with vitamin A should be avoided in pregnant patients except in areas where vitamin A deficiency is prevalent. In this circumstance, supplementation should not exceed 10,000 IU daily.

Of note, mild adverse effects have been observed with vitamin A given with immunization. Symptoms include loose stools, headache, irritability, fever, nausea, and vomiting. These side effects are rare and typically resolved within 24 to 48 hours.