The safe and successful utilization of any nuclear imaging modalities discussed above depends not only on expert knowledge from members of each discipline but also on careful communication among the healthcare team. This begins as early as the ordering of the exam. Channels for dialogue with a nuclear medicine physician should be established and accessible so an ordering physician can consider the diagnostic yield of a scan or patient appropriateness for a study in a given clinical scenario.

It is the responsibility of the ordering clinician or practitioner to ensure the appropriateness of the test before subjecting the patient to its associated risks. During the imaging process, the patient will inevitably encounter multiple handoffs of their care; the use of standardized handoff techniques is recommended, such as SBAR or an institution-specific model. Clear written instructions on preparing for the exam should be given to the patient before the exam day.

The highly technical nature of the exams also presents areas for interdisciplinary cooperation. For example, each radiotracer has a particular timeframe in which it must be administered following preparation. Coordination between the radiology technician preparing the radiotracer and the administering technician, who has insight on patient readiness for the exam, will ensure the tracers prepared are neither wasted nor administered inappropriately. Timing when obtaining imaging is often crucial to produce satisfactory and clinically useful results.

Depending on the purpose of the exam and the diagnosis being investigated, the timing of imaging may be variable even within an individual imaging modality. Clear communication between the ordering practitioner and the nuclear medicine physician about the indications for the exam and the information desired from the exam will allow for implementing the appropriate imaging protocol.

In the imaging suite, careful communication should continue between the radiology staff and the patient to ensure patient-centered care, patient safety, and patient satisfaction. Unique circumstances may arise regarding patient handling of trauma patients in the scanner, for example, which require additional caution. Time should be protected before the exam for a full explanation of the procedure and answering patient questions, and established protocols performed to confirm the correct patient and anatomical site being investigated.