Sickle cell disease is the most common hemoglobinopathy affecting about 100,000 Americans,, mostly of African descent and 20 million worldwide. It was first discovered in the 1900s, but its molecular and clinical manifestations were inconclusive. It was not until Dr. Linus Pauling, a renowned scientist, carried out a landmark study in 1949 where he concluded that sickle cell disease is caused by abnormal hemoglobin that sickles once exposed to a low oxygen environment. This sickle-shaped hemoglobin is due to a single amino acid mutation that forms abnormal hemoglobin called hemoglobin S.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder that is caused by a mutation in the beta-globin chain genes leading to what we know as hemoglobin S. This mutation of the sixth amino acid in the hemoglobin Beta-chain induces polymerization of the hemoglobin, causes deformation of red blood cells and ischemia leading to multiple organ damage.

Since 1949, scientists have understood the molecular manifestations. However, there had been no cure for this genetic disorder until about two decades ago,, when the first bone marrow stem cell transplant was carried out. This procedure offered a cure for the disease. According to Dr. Mary T Basset, a physician during the American civil rights movement, sickle cell disease research, screening, and treatment received little to no funding and was neglected because patients were of mostly African American descent.[2] As a result, one achievement of the civil rights movement in the 1970s was to create the Sickle Cell Disease Association of America,, which led to the establishment of the Sickle Cell Anemia Act of 1972. Since then, there has been more public awareness of the genetic disorder,, and it has led to more funding towards finding a cure for the disease.

Since the Sickle Cell Anemia Act, there has been progress in the screening and treatment of sickle cell disease. For instance, in most parts of the United States,  sickle cell screening is done before babies are discharged from the hospital. As a result, parents know the status of their baby, leading to early medical intervention at a young age and reducing morbidity and mortality. Treatment of sickle cell disease has also improved, including the use of penicillin prophylaxis for patients <5 years old, the use of hydroxyurea for increasing the number of fetal hemoglobin, blood transfusions, and pain medications,, including opioids. Most of these treatments are palliative,, and unfortunately, patients still have a poor quality of life because of extreme pain episodes, end-organ damage, and also a reduced life expectancy.

In September 2018, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) launched the Cure Sickle Cell Initiative. Advancement in new gene therapy has shown a promising result in both preclinical and clinical trials. This new technology will entail removing the patient’s stem cells from the bone marrow and then adding a therapeutic gene to those cells,, which will then lead to the production of anti-sickling cells.