The majority of the cases can be treated non-operatively by:

- Thoracolumbosacral / lumbosacral brace.

- Activity modification (avoidance of hyperextension)

- Core muscles strengthening focusing on the deep abdominal muscles and the multifidus muscle

- Lumbar flexion-based exercises.

- Analgesia

- In cases of adult degenerative spondylolisthesis with canal stenosis, an epidural steroid injection can provide short-term relief.

Non-operative management of acute cases among sportspersons was successful in 95% of patients, and only 5% required surgical intervention. Among that treated non-operatively, 82% returned to their previous level of play.

Surgical intervention has shown >80% success in appropriately selected patients, with a low incidence of complications. Surgical techniques include the following:

- In the pediatric population with pars fracture or non-union, surgical repair of the pars may be an option with lag screw or tension band wire technique or pedicle screw hook fixation.

- Uninstrumented fusion in situ, A randomized control trial by Moller

- Decompression, Though there was some skepticism in just performing decompression of the nerve roots without fusion, i.e Gills procedure, results show 70 % good results with regards to patient satisfaction. Only grade I and II patients met the inclusion criteria for the study.

- Instrumented posterolateral fusion with decompression is the standard procedure.

- Anterior / posterior / transforaminal and direct lateral lumbosacral interbody fusion, reduction, and fusion.

- Reduction with spondylolectomy (vertebrectomy) of L5 and fusion of L4 on S1.

- Sacral dome resection and fusion.

Operative options should be considered only if non-operative options fail or symptoms are significant. The reduction of the slip is controversial as in approximately 20% of cases, it causes L5 nerve root injury. Nevertheless, some evidence suggests better functional and cosmetic outcomes for patients who underwent reduction and instrumented fusion.