Congenital pulmonary airway malformation is a diagnosis that should be managed and monitored from the prenatal period and beyond, regardless of the severity of symptoms. Communication and coordination of care are imperative between the maternal-fetal health physician, obstetrician, pediatrician, and surgical team, especially if diagnosed prenatally. It is also vital to consider respiratory distress in a newborn as the initial presenting sign of CPAM, whether it is in the newborn nursery or NICU setting. If an infant is asymptomatic with a known lesion, and the decision is made to observe the infant versus resect surgically, then the recommendation is to have close follow up during the first year of life to monitor for any respiratory symptoms. Annual imaging with either chest radiograph or advanced thoracic imaging (either CT or MRI) is also necessary.

Neonatal nursing is an integral strategic partner on the interprofessional healthcare team, collaborating with obstetricians and neonatal clinical specialists in the diagnosis and management of CPAM. They provide ongoing monitoring of the infant both before, during, and after procedures. For those patients who do not manifest symptoms until later in childhood, nursing at the pediatrician can fill a similar role. In all cases, the nurses can counsel the parents and educate them regarding the treatment and prognosis, reiterating the clinician's instructions. By operating as an interprofessional team, children with CPAM can achieve better outcomes. [Level 5]