The first step after patient positioning is to identify the target level and spot for epidural placement. This is done by palpating the two spinous processes corresponding with the desired spinal level for placement. The target area for needle insertion will be between these two processes. Once identified, an antiseptic solution is used to cleanse the target area with wide margins. The solution should be given adequate time to dry, usually three minutes. Once dry, the area is draped.

A 25 gauge (g) needle is then used to establish a skin wheel with a local anesthetic at the target area. The target area is midline for a median approach and roughly 1 cm to 2 cm lateral of the midline for a paramedian approach. The needle can be penetrated deeper along the anticipated path of the epidural needle to anesthetize the subcutaneous tissue. Next, the epidural needle is introduced along the anticipated projected path, penetrating through the supraspinous and into the interspinous ligament. Note that the needle is directed straight anterior in a midline approach, while in a paramedian approach, the introducer should be directed at a roughly 45-degree medial angle. The epidural needle is then introduced with the needle bevel pointed cephalad through the introducer needle, where it will pass through the ligamentum flavum before reaching the epidural space.

Prior to advancing the epidural needle, a glass syringe is applied. This syringe can be filled with air or normal saline pending administering provider preference. The purpose of this syringe is to identify a loss of resistance as the spinal needle advances from the ligamentum flavum into the epidural space. Depending on provider preference, an intermittent or continuous pressure technique can be utilized. As soon as a loss of pressure is realized, immediately stop needle advancement to avoid post-dural needle puncture. If using air for loss of resistance, caution should be taken to avoid injecting more than 1 ml to 2 ml, as this may result in a patchy anesthetic and even possible air embolism.

Upon loss of resistance, remove the syringe and count the visible markings to determine the distance to the epidural space. Then thread the epidural catheter to where the 20 cm mark reaches the needle hub. Resistance upon advancement may be variable, though the catheter should advance with gentle continuous pressure. After catheter placement, the needle can be removed with careful attention to prevent removing the catheter with the needle. The mark at which the catheter enters the skin should be withdrawn to leave roughly 4 cm to 6 cm in the epidural space. While the optimal length of catheter insertion into the epidural space is debated, length beyond 4 cm to 6 cm in the epidural space is not recommended as it increases the chance for inadequate function.

After placement of the catheter, administer the catheter connector to the end of the catheter to enable attachment of syringes or tubing. Aspirate the catheter with an empty and dry 3 ml syringe to ensure no return of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). If negative, proceed to administer a test dose. If positive (CSF return), remove the catheter, and attempt re-insertion at a different level.

The test dose is aimed at identifying unintentional intrathecal or epidural vein catheterization. Intrathecal catheterization could result in a total or high spinal while that of a vein could result in local anesthetic toxicity. A 3 ml solution consisting of 1.5% lidocaine and 1:200,000 epinephrine is commonly used. A positive test dose is indicated by acute onset tachycardia (20 to 30 beats above baseline) within one minute of administration (intravascular placement) or a dense motor blockade within five minutes of administration (intrathecal placement). Clinicians should be aware of the potential for a blunted response in patients receiving beta-adrenergic blocker medications. An increase in systolic blood pressure (15 mmHg to 20 mmHg) without tachycardia may also be interpreted as a positive test dose. Chloroprocaine may be used as a single test dose alternative as a small dose intravascular or intrathecal injection will cause noticeable but significantly blunted LA systemic toxicity effects. It is important to keep in mind that a negative test dose is not a definitive confirmation of proper placement. Once completed, a transparent sterile dressing should be placed over the catheter site, and the remaining catheter can be secured with tape.