The How of HFS involves every aspect of simulation design from the selection of modality through the determination of type(s) and level(s) of fidelity. It begins with the identification of the desired outcomes based on the stated learning objectives.

The term fidelity must be defined, and the levels and types of fidelity explored, before the use of HFS can be implemented. Along with calculating the appropriate level of fidelity, another essential element of simulation design is determining the type(s) of fidelity involved in achieving the requisite level of realism for the attainment of the stated objectives. The three primary types of fidelity are physical, conceptual, and psychological.

Physical or environmental fidelity is that which can be perceived by the senses. It is concerned with what the participant sees, hears, feels, and smells in the setting. It is vital to note lapses in physical fidelity are better accepted by participants than lapses in conceptual fidelity.

Additional classifications of fidelity occur in the current literature, including functional fidelity and sociological fidelity. Functional fidelity refers to the dynamic interaction between the participant and the assigned task, and it is essential when teaching technical or psychomotor skills. The more precise the skill or procedure, the higher the level of functional fidelity required.

The desired level and type of fidelity will inform the selection of simulation modality.

Task trainers, models representing a part or region of the body designed for practicing specific procedural skills, allow the development of technical skills. These devices focus on functional fidelity and range from low- to high-fidelity. Task trainers represent a simulation modality most often referred to as procedural simulation. They can be very high-tech, which may or may not translate into a higher level of fidelity. Task trainers might employ haptic feedback technology to provide tactile realism, increasing the level of physical fidelity.

Maximizing realism can occur by addressing other elements of the simulation design, in addition to the selected modality. Moulage is a low-tech method for making a situation appear more authentic; it refers to the techniques such as makeup and molds, applied to a manikin or SP to simulate illness or injury. Moulage engages the participant’s sensory perceptions.  Smells, visual & auditory cues, and materials that enhance tactile perceptions are all ways to increase the fidelity of the experience for learners.

The When of HFS involves consideration of both the learner and the desired objective. Conventionally, educators believed the level of fidelity should correspond with the level of the learner, low-fidelity SBLE for novices, and higher levels of fidelity for expert learners.

An understanding of educational principles guides the determination of the fidelity level. HFS is a practical methodology for teaching, assessing, and evaluating both knowledge and skills. It is appropriate at all four levels of Miller’s Pyramid of Clinical Competence (see Figure 1).

The experiential nature of HFS promotes student engagement, impacting knowledge acquisition, retention, and retrieval.

Pairing task trainers with standardized patients or full-body, computerized manikins representing a mixed-modal or multi-modal simulation activity, can add another dimension of realism to the simulation activity. The added features generated by the incorporation of multiple modalities allow the practice of other skills, such as communication, teamwork, and decision-making, alongside the more technical skills.

When repeated exposure to the activity is necessary for the attainment of the expected outcomes, lower-cost, lower-fidelity experiences may be preferred.

The as-if concept is central to effective SBLE; it affords facilitators the freedom to tailor the activity to fit the learner’s needs. It allows for a distorted state or hyper-realism, which can positively impact learning.