**Structure of the Anterior Cervical Region**

The anterior cervical region or triangle can be topographically located at the anterior portion of the neck. It spans seven levels of cervical vertebrae (C1-7). The anterior triangle is a region bounded superiorly by the inferior border of the mandible, laterally by the anterior median of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and inferiorly by the jugular and clavicular notch of the manubrium.

Immediately inferior to the skin is the superficial investing layer of the fascia, followed by the platysma muscle, which is the most superficial musculature in this anterior triangle. This large, flat muscle arises from the pectoralis major muscle fascia and extends superiorly to insert into the mandibular base. Functions of this muscle include depression of the jaw bone and grimacing maneuvers of the face.

The anterior triangle of the neck can further subdivide into four smaller regions, which include the submental or digastric triangle, submandibular triangle, carotid triangle, and muscular triangle.

**Submental Triangle**

The craniocaudal border of the submental region is the chin and hyoid bone, bilateral boundaries are the anterior belly of the digastric muscle. The mylohyoid muscle composes the floor of this region, and it contains the submental lymph nodes, an important site of metastasis.

**Submandibular Triangle**

Immediately lateral on either side of the submental triangle is the submandibular or digastric triangle. The superior border of this triangle is the lateral margin of the mandible on either side, while the anteroposterior boundaries are the anterior and posterior bellies of the digastric muscle. Significant contents of this triangle include the submandibular gland, submandibular lymph nodes, hypoglossal nerve (CN XII), facial artery, and facial vein. This region is also home to the glossopharyngeal and lingual nerves, the former being involved in stretch signaling for the carotid baroreceptor reflex.

**Carotid (Superior Carotid) Triangle**

Inferolateral to the submandibular triangles are the carotid triangles, which contain vital vasculature for the entire body. The omohyoid muscle is the anterior border of this triangle, and the posterior belly of the digastric makes up the superior border. The anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid makes up the posterior of this triangle. The contents of this triangle include the internal and external carotid bifurcations, the carotid body, the hypoglossal (CN XII) nerves, and vagus (CN X) nerves. It also includes the internal jugular vein, as well.

**Muscular (Inferior Carotid) Triangle**

The fourth and final triangle is known as the muscular triangle, which extends in the midsternal plane laterally to the omohyoid (superior belly) and sternocleidomastoid (anterior belly). It contains the sternothyroid and sternohyoid muscles, as well as the thyroid and parathyroid glands. The sternohyoid muscle depresses the hyoid bone and lies superficial to the sternothyroid muscle. Both muscles overlie other neuro-vasculature, including the common carotid artery, vagus nerve, internal jugular vein, and anatomic structures like the esophagus and trachea.