Elder abuse is a common problem with complex psychosocial and medical considerations. In general, elder abuse is considered a direct action, inaction, or negligence toward an older adult that harms them or places them at risk of harm either by a person in a position of presumed trust or by an outside individual targeting the victim based on age or disability.

Physical abuse of the elderly consists of intentional physical force to inflict pain, cause impairment, or injure the victim. Examples include hitting, restraining a person inappropriately, hair pulling, forcibly feeding a person, pinching, pushing, and any other mechanism intentionally used to cause physical harm.

Psychological or emotional abuse encompasses verbal threats of harm, harassment, intimidation, yelling, isolating someone, or treating an older person like a child. This abuse may lead to the elderly individual being depressed, anxious, withdrawing from social interactions, living under a constant state of fear, and may leave them feeling hopeless.

Sexual abuse of the elderly is considered a nonconsensual sexual act where the victim is either forced into the act against their will or are incapable of understanding or consenting to the sexual act.

Neglect is unique in that it may be intentional or unintentional.

Financial exploitation encompasses the withholding or misuse of the older adult’s resources, including money, property, and other assets to the detriment of the victim or benefit of the perpetrator. This form of abuse may include directly stealing assets, forging the victim’s signature on documents or checks, inappropriate changing of a will, overpaying for goods or services, use of the victim’s assets without their knowledge, or forcing them to make financial changes that are not in their best interest.

Elder abuse has devastating and costly effects on the victim and society as a whole, yet often goes unidentified or unreported.