There are several muscles associated with the flexor retinaculum. Situated deep to the flexor retinaculum are the four tendons of the flexor digitorum superficialis. The flexor digitorum superficialis, which is in the anterior compartment of the forearm, originates at the medial epicondyle of the humerus as well as parts of the radius and ulna. The flexor digitorum superficialis inserts on the base of the second to fifth middle phalanges.

The main action of the flexor digitorum superficialis is flexion of the phalanges, primarily at the proximal interphalangeal joints. Deep to the flexor digitorum superficialis is the flexor digitorum profundus. The origin and insertion are the proximal anteromedial surface of the ulna and the distal interphalangeal joints of the phalanges, respectively.

The main action of the flexor digitorum profundus is to flex the distal phalanges at the distal interphalangeal joints. It has a secondary action to flex the proximal interphalangeal joints, metacarpal phalangeal joints, and wrist. Below the flexor retinaculum and lateral to the flexor digitorum superficialis lies the flexor pollicis longus. The origin of the flexor pollicis longus is the middle half of the volar (anterior) radius, and the insertion is the base of the distal phalanx of the thumb.

One clinical test of the flexor pollicis longus (anterior interosseus nerve) and the adductor pollicis (ulnar nerve) is to have the patient attempt to hold a piece of paper between the thumb and first finger. If the patient cannot do so successfully, the problem lies either with the ulnar nerve (adductor pollicis) or the anterior interosseus nerve). A tip as to which is involved:  watch the thumb as the patient fails to hold the paper. The thumb will flex at the distal phalanx if the problem is with the adductor pollicis (ulnar nerve). If the difficulty involves the anterior interosseus nerve/flexor pollicis longus), the thumb will not flex at the distal phalanx. This information can guide the physician in further investigating the cause of the patient's lesion.