Epidemiological data regarding the alcohol and substance abuse rates among Alaskan Native and American Indian populations demonstrate a complex pattern with great variation between the studies. Today, the majority of Alaskan Native and American Indians reside in urban or suburban areas.

Due to the federal government efforts in the mid-twentieth century, which forced Alaskan Native and American Indian assimilation, many tribes are now dispersed. This makes research and sampling among Alaskan Native and American Indian populations very complicated. The commonly used national probability samples based on U.S. residential patterns have led to skewed results. As a result of this challenge, much of the research performed among Alaskan Native and American Indians is conducted on tribal reservations. It thus is capturing only a small portion of the entire population.

According to the Tri-Ethnic Center, Alaskan Native and American Indian adolescents demonstrate higher rates of tobacco, alcohol, drug use, and earlier initiation when compared to other adolescents in the United States.

In Alaskan Native and American Indian adults, the same picture of variation between tribal communities and geographic location exists. A joint study published by National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Study and American Indian Service Utilization, Psychiatric Epidemiology, and Risk and Protective Factors Project showed Alaskan Native and American Indians who lived in urban or suburban areas consumed alcohol more frequently than those who lived on a reservation. Another study showed that alcohol use rates were lower in Alaskan Native and American Indian adults than other Americans, but among those Alaskan Native and American Indian who did drink, there was heavier episodic use. In Alaskan Native and American Indian adults, tobacco use rates were higher, and drug use rates were found to be equivalent to other American adults.