**Branches**

The IMA comes off the anterolateral aspect of the left side of the aorta. The takeoff is below the renal arteries and just above the bifurcation of the common iliac arteries, usually at L3. The branches of the inferior mesenteric artery include 1) the left colic, which is located retroperitoneally and supplies the descending colon; 2) the sigmoid branches, which supply the sigmoid colon; and 3) the superior rectal artery, which is the terminal branch of the inferior mesenteric artery at the pelvic brim. The superior rectal artery supplies the upper rectum. All branches of the inferior mesenteric artery have multiple divisions of fine arcades that supply the left colon in segments. The inferior mesenteric vein accompanies the inferior mesenteric artery. However, the inferior mesenteric vein does not drain into the inferior vena cava but instead empties into the splenic vein. The latter vein then becomes part of the porta hepatis draining into the portal vein.

Left Colic Artery

The first branch of the inferior mesenteric artery is the left colic artery. The left colic artery supplies blood flow to the distal third of the transverse colon and the entirety of the descending colon. Once diverging from the IMA, the left colic artery runs anterior to the left ureter, left internal spermatic vessels (males), and psoas major before branching into its ascending and descending segments.

The ascending branch travels anteriorly to the left kidney before entering the mesentery of the transverse colon. The ascending branch provides blood flow to the distal third of the transverse colon and proximal descending colon.

The descending branch moves inferiorly from the bifurcation to supply the distal descending colon—the descending branch anastomoses with the superior sigmoid artery.

Sigmoid Arteries

The sigmoid artery anastomoses with the descending branch of the left colic artery to help supply the distal aspect of the descending colon. The sigmoid artery typically consists of 2 to 4 branches, the superior of which is called the superior sigmoid artery. The path these arteries take is inferior, obliquely, and to the left, crossing over the psoas major, left ureter, and left internal spermatic vessels.

Superior rectal artery

The superior rectal artery is the terminal branch of the Inferior mesenteric artery, providing blood flow to the rectum. It descends into the pelvis coursing anteriorly to the left common iliac artery and vein. The superior rectal artery bifurcates into terminal branches around the S3 vertebral level. These branches anastomose with the middle and inferior rectal arteries.