**Slit-Lamp Evaluation**

A thorough slit lamp evaluation should be performed before pupillary dilation. In an open globe injury with concomitant corneal and iris injury, the corneal tear should be repaired first to have a water-tight closure for performing iris manipulations. After corneal tear repair, a thorough evaluation is necessary to assess the extent of iridodialysis, iris tears, lens injury, and associated vitreous or retinal damage. The cornea should also be examined for sensation, TBUT, staining, dry eye assessment, presence and absence of guttae.

A thorough retinal evaluation is a must before attempting traumatic iris repair. The presence of iris atrophy, peripheral anterior or posterior synechiae, transillumination defects, and the presence or absence of pseudo-exfoliative material should be noted. The pupillary margin should be assessed for atrophy, persistent pupillary membranes, new vessels, sphincter tear, and ectropion uvea. If there is a traumatic cataract, the lens must be removed, and a decision on PCIOL or SFIOL can be made in the primary sitting or as a secondary procedure.

It is mandatory to perform a thorough contralateral eye assessment. If there is aphakia, the capsular support must be determined after full dilatation. In the case of pseudophakia, the stability and type of IOL must be noted.

**Gonioscopy**

A gonioscopy should be performed to rule out any neovascularization of angles, angle recession glaucoma, the extent of iridodialysis, presence of pigments, and peripheral anterior synechiae.

**Imaging**

When slit lamp examination is not possible or inconclusive, anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) or ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) to assess the angle of the anterior chamber, the thickness of iris, and posterior chamber details.****

**X-ray, CT, and MRI**

An anterior-posterior and lateral view X-ray is indicated in occult impacted foreign bodies in the skull and orbital area. CT and MRI are indicated in bony deformities and soft tissue injuries, respectively, and suspected foreign bodies. In the case of metallic foreign bodies, MRI is contraindicated.

**Pre-Operative Preparation**

- The iris repair should be performed in an aphakic or pseudophakic eye as there is a high risk of lens capsule injury during the suture bites.

- The peribulbar or the retrobulbar block is preferred to perform the iris repair.

- Pilocarpine should be used to constrict the pupil.

- Centripetal pulling of the iris by mechanical force will help in loosening the tone of the iris and prepare it for suturing.

- The prolapsed vitreous, if any on the anterior or posterior surface of the pupil and iris, must be removed before any surgical manipulations. A manual vitrectomy will be enough in such scenarios. It is necessary to do a vitreous cut to prevent retinal tears or detachments.

- Liberal viscoelastic use is recommended to safeguard the endothelium, and viscoelastic should be pushed in the sulcus to push the iris upwards to facilitate easy passage of suture. The anterior chamber maintainer and pars plana infusion can also be used in eyes that have undergone vitrectomy.

- The needle can be docked to a 25 gauge cannula as it enters and exits the anterior chamber. This will prevent damage to the Descemet membrane.