Prevention of Salmonella infection is focused on several categories, including sanitation, child care with pets, and vaccination. Preventing Salmonella infection through good sanitation practices involves clean water supply and proper food handling practices. Contamination of water supplies can promote Salmonella infection, and chlorination with the purification of water is essential in preventing infection. Food must be processed properly in kitchens. Food handlers must practice good hand washing protocols. Street food like fruit and ice cream along with animal products like raw eggs, chicken, and uncooked meat are important sources of infection.

Pets and child care is an important source of Salmonella infection. Reptiles and amphibians are a known source of Salmonella transmission to humans. After handling these animals, individuals should wash their hands. There should be no food or drink in areas where animal handling occurs. These pets should not be found in child care centers or should be inaccessible to children less than five years of age. Patients with immunocompromised states should not be handling reptiles and amphibians. Children infected with Salmonella may return to school and daycare centers once symptoms like diarrhea have resolved. In Salmonella typhi or paratyphi 3, negative stool cultures have to be documented before the child is allowed to return to school.

Vaccination is a current method to prevent typhoid fever. Two vaccines provide protection against Salmonella serovar typhi. They are recommended to travelers, people with intimate exposure to typhoid fever carriers, and laboratory workers with exposure to Salmonella.  The first vaccine, Ty21a strain typhoid vaccine, is a live attenuated oral vaccine given to patients six years and older. The vaccine is administered in 4 doses on days 0, 2, 4, and 6. Vaccination should be completed one week before exposure. Boosters, with all 4 oral doses, should be completed every 5 years. Antimicrobials like proguanil, mefloquine, chloroquine, and other antibiotics should not be given at least 3 days before starting vaccination and at least 3 days after completing vaccination depending on the pharmaceutical. The second vaccine is a Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine (ViCPS) given to patients 2 years and older. It is given as a one-time intramuscular injection at least 2 weeks before exposure. Boosters are given every 2 years.