Chylothorax is the accumulation of chyle in the pleural cavity. The word chyle is derived from the  Greek word “Chylos,” which means juice. Chyle is the milky bodily fluid formed in the lacteal system of the intestine. The small and medium-chain triglycerides consumed in the diet are easily broken to free fatty acids by the intestinal enzymes and readily absorbed into the portal circulation. However, the large molecules of complex long-chain triglycerides cannot be broken down by the intestinal lipases. They combine with phospholipids, cholesterol, and cholesterol esters to form chylomicrons in the jejunum. These large molecules then get absorbed into the lymphatic system of the small intestine to form the chyle. The lymphatic drainage system of the intestine will be joined by the lymphatic drainage from the lower extremities to form the thoracic duct system, which ultimately drains in the system circulation. If there is a breach of the integrity of the thoracic duct, the milky lipid-rich chyle leaks to the surrounding structures. Chylothorax is formed when the chyle leaks into the pleural cavity due to damage to the thoracic duct. As the normal chyle production is around 2.4 liters per day, a considerable amount of chyle can accumulate in the pleural cavity in a very short period. Chylothorax was first described in the 17th century by Dr. Bartloet and, in the last decade, has received special attention due to the innovation of new management strategies with favorable outcomes.