Abnormal lab suggesting metastatic disease includes anemia, hypercalcemia, and electrolyte disturbances (SIADH).

A chest X-ray is initial imaging usually performed in both symptomatic patients and patients with known primary tumor. It is cost-effective and readily available. The downside is that small metastasis or miliary distribution is not visible. In one study, high kilovolts radiation helps detect pulmonary nodules up to 5 to 10 mm on a chest X-ray.

Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is the next option, with helical or multi planer projection or maximum intensity projection to increase sensitivity. Spiral CT is more sensitive due to a higher rate of detection of metastasis than other imaging techniques. Up to 72% to 97% nodules and as little as 3 mm nodules are detectable on 5 to 10 mm slices. The sensitivity of CT scan decreases due to high false-negative attributed to unequal respiratory cycles.

Positron emission tomography (PET) with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is used to detect metastasis elsewhere in the body. PET-CT is used for the precise location of metastasis superimpose on a CT scan.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), on the other hand, has not improved the diagnosis of lung metastases compared with conventional CT. It is specifically indicated for showing tumor invasion of the great vessels, chambers of the heart, chest wall, and spinal column and can help rule out synchronous liver metastases.

Flexibltracheobronchoscopy with endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) is a standard component of the preoperative diagnostic workup. It allows the evaluation of the mucosa and confirmation of the histology of centrally located metastases. In combination with endobronchial ultrasound, it helps in determining the status of the peribronchial and mediastinal lymph nodes.

CT guided biopsy for peripherally located lesions or lesions that are near large vessels.

**Mediastinoscopy**

For peripheral foci up to 3 cm in size, video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) has become established for use as a diagnostic procedure with a low complication rate.

After obtaining a tissue biopsy, genetic, cytologic, immunohistologic testing follows to identify the source of the metastasis.

Because lung metastasis gets detected on imaging studies, it is essential to recognize the pattern suggesting a particular route of spread.

**Imaging**

Specific patterns associated with different tumors on CT chest include Diffuse miliary seeding (medullary carcinoma of the thyroid), large singular metastases (choriocarcinoma, melanoma, and hypernephroma), calcification of metastases (osteosarcoma, adenocarcinoma, and secondary to chemo- and radiation therapy), and cavitation of pulmonary metastases (squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck and from the genitourinary tract in women).

Most of the hematogenous metastasis appears to happen from the distal pulmonary artery nidus of metastatic tumor cells, resulting in most of the metastatic focus on basal and peripheral segments of the lungs.

Chest x-ray patterns recognized with lung metastasis via lymphatic spread include reticular or reticulonodular interstitial markings, thickening of the interlobular septa (Kerley B lines), hilar adenopathy, and pleural disease. High-resolution CT is sensitive to detecting patterns such as thickened core structures in the central portions of the secondary pulmonary lobules.

On plain films and CT scans, pleural metastases may appear as nodules or plaque-like formations. Malignant pleural effusions, seen in around 42% of cases, most commonly arise from primary tumors of the lungs, the breast, and the ovaries, and lymphoma.