Extension block-splints should position the wrist in 30 degrees of flexion to take tension off flexor tendon repairs and minimize the risk of postoperative tendon rupture, with metacarpophalangeal joints in 45-70 degrees of flexion, maintaining interphalangeal joints in near full-extension or slight flexion (15 degrees). Sutures are removed after two weeks.

Through advancements in biomechanical and clinical research, there is a general understanding that early therapy-guided tendon excursion is more beneficial than strict immobilization in efforts to achieve maximal functional recovery. Mobilization promotes intrinsic tendon healing, increases tensile strength, and decreases adhesion formation while improving tendon gliding - all benefits which translate into optimized joint motion, fewer flexion contractures, and overall, enhanced functional outcomes. Tendon repair rehabilitation programs are ideally constructed to improve the function of the entire hand while facilitating the differential incorporation of soft tissue injuries. Although each patient’s situation is generally similar, the therapy program must be individualized. Thus, there is no alternative to a knowledgeable, experienced, energetic, meticulous hand therapist. Early controlled mobilization protocols are now the standard of care; passive rehabilitation protocols have been largely abandoned.

Once such, the Saint John Protocol, describes a regimen of up to one-half fist of protected true active finger flexion initiated 3 to 5 days following flexor tendon repair. Waiting 3 to 5 days before movement allows the swelling, work of flexion, and friction to decrease, thus minimizing the risk of rupture.

Support of early therapy was additionally favored via a study by Johnson et al. in which 56% of their cohort started therapy within one week of tendon repair. Given the known clinical benefits of early hand therapy, with no difference in complication rate, tendon rupture, or secondary surgeries based on the timing of hand therapy initiation, their study supports the initiation of hand therapy in the early-to-mid part of postoperative week 1, specifically, for zone 2 injuries.

If immobilized, repair strength is 50% less than the original repair following the first postoperative week. After three weeks of continued immobilization, the strength decreases by 30%. On the other hand, following a synergistic wrist protocol with mobilization, the repair site strength increases by a factor of 2 or more between 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively. After 3 to 4 months, patients have recovered approximately 90% of their ultimate range of motion.

As soon as possible, patients begin a graded rehabilitation protocol under the supervision of a qualified therapist while using a molded, protective aftercare splint and synergistic wrist motion to increase repair site excursion. The therapist will frequently monitor compliance by having the patient attend therapy at least twice weekly for the first 6 to 8 weeks. Progression through the postoperative therapeutic regimen is based on the injury and the patient’s physiologic response. Anticipate the patient returning to full activity 4 to 6 months postoperatively, pending full and motivated compliance to their postoperative regimen.

While the up-to-date techniques in flexor tendon repair have caused an evolution in rehabilitation practice, prompting a transition from passive methods to early, controlled, more active ones, optimal flexor tendon surgery, and therapy results are dependent upon a patient-centered rather than strictly structured protocol.