An APN is a registered nurse with at least a master's degree in nursing who has completed graduate-level education and training from a nationally accredited program. Training must be based on a specific specialty, such as midwives or anesthesia. It can also be based on a population, such as pediatric or family practice. APNs must pass a national certification examination that measures the role and specialty-specific or population-focused competencies. Their knowledge and skills are built upon the foundation of nursing to bridge the gap in medical and allied health, providing direct care to patients and focusing on individuals and families.

These advanced-trained registered nurses are prepared educationally to bear the responsibilities and accountabilities of providing health maintenance and preventive care to the public. License to practice is privileged by the individual state the APN applies to after receiving a conferred degree from an accredited institution.

Four APN roles exist with a license to practice in all US states and territories:

- Certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA)

- Certified nurse-midwife (CNM)

- Clinical nurse specialist (CNS)

- Certified nurse practitioner (NP)

Traditionally, surgical doctors trained nurses to provide anesthesia care for surgical patients until the establishment of anesthesiology as a medical specialty in the US.

CRNA credentialing came into existence in 1956.

The practice of midwifery has existed in many cultures on the continents for millennia.

The American Association of Nurse-Midwives (AANM) was founded in 1928, originally known as the Kentucky State Association of Midwives. Certification and credentialing processes began in 1971 after formal educational programs and accreditation were established in the US.

Customarily, nurses were trained to work in hospitals to care for unique populations with various healthcare conditions. With the consistency of day-in and day-out caring for patients with similar medical conditions, this line of work enabled the nurses to develop specialized and advanced skills to provide specific healthcare needs to these unique populations. In 1943, the term nurse-clinician was coined by Frances Reiter,  who acknowledged that nurses comfort, teach, protect, encourage, and nurture patients back to health.

Initially, the CNS specialty was started at a graduate level of the nursing training program, responding to the need to care for patients in psychiatric settings. CNS expansion to other healthcare settings grew rapidly during the 1960s to reciprocate the need to care for complex patients, particularly after the Vietnam War.

NP role was started in the 1960s by Dr. Loretta Ford, a nurse, and Dr. Henry Silver, a doctor, with a vision to serve the needs of the poor pediatric population in rural Colorado. The role was a disruptive innovation to bridge between a nurse and a doctor. With a strong belief that nurses can provide high-quality primary care to the ailing populations in the remote countryside, the NP role was created to widen healthcare access to the masses. With advanced training and education, nurses can specialize in a population-specific field of study to provide primary care to patients. Looking back in history, nurses were providing primary care to patients independently and autonomously before the rise in regulated medical practices.

In 1965, a formal educational nursing program was first established at the University of Colorado to train nurses on advanced skills to care for patients outside the hospital setting. During the early years of the NP role, NPs were required to work under a physician's supervision with regulatory stipulations, such as prescriptive authority. As the healthcare landscape evolves, particularly after the implementation of the comprehensive healthcare reform Affordable Care Act in 2010 and the Institute of Medicine Report findings on APRN barriers in 2011, NPs are empowered to deliver health care to the extent of their advanced training.

More and more states in the US are granting NPs full authority in rendering health care services. The American Association of Nurse Practitioners (AANP) provides credentialing certification for the

- Family Nurse Practitioner (FNP),

- Adult-Gerontology Primary Care Nurse Practitioner (AGPNP), and

- Emergency Nurse Practitioner (ENP).

The American Nurses Credentialing Center provides certification examinations for the

- Family Nurse Practitioner (FNP),

- Adult-Gerontology Primary Care Nurse Practitioner (AGPCNP),

- Adult-Gerontology Acute Care Nurse Practitioner (AGACNP), and

- Psychiatric-Mental Health Nurse Practitioner (PMHNP).

The Pediatric Nursing Certification Board provides certification exams for the

- Certified Pediatric Nurse Practitioner Primary Care (CPNP-PC), and

- Certified Pediatric Nurse Practitioner Acute Care (CPNP-AC).

The National Certification Corporation provides credentialing certification exams for the

- Women's Health Care Nurse Practitioner (WHNP),

- Obstetrics and Gynecology Nurse Practitioner (OB/GYN NP), and

- Neonatal Nurse Practitioner (NNP).

APNs are registered nurses with many clinical hours of nursing experience prior to the start of graduate school. APNs are educated and trained on specific core competencies in graduate schools.

Different APN roles have different requirements in clinical training hours and competency-based requirements. In addition, some states have specific regulatory requirements on training topics and clinical hours. Besides the training on the specialty-specific and/or population-specific required competencies, advanced educational programs also prepare APNs for systems thinking and policy advocacy that empower them to promote changes.

APNs are educated and trained to provide health care utilizing evidence-based practice (EBP). The value and the importance of EBP utilization among APNs provide guidance for standardizing patient care and ensuring high-quality care at a minimum cost.

Many states require APNs to have protocols approved by a medical director to deliver structural plans of care to a specific patient population or specialty based on the APNs' training. APNs are employed in various healthcare systems, including outpatient and inpatient environments. However, 26 states in the US have adopted a full practice authority to allow APNs to practice to the full extent of their education and training without any medical supervision.

APNs have advanced training and higher education; hence autonomy is crucial to allow APNs to provide medical care to the extent of their training. They are licensed and authorized to: (1) evaluate patients, (2) diagnose patient problems, (3) order and interpret diagnostic tests, and (4) initiate and manage treatments, including prescribing medications and controlled substances under the licensure authority of a state board of nursing.

APNs have been recognized widely at the federal and state level of medical billing practices.