**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise Only From Odontogenic Epithelium Without Odontogenic Ectomesenchyme**

**Ameloblastoma**

The multi-cystic or solid type is the most common (92% of cases). It can be seen in a wide age range with an average of 40.2.

The second most common type is the Uni-cystic ameloblastoma (6% of cases). It mainly affects younger patients with an average age of 22.1. More than 90% of cases are found in the molar part of the mandible. This is followed by the peripheral type (2% of cases). It may occur over a wide age range with an average of 52. Clinically, it presents as a small (less than 1.5cm), non-ulcerated sessile or pedunculated lesion. Most cases arise from the posterior gingival mucosa.

Other tumors include adenomatoid odontogenic tumors, an uncommon tumor representing 3% to 7% of all odontogenic tumors. Most cases are diagnosed in the second decade of life****and show female sex predilection. It often affects the anterior maxilla.

Clinically, it appears as a small, well-circumscribed lesion (less than 3 cm) around an unerupted tooth. A calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (Pindborg tumor) is a rare tumor that accounts for less than 1% of the total number of odontogenic tumor cases. It mainly affects patients between the age of 30 and 50 years of age. However, fewer cases have been reported with a wider age range.

The most common clinical feature is painless, slowly growing mandibular mass. Squamous odontogenic tumor is also another rare benign odontogenic tumor that may be clinically aggressive. The affected patients are usually in their third decade of life. The most common presentation is a slowly growing painless swelling and loosening of teeth.

**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise From Both Odontogenic Epithelium and Odontogenic Ectomesenchyme, With or Without Dental Hard Tissue Formation**

Odontogenic ghost cell tumor (calcifying odontogenic cyst) is a rare well-circumscribed solid or cystic lesion. It mainly affects areas anterior to the molars with slightly higher incidence on the maxilla compared to the mandible, 38% and 27%, respectively. It is more common in the second decade of life with no sex predilection, and the most common presentation is a painless expansion of the cortical plates.

Ameloblastic fibroma tends to affect the younger population with an average age of 14. The posterior mandible is the most affected site in 70% of cases. It may be asymptomatic if small lesions, while larger lesions usually cause painless swelling.

**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise From Ectomesenchyme With or Without Included Odontogenic Epithelium**

Odontogenic fibroma is an uncommon tumor with female sex predilection. The male to female ratio is 2.2 to 1. It affects a wide age range from 4 to 80 years of age. It presents as a painless swelling. While it mainly affects the mandible molar region, it tends to affect anterior teeth in the maxilla.

**Malignant Odontogenic Tumors**

The most common presentations of all malignant tumors are progressive painful swelling of the jaw along with tooth loosening, paresthesia (involvement of the inferior alveolar nerve), and cervical lymph node metastases. Distant metastases are uncommon. Ameloblastic carcinoma usually presents as rapid painful growth in the posterior mandible with 5 years survival of 70%.

Clear cell odontogenic carcinoma is another uncommon malignant tumor that usually affects elderly females in their 5th to 7th decades of life. It usually manifested as a painful swelling of either the mandible or maxilla, and it is frequently associated with the loosening of teeth. It is potentially aggressive with the potential of recurrence.

NOS sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma affects a wide range of ages between 30 to 70 years of age with no sex predilection. Premolar and molar areas of the mandible are the most common sites.

Accurate histological assessment is difficult in small biopsies. Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma is also a rare tumor as only 40 cases were reported worldwide, with more than half of them from Asia. It is more common in males, and the maxilla is usually the primary site—the 5-year survival rate of about 70%. Odontogenic sarcoma and carcinosarcoma are regarded as low-grade tumors that rarely metastasize compared with odontogenic carcinomas.