An ideal anesthetic agent should possess analgesic, sedative, and amnestic properties with a rapid onset and short duration of action, allowing for quick recovery and discharge of patients. Unfortunately, at the time of this writing, no such single agent that possesses all of these properties exists. Therefore, it is common practice to utilize a combination of agents to carry out OAPS, although single-agent OAPS is not uncommon. For example, while there is no standard regimen, most practitioners utilize a combination of a short-acting benzodiazepine such as midazolam and an opioid such as fentanyl for OAPS in adult patients, taking advantage of the anxiolytic, sedative, and amnestic properties of benzodiazepines, and the analgesic properties of opioids. That being said, numerous other medications are often employed, either as sole agents or in combination, like ketofol (ketamine and propofol). Many studies have shown this combination to have fewer adverse effects like respiratory depression compared with single-use agents.

**Benzodiazepines**

- One benzodiazepine commonly utilized during the perioperative period is midazolam. It has advantages due to its effects on anterograde amnesia and anxiolysis.

- Midazolam

- 
              
- DOSE: For healthy adults, an initial dose of 1 to 2 mg IV, followed by further 1 to 2 mg doses every 3 to 5 minutes until the desired effect is achieved. It is uncommon to require greater than 5mg.
              
              
- ONSET: When given intravenously, less than 1 minute.
              
              
- DURATION: Peak effect occurs at 3 to 5 minutes, and its sedation effects can last from 15 to 80 minutes.
              
              
- REVERSAL: Flumazenil, 0.2 mg IV over 15 seconds with additional 0.1 mg doses every minute until the desired effect is achieved.

**Opioids**

- The most frequently utilized opioid during OAPS at present is fentanyl. It is a synthetic opioid with multiple routes of administration, and although it possesses sedative properties, it is primarily utilized during OAPS for its analgesic properties. One of the benefits of it over other opiates like morphine is that it causes less histamine release and theoretical hypotension and side effects like itching.

- Fentanyl

- 
              
- DOSE: 1 to 1.5 mcg/kg given as an initial dose, with further doses of 0.5 to 1 mcg/kg given every 10 to 20 minutes.
              
              
- ONSET: When given intravenously, less than 1 minute.
              
              
- DURATION: Effects can last between 30 to 60 minutes.
              
              
- REVERSAL: Fentanyl-related respiratory depression, the most notable potential adverse effects of fentanyl and opioids in general, can be reversed with Narcan (naloxone), a pure opioid antagonist. An initial dose of 0.4 to 2 mg IV can be given, followed by further doses 2 to 3 minutes apart. Although effective for the aforementioned purpose, naloxone can come with unwanted effects such as tachycardia, hypertension, nausea, vomiting, and seizures, to name a few.

**Propofol**

- A commonly utilized anesthetic for both general anesthesia and OAPS. It has sedative, amnestic, and anti-emetic properties, along with quick onset and offset times which are more favorable for OAPS.

- 
              
- DOSE: A typical dose for sedation can range from 25 to 100 mcg/kg/min. It can be administered in boluses or as a continuous infusion.
              
              
- ONSET: less than a minute.
              
              
- DURATION: 5 to 10 minutes.

**Ketamine**

- A dissociative anesthetic with sedative, analgesic, and mild amnestic properties. The main factor limiting its use is its association with unpleasant emergence reactions. It is also associated with laryngospasms which are not associated with any particular identifiable risk factors.

- 
              
- DOSE: 1 to 2 mg/kg IV as an initial dose. Smaller doses can be given if analgesia without dissociation is desired (0.2 to 0.8 mg/kg IV).
              
              
- ONSET: less than a minute.
              
              
- DURATION:5 to 15 minutes.

Knowledge of these four medications gives any provider a good foundation of OAPS techniques. Many other agents can be utilized during OAPS for specific reasons, but these are beyond the scope of this article.