Despite the potential improvement intended from both traditional and modern QA projects, several limitations and drawbacks exist. "Quality" by nature, is difficult to quantify. Assurance of quality often can be more related to assuring the standard of care was met than by assuring a specific metric. By assuming a binary set of outcomes (i.e., yes or no), these metrics become inflexible and do not take into account complexities related to patients' needs and goals of care. For example, in the case of a diabetic patient, the standard recommendation for hemoglobin A1c is <7%. However, in the case of a palliative care patient, there may be minimal potential health gains or even potential harm associated with strict adherence. Yet, QA metrics will flag the provider regardless. Additionally, binary metrics have the potential to reflect the respect of patient autonomy and the right to refuse recommended treatment negatively on the healthcare provider. Finally, tying QA metrics to reimbursement adds administrative burden to an already costly healthcare system. Insurance companies utilize thousands of metrics to calculate payment adjustments, resulting in a burdensome system with difficult calculations and interpretations. In 2014, the American Medical Association publicly called on the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) to simplify and streamline the process.

Another possible issue with the concept of QA is that since the 1990s, the pursuit of healthcare quality has been shifting from quality assurance to quality improvement. The Joint Commission's 1992 Accreditation Manual for Hospitals began moving toward the concept of CQI.