The administration of ketorolac can be done via oral, nasal spray, IV, or IM routes. The oral version should be administered only following IV or IM ketorolac. Ketorolac administration should not be for longer than five days, given an increased risk of cardiac thrombotic events, renal failure, peptic ulcers, and increased risk of bleeding beyond this point.

**Dosage Formulations**

- Ketorolac tromethamine IV injection solution: 15 mg/mL; 30 mg/mL

- Ketorolac tromethamine IM injection solution: 60 mg/2 mL

- Oral tablets: 10 mg

**Adult Dosing**

- IV and IM dosing for adults are recommended at 30 mg single dose or 30 mg every 6 hours, not exceeding 120 mg in 24 hours.

- The recommended oral dosing in adults is a 20 mg single dose after IV or IM therapy, then 10 mg every 4 to 6 hours, not exceeding 40 mg in 24 hours.

- Half-life: 5.6 hours for a single 30 mg IM or single 10 mg oral dose

**Pediatric Dosing**(off-label for acute moderate to severe pain; ketorolac has no approval for use under the age of 17)

- Less than two years

- Not recommended

- 2 to 16 years

- Single-dose: 0.5 mg/kg IV/IM once; not to exceed 15 mg
- Multiple-dose: 0.5 mg/kg IV/IM q6h; not to exceed 5 days

- Over 16 years, less than 50 kg

- IV: 15 mg in a single dose or 15 mg every 6 hours; do not exceed 60 mg/day
- IM: 30 mg in a single dose or 15 mg every 6 hours; do not exceed 60 mg/day
- PO: 10 mg once after IV/IM therapy, then 10mg every 6 hours; do not exceed 40 mg/day

- Over 16 years, greater than 50 kg

- Adult dosing as described above

**Geriatric Dosing:**Because this group is more sensitive to the dose-related adverse effects of NSAIDs, and ketorolac may be eliminated more slowly by the elderly, extreme caution and reduced dosages with careful clinical monitoring must be used when treating the elderly with ketorolac tromethamine.

- Single Dosing regimen

- IM Dosing: Renally impaired and/or less than 50 kg (110 lbs) of body weight: One dose of 30 mg.
- IV Dosing: Renally impaired and/or less than 50 kg (110 lbs) of body weight: One dose of 15 mg.

- Multiple-Dose Treatment (IV or IM)

- For patients with renal impairment and less than 50 kg (110 lbs) of body weight: 15 mg ketorolac injection every 6 hours, and the maximum daily dose for senior adults should not exceed 60 mg.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

- Based on animal studies, ketorolac is a Pregnancy Category C medicine. Since nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have the potential for causing the fetal cardiovascular adverse reaction (closure of ductus arteriosus), using ketorolac during pregnancy (particularly late trimester) should be avoided. There are no well-controlled adequate studies of ketorolac in pregnant women. Therefore, ketorolac should be administered during pregnancy only if the potential benefit outweighs the potential risk to the fetus.

- Ketorolac administration is contraindicated in labor and/or delivery because of its prostaglandin synthesis inhibitory effect; it may adversely impact fetal blood circulation and prevent uterine contractions, increasing the risk of uterine hemorrhage.

- Ketorolac inhibits cyclooxygenase/ prostaglandin synthesis, may decrease fertility, and should not be recommended in women planning to conceive.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

- Use ketorolac with caution when administered to a nursing woman. No adverse events are reported on ketorolac use in lactating women and its effect on breastfed babies; however, instruct patients to contact their pediatrician if there are any adverse events.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

- The majority of ketorolac and its metabolites are eliminated via the kidneys. Around 92% of a dose is excreted in urine as 60% as unchanged ketorolac and 40% as metabolites. According to Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes guidelines (

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

- The manufacturer has provided no information on ketorolac dose adjustment in patients with hepatic impairment.