When performed correctly, the insertion of a central venous catheter is safe, productive, and potentially life-saving. However, particular clinical pearls should be at the forefront of the proceduralist’s mind when performing this procedure.

- Whenever possible, take the time to prepare for the procedure thoroughly, and ensure that all necessary personnel and equipment are in the room and readily available. Lack of preparation will compound any potential complications that may be encountered.

- Ensure that sterile products are not contaminated and that there is no evidence of damage to the packaging. Follow sterile procedures at all times. Central line infections can be severe and life-threatening illnesses.

- When using the IJ or SC site for access, obtain a stat portable chest x-ray immediately after line placement to ensure no pneumothorax and that the line terminates in the superior vena cava.

- Suppose one has a failed attempt at the IJ site and needs to seek access at another location. In that case, the ipsilateral subclavian is preferred, given the risk of bilateral pneumothoraces with an attempt at the contralateral internal jugular vein. One may anticipate this possibility by cleaning and prepping the IJ and SC site on the procedure side.

- If unsure of the placement of a guidewire within the vein and limited views on ultrasound, manometry is a valuable tool to establish that the guidewire is within the venous system. However, this may be falsely reassuring in shock states where arterial pressure is low.

- Subclavian access does appear to have fewer infections but potentially higher procedural complications, mainly if performed by a clinician with limited experience.

- The internal jugular, subclavian, and femoral veins have higher success rates and fewer complications when access is performed with ultrasound.

- The clinician must maintain hold of the guidewire at all times while it is inside the patient. The wire can be lost inside the patient and may migrate into the right ventricle or inferior vena cava, leading to additional invasive procedures to recover the wire.

- Always ensure that the catheter is appropriately placed through one or several methods: radiographic evidence, measurement of CVP, or analyzing venous blood gas.

- Never use excessive force during any part of this procedure. It will lead to damage to local structures.