The obturator muscles are considered part of the short external rotators of the hip, along with the gemellus superior and inferior, piriformis, and quadratus femoris. These muscles are innervated by nerves of the sacral plexus (L5-S2), with the exception of the obturator externus, which receives innervation from the lumbar plexus. Similarly to the obturator muscles, the short external rotators of the hip originate from the pelvic region and insert onto the greater trochanter of the femur. The muscles in this group sit posteriorly to the pelvic bone. During contraction, the muscles shorten and work synergistically to rotate the femur laterally.

The medial rotators of the hip act as antagonists to the short external rotators. The medial rotators include the gluteus medius and minimus, tensor fasciae latae, and the hip adductors.

While the main function of the obturator externus is external rotation, it can provide a small amount of assistance with adduction of the flexed hip. With the exception of the obturator externus, the hip adductors originate from the pubis or ischium and insert onto the medial posterior part of the femur bone. The hip adductors include obturator externus, pectineus, gracilis, and adductor brevis, longus, magnus, and minimus.

When the hip is flexed, the obturator internus muscle acts as an antagonist to the obturator externus since it plays a role in abduction. The primary hip abductors include the gluteus medius and minimus and the tensor fasciae latae.