Patients usually are asymptomatic, and lesions usually resolve within months to a year. Treatment is usually for symptomatic or cosmetically disturbing lesions.

Reported treatment options

- Topical corticosteroids

- Systemic corticosteroids

- Topical calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus)

- Acitretin

- Narrow UVB rays

- Photochemotherapy (PUVA)

- H1 receptor antagonist

- Astemizole

- Dinitrochlorobenzene immunotherapy

- Itraconazole

- Isoniazid

- Cyclosporine

- Systemic Isotretinoin

In chronic or persistent forms of lichen, nitidus topical or systemic corticosteroids are options.

In patients who have generalized lichen nitidus, the resolution is less predictable.

Acitretin has been reported to have good results in patients with involvement of palms and soles.

If there is nail involvement, intramatricial injections of corticosteroids are a treatment option.

Narrowband UVB has less carcinogenic risk compared to broadband UVB or PUVA The mechanism for treatment is unknown but is thought to impair cellular immunity by depleting the number of epidermal Langerhans cells.

Cyclosporine reported in a case report was beneficial for generalized purpuric lichen nitidus.

A case of systemic isotretinoin used for treatment was reported successful. Retinoids are thought to suppress inflammation by reducing the migration of neutrophils and eosinophils to the dermis and also have antiproliferative effects. The dose reported was isotretinoin 40 mg daily, and researchers noted regression after four months. This case was a patient who had cosmetic fears and diffuse pruritus.

The papules seen in lichen nitidus can lead to postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, which usually resolves within a few months.