The specific anatomy of each joint involved will not be covered here. Therapeutic exercise can theoretically involve all joints. This article will present the basics of exercise physiology here.

The main benefits of exercise involve long term adaptation include effects upon the musculoskeletal, metabolic, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems. In the injured or ill individual, the benefits of exercise include recovery and restoration of function, including the range of motion, increased cardiopulmonary reserve, and functional status along with numerous benefits for diseases such as diabetes (in terms of insulin resistance). The main measurement of exercise capacity is the lactate threshold and maximal oxygen uptake (know as VO2 max).

**The maximal oxygen uptake**(VO max, L/minute) reflects the ability of a person to imbibe, transport, and use oxygen, which defines that person's functional aerobic capacity. This capacity, as is the gold standard of cardiorespiratory fitness.

-  VO max (ml/kg/min) = 79.9 – (0.39 x age) – (13.7 x sex (0=male, 1=female) – (0.127 x height)

**Skeletal muscle metabolism**— Muscle contraction and relaxation depend primarily upon hydrolysis of ATP, which releases the chemical energy necessary for binding of the protein myosin with actin filaments to allow myosin to slide along the actin filament leading to mechanical contraction.

Exercise has been validated as a treatment for osteoarthritis with benefits extending at least 2 to 6 months after cessation of the formal training regimen. Exercise appears to have anti-inflammatory effects as well as nourishing the joints themselves through pushing more synovial fluid through the joint.