The nerves to rectus muscles and superior oblique muscles insert into the muscles at one-third the distance from the origin to the insertion. This makes damage to these nerves during anterior segment surgery difficult but not impossible. Instruments that are advanced 26 mm posterior to the rectus muscle insertions can cause injury to the nerve.

Blood vessels may be compromised during surgery of the superior rectus muscle. The vessels which supply blood to the extraocular muscles also supply nearly all the temporal half of the anterior segment of the eye. Most of the nasal half of the anterior segment circulation also derives from blood vessels that supply the extraocular muscles. Therefore, care must be taken during surgery of the superior rectus or other extraocular muscles to avoid disrupting this blood supply.

Other complications may result from superior rectus surgery, which also may result from other rectus muscle surgery. Unsatisfactory alignment is the most common complication and may require additional surgery to correct. Refractive changes may occur when two rectus muscles of one eye are operated; this may resolve over months. Other possible surgical complications include diplopia, perforation of the sclera, and postoperative infections. Although uncommon, serious infections may result after strabismus surgery, including pre-septal or orbital cellulitis and endophthalmitis.

The superior rectus muscle associates somewhat with the levator palpebrae superioris muscle; therefore, procedures targeted toward the superior rectus may also cause changes in the upper eyelid. When the superior rectus is resected, the palpebral fissure may narrow, and the eyelid may come forward. When the superior rectus muscle is recessed, the palpebral fissure may widen, and the eyelid may be pulled upward.