**Piriformis Syndrome**

Piriformis syndrome is caused by a swollen piriformis that compresses the sciatic nerve or its divisions - the tibial division and/or the common fibular division. In Beatty and Anson type and Robinson type C or III, the common fibular division passes above the piriformis muscle.

The piriformis syndrome produces hip pain that radiates down into the lower limb. The pain is made much worse when driving and sitting. Unlike a herniated disc, piriformis syndrome does not produce paralumbar muscle spasms. The presence of piriformis syndrome has been estimated to be about 16%.

Guiding the lidocaine injection with ultrasound can be used in an emergency department setting to treat piriformis syndrome.

In an MRI study of 254 sciatic nerves in 127 patients, the sciatic nerve and piriformis muscle in patients with piriformis syndrome demonstrated increased T2 signal intensity. Splitting of the sciatic nerve was seen in 56/64 compared to 20/190 control cases (P<0.0001). The symptomatic side demonstrated the increased size of the sciatic nerve, increased piriformis size, and increased T2 signal intensity.

The posterior aspect of the piriformis syndrome is especially important when performing an arthroplasty of the hip, blockade of the sciatic nerve, or image-guided injection of the piriformis syndrome.

One concept is that trauma of the piriformis causes the release of inflammatory mediators that cause swelling of the piriformis, compressing the divisions of the sciatic nerve.