Most cases of acute cough should be treated empirically and will focus on symptomatic relief. This includes supportive measures of over-the-counter cough and cold medicines. However, many over-the-counter antihistamine-decongestant medications have been shown to offer no clinical benefit over placebo. Cough suppressants may be used to lessen the cough by blunting the cough reflex, and expectorants may be used when excessive mucous secretions are determined to be the primary issue to increase mucus clearance. The most commonly used suppressant is dextromethorphan, and the most common suppressant is guaifenesin. It is important to remember, however, that coughing is a basic defense mechanism and plays an important part of the body’s immune systems. Therefore, decreasing the cough reflex may have detrimental impacts on the recovery time of an illness. As such, the current American College of Chest Physicians guidelines do not recommend the use of peripherally or centrally-acting cough suppressants for the treatment of cough due to and discourage the use of over the counter combinations for the treatment of acute cough due to the common cold. Whenever an infectious etiology is suspected, sputum culture should be attempted, and antibiotic therapy tailored to the pathogen. In chronic infectious upper respiratory etiologies, prolonged antibiotic therapy for 3 to 6 weeks with an appropriately selected agent (similar to those used for acute infections) is necessary. Amoxicillin/clavulanate (Augmentin) 875 mg orally twice a day for 3 to 6 weeks is the first-line of treatment. However, alternative therapies may be used including:

- Clindamycin (Cleocin) 300 mg by mouth 3 times a day for 3 to 6 weeks

- Cefuroxime axetil (Ceftin) 500 mg twice a day for 3 to 6

- Cefprozil (Cefzil) 500 mg twice a day for 3 to 6 weeks

- Clarithromycin (Biaxin) 500 mg twice a day for 3 to 6 weeks

- Gatifloxacin (Tequin) 400 mg by mouth 4 times daily for 3 to 6 weeks

- Levofloxacin (Levaquin) 500 mg by mouth 4 times daily for 3 to 6

- Moxifloxacin (Avelox) 400 mg by mouth 4 times daily for 3 to 6 weeks

Inhaled albuterol and ipratropium bromide nebulizer solutions may be used for bronchodilatory effect in a constricted airway is suspected for symptomatic relief in urgent situations. Treatment of a chronic cough should attempt to target the underlying etiology whenever possible to reduce coughing instead of suppressing the cough. If a patient is identified to be taking an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, this medicine should be discontinued, and an aldosterone-receptor blocking medicine started in its place. In reactive airway disease inhaled steroids and/or anticholinergic medications may be indicated. Cardiac function should be optimized following appropriate cardiology recommendations in a patient-specific manner. Gastroesophageal reflux should be treated aggressively by avoiding reflux predisposing substances including chocolate, caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco. Furthermore, to prevent aspiration patients should elevate the head of the bed and not eat for several hours before bedtime. Medical therapy should include a proton pump inhibitor at maximal dosing.

Treatment of chronic neurogenic cough is different than other neuropathic conditions. For isolated cough with no laryngopharyngeal reflux, start treatment with tramadol 25 mg up to 4 times per day when necessary or amitriptyline 10 mg at bedtime. If laryngopharyngeal reflux is present or there are other symptoms, gabapentin 100 mg 4 times per day is preferred with an escalation of dose as tolerated and as needed. Patients typically require 300 to 500 mg 4 times per day. These medications may be used alone or in combination. Typical combination therapies include gabapentin with a small dose of amitriptyline at bedtime. Pregabalin and baclofen are second-line choices used in special situations.