The importance of surgical fire prevention cannot be diminished and is an essential concern for surgeons. Surgical fires cause harm to the patient, increase adverse outcomes, increase the cost of health care, and are associated with significant litigation. Of 114 cases identified involving surgical fires, 60% of these resulted in a median award of $215000 to the plaintiff.

In addition to direct harm to the patient, fires that occur within the operative suite likely cause indirect harm in the form of smoke inhalation. Very few cases of urologic surgical fires appear in the literature. However, one case report involved a hypospadias repair where prep fluid ignited under the drapes causing first and second degree burns to the patient’s perineum.

Fortunately, the majority of fires occur at operative sites distant from the typical urologic operative sites. In addition, urologists utilize tools and techniques that both reduce the risk and contain risk factors. For example, urologists often operate using irrigation and iodine prep, both of which reduce the risk of operative fires. Urologists also often use many devices, such as light cords or flexible endoscopes, that can cause sparking. Within certain types of procedures, such as abdominal surgeries, urologists may conduct a bowel resection, which increases the risk of bowel gas ignition as well as electrocution. Another example may be the rare cases where a urologist operates above the xiphoid process for a buccal graft which exposes urologists to even higher risk due to proximity to oxygen delivery devices.

While surgical fires are avoidable and the hope is that they never occur, having a calculated and articulate response is still a necessary component in reducing harm. The risk to a patient could result in devastating consequences, and a swift and practiced response could reduce those risks to the patient and to the OR staff. The response varies with the location of the fire, the cause, and requires specific training as to each. An excellent step-by-step guide was created by ERCI that is useful when training OR staff (image 1). The step-by-step guide for fires on or in the patient requires the following action steps: Stop administration of supplemental gas, removal of the material that is on fire, and extinguish the active fire. Next, assess the patient and provide the necessary care. Lastly, if the fire cannot be controlled or contained, notify the appropriate individuals, and isolate the room.