The Rule of Nines functions as a tool to assess second-degree and third-degree total body surface area (TBSA) in burn patients. Once the TBSA is determined and the patient is stabilized, fluid resuscitation may begin often with the use of a formula. Often the Parkland formula is used. It is calculated as 4 mL intravenous (IV) fluid per kilogram of ideal body weight per TBSA percent (expressed as a decimal) over 24 hours. Due to reports of over-resuscitation, other formulas have been proposed such as the Modified Brooke formula, that decrease the intravenous fluid to 2 mL instead of 4 mL. After the total volume of intravenous fluid resuscitation for the first 24 hours is established, the first half of the volume is given over the first 8 hours and the other half is given over the next 16 hours (this is converted to an hourly rate by dividing half the total volume by 8 and 16). The 24-hour volume time starts at the time of the burn. Should the patient present 2 hours after the burn and intravenous fluid resuscitation have not been started, the first half of the volume should be given in 6 hours with the remaining half of fluids running as per protocol. Fluid resuscitation is highly important in the initial management of second-degree and third-degree burns that encompass greater than 20% TBSA as complications of renal failure, myoglobinuria, hemoglobinuria, and multi-organ failure may arise if not aggressively treated early. Mortality has been shown to be higher in patients with greater than 20% TBSA burns that do not receive appropriate fluid resuscitation immediately following the injury.