Given that there are several types of nasogastric tubes selecting the correct tube is the most important part of the process of gathering equipment. For decompression, the standard tube used is a double-lumen nasogastric tube. There is a double-one large lumen for suction and one smaller lumen to act as a sump. A sump allows air to enter so that the suction lumen does not become adherent to the gastric wall or become obstructed when the stomach is fully collapsed.

If the tube is being placed for administration of medications or nutrition, then a small-bore single lumen tube such as a Dobhoff or Levin tube may be placed. A Levin tube is just a simple small diameter tube. A Dobhoff is a small diameter tube with a weight on the end, the weight is added in hopes that gravity and peristalsis will advance the end of the tube past the pylorus, given an additional barrier between the nutrition or medications administered and any potential aspiration risk.

Additional essential equipment is some type of sterile lubricating gel to dip the tube into to ease its passage through the sinus cavity and gloves for the protection of both the patient and whoever is placing the tube. The gloves do not have to be sterile, given that this is a nonsterile procedure.

Non-essential equipment that is helpful to have is a cup of water with a straw in it for the patient to sip from during the procedure, provided they can tolerate it. This swallowing action helps advance the tube, and the water can ease some of the irritation on the back of the oropharynx from the tube. The topical use of local anesthetics such as lidocaine has not been shown to be very useful.