A child with a presumed airway obstruction that is still able to maintain some degree of ventilation should be allowed to clear the airway by coughing. If the child cannot cough, vocalize, or breathe, emergent steps are necessary to clear the airway. For infants under one year of age, alternating sequences of five back blows and five chest thrusts are performed until the object clears or the infant becomes unresponsive. Abdominal thrusts should not be performed in infants as their livers are more prone to injury.

The treatment for an adult with complete FBAO is similar to that of a child where a bystander performs the Heimlich maneuver until expelling the foreign body or CPR if the patient loses consciousness. If nobody is present to assist in the Heimlich maneuver, the choking individual may self-administer thrusts with his or her fist or by forcibly leaning against a firm object such as the back of a chair. For patients who are pregnant or morbidly obese, abdominal thrusts may not be feasible, and chest thrusts against the patient’s sternum may be performed.

If the above described basic life support measures do not clear the obstruction, direct laryngoscopy should be performed with attempts to remove the foreign object with Magill forceps and/or suction. If the object is still causing obstruction and the clinician believes the foreign body is above the level of the vocal cords, a cricothyrotomy with trans-tracheal ventilation is appropriate. If the foreign body lodges below the level of the vocal cords, the provider may attempt endotracheal intubation with the endotracheal (ET) tube used to advance the foreign body into the right mainstem bronchus. The ET tube should then be withdrawn above the carina to allow ventilation of the left lung, and preparations should be made for bronchoscopy in the operating room.

When a partial FBAO is suspected, a diagnostic bronchoscopy should be strongly considered, even in the absence of radiological findings. History of a witnessed aspiration event, physical exam findings, and radiological findings should merit consideration to determine the necessity of bronchoscopy. However, negative physical exam and radiological findings alone should not be used to rule out FBAO.  A multi-year study with 431 patients determined that despite negative physical exam and radiological findings, one-third of these patients were still found to have a foreign body by bronchoscopy.