Unruptured cerebral aneurysms are asymptomatic and are therefore unable to be detected based on history and physical exam alone. However, when ruptured, they commonly present with a sudden onset, severe headache. This is classically described as a “thunderclap headache” or “worse headache of my life.” In 30% of patients, the pain is lateralized to the side of the aneurysm. A headache may be accompanied by a brief loss of consciousness, meningismus, or nausea and vomiting. Seizures are rare, occurring in less than 10% of patients. Sudden death may also occur in 10 to 15% of patients. Interestingly, 30 to 50% of patients with major SAH report a sudden and severe headache 6 to 20 days prior. This is referred to as a “sentinel headache,” which represents a minor hemorrhage or “warning leak.” Physical exam findings may include elevated blood pressure, dilated pupils, visual field and/or cranial nerve deficits, mental status changes such as drowsiness, photophobia, motor or sensory deficits, neck stiffness, and lower back pain with the neck flexion.

The Hunt and Hess grading system can be used by clinicians to predict an outcome based upon initial neurologic status. There are 5 grades, ranging in the severity of symptoms that correlate with the overall rate of mortality. Grade 1 includes a mild headache with slight nuchal rigidity. Grade 2 is given for a severe headache with a stiff neck but without a neurologic deficit other than cranial nerve palsy. For grade 3, the patient is drowsy or confused with a mild focal deficit. In grade 4, the patient is stuporous with moderate to severe hemiparesis. Finally, grade 5 includes a coma with decerebrate posturing.