Effective treatment hastens endocardial vegetation eradication and limits or prevents secondary complications. However, those presenting in extremis with acute decompensated heart failure, septic shock, or stroke require stabilization and resuscitation, prioritizing the tenets of airway, breathing, and circulation. Following initial stabilization, subsequent treatment concentrates on prolonged bactericidal antibiotic regimens and possible cardiothoracic surgical intervention.

Antibiotic treatment duration and selection depend on the nature of the valve involved and the resistance pattern of the infecting organism. In the case of native valve endocarditis with penicillin-susceptible viridans group strep or S. gallolyticus, the shortest proposed treatment regimen involves a two-week course of ceftriaxone 2 gm IV every 24 hours plus gentamicin 3 mg/kg IV every 24 hours.

Patients at risk for staphylococcal infection typically require more prolonged antibiotic therapy. Patients with native valve methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) infections can receive 6-week courses of either nafcillin 2 gm every four hours or cefazolin 2 gm every 8 hours. In cases of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) infections, a standard course involves vancomycin 15mg/kg every 12 hours or daptomycin 8 mg/kg daily for 6-weeks. Of note, gentamicin dual therapy is no longer recommended for MSSA or MRSA infections given the lack of clinical benefit and associated renal toxicity.

Since beta-lactam monotherapy does not possess bactericidal activity against enterococci, both native and prosthetic valve enterococcal infections require combination regimens. Examples include ampicillin or penicillin G plus an aminoglycoside such as gentamicin for 4 to 6 weeks. Interestingly, a dual beta-lactam regimen such as ampicillin plus ceftriaxone achieves appropriate bactericidal activity against Enterococci faecalis and may be utilized.

Overall, antimicrobial treatment guidelines remain ever-evolving and should be routinely reviewed. To further guide and help develop appropriate antibiotic therapy courses, early infectious disease consultation is encouraged. As an additional principle of medical management, two blood cultures should be drawn every 24 to 48 hours to ensure clearance of bloodstream infection and direct ongoing antimicrobial therapy.

In general, early surgical intervention, including valve repair versus replacement, is indicated in the event of acute heart failure, extensive infection with localized complications, and recurrent arterial embolization. Acute valvular compromise manifesting with heart failure symptomatology typically warrants operative intervention within 24 hours. However, AHA/ACC also recommends early surgical treatment before completion of the initial antibiotic course in the event of an associated atrioventricular block, paravalvular abscess, or presence of destructive infiltrative lesions.