**Clinical Presentation and Pathophysiology Related to Individual Viral Entity**

- **Parvovirus B-19**: Commonly known for causing "fifth disease" or erythema infectiosum, parvovirus B-19 can also cause arthritis/arthralgia in children and adults. Joint symptoms occur in as many as 60% of infected adults.

- **Hepatitis Viruse****s**: Hepatitis A sometimes can cause arthralgias but usually no arthritis. Both hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) viruses can cause arthritis and arthralgia. Approximately 10% to 25 % of patients with HBV develop symptoms of arthralgia and arthritis. Arthritis in patients with HBV is mediated through the formation and deposition of immune complexes.

- **HIV**: The arthritis syndromes associated with HIV include many entities such as HIV-associated arthritis, reactive arthritis, septic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and rarely described painful articular syndrome.

- **EBV**: Arthralgias are the most common joint manifestation of Epstein-Barr viral infection, with the rare case of arthritis causing occasional large joint swelling. The joint signs and symptoms are self-limited, and treatment is symptomatic. A triggering role in the development of chronic inflammatory arthritis in RA has been proposed, but no definite evidence has been found.

- **Alphaviruses**: These viruses are mosquito-borne RNA viruses that cause epidemics of febrile arthralgia and polyarthritis. This group includes the Ross River virus, Barmah Forest virus, O'nyong-nyong, Sindbis virus group, Mayaro, and CHIKV.Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are the vectors of CHIKV. The arthritis of CHIKV is typically symmetrical and most commonly involves the fingers, wrists, knees, and ankles. Raynaud phenomenon has been reported as well in some patients. Chronic symptoms of joint pain and swelling have been reported to be relapsing and remitting in a majority (up to 80%) of patients.

- **Flaviviruses**: Dengue and Zika virus are prominent members of this group causing febrile illnesses and symptoms of joint pain and swelling. As with the above-mentioned alphaviruses, the geographical distribution of these viruses has significantly expanded in recent times. Aedes aegypti is the principle vector for Dengue.

- **Other viruses**: Mumps, HTLV-1, rubella, and some enteroviruses can also cause arthralgia and arthritis.

**Diagnosis**

There is no single test or clinical presentation which is suggestive of viral arthritis. The diagnosis is mainly clinical, supported by other tests, including inflammatory markers, autoantibodies, and serology. A viral etiology should be suspected in a patient presenting with acute onset of arthralgias or polyarticular symptoms, especially if the duration of symptomatology has been less than six weeks. The presence of extra-articular symptoms, viz rash or lymphadenopathy, should be noted. Testing for antinuclear antibodies (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) could be helpful if the features of inflammatory arthritis persist. In suspected cases of viral arthritis, the serum should be collected for serology. Serologic testing, however, must be directed against the specific viruses suspected based upon both epidemiologic and clinical data. As a general rule with serology, an IgM antibody response would be indicative of acute infection and would be converted to an IgG isotype after a few weeks. Due to the high rate of infections in the general population, for example, with EBV and hepatitis, positive IgG antibodies, especially if stable in titers, are non-diagnostic. Other laboratory features are related to the specific viral syndromes. For example, the detection of positive HBsAg elevated aminotransferases and IgM anti-HBc antibodies in a patient with recent-onset polyarthritis could provide the clue to the diagnosis of HBV-associated polyarthritis. Isolation of virus from the joint itself or viral cultures is not useful except in rare circumstances.