The way a child's development progresses in the first years of life can dictate the individual's lifelong development and level of success they could potentially achieve in adulthood. The role of the primary care physician is crucial in the recognition of normal development and identification of developmental delays. The provider should outline appropriate anticipatory guidance to the caregiver and educate them on what they should expect their child to be achieving as they grow. Developing a strong relationship with parents is important to ensure that when any abnormality in the child's development is identified, the parents will acknowledge the perturbation and acquiesce to recommended intervention strategies and treatment plans.

Developmental delays, such as speech and language delay, can be a presenting feature of conditions such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and also serve as a prognostic factor.

Whenever screening results are concerning for developmental delay, a further, complete evaluation is necessary. Evaluations ideally performed by developmental specialists (neurodevelopmental pediatricians, developmental-behavioral pediatricians, pediatric neurologists, pediatric psychiatrists), and they can occur at home or medical centers. Early childhood professionals such as educators, psychologists, social workers, and therapists must be included as part of the multidisciplinary team, which will ensure the child is receiving appropriate care.

Referral to early intervention programs as early as possible is valuable to ensure more positive outcomes. These programs not only provide complete evaluations but connect families with the services required, provide them with service coordinators and social workers that can assist families with issues such as transportations, home visits, counseling, insurance. It is essential to recognize that a specific diagnosis is not required to refer to Early Intervention and to educate parents that they can also request the referral.