**Disposing of PHI**

When disposing of the medical records, labels, prescription labels, the documents should be shredded or incinerated so that there is no chance that they will be reconstructed. Any PHI on a computer must be completely erased before disposing of the PC. The same applies to any CD or zip drive. The people who are in charge of shredding or disposing of the PHI must be properly selected to make sure that the records are destroyed and not just taken home.

**Signed Consent**

During a visit or medical encounter, pharmacies and hospitals may get signed authorization from patients before service, allowing that entity to access the patient's PHI during care. However, this form has to contain the initiation and expiration date for the disclosure. The authorization only remains valid until the expiration date and can be renewed. So if a patient has signed an authorization for the release of his medical records to a psychiatrist, then one can send the records during that time. But one is not allowed to send PHI to other healthcare entities without additional consent nor can PHI be sent continuously outside of the specified time frame. If the patient is not available or is not able, then the risk analysis committee may disclose PHI without authorization, if it is a matter of life or death. Other cases where PHI may be disclosed are in cases of child abuse, elderly neglect, public health law, or where there appears to be fraudulent activity.

**Training Employees**

It is imperative that the entire staff know about HIPAA. Thus, regular education seminars must be conducted. The teaching not only applies to regular staff but all interns and volunteers who come into contact with PHI. The staff must be fully trained, updated regularly, and made aware of HIPAA rules that apply to them.

**Reporting HIPAA Violations**

In general, HIPAA violations must be self-reported to the department of health and human services (HHS). If a violation has affected more than 500 patients, the department must be notified in writing within 60 days. If less than 500 patients have been affected then HHS has to be notified no later than 60 days after the calendar year ends. Penalties may increase if self-reporting is not done and the violation is discovered through the media.

**Who Monitors Hospitals and Healthcare Workers for HIPAA Compliance?**

The office for civil rights (OCR) under health and human services (HHS) is the entity responsible for enforcing HIPAA privacy and security rules. The agency enforces rules in the following ways:

- Performs an investigation after receiving complaints from patients

- Will perform an audit to ensure compliance is maintained. OCR may select an institution at random for an audit

- Conduct education seminars and outreach to boost compliances. During these sessions, they may also perform an audit and catch everyone by surprise

- May have read or heard in the media about PHI being discovered or disposed of improperly

**The Investigation Protocol**

Once OCR receives a complaint of HIPAA violation, it gathers the information and tries to determine if the privacy and security rules were violated. If the problem is a minor case of noncompliance, OCR will initially try and resolve the matter with the respective institution in the following ways:

- Recommend voluntary compliance

- Recommend some type of corrective action

- Resolution agreement

For those institutions that fail to comply with HIPAA, there may be criminal and civil penalties. If the complaint received indicates a violation of the criminal provision of HIPAA, then the matter may be referred to the department of justice (DOJ) for further investigation.

**Civil and Criminal Violations**

When the healthcare institution fails to comply with the matter satisfactorily, OCR may impose civil monetary penalties that are based on the seriousness of the non-compliance. The amount of monetary fine is usually up to the discretion of the secretary of HHS and depends on the extent and nature of the harm that occurred as a result of the violation. In almost all cases, the secretary is not permitted to impose any civil penalty for a violation that is corrected within 4 to 6 weeks. All criminal violations of HIPAA are handled by the DOJ, who in addition to civil penalties may add other fines depending on the severity of the violation.

**Criminal Violation of HIPAA Rules**

Criminal penalties for HIPAA violations apply to the following entities:

- All health coverage plans

- Health care clearinghouses

- All health care providers who transmit claims electronically

- Medicare prescription drug card sponsors

Besides institutions, individuals can also be charged with criminal violations of HIPAA and this includes employees, directors, officers, nurses, secretaries, and telephone operators. Even individuals not directly liable under HIPAA may be charged with abetting or conspiring. Finally, the HHS has the authority to exclude any individual or healthcare institution from participation in medicare as either temporary or permanent.

It is critical to understand that no matter how big or small the institution or how many or few healthcare workers work in a clinic, each entity can be penalized for HIPAA violations. While the monetary penalties can be dramatic, all such violations are published in cyberspace and this can quickly ruin the reputation of the facility or the healthcare provider.

**Can Patients Sue a Healthcare Facility or a Healthcare Worker for Violating HIPAA?**

For example, a pharmacist calls up the home of a patient, but no one answers the phone. Then he leaves a message asking when you will be coming up to pick up your HIV medications. The patient can claim that no one in the home knew about his HIV status and now the pharmacist has disclosed his private health condition to everyone in the home. Can the patient sue the pharmacist?

When a healthcare worker or the facility has violated HIPAA rules, patients generally have no recourse except to report the matter to the OCR. In fact, HIPAA has created a right to privacy and does not allow for most patients to file lawsuits. However, if the HIPAA violation is due to gross negligence and professional malpractice, then such a case may be brought to court.

**Avoiding HIPAA Violations**

Preventing HIPAA violations is not difficult. First, get professional help from a HIPAA expert.

- Develop a code of conduct booklet and write down all the policies and procedures that everyone must follow.

- Do not let anyone get away with violations of policies because, in the end, it is the healthcare provider who will have to face the legal system.

- If healthcare providers or institutions already have HIPAA policies in effect and have suffered a HIPAA violation, consult with a HIPAA specialist to determine any deficiencies and corrective solutions. These individuals provide comprehensive education, tips, and offer seminars to the staff about HIPAA rules and regulations. It is money worth spent because violation of HIPAA is a very expensive ordeal.

**Violation Amount/Violations of an Identical Provision in a C****alendar Year**

Did not know: $100 to $50,000; $1.5 million

Reasonable cause: $1,000 to $50,000; $1.5 million

Willful neglect (corrected): $10,000 to $50,000; $1.5 million

Willful Neglect (uncorrected): $50,000; $1.5 million

**Pearls**

- HIPAA has been enacted to ensure the privacy and security of PHI.

- Each healthcare institution may set up unique policies and procedures, but they must conform to HIPAA guidelines.

- With evolving technology, one must keep updated with HIPAA and ensure that PHI remains protected.

- Ensure that all the workers in the organization know the HIPAA policies and procedures.

- Be stringent with workers who break HIPAA rules because eventually, there will be a cost.