# Learning Outcome

- Recall the causes of osteomyelitis

- Describe the presentation of osteomyelitis

- Summarize the treatment of osteomyelitis

- List the nurse's role in the management of a patient with osteomyelitis

# Introduction

Bone infection is called osteomyelitis. It is an acute or chronic inflammatory process involving the bone and its structures secondary to infection with pyogenic organisms, including bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria. Interestingly, archeological finds showed animal fossils with evidence of bone infection, making this a relatively old disease.

# Nursing Diagnosis

- Pain

- Disturbed body image

- Impaired skin integrity

- Ongoing infection

- Anxiety

- Fever

- Drainage from wound

# Causes

Healthy intact bone is resistant to infection. The bone becomes susceptible to disease with the introduction of a large inoculum of bacteria, from trauma, ischemia, or the presence of foreign bodies because bone sites to which microorganisms can bind are exposed.Staphylococcus aureus adhere to the bone by expressing receptors, called adhesins, for some components of the bone matrix, including laminin, collagen, fibronectin, and bone sialoglycoprotein. S. aureus expresses a collagen-binding adhesin, which permits its attachment to bone cartilage while the fibronectin-binding adhesin's role in attachment of bacteria to surgically implanted devices in bone was recently discovered.S. aureus can survive intracellularly after being internalized by cultured osteoblasts. Some bacteria create a protective biofilm coating around themselves and underlying surfaces. This characteristic of some bacteria to adhere to the bone and surgically implanted devices following which they express phenotypic resistance to antibiotic therapy and their ability to survive intracellularly may explain the persistence of bone infections and high failure rates of shorter courses of antimicrobial treatment.

# Risk Factors

The overall incidence of osteomyelitis in the United States is mostly unknown, but reports show it to be as high as 1 in 675 US hospital admissions each year or about 50,000 cases annually.

# Assessment

The clinical presentation of osteomyelitis depends on the etiology. Sometimes diagnosis in adults can be tricky, and it requires a high index of suspicion. A good history and physical is always the right place to start and are essential parts of the initial evaluation. Some patients are at high risk for osteomyelitis, and these include those with bacteremia, endocarditis, intravenous drug use, trauma, and open fractures. Also, patients with chronic poorly healing wounds in the setting of diabetes mellitus, peripheral vascular disease, peripheral neuropathy, or orthopedic hardware are at increased risk.

In chronic osteomyelitis, symptoms may occur over a longer duration of time, usually more than two weeks. As with acute osteomyelitis, patients may also present with swelling, pain, and erythema at the site of infection, but constitutional symptoms like fever are less common.  Patients who have deep or extensive ulcers that do not heal after several weeks of appropriate therapy, especially in people with diabetes or debilitated patients, should raise the suspicion for osteomyelitis. Physical examination should focus primarily on finding a possible nidus of infection, assessing sensory function, and peripheral vasculature. Tenderness to palpation over vertebral bone may be a significant finding in vertebral osteomyelitis. The ability to probe an ulcer to the bone with a blunt sterile instrument is highly suggestive of osteomyelitis.

# Evaluation

Laboratory data can be useful in the assessment of osteomyelitis but are usually nonspecific for osteomyelitis. There may or may not be leukocytosis, elevation of ESR, and C-reactive protein (CRP). The CRP level correlates with clinical response to therapy and may be used to monitor treatment. Blood cultures may be positive, especially in hematogenous osteomyelitis involving the vertebrae, clavicle, or pubis.

Radiographic imaging is an essential component of the evaluation of a patient with suspected osteomyelitis. Clinically, the most useful studies are plain radiographs, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and technetium-99 bone scintigraphy.

Of all the imaging modalities currently in use, MRI has the highest combined sensitivity and specificity (78% to 90% and 60 % to 90% respectively) for detecting osteomyelitis. It can detect early bone infection within 3 to 5 days of disease onset

Other imaging modalities less commonly used are positron emission tomography (PET), which is expensive and not routinely available, leukocyte scintigraphy, gallium scan, and computed tomography (CT scan). A CT scan is more sensitive than plain radiograph for assessing cortical and trabecular integrity, periosteal reaction, intraosseous and soft tissue gas, the extent of a sinus tract, and is superior to MRI in detecting necrotic bone fragments. However, though the CT scan is readily available compared to the MRI, it is more expensive than plain radiograph and has a limited role in the diagnosis of osteomyelitis. It should be used mainly to determine the extent of bony destruction (especially in the spine) to guide biopsies or in patients with contraindications to MRI.

Bone biopsy (either open or percutaneously) is essential to establish the histopathological diagnosis in osteomyelitis, identify the causative pathogen, and provide susceptibility data that helps direct antibiotic therapy. Superficial wound cultures or material from needle puncture or sinus tracts should not be used in diagnosis as these specimens do not correlate well with bone biopsy results.

# Medical Management

Hematogenous osteomyelitis is primarily monomicrobial, while osteomyelitis due to contiguous spread or direct inoculation is usually polymicrobial or monomicrobial.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). In some studies, MRSA accounted for over one-third of all staphylococcal isolates.staphylococcus, beta-hemolytic streptococcus, enterococci, aerobic gram-negative bacilli (including Pseudomonas species, Enterobacter species, Escherichia coli) and anaerobic gram-negative bacilli (such as Peptostreptococcus, Clostridium species, Bacteroides).

It is crucial to consider less common pathogens in the appropriate epidemiological setting and immunocompromised patients. These include Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which may spread to the spine from the lungs; nontuberculous mycobacteria (Mycobacterium avium intracellulare, Bacille Calmette-Guerin which may complicate intravesical therapy for bladder cancer); Candida species; fungi such as Blastomyces, Coccidiodes, Cryptococcus, and Aspergillus. Infection with Actinomyces and Sporothrix usually follow traumatic inoculation, Salmonella and S. aureus are implicated in hematogenous osteomyelitis in sickle cell disease while Brucella and Salmonella occur in spinal infections.Bartonella henselae may be associated with HIV related osteomyelitis and Pasteurella multocida or Eikenella corrodens seen in human or animal bites.

Effective treatment of osteomyelitis involves a collaborative effort among various medical and surgical specialties. The two main aspects of therapy are surgical containment of the infection and prolonged antibiotics. Surgical debridement of all diseased bone is often required as antibiotics penetrate poorly into infected fluid collections such as abscesses and injured or necrotic bone.S. aureus is involved.

Also important is the need for revascularization of the affected limb before surgical intervention if there is evidence of significant peripheral vascular disease, control diabetes mellitus and address other host factors that may impede wound healing including tobacco use, malnutrition, chronic hypoxia, immunodeficiency states, chronic lymphedema and peripheral neuropathy

Prolonged antibiotic therapy is the cornerstone of treatment for osteomyelitis. Results of culture and sensitivity should guide antibiotic treatment if possible, but in the absence of this data, it is reasonable to start empiric antibiotics. A commonly used broad-spectrum empiric antibiotic regimen against both gram-positive and negative organisms including MRSA is vancomycin (15 mg/kg intravenously [IV] every 12 hours) plus a third a generation cephalosporin (e.g., ceftriaxone 2 gm IV daily) or a beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combination (e.g., piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 IV every 8 hours).

**Pathogen-Specific Antibiotic Therapy for Osteomyelitis in Adults**

**Staphylococcus aureus penicillin-sensitive**

Treatment of choice is penicillin G 4 million units every 6 hours

Alternative regimens are a first-generation cephalosporin, e.g., cefazolin 2 g IV every 8 hours, clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours, vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV every 12 hours, oxacillin or nafcillin 2 g IV every 4 hours

**Staphylococcus aureus penicillin-resistant**

Treatment of choice is nafcillin 2 gm IV every 4 hours

Alternative therapies are cefazolin, clindamycin or vancomycin (doses as above)

**Staphylococcus aureus methicillin-resistant**

Treatment of choice is vancomycin IV

An alternative regimen is linezolid 600 mg IV every 12 hours.

**Streptococci (group A, B, Beta hemolytic, Streptococcus pneumoniae)**

Treatment of choice is penicillin G 4 million units every 6 hours

Alternative regimens include ceftriaxone 2 gm IV daily, clindamycin IV, vancomycin IV, cefazolin IV (doses as above)

**Enterobacteriaceae quinolone sensitive**

Treatment of choice is ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV twice per day (bid) or 750 mg orally (PO) bid, levofloxacin 500 to 750 mg PO or IV daily

Alternative regimens include ceftriaxone 2g IV daily, cefepime 2 gm IV every 12 hours, ceftazidime 2 gm IV every 8 hours

**Enterobacteriaceae, quinolone-resistant (Escherichia coli)**

Treatment of choice is piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 g IV every 8 hours, Ticarcillin/clavulanate 3.1 gm IV every 4 hours

An alternative regimen is ceftriaxone 2 g IV daily

**Pseudomonas aeruginosa**

Treatment of choice is cefepime 2 gm IV every 12 hours, ceftazidime 2 gm IV every 8 hours

Alternative regimens include meropenem 1 gm IV every 8 hours, Imipenem 500 mg IV every 6 hours, ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV every 12 hours or 750 mg PO daily

**Enterococci**

Treatment of choice is penicillin G 4 million units every 6 hours

Alternatively vancomycin 15 mg/kg every 12 hours, daptomycin 6 mg/kg IV daily, linezolid 600 mg IV or PO every 12 hours

**Anaerobes**

Treatment of choice is clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours, ticarcillin/clavulanate 3.1 gm IV every 4 hours

Alternatively, metronidazole 500 mg IV every 8 hours (for gram-negative anaerobes)

The recommended duration of treatment for osteomyelitis in adults is 4 to 6 weeks of parenteral antibiotic therapy to achieve acceptable cure rates with a decreased risk of recurrence.

Vacuum-assisted wound closure devices are used in the right clinical setting, especially where large or deep wounds are left after extensive debridement. These devices have been shown to promote healing by both direct and indirect effects on the wound.

# Nursing Management

- Promote bed rest

- Assess nutritional needs

- Administer antibiotics as ordered

- Administer pain medications as ordered

- Monitor and dress wound as ordered

- Encourage out of bed activity

- Provide deep venous thrombosis and pressure sore prophylaxis

- Educate patient about medication compliance

- Improve muscle strength and functioning

- Involve social work for home care

- Provide techniques to improve self-care

- Ensure wound care nurse is following the patient

# When To Seek Help

- Persistent fever

- Foul drainage

- Increasing pain

- Unstable vital signs

# Outcome Identification

- No drainage

- No pain

- Normal appetite

- No fever

- Skin intact

# Coordination of Care

Osteomyelitis is a complicated infection to treat. In most cases, management involves a multifaceted, interprofessional approach, including the primary care provider, radiologist, surgeons (orthopedic, vascular), a podiatrist, an infectious disease specialist, pharmacist, nurse wound care team, and sometimes a plastic surgeon, a pain specialist or interventional radiologist. The primary care provider often plays a vital role in the initial diagnosis and coordination of care across these medical and surgical specialties.

The therapeutic approach to management is guided sometimes by the site of infection and the presence of vascular insufficiency. Minimally invasive CT or fluoroscopically guided aspiration of the disc space (usually by interventional radiology) for microbiological and histopathological testing is recommended for the diagnosis of suspected NVO if clinical, imaging and other laboratory data suggest osteomyelitis in the absence of positive blood cultures with an organism known to cause osteomyelitis (S. aureus, Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Brucella).

Once again, a strong collaboration between the surgical and vascular teams is essential for effective management of osteomyelitis due to vascular insufficiency, especially if associated with diabetes mellitus. Revascularization of the affected limb is critical for proper wound healing. Procedures to restore adequate blood flow, including therapeutic angiogram by either interventional radiology or vascular surgery and even femoral to popliteal by-pass, are used before amputation depending on the severity of vascular insufficiency. Surgical revascularization procedures that use local pedicle muscle flaps and myocutaneous flaps maintain vascular supply to the surgical site, fill the space left by surgical debridement, and also fight infection.

Following surgical debridement, the need for close follow-up with prolonged antibiotics and meticulous wound care cannot be overemphasized. Infectious disease specialists involved in the patient's care often monitor response to therapy and adjust antibiotics regimens where needed. Many patients can continue with parental antibiotics outpatient via peripherally inserted intravenous access to complete their antibiotic course while others can transition to highly bioavailable oral antibiotic therapy such as quinolones when feasible based on microbiological results. Qualified home-bound patients benefit from home health wound nurse visits several times a week, while those who are ambulatory are encouraged to use wound care clinics if available. Family members and caregivers are also an integral part of the care team, providing support and care between healthcare provider visits. Only through such an approach can the morbidity of osteomyelitis be decreased.

# Health Teaching and Health Promotion

Patient education about the prolonged nature of therapy and the need for compliance with treatment recommendations to ensure adequate wound healing thereby reducing the risk for recurrence is an essential part of the care in these patients.

# Discharge Planning

Osteomyelitis is a complicated infection to treat. In most cases, management involves a multifaceted, interprofessional approach, including the primary care provider, radiologist, surgeons (orthopedic, vascular), a podiatrist, an infectious disease specialist, pharmacist, nurse wound care team, and sometimes a plastic surgeon, a pain specialist or interventional radiologist. The primary care provider often plays a vital role in the initial diagnosis and coordination of care across these medical and surgical specialties.

The therapeutic approach to management is guided sometimes by the site of infection and the presence of vascular insufficiency. Minimally invasive CT or fluoroscopically guided aspiration of the disc space (usually by interventional radiology) for microbiological and histopathological testing is recommended for the diagnosis of suspected NVO if clinical, imaging and other laboratory data suggest osteomyelitis in the absence of positive blood cultures with an organism known to cause osteomyelitis (S. aureus, Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Brucella).

Once again, a strong collaboration between the surgical and vascular teams is essential for effective management of osteomyelitis due to vascular insufficiency, especially if associated with diabetes mellitus. Revascularization of the affected limb is critical for proper wound healing. Procedures to restore adequate blood flow, including therapeutic angiogram by either interventional radiology or vascular surgery and even femoral to popliteal by-pass, are used before amputation depending on the severity of vascular insufficiency. Surgical revascularization procedures that use local pedicle muscle flaps and myocutaneous flaps maintain vascular supply to the surgical site, fill the space left by surgical debridement, and also fight infection.

Following surgical debridement, the need for close follow-up with prolonged antibiotics and meticulous wound care cannot be overemphasized. Infectious disease specialists involved in the patient's care often monitor response to therapy and adjust antibiotics regimens where needed. Many patients can continue with parental antibiotics outpatient via peripherally inserted intravenous access to complete their antibiotic course while others can transition to highly bioavailable oral antibiotic therapy such as quinolones when feasible based on microbiological results. Qualified home-bound patients benefit from home health wound nurse visits several times a week, while those who are ambulatory are encouraged to use wound care clinics if available. Family members and caregivers are also an integral part of the care team, providing support and care between healthcare provider visits. Only through such an approach can the morbidity of osteomyelitis be decreased.