Management of prosthetic joint infection necessitates a multidisciplinary team approach

**Treatment principles include:**

- Cure (eradication of infection, return of joint function, and alleviation of symptoms)

- Palliative approach (may include suppressive antibiotics, joint fusion, and symptom control).

Antibiotic therapy is often necessary but should be delayed until after culture materials (at least joint aspiration culture) are obtained. The exception is in the rare situation of sepsis or overwhelming infection. Empirical antibiotic therapy should be tailored according to the timing of infection. As a general guide, the antibiotic choice should at least provide adequate coverage against Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)), coagulase-negative staphylococcus, and aerobic gram-negative bacilli. Antibiotics with excellent activity against biofilms such as Rifampin and fluoroquinolones are often included in treatment. Other possible oral antibiotic choices for prosthetic joint infection include minocycline, linezolid, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

Surgical options can be further categorized into five options as follow:

**Debridement and retention**: As the name implies, the implant is left in place, but the joint cavity is debrided with or without removal of the synovial polyethylene lining. This is typically the surgical approach for early prosthetic joint infection provided the implant is stable, symptom duration is less than 3 weeks, there are no sinus tracts, and the isolated pathogen is susceptible to active biofilm antibiotics. The other indication would be an acute hematogenous infection with symptoms duration of fewer than 72 hours. Prolonged antibiotics for 3 to 6 months are often necessary (three months for retained hip and 6 months for retained knee joint).

**One-stage exchange**: This is the surgical approach commonly employed in Europe but not the standard of care in the United States. It involves the removal of the infected prosthesis and simultaneously replaced with a new one. This is indicated when the patient is not immunocompromised with minimal medical comorbidities and soft tissues are healthy. there should be no prolonged use of antibiotics and no bone grafts implanted. The organism has to be of low virulence with known antibiotic sensitivity preoperatively. It is often accompanied by two weeks of intravenous antibiotics followed by 3 to 6 months of oral antibiotics. This approach has the advantage of being of lower cost, shortened hospital stay, and patient's immobilization. But, this is at the expense of carrying a high risk of residual infection.

**Two-stage exchange:**This is the standard of care in the United States and offers the best chance of cure especially for delayed and late prosthetic joint infections. In its simplified version, it involves complete removal of the infected prosthesis, placement of a joint spacer (which could be antibiotic-impregnated), antibiotic therapy for two to eight weeks, and subsequent placement of a new prosthesis. Patients have to be fit enough to afford multiple procedures and have adequate bone stock. The decision on reimplantation requires confirmation by clinical examination, normal lab analysis, and negative cultures 2 weeks after the completed antibiotic course.

**Resection Arthroplasty (Implant removal without replacement):**This is a reasonable approach for elderly, non ambulatory patients with high operative risks or when there is no functional benefit expected by prosthesis exchange. Other indications would be inadequate bone stock and poor soft tissues, recurrent infections,  multiple previous failed revision surgeries.**Arthrodesis**often accompanies it.

**Above Knee Amputation:**Indicated when prosthetic knee joint infection is resistant to all conservative and surgical options and patients continue to experience severe persistent pain. Also, indicated in severe bone and soft tissue loss and vascular compromise.

**Chronic Suppressive antibiotic therapy:**This is often employed when surgery is not an option, for example, bedridden debilitated patients or those with multiple severe co-morbidities.