During the fifth week of embryologic development, there are 3 major identifiable pairs of veins: the vitelline veins, the umbilical veins, and the cardinal veins. Only the vitelline veins and the cardinal veins contribute to the formation of the inferior vena cava in the human adult.

The vitelline veins, also known as the omphalomesenteric veins, form a plexus around the primitive duodenum and pass through the septum transversum to drain venous blood from this area. As liver cords grow into the septum transversum a dense, sinusoidal network forms and the left vitelline vein regresses. The sinusoidal network becomes the hepatic sinusoidal system, and the plexus around the duodenum becomes the portal vein. While the left vitelline vein regresses, the right vitelline vein becomes more prominent and is called the hepatocardiac channel.

The hepatocardiac channel forms the hepatocardiac portion of the inferior vena cava.

The cardinal veins, which are primarily responsible for venous drainage of the early embryo, are paired veins divided into anterior and posterior segments. The anterior cardinal veins drain the cephalad portion of the embryo, and the posterior cardinal veins drain the caudal portion. Sometime between the fourth and fifth weeks of embryologic development the subcardinal veins, the sacrocardinal veins, and the supracardinal veins are derived from the cardinal veins. These derivatives of the cardinal veins play an important role in the formation of the inferior vena cava.

The supracardinal veins assume the role of the posterior cardinal veins and drain the body wall by becoming intercostal veins. Supracardinal veins do not directly contribute to the formation of the inferior vena cava.

The left subcardinal veins coalesce to form the left renal vein and left gonadal vein. The right subcardinal vein becomes the renal portion of the inferior vena cava.

The sacrocardinal****veins coalesce to form the left common iliac vein. The right****sacrocardinal****vein becomes the****sacrocardinal****segment of the inferior vena cava.

The union of the renal portion of the inferior vena cava with the hepatocardiac portion of the inferior vena cava completes the embryologic formation of the inferior vena cava with its hepatic, renal, and sacrocardinal segments.