Bromocriptine is a medication currently used in the management and treatment of Type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is an ergot alkaloid derivative in the dopamine D2 agonist class of drugs. This discussion reviews the indications, contraindications, and mechanism of action for bromocriptine as a valuable agent in the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus, as well as its more traditional uses in Parkinson disease, acromegaly, and pituitary prolactinomas.

**Diabetes Mellitus Type 2**

The most recently FDA-approved indication for bromocriptine mesylate is a supplemental medication for adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus (type 2 DM) to help with glycemic control.

**Hyperprolactinemia**

Bromocriptine is an FDA-approved medication indicated for the use of disorders causing hyperprolactinemia, which most often is due to the most common of the pituitary adenomas – prolactinoma.

**Acromegaly**

Acromegaly characteristically demonstrates a set of complications associated with increased blood concentrations of growth hormone (GH). GH is affected by the sympathetic nervous system, where the binding of catecholamines to alpha receptors increases blood concentrations of GH, and the binding of beta receptors decreases blood concentrations of GH. In an average adult, catecholamines, including norepinephrine, epinephrine, and L-DOPA, would increase blood concentrations of GH.

**Parkinson Disease**

Parkinson disease (PD) is a progressive neurological disorder characterized by resting tremor, rigidity, akinesia or bradykinesia, and postural instability due to the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra.