For hard palate SCC with positive margins or extracapsular nodal extension, the addition of concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy to radiation therapy has been shown to improve locoregional control and overall survival versus adjuvant radiation alone.

Chemotherapy alone has been reserved as a palliative option for metastatic or recurrent salivary gland tumors that are not amenable to surgery or radiation therapy. No specific chemotherapy regimens have been proposed by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), and few agents (such as cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and doxorubicin) are considered effective in improving overall or disease-free survival.

Systemic therapy for mucosal melanoma has included chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. Chemotherapy regimens for mucosal melanoma have included 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin, dimethyl triazeno imidazole carboxamide (DTIC), interferon, dacarbazine, nimustine hydrochloride (ANCU), and vincristine.

Chemotherapy is indicated for Kaposi’s sarcoma when there is widespread skin involvement, extensive intraoral disease, symptomatic edema, or rapidly progressive disease. Patients with high-risk factors such as advanced age and poorly controlled AIDS should undergo a combination of HAART and chemotherapy. Chemotherapy regimens have included bleomycin, vinca alkaloids, and Adriamycin.

In addition to radiation therapy, NHL is most commonly treated with a standard chemotherapy regimen involving cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (CHOP) for 8 cycles over a duration of 3 weeks.