In the bone marrow, stem cells differentiate into megakaryoblasts (that will become platelet-producing megakaryocytes), erythroblasts (that will become erythrocytes or red blood cells), myeloblasts (that will become eosinophils, basophils, and neutrophils), monoblasts (that will become monocytes), and lymphoid progenitor cells (that will become B or T lymphocytes). The term 'leukocyte' applies to any cells within the myeloblast, monoblast, and lymphoid lineages. Leukocytosis can be classified based on the cell line that is elevated. A complete blood count (CBC) with predominantly elevated neutrophils is termed neutrophilia, eosinophils—eosinophilia, basophils—basophilia, monocytes—monocytosis, and lymphocytes—lymphocytosis. The type of cell elevated may help to identify the trigger for leukocytosis, and a detailed history and physical exam is important to support particular differential diagnoses of the particular leukocytosis presenting itself. This article will describe the general etiologies of some of the most common presentations of leukocytosis.

- **Neutrophilia:**Neutrophils typically make up about 40% to 60% of the total leukocyte count, and neutrophilia is the most common type of leukocytosis.
- **Leukemoid Reaction:**A leukemoid reaction is a transient increase in WBC count defined as significant neutrophilia >50x10^9/L in the absence of a myeloproliferative neoplasm. This acute inflammatory reaction can be mistaken for leukemia, but careful history, physical examination, and, if necessary, further laboratory evaluation can find that this reaction can occur in sepsis, organ rejection, solid tumors, and bacterial infections. Peripheral smears and radiological imaging may be necessary to identify the true cause of these reactive laboratory findings.

- **Lymphocytosis:**Lymphocytes, on average, make up approximately 20-40% of a person's total leukocyte count. Increases in lymphocytes in children are usually benign and related to the rapid growth and development of the immune system. Less benign conditions, such as viral infections, hypersensitivity reactions, leukemia, and lymphoma, can all cause lymphocytosis. A careful review of systems, history collection, and physical examination findings will help guide clinicians as to which etiology may be the cause of the presenting lymphocytosis. Evaluation of acute or chronic infection can help tailor the differential for lymphocytosis. Acute infections such as cytomegalovirus, Bordetella pertussis, hepatitis, toxoplasmosis, and Epstein-Barr have all been implicated in acute absolute lymphocytosis. Chronic infections, such as brucellosis and tuberculosis, have also been shown to have chronic lymphocytosis.

- **Eosinophilia:**Eosinophils are approximately 1-4% of a person's total leukocyte count. Elevations above 0.5x10^9/L, which in the past have been identified as mild eosinophilia, is the generally accepted cut-off for eosinophilia. However, significant elevations over 1.5x10^9/L are the usual cut-off for further evaluation and consideration, especially in multiple CBCs separated in time. Eosinophilia can occur in neoplastic, inflammatory, infectious, parasitic, autoimmune, and allergic conditions.

- **Monocytes:**Monocytes make up approximately 2-8% of a person's total leukocyte count.

- **Basophils:**Basophils compromise 0.5-1% of a person's peripheral blood smear.