Carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids are digested and absorbed by the small intestine. Dietary carbohydrates begin as polysaccharides, such as amylose, or disaccharides, such as lactose, sucrose, maltose, or trehalose. Each disaccharide is made up of two monosaccharides, which include glucose, fructose, and galactose. For the small bowel enterocytes to absorb carbohydrates, they must be broken down into monosaccharides.

Protein digestion occurs by breaking peptide bonds through hydrolysis by proteolytic enzymes. Proteins are broken down into their amino acids. Pepsin is a proteolytic enzyme in the stomach, where protein digestion starts. Chief cells secrete pepsinogen, an inactive precursor of pepsin, which can activate itself. Although pepsin helps digestion in the stomach, it is not completely necessary for protein digestion and must have an environment with a pH of 1 to 3 to work appropriately. Pepsin is not found in the small intestine, as the pancreatic fluids cause the duodenum to be a more basic environment.

Once trypsin is activated, it can auto-activate more of itself to hasten digestion. Protein digestion yields free amino acids, dipeptides, tripeptides, and oligopeptides. Dipeptides and tripeptides are transported via Pept-1, which requires a hydrogen ion gradient. Amino acid absorption involves many carrier-mediated active and facilitated transport proteins.

Dietary fats come in the form of triglycerides and are acquired primarily from animal sources. Triglycerides are broken down into 2-monoglycerides and fatty acids. Lipid digestion enzymes come from many areas prior to the duodenum, including lingual, gastric, and pancreatic lipases. CCK release from the duodenum causes sluggish gastric emptying, allowing more time for lipid digestion by the lingual and gastric lipases. There are also lipases within foods, termed food-bearing lipases, that can begin auto-digesting themselves. Colipase, lipase, phospholipase A2, and cholesterol ester hydrolase are pancreatic enzymes that break down fats. Bile salts cause the inactivation of lipases.

Colipase prevents lipase inactivation. Emulsification is essential in fat digestion as it breaks fat globules into smaller droplets, increasing the surface area for pancreatic lipases. Absorption of lipids was initially thought to be a passive process, yet the discovery of fatty acid-binding proteins supports an active course. Fatty acids are relocated to the endoplasmic reticulum of enterocytes and reformed. Free fatty acids are most commonly absorbed in the jejunum of the small intestine.

The small intestine also absorbs vitamins and minerals. Folate goes through hydrolysis, is absorbed in the duodenum and upper part of the jejunum, and is actively transported into the portal circulation.