The differential diagnosis of nasal polyps can be extensive. Therefore, histologic confirmation of nasal growths is mandatory in most instances. The diagnosis might include:

- Antrochoanal polyps

- Inverted papillomas

- Schneiderian papillomas

- Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)

- Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

- Melanoma

- Esthesioneuroblastoma

- Hemangiopericytoma

- Nasal duct cysts

- Nasal gliomas

- Encephaloceles

- Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma

- Rhabdomyosarcomas

- Hemangiomas

- Chordomas

All of the differentials mentioned above can be ruled out with biopsies in the operating room (OR), particularly if unilateral, which raises concern for neoplasia. For this same reason, polyps removed during endoscopic sinus surgery for chronic sinusitis need histopathologic confirmation. Careful examination of preoperative imaging studies is essential. For instance, encephaloceles might mimic inflammatory polyps during nasal endoscopy, while its true nature is identified in CT images. Biopsying an encephalocele will result in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula.

In patients where you suspect malignancy in the preoperative setting, thorough evaluation with imaging is crucial. CT scan with intravenous (IV) contrast helps evaluate the bony contours, the vascularity of the lesions, as well as soft tissue invasion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) helps to identify the perineural, orbital, and intracranial spread of neoplasms. It is also useful in cases of complicated sinusitis. Different pathologies of the nasal cavity have a different appearance on imaging. For instance, patients with nasal polyposis have smooth, convex, enhancing soft tissue masses on CT. In contrast, patients with squamous cell carcinomas may have bone erosion on CT and hypointense appearance on T2-weighted MRI with homogenous enhancement on contrasted MRI.