The epidural needle can be placed using the midline or paramedian approach. In both cases, lidocaine 1% is infiltrated in the epidural needle insertion area.

In the midline approach technique, the needle is placed in the midline between 2 spine processes. In the paramedian approach technique, the needle is inserted 1 cm lateral and 1 cm caudal to the lower border of the upper spinous process.

The epidural needle is advanced through ligaments and soft tissue. The epidural space is localized by using the loss of resistance (LOR) syringe. The syringe is filled with normal saline or air, and the resistance is tested by advancing the needle connected to the syringe and pushing its plunger until the resistance is lost once the epidural space is reached.

After reaching the epidural space, the syringe used for LOR is removed, and the epidural catheter is inserted through the epidural needle. The catheter will be used to administer medications through bolus or infusion.

**Maintenance of Analgesia Techniques**

**Intermittent Bolus**

Intermittent injection of analgesics through the epidural catheter offers a better area of distribution and less LA consumption when compared to continuous infusion.

**Continuous Epidural Infusion (CEI)**

Continuous infusion of local anesthetics and opioids has been widely implemented after its first description because of its practicality and possibility to achieve stable analgesia. However, it has been associated with increased local anesthesia consumption and, therefore, profound and sustained motor blockade.

**Patient-controlled Epidural Analgesia (PCEA)**

This technique was described in 1988 by Gambling for the first time.