The pathophysiology related to vascular physiology is rooted in the hemodynamic parameters described. Among several associated conditions, the following are common sequelae to consider:

- Aging/Hypertension: Most notably with the aorta, there is a decrease in compliance with age due to a loss in elasticity.

- Vessel Aneurysm: With a loss or defective elastic components of a vessel, as noted with connective tissue diseases, the outward transmural pressure (distension) can be unbalanced with an inadequate tension force (as applied by Laplace), which allows for an aneurysm to form which is susceptible to rupture.

- Atherosclerosis: In cases where the stress to move fluid forward (same stress that causes deformation of the vessel) is too large, due to changes in blood components, for example, smooth laminar flow is broken. Such flow can disrupt the endothelial layer of the vessel causing a proinflammatory response with the release of several pro-atherogenic factors (i.e., interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor, and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1) that lead to the formation and progression of atherosclerotic plaque.

- Dissection: When there is severe stress on the vessel wall that can lead to dissection of the blood vessel. Cervicocerebral dissection occurs commonly in young people. It can be due to various reasons, including trauma, fibromuscular dysplasia, Marfan syndrome, and several other causes. Up to one-half of the patients have a headache. Usually, the extracranial dissection is associated with good prognosis.

- Reversible Cerebral Vasoconstriction Syndrome: This is associated with vasoconstrictive medications, pregnancy, illicit drugs, etc. Most patients have severe thunderclap headache. It presents as subarachnoid hemorrhages, ischemic stroke, and lobar hemorrhages. Calcium channel blockers are the initial therapy. The recurrence is rare.