Tactile mechanoreceptors that respond to mechanical stimuli are in the skin

- Meissner’s corpuscles are encapsulated neurons between the dermal papillae under the epidermis of the glabrous skin on the fingers, palms, and soles - Meissner’s corpuscles are the most common mechanoreceptors of smooth and hairless skin.

- Pacinian corpuscles are large encapsulated nerve endings located in the subcutaneous tissue.

- They make up to 15% of the cutaneous receptors in the hand.
- Pacinian corpuscles are located in interosseous membranes, most likely to enable vibration detection in the skeleton.

- Merkel’s disks are unencapsulated nerve endings in the epidermis. They align with the papillae that lie under the dermal ridges; one-fourth of these mechanoreceptors are in the hand. There is a high density in the fingertips, lips, and external genitalia.

- Merkle discs are responsible for the fingerprint pattern of hands and feet.
- A cluster of Merkel disks in glabrous skin are referred to as “touch spots.” In hairy skin, these clusters are referred to as “touch domes.”

- Ruffini’s corpuscles slow-adapting, encapsulated mechanoreceptors deep in the skin, ligaments, and tendons - they account for 20% of the receptors in the human hand.

Baroreceptors are near the arch of the aorta where the common carotid artery bifurcates. Afferent fibers from these baroreceptors join the ninth cranial nerve, which travels to the nucleus of the solitary tract within the dorsal medulla. Baroreceptors also project to efferent cardiovascular neurons in the spinal cord and medulla. There are stretch receptors in the lung and heart vessels known as cardiopulmonary receptors. These receptors transmit afferent signaling through the vagus nerves. The efferent part consists of sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers towards the heart, vascular smooth muscles, and other organs.