Balloon sinuplasty is a minimally invasive process with a low complication rate and side effect profile. Although rare, complications of balloon sinuplasty may require intervention by other physician providers if deemed necessary by the procedural physician and team. Episodes of acute bacterial sinusitis may require the use of a pharmacist for appropriate antibiotic dosing in patients with concomitant comorbidities reducing renal or hepatic clearance.

As mentioned earlier in the article, other health professionals need to be aware of the equipment and necessary steps, especially if they plan to assist in the procedure itself. In many offices, medical assistants, nursing staff, residents, or medical students can support the operating physician in setting up the device, preparing the patient, inflating the balloon, and providing irrigation. The assistants need to have an adequate understanding of the parts and controls of the device in cases of defective instrumentation or if the operator requests assistance. If these assistants have in-depth knowledge of the procedural steps and instrumentation, they could also act as sentinels to prevent mistakes or errors made by the operating physician and prevent complications to the patient.

Otolaryngologist nurses will provide post-procedural care and can coordinate again with the pharmacist if pain medications needed and request the treating physician to prescribe as needed.  Additionally, the pharmacist can verify dosing and administration for post-operative meds such as nasal rinses, etc. Only with an interprofessional team approach, involving physicians, nurses, surgical assistants, and pharmacists to balloon sinuplasty can the likelihood of positive patient outcomes be increased. [Level V]