The use of normal saline can contribute to iatrogenic fluid overload. This complication is particularly concerning in patients with impaired kidney function (acute kidney injury, chronic kidney disease, etc.), and these patients should, therefore, receive treatment with judicious use of intravenous fluids.

Patients with congestive heart failure are at an increased risk for detrimental effects of normal saline administration. In these patients, fluid overload is a considerable concern; this can lead to life-threatening pulmonary edema and the worsening of diastolic or systolic heart failure, leading to end-organ damage or even death.

Adverse effects of normal saline may occur secondary to solution or technique of administration. These effects include febrile response, infection at the site of injection, venous thrombosis or phlebitis extending from the site of injection, extravasation, and hypervolemia. Additionally, if infusing normal saline in large quantities, chloride ions will be vastly increased within the blood. This influx of hyperchlorhydria causes an intracellular shift of bicarbonate ions to allow for equilibria. Overall, this decreases the number of bicarbonate ions available for buffering.

While the overuse of 0.45% sodium chloride can cause hyponatremia and cerebral edema, this is due to its hypotonic nature, creating a migration of water molecules into areas of higher sodium concentration.

Therefore, if an adverse effect does occur, discontinuation of the infusion is strongly suggested. The patient should then undergo a clinical evaluation and the proper therapeutic countermeasures engaged. All while, the remainder of the fluid should be saved for examination if contamination is suspected.