There are many more ways that arteries aid in maintaining balance, including some vasodilators such as histamine or serotonin. This, however, can become dangerous if balance is not maintained. An angiogram, or insertion of a tube and dye into the artery, can be used to monitor the blood flow to identify bleeds or blockages. However, environmental factors also play a role in the structure of arteries. For example, during anaphylaxis shock, massive amounts of histamine are released into the body, causing the arteries to dilate to an unsafe amount. This creates a lack of pressure for the perfusion of nutrient-rich blood. In an attempt to make up for this loss, the body begins entering a state of compensated shock by the heart rate. This does not work forever, and without dilation, the patient will soon go into a state of shock. In addition to having to be balanced, many medical issues may arise that would further complicate the situation.

One of the most common medical problems concerning arteries is atherosclerosis; the arteries build up with plaque until it affects normal cardiovascular function. This compilation of plaque can form anywhere, meaning a blockage can develop in any area. A myocardial infarction will occur if the blood supply gets cut off from the heart.

Individuals with a history of stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) should be evaluated with carotid ultrasound to assess the level of stenosis. Vascular surgery may be performed to open the arterial lumen further, depending on the level of stenosis or obstruction in these major vessels. This process is often achieved through ballooning and stenting of the artery through subclavian artery access. This procedure is minimally invasive and referred to as TCAR. If TCAR is unsuccessful, an endarterectomy may be performed to open the artery and remove any atherosclerotic plaque buildup directly. The cardiovascular system is essential for keeping all other systems in the body. Arteries, in particular, are vital in supplying nutrients, including oxygen, to the rest of the body. It is crucial to recognize the part that arteries play in the cardiovascular system to prevent medical obstacles in the future.