Providing pediatric patients with optimal care is a team sport; an interprofessional team providing a collaborative approach is critical. At a pediatric hospital, the respiratory therapists and nurses are often on the frontlines, assessing a child most frequently. It is crucial to have both mutual respect and good communication amongst all of the team members.

It is not always realistic for families to seek initial medical care for their children at a pediatric hospital or at a facility with pediatric-trained physicians and staff. Telemedicine, pediatric transport teams, and ongoing communication between the referring hospital and tertiary pediatric referral center play a crucial role in the successful management of complicated, critically ill pediatric patients with severe bronchospasm.

The exposure to tobacco and other smoke is a known trigger for children with asthma. Damage to children's lungs incurs that is directly attributable to exposure to smoke. Parents should be educated and counseled on the increased risk for acute exacerbations in the setting of secondhand smoke.

To decrease the morbidity of respiratory infections, it is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics that infants receive breastfeeding exclusively for at least six months.

Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency. If a child has signs or symptoms consistent with it, one should seek medical attention immediately. After resolution of the acute event, epinephrine should be carried with the child or parent at all times, as one is at risk for further occurrences if a child has developed anaphylaxis in the past.

Given the number of possible pharmaceutical agents used to manage cases accompanied by pediatric bronchospasm, a pharmacist should be explicitly involved with agent selection, combination therapy, dosing, and overall medication regimen. Nursing can verify compliance, and assist the pharmacist and treating physician in educating the patient's family on drug administration, trigger avoidance, and other items discussed above.  If the pharmacist or nurse encounter any concerns or notices adverse events or therapeutic failure, they should immediately consult with the interprofessional team. Only with this type of interprofessional collaborative approach can these cases be directed to their optimal outcomes. [Level V]