Management strategies for wound care should include maintaining a moist wound environment, treating and preventing infection, offloading the affected area, debridement of necrotic tissue and biofilm, maximization of perfusion, nutrition and oxygen delivery. Offloading strategies include debridement of calluses, padding, orthotics, therapeutic footwear, walking boots, total contact casts, and Achille's tendon lengthening

Superficial wound infections can be treated with topical antimicrobials, however, once cellulitis is present systemic antibiotics will be required. Even mild peripheral vascular disease should be corrected in these patients to optimize their likelihood of healing.

The duration of treatment with antibiotics usually varies from 2-4 weeks. Those with osteomyelitis may need at least 6 weeks of treatment. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy can prevent amputations in patients with Wagner grade 3 or higher ulcers with a number needed to treat of four

Hyperbaric oxygen does this through a variety of mechanisms including increased oxygen delivery to ischemic/hypoxic tissues, enhanced white blood cell-mediated bacterial killing, angiogenesis, accelerated collagen synthesis and fibroblast growth, and decreased edema. Nine randomized controlled trials show the effectiveness of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in these patients in speeding healing, preventing amputations and improved transcutaneous oxygen measurements. Hyperbaric oxygen increases the likelihood of wound healing with an odds ratio of 10. A standard treatment course is 30 to 40 treatments at 2.4 ATA these are given once or twice daily

Surgical debridement is an essential treatment in many diabetic foot infections. The surgery involves debridement of the infected bone. In some cases, digital amputation may be required. A vascular surgeon should be consulted prior to undertaking any debridement because some patients may benefit from a bypass of the occluded vessel.