Four major tenets that serve to guide the osteopathic physician are important in understanding the goals of HVLA treatment. They are (1) the body is a unit; a person is a unit combining body, mind, and spirit, (2) the body possesses the capability of self-healing, self-regulation, and maintenance, (3) structure and function are inter-related, (4) rational treatment is based upon an understanding of the other three tenets. When performing any osteopathic manipulation on a patient, it is crucial to keep these tenets in mind. Osteopathic physicians receive specialized training in using manipulation, and it is vitally important to understand the anatomy and physiology behind these maneuvers before performing them on patients.

High velocity, low amplitude (HVLA) is a treatment modality utilized by many practitioners for the treatment of many different somatic dysfunctions. Thoracic HVLA specifically focuses on restoring structure and function to the thoracic spine. The thoracic spine is a unique segment of the spine as each vertebra is attached to a pair of ribs and is responsible for anchoring the rib cage. Fryette's Laws can describe somatic dysfunctions of the thoracic spine. Both type I and type II segment somatic dysfunctions can be effectively treated with thoracic HVLA if indicated. Often, one of the transverse processes on an affected thoracic segment is oriented posteriorly, and, when palpated, the patient reports pain in that area. The somatic dysfunction is then elicited by having the patient flex and extend at the affected segment and determining how the posterior transverse process reacts.

From a physiological standpoint, there are some theories regarding why HVLA is an effective form of treatment. First, an HVLA thrust appears to stretch a contracted muscle, which, in turn, produces several afferent impulses from the muscle spindles to the central nervous system. The central nervous system then reflexively sends an inhibitory impulse to the muscle spindle to relax the muscle. An alternative theory suggests that instead of the muscle spindle, the Golgi tendon receptors become activated, ultimately relaxing the muscle.