**Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency**

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency is a neurodegenerative disorder due to an abnormal pyruvate decarboxylase subunit caused by a mutated X-linked PDHAD gene. This mutation leads to the impaired conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. Since there is an excess accumulation of pyruvate, lactate dehydrogenase will convert it to lactate leading to potentially fatal metabolic acidosis. Other symptoms include neonatal-onset lethargy, hypotonicity, muscle spasticity, neurodegeneration, and early death.

**Leigh Syndrome**

Subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy or Leigh syndrome is a progressive neurological disorder due to gene mutations encoding proteins of the PDC. In most children, the first observed sign is the inability to perform motor skills previously acquired. Other symptoms include loss of head control, poor suckling, recurrent vomiting, and loss of appetite.

**Thiamine Deficiency**

Thiamine deficiency is similar to pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency in that it will lead to the shunting of pyruvate to lactate leading to metabolic acidosis. However, the culprit here is a deficiency in the active form of thiamine (thiamine pyrophosphate) rather than PDC. Acute thiamine deficiency is dry beriberi, while chronic thiamine deficiency is wet beriberi. Dry beriberi characteristically demonstrates diminished reflexes and symmetric peripheral neuropathy with motor and sensory changes. On the other hand, wet beriberi classically affects the heart leading to tachycardia, dilated cardiomyopathy, high-output congestive heart failure, and peripheral edema.

**Fumarase Deficiency**

Fumarase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of the TCA cycle due to a mutation in the FH gene. It is characterized by a deficiency of the enzyme fumarase hydrates, which leads to the buildup of fumaric acid. It is a condition that mainly affects the nervous system. Affected children may have severe developmental delay, microcephaly, hypotonia, encephalopathy, seizures, psychomotor retardation, and failure to thrive.

**Mutations of Isocitrate Dehydrogenase**

Researchers have found mutations of isocitrate dehydrogenase in several types of cancers, including leukemia, gliomas, and sarcomas. IDH mutations can be useful for the differential diagnosis and subclassification of human gliomas. The normal function of IDH is to catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate to alpha-ketoglutarate. Mutant IDH catalyzes the formation of 2-hydroxyglutarate instead of alpha-ketoglutarate. 2-hydroxyglutarate is an oncometabolite that causes DNA and histone hypermethylation leading to neoplasia. 2-hydroxyglutarate can be used as a biomarker for cancer in patients with inborn errors of metabolism.