In adults, colitis may be the result of infection, inflammatory bowel disease, microscopic colitis, ischemia, drugs, secondary to immune deficiency disorders, or radiation.

- Infection: Bacterial infections including Campylobacter jejuni, Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Shigella, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Clostridium difficile responsible for Pseudomembranous colitis. Parasites such as Entamoeba histolytica, and viruses such as cytomegalovirus.

- Inflammatory bowel disease: This refers to Crohn disease (CD) and Ulcerative colitis (UC).

- Microscopic colitis: This condition is a relatively common cause of chronic watery diarrhea, especially in the elderly. The disease has two main subtypes, collagenous colitis (CC) and lymphocytic colitis (LC), which are very similar clinically with the main distinction being the presence or absence of a thickened subepithelial collagen band. The disease is associated with autoimmune disorders such as celiac disease, type 1 diabetes, thyroid dysfunction, and psoriasis.

- Ischemic colitis: Occurs when there is hypoperfusion in blood supply below that required for the metabolic needs of the colon resulting in colonic mucosal ulceration, inflammation, and hemorrhage.

- Drug-induced colitis: Drugs such as non-steroidal inflammatory drugs, aspirin, proton pump inhibitors, Hreceptor antagonists, beta blockers, statins, immunosuppressive drugs, vasopressors may cause colitis.

- 
Secondary to immune deficiency disorders

- 
Tuberculous colitis

- Radiation colitis: This can occur secondary to pelvic radiotherapy for gynecological, urological and rectal cancers.