# Continuing Education Activity

Recognizing the remote effects of cancer is important as they may point towards an undiagnosed malignancy or even recurrence of a previously treated neoplasm. Cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR) is a rare retinal paraneoplastic disorder associated with cancer that can cause blindness. Investigations helpful in identifying this condition include visual fields, fundus autofluorescence (FAF), fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), electrophysiological tests, and antibody testing. This activity will highlight the etiology, pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of cancer-associated retinopathy and the role of the interprofessional team in managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the etiology of cancer-associated retinopathy.
- Describe the findings and investigations required for the evaluation of cancer-associated retinopathy.
- Review the different options for the management of cancer-associated retinopathy.
- Summarize the importance of patient education and interprofessional team strategies to improve the outcomes.

# Introduction

Acute or subacute loss of visual acuity caused by circulating antibodies formed against the retinal proteins in the presence of systemic cancer is called cancer-associated retinopathy or carcinoma-associated retinopathy (CAR).

Sawyer and colleagues first described visual loss along with retinal degeneration in patients suffering from lung carcinoma in 1976.

CAR is a rare type of retinal paraneoplastic retinopathy. Paraneoplastic syndrome is defined as 'rare clinical syndromes due to the systemic effects of tumors; they are unrelated to tumor size, invasiveness or metastases.'

It has been reported that the diagnosis of CAR (confirmed by the presence of anti-retinal antibodies in the sera) precedes the diagnosis of cancer in up to 50% of the patients.

# Etiology

Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is the most important condition associated with neurologic paraneoplastic syndrome.

- Non-small-cell lung carcinoma

- Breast cancer

- Endometrial cancer

- Invasive thymoma

- Lymphoma

- Uterine cervical cancer

- Endometroid sarcoma

- Myeloma

- Basal cell carcinoma

- Colon cancer

- Kidney cancer

- Leukemia

- Mixed Müllerian tumor

- Prostate cancer

- Melanoma

- Squamous cell carcinoma

- Pancreatic cancer

# Epidemiology

Autoimmune retinopathy accounted for less than 1% of all the cases seen at a tertiary eye center.

CAR is more common in females as compared to males. Misiuk-Hojlo et al. noted that sera of 6 patients of the 295 breast cancer patients had immunoreactivity to retinal antigens though only 2 cases showed ocular features of CAR. The mean age of onset of CAR ranges from 55 to 65 years.

In a case series of 209 patients, Adamus showed that the mean age of CAR was between 40- 85 years. Adamus also reported that CAR was mainly associated with malignancy of the breast (31%), followed by lung (16%) and hematological malignancies (15%). Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for approximately 29,000 diagnosed cases in the United States annually.

The time interval between the onset of retinopathy and the cancer diagnosis can vary from weeks to months (lymphoma and lung cancer) to even years (breast and prostate cancer).

# Pathophysiology

The autoimmune theory was given by Keltner et al. in 1983. Suggesting this theory, the antibodies against the retinal photoreceptors were present in the serum of lymphoma patients who developed acute loss of vision and retinal degeneration. The pathological changes seen in CAR result from an interaction between the retinal antigen expression in the cancerous tissues and their systemic immune response. These antigens trigger an autoimmune response within the host to form antibodies that cross-react with the retinal antigen, ultimately causing cell death/apoptosis with retinal degeneration. Thirkill and colleagues, in 1987, first observed the appearance of autoantibodies against the 23 kDa retinal protein in patients of small cell carcinoma of the lung with CAR. The 23 kDa protein implicated as the CAR-antigen was noted to be a 'photoreceptor cell-specific protein' or 'recoverin-like protein.'

Recoverin is regarded as the most commonly involved antigen seen in CAR patients.

In cancer, the level of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) increases, which causes retinal pericyte loss.

Ohguro and colleagues demonstrated that recoverin dysfunction leads to increased phosphorylation of rhodopsin and opening of cGMP-gated channels, causing a rise in the intracellular calcium.

The gene for recoverin is present on chromosome 17p13.1.

Recoverin may aid in cancer treatment by causing cancer cells to become more sensitive to the chemotherapy or by itself becoming the target for cancer treatment. Bazhin AV et al. analyzed serial samples of tumor tissues and sera from 143 patients with lung cancer and showed that on account of a high occurrence of aberrant expression of recoverin in lung tumors, targeting recoverin as a paraneoplastic antigen may play a role in immunotherapy of lung cancer.

Adamus et al. showed that anti-recoverin antibodies can be detected in only 10% of patients with visual symptoms and identified the presence of auto-antibodies against α-enolase (46 kDa) and transducin-α (40 kDa) in the serum of patients with CAR and non-neoplastic retinopathy.

Vision loss in enolase-associated retinopathy is less severe as compared to recoverin-associated retinopathy. Recoverin-associated retinopathy has an acute onset with faster progression. Anti-enolase antibodies have been associated with breast, prostate, and hematologic cancers.

Ohguro and colleagues suggested that humoral autoimmunity against recoverin and heat shock cognate protein 70 (65 kDa) may play a role in the pathogenesis of CAR.

- Anti-Carbonic anhydrase II (30 kDa)

- Anti-GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase)

- Interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein (145 kDa)

- Neurofilament proteins

- Tubby-like protein 1 [TULP1]

- Arrestin

- Heat shock cognate protein HSC 70

- GCAP 1 and 2 (guanylyl cyclase-activating proteins)

- PNR photoreceptor cell-specific nuclear receptor

- Rab6A GTPase (Rab6A), and other unidentified antibodies formed against the retinal proteins

T cells are also involved in the pathogenesis of CAR. Enhancement of CAR occurs by blockade of the negative T-cell signaling via the CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4).

# Histopathology

Histopathological examination reveals patchy photoreceptor loss.

The retinal pigment epithelium and choroid are usually not involved in CAR, contrary to retinitis pigmentosa. Immunohistochemical staining of the retina varies depending upon the specific type of antibody involved in the pathogenesis. Recoverin-mediated CAR shows predominant photoreceptor staining. Sawyer et al. showed photoreceptor degeneration of rods and cones and scattered melanophages in the outer retina and sparing of the ganglion cells in the inner retinal layer.

# History and Physical

CAR leads to progressive and rapid visual loss caused by rod and cone dysfunction with retinal degeneration. It is characterized by acquired, acute, or subacute sudden, bilateral,  progressive, painless visual deterioration, which can sometimes have a chronic presentation. Even though CAR is usually bilaterally symmetrical, it can be asymmetric and sequential or rarely even have a unilateral presentation.

Early cases of CAR may mimic various other conditions and may be difficult to diagnose. Nonspecific complaints are not uncommon and include glare, photosensitivity, reduced vision, especially in scotopic conditions, floaters, photopsia, apparent graying or darkening of the surrounding environment, transient visual obscurations, and 'bizarre visual sensations.' Clinical features of cone dysfunction are decreased visual acuity, abnormal color vision, metamorphopsia, central scotoma, and abnormal cone-mediated electroretinogram (ERG).

Rod dysfunction leads to prolonged dark adaptation, nyctalopia, constricted visual fields, mid-peripheral or ring scotomas, and abnormal rod-mediated ERG. Loss of vision in patients with CAR can occur over weeks to months. Patients with recoverin antibodies in their serum have a diffuse involvement of both rods and cones and suffer from profound visual impairment compared to patients with anti-α-enolase antibodies. Patients with anti-α-enolase antibodies are also less likely to develop nyctalopia due to more limited central cone involvement.

Visual symptoms in CAR may manifest even months or years before the diagnosis of the neoplasm and occur as a result of the remote effect of the neoplasm. The interval may be as long as 11 years.

Recent onset acquired nyctalopia in an elderly patient with no family history of retinitis pigmentosa or no evidence of vitamin A deficiency are other clinical clues for CAR diagnosis.

A slit-lamp examination may reveal the presence of low-grade inflammation in the anterior chamber or cellular debris in the anterior vitreous. The fundus may appear normal, but some patients may have retinal pigment abnormalities in the form of bony spicules or atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, vascular attenuation, and optic disc pallor. Other fundus findings include vascular sheathing, macular edema, periphlebitis, chorioretinal atrophy, and vitritis. Vitritis may be seen in up to 20% of patients. Cancer patients also develop cataracts at an early age.

Malignancy is associated with the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS).

# Evaluation

Various modalities to confirm the diagnosis of CAR are as follows:

**Visual Fields**- Visual field testing usually shows constriction of fields. Other visual field defects include central, cecocentral, or equatorial scotomas and enlargement of the blind spot.

**Fundus autofluorescence (FAF)**- This is an important non-invasive tool used to analyze patients with CAR. It uses a scanning laser ophthalmoscope and is based on the evaluation of lipofuscin.

CAR is characterized by the presence of a hyper-autofluorescent parafoveal ring with normal autofluorescence within the ring and hypo autofluorescence outside the ring primarily centered in the macular and peripapillary region. Hyper-autofluorescent rings can also be seen in multiple disorders, including retinitis pigmentosa, X-linked retinoschisis, Leber congenital amaurosis, and cone dystrophy.

The Robson-Holder ring represents an area of lipofuscin accumulation around a preserved subfoveal RPE.

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA)**- It is usually normal. Infrequent findings include optic nerve head staining, perivascular leakage in vasculitis, and petaloid leak at the macula in cystoid macular edema. Peripheral subtle window defects corresponding to retinal degeneration may also be seen.

**Spectral-Domain Optical Coherence Tomography (SD-OCT)**- This provides an objective measure of the amount of retinal damage that has occurred and is also helpful in diagnosing CAR. It may detect the presence of CAR in the early stages.

SD-OCT shows loss of the outer retinal complex, including disruption of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) and thinning of the photoreceptor layer. Abazari et al. showed the presence of outer retinal abnormalities and/or decreased central macular thickness on SD-OCT in CAR patients. Similarly, Sepah et al. showed statistically significant loss of the photoreceptor layer in CAR patients.

OCT findings depend upon both the severity and the duration of the disease. Diagnostic delay accounts for deterioration in the visual acuity and imminent reduction in the sub-foveal EZ. Cystic spaces or the presence of cystoid macular edema (CME) is also a frequent finding. Larson et al., in a study among 17 patients with autoimmune retinopathy, showed CME to be the most prevalent finding seen in 24% of the patients. Patients with CME at initial presentation have a greater rate of EZ loss than those without CME.

The condition is also more aggressive in patients with CME, which manifests in reduced a and b waves in the electroretinogram.

**Electrophysiological tests**- These measure the electrical activity generated by the eye, the optic pathways, and the visual cortex. The full-field electroretinogram (ffERG) provides information about activity in the rod and cone systems and other neural elements.

ERG may be a more sensitive tool than OCT, and ffERG is abnormal in the very early stage of the disease. However, some cases may have involvement of the central cones, which is only evident on multifocal ERG (mfERG). The mfERG indicates the topographical location of the response within the retina. Measurement of the integrity of the retinal pigment epithelium is given by the electrooculogram (EOG). The a-wave of full-field ERG indicates the response of the photoreceptors. The b wave can be photopic and scotopic. The photopic, cone-driven b wave reflects the activity of the on and off bipolar cells whereas, the scotopic, rod-driven b wave reflects the activity of the on-type bipolar cells. Photoreceptor damage affects both the a and b waves, while conditions affecting the bipolar cells result in an absent b wave with a wave showing negative deflection. Oscillatory potentials (OPs) represent the activity of a complex feedback circuit which includes the amacrine cells, bipolar cells, and interplexiform cells.****Responses such as delayed b wave, the extinguishing of a and b waves involving the rods and cones, reduced b wave, and an electronegative ERG may be seen in patients with CAR.

Electronegative ERG is more typical of melanoma-associated retinopathy. Full-field ERG is almost always abnormal, showing absent or attenuation flash responses in photopic and scotopic conditions. When cones are mainly affected, full-field ERG might be normal, but the multifocal ERG is abnormal.

In a case series of 10 patients by Thirkill et al., loss of rod and cone amplitudes with normal or prolonged implicit times were seen in patients with anti-recoverin antibody-associated CAR. Weleber et al., in a case series of 12 patients, showed that anti-enolase-associated retinopathy is associated with more central or global cone dysfunction than rod dysfunction. In a case series of 39 patients, Adamus et al. showed abnormal electroretinogram findings in patients with anti-rod transducin-α associated with npAIR and CAR.

**Antibody testing**- The presence of antiretinal antibodies in cancer patients was first shown by Kornguth et al.

Patients with anti-α-enolase antibodies have limited involvement of the central cones. CAR associated with transducin-α antibodies has more rod degeneration. Serum antibody levels may be found to be elevated even after completion of treatment of the primary neoplasm, and it may also be associated with the progression of CAR. However, fluctuating auto-antibody levels in the serum do not indicate cancer recurrence or progression.

The role of serial serum anti-retinal antibody levels for longitudinal monitoring requires further research and technical difficulty, and cost limits its regular use. It is important to note that anti-retinal antibodies can be found even in the normal population and patients with non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy. Ko et al. showed the presence of anti-retinal antibodies in 42% of normal individuals. Hence, positive anti-retinal antibodies alone are not diagnostic of CAR. Anti-retinal antibodies can also be found in the sera of patients with systemic autoimmune diseases like Behçet disease, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and age-related macular degeneration.

As CAR can precede the underlying cancer diagnosis by several months, running a systemic survey facilitated by the primary care physician is essential. This includes a thorough medical history with physical examination, complete blood investigations, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, computerized tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, whole-body positron emission tomography (PET), and other appropriate tests such as mammogram, colonoscopy, prostate and genitourinary system evaluation, and others. This extensive methodology is pivotal in determining the treatment protocol and prognosis of the patient.

There are no set diagnostic criteria for CAR. The diagnosis is made by combining the patient's clinical symptoms, exam findings, diagnosis of systematic cancer, and positive antibodies against retinal proteins. A patient's visual symptoms may precede cancer diagnosis, making the diagnosis of CAR difficult initially.

# Treatment / Management

Primary treatment initiation is critical for the preservation of vision. CAR associated with untreated anti-recoverin antibodies may lead to severe vision loss and even no perception of light.

Systemic steroids can be used for treatment, but they have variable outcomes. The use of corticosteroids has been seen to be more efficient in the short-term management of CAR associated with recoverin-mediated auto-antibodies. Keltner and colleagues first used serum auto-antibody guided prednisone to control the intraocular disease in a cancer patient. The dose of initial oral prednisone may be as high as 1 to 2 mg/kg/day.****Intravitreal triamcinolone and sub-tenon triamcinolone (40 to 60 mg) are other treatment options.

Intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg/day for three days) when integrated with resection of the primary neoplasm can lay down notable short-term improvement as reported by C Dot et al. The use of intravenous methylprednisolone is associated with more favorable outcomes as compared to oral prednisone and hence can be used to initiate the treatment.

Multiple steroid-sparing immunomodulatory agents have been used in the treatment of CAR, but no single therapy has shown consistency or long time efficacy. Systemic azathioprine (100 mg/day), cyclosporine (100 mg/day), and mycophenolate mofetil (2 g/day) have been used in the management of CAR. Parallel and synchronous use of multiple agents can be done to hold up the visual decline.

Ferreyra and colleagues showed that supplementation of immunosuppressive agents [azathioprine (100 mg/day), cyclosporine (100 mg/day)] causes improvement in visual acuity and visual fields with stabilization in ERG (electroretinogram) in CAR patients associated with recoverin autoantibodies.

Guy and colleagues showed stabilization in patients with CAR using intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG). IVIG (400 mg/kg/per day for five days) can improve both visual acuity and visual field.

The use of IVIG and plasmapheresis in the treatment of CAR is appropriate if given before the onset of irreversible neuronal degeneration.

Newer treatment modalities include the use of newer monoclonal antibodies such as alemtuzumab (anti-CD52, pan-lymphocyte) in the dose of 30 mg intravenously three times a week for four months) and rituximab (anti-CD20, B-cell) in patients who have failed prednisone and intravenous immunoglobulins.

Rituximab in the dose of 1000 mg twice a week of 2 doses or 375 once a week for four weeks, when combined with immunosuppressive agents (such as prednisone, azathioprine, infliximab, cyclosporine, and mycophenolate), gave beneficial effects in the form of stable or improved visual outcomes in 77% of eyes in a retrospective case series of 16 patients (30 eyes) with autoimmune retinopathy (including one melanoma-associated retinopathy, six CAR, and nine npAIR patients).

Ohguro and colleagues showed improvement in ERG and a delay in the progression of the disease by pharmacological reduction of intracellular calcium (nilvadipine) in experimental animals. The anti-recoverin antibodies get localized in the photoreceptor cells to block the recoverin function and regulate rhodopsin, resulting in enhancement of phosphorylation of rhodopsin and induction of apoptotic cell death.

By decreasing the phosphorylation of light-dependent rhodopsin or by antagonism of the intracellular calcium levels, retinal dysfunction may be prevented. Adamus and associates demonstrated that nifedipine might protect from apoptosis in an experimental CAR model.

Antioxidants and vitamins like lutein, vitamin C, vitamin E, and beta carotene (in non-smokers) may help stabilize the retinal degeneration and the disease course, though their exact role may need further evaluation. Future treatment for CAR is directed towards the inhibition of VEGF receptor 1 to prevent the penetration of antibodies. Calcium modulation and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) gene transfer may cause a delay in apoptosis.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is important to differentiate CAR from the following:

**Retinitis Pigmentosa**- This entity is associated with family history and is inherited by various modes (autosomal dominant, X-linked, autosomal recessive, or sporadic).****The reason for eliciting similarity is sharing a common target in the form of S-antigen and interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein.

In retinitis pigmentosa, there is a predominant rod photoreceptor dysfunction with a later cone photoreceptor and retinal pigment epithelium dysfunction. The disease manifests during adolescence with the chief complaint of night blindness and mid-peripheral visual loss (due to rod cell damage) and development of tunnel vision at later stages.

**Non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy (npAIR)**- Description of npAIR was first done in 1997. The phenotype and electrophysiological tests seen in npAIR are similar to those in CAR. It is usually associated with an autoimmune family history, and hence, it needs a more intense immunosuppressive therapy. Non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy has a slower progression rate than CAR, the visual changes are more subtle, and the age of presentation is usually younger. npAIR can be associated with photopsia, dyschromatopsia, and nyctalopia. The presence of macular edema and chorioretinal atrophy also points towards non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy.

The anti-recoverin antibodies are usually found in the sera of patients with suspected npAIR. Other antiretinal antibodies associated with npAIR include anti-carbonic anhydrase II, anti-α-enolase, anti-recoverin, and anti-rod transducin-α antibodies. Adamus and colleagues, after analyzing 193 patients with retinopathy with or without neoplasia, reported that antibodies against recoverin are found in the serum of patients with cancer, whereas α-enolase antibodies were found in all the other patients. Systemic conditions associated with npAIR include hypothyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, autoimmune hepatitis, Hashimoto thyroiditis, Myasthenia gravis, Graves disease, bullous pemphigoid.

**Melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR)**- CAR is most commonly associated with small cell carcinoma of the lung, whereas MAR is commonly associated with cutaneous melanoma. CAR usually precedes the diagnosis of neoplasm, whereas MAR usually presents after the diagnosis of melanoma. MAR typically has a normal fundus, but it can also present with vitelliform material and multiple serous retinal detachments.

Electroretinogram in MAR reveals reduced B-wave and preserved dark-adapted A wave (electronegative ERG) showing bipolar cell dysfunction. Circulating autoantibodies against TRPM1 (transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 1) and bestrophin-1 can be found in patients with MAR. Other antibodies associated with MAR include anti-aldolase A and C, anti-α-enolase, anti-interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein, anti-recoverin, anti-rhodopsin, and anti-transducin antibodies.

**Acute Zonal Outer Occult Retinopathy (AZOOR) and other White Dot Syndromes**- Although AZOOR can present with symptoms, electroretinogram findings, and visual fields showing an enlarged blind spot similar to CAR, AZOOR is typically a bilateral but asymmetric entity. Hypo-autofluorescence is observed in the majority of eyes with AZOOR. Patients with AZOOR show partial recovery or stabilization even without treatment. Multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS) shows unilateral retinopathy associated with optic nerve edema, afferent pupillary defect, and spontaneous recovery.

**Cone Dystrophy**- Here, the rods usually remain normal or are at least partly spared even during the late stages.

**Toxic Retinopathy or Toxic Optic Neuropathy**- Visual impairment occurs due to optic nerve damage caused by a toxin.

**Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON)**- It is a rare mitochondrial disorder affecting young males between 15 to 35 years of age. There occurs a sequential vision loss caused by optic neuropathy.

Red-green color vision abnormalities suggesting optic nerve dysfunction, reduced contrast sensitivity, and subnormal visual electrophysiological parameters can also be seen.

**Nutritional Optic Neuropathy**- There is a visual impairment resulting from the optic nerve damage occurring secondary to nutritional deficiency. It mainly occurs due to vitamin deficiency. Deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine), vitamin B2 (riboflavin), vitamin B3 (niacin), vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin), and/or folic acid is associated with nutritional optic neuropathy. The clinical features and pathophysiology involved are similar to toxic retinopathy. Nutritional Optic Neuropathy can present as a non-specific retrobulbar optic neuropathy.

**Bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation (BDUMP)**- It is a rare paraneoplastic disorder first described by Machemer R et al. in 1966.

The cardinal signs of BDUMP as described by Gass et al. include multiple, subtle, round, or oval, orange-red patches at the level of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE); multifocal early hyper fluorescence; multiple, focally elevated, pigmented, and non-pigmented uveal melanocytic tumors with diffuse uveal tract thickening; the presence of an exudative type of retinal detachment; and rapid cataract progression.

Treatment options available for BDUMP include radiation therapy, use of local and systemic corticosteroids, plasmapheresis, drainage of the subretinal fluid, and vitrectomy. However, it has a very poor visual prognosis and survival rate. Most of the patients become legally blind within one year or succumb to death within three years of initial presentation secondary to the systemic malignancy.

**Chronic Central Serous Chorioretinopathy (CSCR)**- Central Serous Chorioretinopathy is a retinal disorder seen in young males between the ages of 20 and 45 years.

Presenting complaints in acute CSCR include the presence of micropsia, blurring of vision, metamorphopsia, disturbances in color vision, relative scotoma, and temporary hyperopia. whereas chronic form is associated with a more severe or even permanent loss in visual acuity. The extent of visual damage depends on the damage to the photoreceptor outer segments and the external limiting membrane.

Patchy areas of hyper-fluorescence (areas of RPE atrophy) can be seen on Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA). OCT (optical coherence tomography) findings in chronic CSCR comprise elongation of photoreceptor outer segments, the presence of intraretinal cysts, and hyperreflective dots.

**Paraneoplastic Optic Neuropathy (PON)**- PON is a rare paraneoplastic entity affecting middle-aged patients with malignancy. It is characterized by bilateral, subacute, progressive, painless, and profound loss of visual acuity.

Other findings include an abnormal ERG, visual field defects (tubular vision, enlargement of blind spot, and an inferior scotoma), and visual evoked potential (VEP) changes (decreased amplitude and a delayed implicit period).

PON leads to irreversible optic nerve changes and, hence, the visual prognosis of PON remains poor as even immunosuppressive therapy and steroids have not been very effective in management. Prompt treatment of the underlying malignancy is the only way to halt the progression of the disease.

**Vitamin A Deficiency**- Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin required for vision, overall cellular development, immunity, metabolism, and reproductive functions.

Serum retinol concentrations of fewer than 20 micrograms/dL are regarded as vitamin A deficiency. Ocular symptoms of vitamin A deficiency develop when the serum retinol concentration drops below 10 micrograms/dL.

ERG shows undetectable or reduced rod response with reduced amplitudes and increased latency of cone response. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) may show hyperreflective elevated lesions just below the ellipsoid zone corresponding to the white dots.

Hence, to diagnose CAR, it is important to correlate the findings of the sera with the electroretinogram and clinical features with due help from other investigative modalities.

# Prognosis

Visual decline and even loss of visual acuity due to CAR may occur even before the diagnosis of cancer. When CAR is associated with recoverin antibodies, the condition can progress to profound vision loss to even no perception of light.

Early diagnosis and initiation of treatment is a prerequisite for the preservation of vision. However, a targeted decimation of the photoreceptors and the support cells occurs; thus, despite even immunomodulatory therapy, the visual prognosis remains poor. Hence, in any patient, if there is an acute or subacute loss of visual acuity, visual field alterations, and vascular attenuation in the fundus without any other etiology, a suspicion for CAR should be made. Visual prognosis is not affected by treatment of underlying cancer. Overall survival of the patient depends upon the underlying tumor and stage at which it was diagnosed and the available treatment options.

Adamus et al., after examination of 209 cancer patients, concluded that patients who are at risk for developing CAR could be identified early using the anti-retinal autoantibodies. This may prevent vision loss in such vulnerable patients.

# Complications

Choroidal neovascularization can occur secondary to CAR.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with cancer-associated retinopathy need proper guidance and in-depth evaluation. They need to be enlightened about this condition and the various available treatment options. The patients need to understand that CAR is a potentially blinding and devastating condition, and the features of the same may develop even before the neoplasm is clinically evident. The patient must understand that although there is no standard treatment protocol for this entity, proper compliance to the treatment is needed to stall or rarely reverse this condition.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A comprehensive approach is crucial for managing patients with cancer-associated retinopathy. An appropriately high index of suspicion and early diagnosis and treatment plays an imperative role in curtailing the risk of irreversible immunological damage to the retinal cells in these patients. Hence, a multi-disciplinary approach for complete evaluation and treatment is vital for properly managing this condition, even though there is no consensus on the standard treatment protocol.

For instance, when a patient is suspected of having cancer-associated retinopathy, a prompt referral by the treating physician or oncologist to the ophthalmologist is recommended. This is to be followed by collaborative planning between the oncologist, ophthalmologist, rheumatologist, dermatologist, radiologist, or even a uveitis specialist accustomed to administering the immunomodulatory agents.

Therefore, this condition requires interprofessional teamwork. This includes evaluation by the physician/clinician or oncologist, the ophthalmologist, dispensing of medicines by the pharmacist, aiding in patient education for treatment compliance as well as monitoring the vitals by the nurses, and thorough evaluation of the visual acuity by the optometrist. This united interprofessional approach is decisive in managing the patients and acquiring favorable outcomes. [Level 5]