Grossly, GCTs appear as large unilateral solid cystic masses with cut surface showing a tan, yellow color (due to steroid production) and can vary in size from 3 to 24 cm. Microscopy reveals small round to oval pale cells with characteristic coffee- bean nuclei (longitudinal nuclear grooves). These tumors may be mistaken for endometrioid adenocarcinoma on the frozen section, and in such situations, the nuclear features help to clinch the diagnosis.

Granulosa cells tend to form small rings surrounding shrunken nuclei or eosinophilic fluid material called Call Exner bodies, and they are seen in 30 percent of cases. Well-differentiated GCTs show a microfollicular pattern most commonly followed by macrofollicular, solid tubular, hollow tubular, insular, and trabecular patterns. The poorly differentiated GCT  appears as undulating parallel (watered-silk) or zigzag (gyriform) rows of granulosa cells in a single file or diffuse (sarcomatoid) pattern characterized by a monotonous appearance. A thecal cell component may also be present.

Few important histologic clues are that androgenic GCTs tend to be large unilocular/multilocular cysts. At the same time, focal luteinization and edema, and disorderly arrangement are seen in GCT occurring in pregnancy. Juvenile GCT has a diffuse [commonest] or macrofollicular morphology, mucin positive interfollicular secretion, large cells with luteinization, a theca cell component, the paucity of nuclear grooves, and nuclear atypia with variable or high mitotic activity. Immunohistochemistry helps when the morphologic diagnosis is doubtful, and one of the most useful markers is the alpha subunit of Inhibin. It stains all sex cord-stromal tumors, sex cord-like elements of other gynecologic tumors, and most trophoblastic tumors. Inhibin negativity, however, does not rule out a diagnosis of GCT. Calretinin is more sensitive than inhibin but less specific. The most sensitive marker for GCT and all sex cord-stromal tumors is SF1.

Other immunohistochemical markers include activin, anti-Mullerian hormone, and Melan-A. FOXL2 expressed in the tumor nuclei can prove to be of particular advantage in staining cells with scant cytoplasm (adult GCT and fibromas), especially since cytoplasmic stains like inhibin may not be positive in such cells. About 97 percent of adult GCT showed a mutation of FOXL2.