A dialysis care team is an interprofessional group of qualified individuals contributing to holistic patient management and a smooth transition to a dialysis-dependent life. Nephrologists are team leaders with expertise in treating renal conditions. They educate patients about disease progression and measures to slow the decline in renal function and encourage their participation in management decisions.

Advanced providers such as a nurse and a provider assistant collaborate with nephrologists in managing kidney patients at medical offices and the dialysis unit. A nephrology nurse is specialized in assessing dialysis patients, assuring proper administration of medications and treatment, and overseeing the dialysis process. They also supervise home programs training patients and their care partners in administering self-dialysis modalities like home hemodialysis and continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). Renal dietitian-help plan meals and tailor the diet to meet each patient's unique needs. They review dialysis adequacy, rehabilitation, bone management, and anemia management. Nephrology social workers counsel patients and their families to help them cope with renal disease. They can help make lifestyle changes, identify sources of emotional support, identify services provided by agencies to meet patients' needs, and improve the quality of life.

The patient care technician performs the dialysis treatment and monitors patients throughout, while biomedical technicians maintain the machines and water quality at the dialysis center. The vascular access care team includes a vascular access surgeon who creates and maintains dialysis access. The radiologist's imaging helps plan access surgery. The interventional radiologist places a catheter, repairs the fistula, and treats vascular thrombosis. The access coordinator reviews the access history, plans treatment, follows up to ensure that the appropriate treatment was received, and records the information. Billing personnel can answer questions about insurance coverage, billing, or payment.

The National Kidney Foundation is a valuable member of the healthcare team. It supports research to manage renal disease, provides the community with valuable information about kidney disease, management options, diet, and rehabilitation, and offers programs and services for patients with kidney disease.

However, the most important members of this dialysis care team are the patients themselves and their families or caregivers.