The cricoid cartilage can be identified by palpating the hard ridge on the inferior border of the cricothyroid membrane. The arch of the cricoid cartilage, the anterior portion of the signet ring shape, is at the level of the body of C6. This is the same level as the carotid tubercle. A moderate agreement was found between these landmarks with a fluoroscopic study, including non-obese patients performing neck extension. However, the study found the cricoid cartilage slightly superiorly placed, between the C5 and C6 vertebral bodies, compared to previous reports.

The inner shape of the cricoid cartilage varies, with ovoid, oval, and pear-shaped being the most common types. The shape is similar to a signet ring with the broader end, known as the lamina, found posteriorly.

Sellick originally hypothesized that the cricoid cartilage was directly opposed to the esophagus and that posteriorly directed force would occlude the esophagus between the C5 vertebral body and the rigid cricoid cartilage, thus preventing aspiration of gastric contents.

However, it is now believed that the hypopharynx is the target of cricoid pressure as the esophagus begins inferior to the level of the cricoid ring. The cricopharyngeal muscle is a major component of the cricoid pressure unit and is located on the posterolateral hypopharynx at the lower border of the cricoid ring. Additionally, there is an attachment of the tendinous band to the cricoid perichondrium, transverse and oblique aponeuroses of the arytenoid muscles. These structures maintain a fixed relationship between the cricoid ring and the hypopharynx. The collapse of the musculature resulting in a kidney shape during cricoid pressure is a major factor in impeding regurgitation. Furthermore, occlusion of the hypopharynx may be attributed to the bulkier composition of the anterior tissue of the gastroesophageal tract 1cm below the cricoid.

Despite a substantial proportion of the population having a laterally displaced esophagus and cricoid pressure resulting in lateral displacement, the technique is thought to be unaffected as the hypopharynx is the target. Paralaryngeal and paratracheal approaches of occluding the esophagus have been proposed due to the ability to maintain a patent airway with limited success of esophageal occlusion in comparison to cricoid pressure.