There are two different inactivated hepatitis A vaccines licensed in the United States and a combined hepatitis A/B vaccination. Although not available in the US, there is a live attenuated vaccine on the market.

Inactivated hepatitis A vaccine safety is based on the cumulative global experience gained from the use of several hundred million doses administered to children and adults worldwide. Regardless of the schedule or manufacturer of HAV, safety profiles have been excellent.

Before licensure, safety studies of the two different inactivated hepatitis A vaccines found local reactions such as soreness or tenderness at the injection site were reported in a little over 50% in adults, while in children, corresponding rates were between 15 to 17%. Reported headaches were rare and appeared in 14% to 16% of adults.

The most frequently reported side effects are minor problems like injection-site reactions, rash, fever, and headache. There are rare cases of severe side effects like the elevation of liver enzymes, ITP (idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura), and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Vaccine safety has continued to undergo assessment through data monitoring from surveillance systems.

There have not been any tolerability problems to inactivated hepatitis A vaccines in patients with mild-to-moderate chronic liver disease, liver and renal transplantation recipients, and dialysis patients.

Although the review of literature is limited in confirming the safety of these vaccines during pregnancy, vaccine risk from inactivated viruses to the developing fetus is likely to be negligible.