**Medial Tibial Stress Syndrome**

Medial tibial stress syndrome, also known as shin splints, presents as generalized, recurrent pain in the lower part of the tibia. While the exact mechanism is unknown, it is thought to be due to biomechanical imbalances that result in too much force on the tibia. It is most commonly seen in runners and aerobic dancers, who often overload their legs with a large amount of force. It is commonly associated with the female athlete triad of amenorrhea, insufficient caloric intake, and osteoporosis. Medial tibial stress syndrome can be diagnosed by reproducing tenderness with palpation over a large area of the distal, medial tibia. The pathophysiology is traction periostitis. Treatment generally involves rest and ice until the pain improves and then gradually reintroducing activity.

**Apophysitis of the Tibial Tubercle**

Apophysitis of the tibial tubercle, also known as Osgood-Schlatter disease, presents as pain below the knee that increases with activity and is relieved by rest. It is due to overuse of the knee and excess physical stress on where the patellar tendon inserts on the tibia; this causes repeated tension on the epiphyseal plate of the proximal tibia.

**IO Access**

Interosseous access is used in emergency care when vascular access cannot be obtained successfully. The method accesses the bone marrow of long bones which have a rich venous plexus that feeds into the systemic circulation. The tibia is commonly used as an IO access point. The proximal tibia is the most common location followed by the distal portion. Another commonly used bone is the proximal humerus.