Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a disease characterized by elevated pulmonary artery pressure (mean pulmonary artery pressure [mPAP] ≥20 mmHg at rest with a pulmonary vascular resistance [PVR] ≥3 Wood units).

- Group 1—Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)

- Group 2—PH due to left heart disease

- Group 3—PH due to chronic lung disease (CLD) and/or hypoxemia

- Group 4—PH due to pulmonary artery obstructions

- Group 5—PH due to unclear multifactorial mechanisms

The term PAH is used to describe those included in group 1, while the term PH is used when describing all five groups.

While schistosomiasis appears to be the most common cause of PAH worldwide, registry data in regions of the world without endemic schistosomiasis report that over half of cases of PAH are idiopathic (IPAH) and up to 10% are heritable PAH (HPAH).

Compared with other groups of PH, IPAH affects younger adults.

Although both men and women can have PAH, women are more likely to be affected (female: male ratio ranges from 1.7 to 4.8 to 1.0) and symptomatic.

Individuals suspected of having PH should undergo extensive diagnostic testing.

Unfortunately, the diagnosis is often delayed because the presenting features of PH are frequently attributed incorrectly to age, deconditioning, or a coexisting or alternate medical condition.

In the current era of PAH management, 1-year survival rates have increased to 86% to 90% from 65% in the 1980s, and average long-term survival has increased to 6 years from 2.8 years. Research advances focused on phenotyping and understanding the pathophysiology of PAH at a cellular and genetic level has opened the doors to possibilities of precision medicine and the development of therapies that may prevent or reverse pulmonary vascular remodeling.