CJD belongs to a family of prion diseases or transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, which can cause several fatal neurodegenerative disorders in humans and animals. The infectious agent is “prion” (a protein) that can be transmitted either by direct contact with contaminated tissue (iatrogenic) or via inheriting a mutation in the prion protein gene (familial). However, most cases of CJD are sporadic. The word “prion” derives from the words “proteinaceous” and “infectious,” in reference to the previously unknown form of infection due to protein misfolding in 1982. Prions were named and discovered by Stanley Prusiner, who received the 1997 Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine for his work on prions.

**Types of CJD**

**Sporadic**

- The commonest type of CJD

- 85% of cases

- Occurs spontaneously, without a known cause

- The peak age of onset is 55 to 75 years old, with a median age of onset of 68 and a mean of 61 years.

- Mean survival of 4 to 8 months, and 90% of patients die within 1 year.

**Genetic/Familial**

- The second most common type of CJD

- Ten percent to 15% of cases.

- May have a family history and a positive genetic mutation test.

- Due to autosomal dominant mutations in the PRNP gene encoding the prion protein

**Acquired**

- Iatrogenic or oral transmission from human or animal. Through some surgical procedures, transmission occurs when exposed to the infected brain or nervous tissue.

- Less than 1% of cases

- Usually seen in young adults, mean age 29

- Pulvinar sign noted in MRI (hyperintensity of the pulvinar relative to the anterior putamen)

**A Variant Form of CJD**

Acquired by consuming infected beef resulting in a bovine disease similar to human CJD called bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or “mad cow” disease. The majority of cases have occurred in the United Kingdom and France.