Markings are made with the patient standing. Marking the borders of the pectoralis muscle will assist in determining the extent of sub-pectoral dissection. The incision to be used for implant placement is in the axillary fold. It is curvilinear in shape, parallels a skin crease, and is 4.5 to 6.0 cm long.

Prior to the incisions, the axilla should be shaved using an electric shaver to minimize skin trauma. The patient is then placed supine and arms abducted out to 90 degrees. After the patient's skin is prepped and draped, an anesthetic solution with epinephrine is then infiltrated in the area of the incision. The incision is made, and the dissection is carried down until reaching the lateral tendon of the pectoralis muscle. At this point, the dissection changes to the submuscular plane - first using sharp dissection and then using a long, blunt dissector, which can be facilitated using a fiberoptic light retractor. The extent of the submuscular plane should mirror the previously-made external markings.

It is critical that the dissection is carried no more than 1 to 2 cm below the areola and that no sternal or pectoralis insertions become disrupted, as this can give the patient feminine-appearing breasts. Meticulous hemostasis is necessary to avoid potential hematoma formation. The pocket is soaked in either triple antibiotic solution or betadine and allowed to sit while performing the contralateral dissection. The implants are then placed through the incision, taking care to avoid contact with the skin as much as reasonable to avoid possible contamination. The patient must sit up to confirm symmetry. A multi-layered closure is then performed. It is up to the discretion of the plastic surgeon and the anesthesiologist if they wish to perform a medial and lateral pectoral nerve block after the procedure to help minimize post-operative pain.

A light compressive dressing is recommended for about a month, after which time the patient can discontinue this and begin mild physical activity. Surgeons do not typically utilize drains in this procedure.