The rectum starts at the level of S3 around the sacral promontory as a continuation of the sigmoid colon. This portion of the GI tract is differentiated from the colon by the coalescence of taenia coli where the muscular bands spread to form the outer longitudinal muscle layer of the rectum.

The peritoneum covers the upper third of the rectum anteriorly and laterally, but the middle third is only covered anteriorly. The lower third is not covered by the peritoneum but starting at this level, the fascia propria envelops this segment of the rectum. This fascia is more pronounced laterally, forming the lateral rectal stalks. The rectum is attached posteriorly to the presacral fascia at the level of S4 via the Waldeyer fascia.

The peritoneal reflection is variable between individuals but is generally six to eight cm from the anal verge. In men, the reflection of the peritoneum to the posterior bladder forms the rectovesical pouch. In women, the reflection is from the rectum to the posterior cervix forming the rectouterine pouch, also known as the pouch of Douglas.

The rectal wall consists of five layers, starting from the lumen: the mucosa, deep mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa that is covered by the peritoneum. An inner circular and outer longitudinal muscular layer comprise the muscularis propria. The inner circular layer thickens at the anorectal junction, forming the internal anal sphincter while the outer layer continues as the longitudinal layer of the anal sphincter.

The rectum functions primarily as a temporary reservoir for feces storage. It also plays an integral role in controlling defecation as well as maintaining continence.