The goal or function of a terror event is to create mass hysteria. Health professionals must learn to mitigate this effect by being able to recognize an attack and treat and calm victims.

Terrorist acts can be either covert or overt. In a covert attack, the terrorists are attempting to take advantage of the element of surprise. Health professionals must be diligent in evaluating the possibility of a covert attack when multiple patients arrive with similar signs and symptoms. In this setting, the healthcare system may be quickly overloaded unless the institution and staff have prepared and have systems in place to handle a large influx of patient volume. The sooner an event is recognized as an attack, the sooner additional resources can be activated to assist providers. Unless the system prepares in advance, the number of victims triaged may quickly overwhelm the system and result in the terrorist’s goal of creating mass panic.

In an overt attack, terrorists rely heavily on mass hysteria and panic as an impact multiplier. They may announce responsibility immediately for a large-scale event. The number of victims quickly overwhelms even prepared systems that have a well-defined emergency response plan. In either a covert or overt terrorist attack, the system may be flooded with victims.

**Weapons of Mass Destruction**

Weapons of mass destruction include biological, chemical, or nuclear weapons potentially causing mass casualties. The mnemonic CBRNE assists in remembering weapons of mass destruction:

- Chemical

- Biological

- Radiological

- Nuclear

- Explosives