Surgical intervention for a pathologic fracture should only be considered following an exhaustive oncological work-up and biopsy of the lesion. General principles of internal fixation are applicable but may differ when a fracture of pathologic nature is involved. For instance, implant selection should generally adhere to the following guidelines:

- Load-sharing as opposed to load-bearing when possible

- Durable implants with the goal of lasting the length of patient survival with disease progression

- Immediate stability allowing for immediate weight-bearing

- Length of implant should bypass the lesion by two cortical diameters

- Cement augmentation when necessary

There are particular considerations for implant choice. Titanium implants are typically used in benign fractures because they are MRI-compatible, allowing for future imaging with less artifact than stainless steel. Biomechanically, titanium is more similar to the normal bone than stainless steel in terms of the modulus of elasticity. In pathologic fractures, however, the surrounding bony architecture is inherently weaker than normal bone and may, in certain cases, require stainless steel implants, which are stronger than titanium but preclude future advanced imaging due to increased artifact. More recently, carbon fiber implants have become an area of interest due to their radiolucency, improved fatigue strength, and modulus of elasticity that is more similar to the normal bone than any metal. A study by Zimel et al. compared carbon-fiber-reinforced polyetheretherketone (CFR-PEEK) with titanium intramedullary nails. There was significantly less implant artifact on MRI associated with carbon fiber implants compared with titanium.

For hip arthroplasty procedures, the choice of utilizing cement versus uncemented press-fit implants is widely debated. Advantages of cement include immediate fixation in pathologic bone without the need for waiting for bony in-growth of the implant. Disadvantages of cement include pulmonary complications such as bone cement implantation syndrome (BCIS), allergic reactions, prolonged surgical time, and increased difficulty with any revision surgery where cement needs to be removed. A retrospective study by Larsen et al. on oncologic patients undergoing either cemented or uncemented hip arthroplasty revealed no difference in terms of complication rate, 30-day mortality, intraoperative blood loss, or functional outcome.

Embolization should be considered prior to operative fixation of pathological fractures to maintain hemostasis for highly vascular tumor subtypes. Embolization is performed by interventional radiology and involves percutaneous embolization of large feeding vessels supplying tumors with polyvinyl alcohol, coils, or gel foam. Well-known malignancies that have a tendency for greater intraoperative blood loss include renal and thyroid cancer, in which case preoperative embolization should be considered. A study by Pazionis et al. evaluated the use of preoperative embolization in renal and thyroid carcinoma. They found that patients who underwent embolization had decreased surgical times, blood loss, and transfusion requirements compared to patients who did not undergo embolization.

Primary sarcomas are aggressive tumors that require wide-excision with a goal of obtaining a cure, as compared to pathologic fractures due to metastatic disease, which are treated as a palliative measure. It is important to properly diagnose the lesion prior to surgery in order to avoid iatrogenic dissemination of a sarcoma, which may result in the loss of a limb that otherwise might have undergone a limb-sparing procedure.

**Surgery Based on Tumor Location**

The following will report general guidelines for surgical procedures based on anatomic location within the skeleton. These are general guidelines only and may not necessarily be ideal, depending on a multitude of factors. Every tumor and patient poses a unique problem that requires an individualized approach.

**Upper Extremity**

Generally speaking, fractures of the upper extremity are less debilitating than fractures in the lower extremity as they are under lower stress and are not essential for weight-bearing. Pathologic fractures most commonly occur in the proximal humerus and humeral shaft. The following are general recommendations for fixation of pathologic fractures in particular anatomic locations of the upper extremity:

- The humeral head and anatomic neck of the humerus: shoulder hemiarthroplasty versus total shoulder arthroplasty versus reverse total shoulder arthroplasty versus endoprosthesis versus fixed-angle plate with void filler

- The surgical neck of the humerus to the proximal-third humeral shaft: fixed-angle locking plate

- Humeral diaphysis: locked antegrade intramedullary nails versus plate

- Distal humerus (less common): parallel bridge plating versus distal humeral replacement with total elbow arthroplasty

- Radius/ulna (uncommon): plating versus excision

**Lower Extremity**

Pathologic fractures of the lower extremity occur much more commonly than in the upper extremity and are of greater clinical significance due to the necessity for weight-bearing. The following are general recommendations for fixation of pathologic fractures in particular anatomic locations of the lower extremity:

- Femoral head and neck: hemiarthroplasty versus total hip arthroplasty versus endoprosthesis versus plate or nail fixation with void filler

- Intertrochanteric, subtrochanteric, diaphyseal fractures: cephalomedullary nails

- Distal third femoral shaft: locking plate versus retrograde intramedullary nail (a musculoskeletal oncologist must carefully consider any retrograde nailing before proceeding to avoid proximal tumor spread)

- Supracondylar: distal femur periarticular plate

- Proximal tibia: locking plate versus endoprosthesis

- Tibial shaft: intramedullary nail

**Pelvis**

Smaller lesions or fractures of the ischium and pubis may be treated non-operatively with radiation or radiofrequency ablation. Larger lesions involving weight-bearing portions of the pelvis must be treated more aggressively. Generally, impending or pathologic fractures to the pelvis are treated as follows with the possible addition of cement to fill large defects.

- Sacral ala: sacroiliac screws

- Posterior ilium: column screws

- Extensive posterior pelvic ring disruption: spinopelvic fixation

- Anterior column: anterior column screws

A Classification was devised by Harrington for the treatment of peri-acetabular defects, as depicted in Table 2.

**Spine**

The spine is the most common site of skeletal metastasis.