No single laboratory finding is specific for osteomalacia. However, patients with osteomalacia will usually have hypophosphatemia or hypocalcemia. Additionally, increased alkaline phosphatase activity is typically characteristic of diseases with impaired osteoid mineralization. In fact, some sources believe that either hypophosphatemia or hypocalcemia and increased bone alkaline phosphatase level are necessary even to suspect osteomalacia. As the disease progresses, low bone mineral density (BMD) and focal uptake at Looser zones can appear on bone scintigraphy. Below we describe the findings of definite or possible osteomalacia, as proposed by Fukumoto et al., which requires validation with further studies.

- Hypophosphatemia or hypocalcemia

- High bone alkaline phosphatase

- Muscle weakness or bone pain

- Less than 80% BMD of the young-adult-mean

- Multiple uptake zones by bone scintigraphy or radiographic evidence of Looser zones (pseudofractures)

*Definite osteomalacia defined as all findings.

*Possible osteomalacia defined as having numbers 1, 2, and 2 out of the 3 through 5 findings described above.

The serum level of 25(OH)D is currently regarded as the best marker of vitamin D status and is usually severely low (<10 ng/mL) in patients with nutritional osteomalacia. Other sensitive biomarkers of early calcium deprivation include increased serum PTH and decreased urinary calcium.

Radiographic findings may include Looser zones, or pseudofractures, and this is a classic finding in osteomalacia. They may represent poorly repaired insufficiency fractures and are visible as transverse lucencies perpendicular to the osseous cortex. They typically occur bilaterally and symmetrically at the femoral necks, shafts, pubic and ischial rami. Additionally, radiographs can show decreased distinctness of vertebral body trabeculae due to the inadequate mineralization of osteoid. Although not required for diagnosis, studies have demonstrated reduced bone mineral density in the spine, hip, and forearm.

Iliac crest bone biopsy is considered the gold standard for establishing the diagnosis but should be reserved for when the diagnosis is in doubt, or the cause of osteomalacia is equivocal by noninvasive methods.