The interaction between P.
mirabilis and the host defense (immune) system determines the resultant infection. Proteus species have an extracytoplasmic outer membrane, like other gram-negative bacteria, which contains lipoproteins, polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides, and a lipid bilayer. Different components of this membrane interact with the host and host defense mechanisms to determine the organism’s virulence. Additionally, the size of the inoculum has a positive correlation with the level of infection.

Attachment of P. mirabilis to host tissue depends on the activity of its fimbriae (or pili), which are tiny projections on the bacterium surface.  The tips of these fimbriae also contain certain compounds and polysaccharides that allow for attachment to specific sites in the host organism (e.g., endothelium of the urinary tract) or other inanimate surfaces (e.g., medical devices).

Once Proteus species attach to the target site, a cascade of events is initiated in the host cell, including interleukin (IL) 6 and IL-8 secretion in addition to apoptosis and epithelial cell desquamation. Proteus species also produce urease, which has been shown to be associated with an increased risk of pyelonephritis and upper UTIs. Proteus species also hydrolyze urea to ammonia, thereby alkalinizing the urine. Through the production of urease and ammonia, Proteus can produce an environment where it can survive. Additionally, alkaline urine will decrease the solubility of both organic and inorganic compounds, encouraging precipitation and struvite (e.g., magnesium ammonium phosphate and calcium carbonate-apatite) stone formation.

Like other gram-negative bacteria, Proteus species release endotoxin (part of the gram-negative bacterial cell wall) when invading the bloodstream; thereby triggering additional host inflammatory responses which can ultimately result in sepsis or systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), a severe condition with a 20% to 50% associated incidence of mortality.