The prefrontal association cortex correlates with various clinical cases and conditions such as major depressive disorders, substance abuse disorders, autism, Parkinson disease, prefrontal syndrome, schizophrenia, and obsessive-compulsive disorders. In individuals with major depressive disorders, the medial prefrontal cortex tends to be underactive or exhibits dysregulation. The subgenual cingulate cortex (Brodmann area 25) is thought to be overactive in depression. Thus, the PFC is the focal area for deep brain stimulation during treatment for depression. Injuries to the PFC result in disinhibition and disregard for social norms and values. Prefrontal syndrome is a condition that results from an injury or damage to the dorsal prefrontal association area. The dorsolateral part of the prefrontal cortex and the cingulate cortex are involved in memory, learning, cognitive function, and attention. Studies have depicted the presence of dysfunctions in motor activities with lesions of the PFC, such as impaired motor perseveration. Individuals with social anxiety disorder showed altered resting-state regional metabolism of the brain, such as in the medial dorsal prefrontal cortex, caudate, insula, and postcentral gyrus. Stress tends to reduce the firing rate of the PFC by weakening connectivity due to the opening of the potassium channel through activation of cAMP pathways. Several studies on sleep physiology have demonstrated that the PFC is an area of origin for slow waves during the non-REM sleep cycle as evidenced by the decreased regional cerebral blood flow to prefrontal areas during non-REM sleep.