The nuclear medicine specialty involves using radioisotopes for diagnosis, staging, therapy, and monitoring of patients' responses. Whether diagnostic or therapeutic, it involves using radiopharmaceuticals, which prompt the best practice of radiation protection to be applied at every stage to minimize and mitigate the risks of accidental radiation exposure to staff, patients, their relatives, and the environment.

The nuclear medicine team is comprised of nuclear medicine clinicians (which can also include mid-level providers such as NPs or PAs), nuclear medicine physicists, radiological safety officers, nuclear medicine technologists, radio-pharmacists, nurses, and the other auxiliary staff. The department itself does not generate referrals but receives them from varied disciplines such as cardiology, oncology, nephrology, urology, endocrinology, pediatrics, neonatology, surgery, respiratory medicine, orthopedics, psychiatry, etc. Interprofessional communication within the department and inter-disciplinary coordination from varied specialties are crucial in proper patient care, especially in nuclear medicine. Any error at any stage can bring significant consequences and thereby compromise patient safety.

The nuclear medicine physician is a doctor who is extensively trained and licensed to report nuclear medicine scans and provide therapies to the patients. They are also responsible for determining the nature of the procedure, the radiopharmaceutical, the quantity to be used, and guiding the technologist to obtain certain image sets apart from routine imaging.

A nuclear medicine physicist is a person who is expected to understand the complete science involved in imaging the patients. They are responsible for understanding the complete diagnostic or therapeutic procedures used in imaging, instrumentation, or other computer analysis. They are expected to recognize any divergence from normal operations along with the responsibility for radiation dosimetry, safety, teaching, and any research in the department.

The nuclear medicine technologist is responsible for acquiring image datasets in consultation with nuclear medicine physicians and nuclear medicine physicists, along with assisting nuclear medicine physicists in other routine works such as quality assurance of the imaging and other radiation safety and measuring equipment. The radio-pharmacist is responsible for preparing radiopharmaceuticals, performing quality control, and injecting them in consultation with nuclear medicine physician, along with the responsibility of maintaining records and safe storage of radioactive materials. The nurse is responsible for patient preparation and assists nuclear medicine physicians in day-to-day activities.

Patient safety is paramount in high-quality healthcare and is defined as the reduction of the risk of unnecessary harm associated with healthcare to a minimum acceptable.

The incidents which can be commonly reported in nuclear medicine are:

- Extravasation of radiopharmaceutical or CT contrast agent despite check with a saline flush causing pain and swollen arm. A rescheduling of study can be an option

- Incomplete patient verification by the radiopharmaceutical administration staff resulting in a medical event as per the United States National Regulatory Commission Regulations (USNRC) 10 Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) Part 35.3045

- Wrong administration of radiopharmaceuticals such as I instead of I-mIBG

- Administration of CT contrast media despite reportedly informing history of an allergic reaction

Proper interprofessional communication within the department, attentiveness towards the assigned job, and knowing the key areas of medical errors can be the key to avoiding such incidents. Knowing the science and the professional skills is a basic need of any profession. A number of studies suggest that medical errors could have been prevented under better conditions and better communications, improving outcomes and enhancing team performance.