The diagnosis of AKA is made on a clinical basis.  Patients are usually tachycardic, dehydrated, tachypneic, present with abdominal pain, and are often agitated. Most patients will often have a ketone odor on their breath.

- Tachycardia is common and due to several factors, including (1) several days of ethanol ingestion, which blocks antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and causes diuresis and increased urinary frequency, (2) nausea and vomiting, which result in decreased oral intake 1 to 3 days prior to presentation, (3) abdominal pain which exacerbates decreased oral intake. Patients develop acidosis, which causes an increase in respiratory rate and fluid loss.

- Dehydration causes an elevated heart rate and dry mucous membranes.  A degree of alcohol withdrawal and agitation are likely to be present, resulting in an increased heart rate as well.

- Patients often become tachypneic due to acidosis, dehydration, alcohol withdrawal, and abdominal pain.

- Abdominal pain is commonly present, although it may be secondary to alcoholic gastritis or pancreatitis. Rebound tenderness is not common, and the pain is commonly epigastric in nature. If rebound tenderness or peritoneal signs are present, another cause should be sought for the pain.

Neurologically, patients are often agitated but may occasionally present lethargic on examination. Alcohol withdrawal, in combination with nausea and vomiting, makes most patients agitated. However, if an AKA patient is lethargic or comatose, an alternative cause should be sought.