The surgical management of subungual melanoma has been controversial for the last decade. For many years, the only acceptable option for management was digital amputation. In 1965 Das Gupta et al. conducted a study looking at the management of subungual melanoma. The study included 34 patients looking at amputation at the interphalangeal joint versus more proximal amputation. This study reported that all patients who underwent amputation at the interphalangeal joint did not survive for five years. Following this, surgeons believed that these rare cancer cases should undergo aggressive treatment in the form of proximal amputations at the level of the carpometacarpal or tarsometatarsal joint. This level of amputation can impede the function of the hand or foot affected, especially because the most common digits affected are the thumb and the hallux. The findings of this study are significant; however, the authors did not report the depth of the lesions, and half of the patients had metastatic or recurrent disease at presentation. Therefore, the treatment recommendations are perhaps a little skewed.

More recently, this aggressive treatment has become less acceptable, leading to the investigation of less radical surgical options to preserve length and obtain surgical clearance. Cochran et al. published a literature review in 2014, looking specifically at the management options of subungual melanoma. This review concluded that in situ excision surgery for lower-grade melanomas and melanoma is a reasonable option. This translates as excision down to periosteum or paratenon. Other deeper, higher-grade melanomas could undergo amputation at a more distal level (interphalangeal joint) than advised by Das Gupta. However, despite the encouraging evidence that surgeons are considering less aggressive options, the data quality is weak, with no randomized controlled trials and mostly retrospective data collection. The surgical excision method remains controversial and should be assessed on a case-by-case basis.

- In situ: 0.5 cm to 1 cm

- Invasive melanoma less than 1 mm Breslow thickness: 1 cm

- One to 2 mm: 1 mm to 2 cm

- Greater than 2 mm: 2 cm

These guidelines should help to determine the excision of subungual melanoma but may need to be adjusted to allow the most functional outcome for the patient.

Those with clinically palpable nodes should be offered a lymph node dissection. The United Kingdom's national guidance is that sentinel lymph node biopsy should be offered to all patients with melanoma of a depth of 1 to 4 mm. Those with a node-positive for micrometastasis should be offered a completion lymph node dissection.