Nerve impulse transmission occurs when voltage-gated sodium channels on the neuronal membrane open, allowing a massive influx of sodium. This results in membrane depolarization and propagation of the nerve impulse. Local anesthetics block nerve impulse transmission in the peripheral and central nervous systems without causing central nervous system depression or altered mental status. The block generally occurs in a stepwise sequence depending on the concentration and volume of the local anesthetic, with autonomic impulses blocked first, then sensory impulses, and finally, motor impulses.

Local anesthetics work to anesthetize skin, subcutaneous tissue, and peripheral nerves for invasive or surgical procedures. The duration of action of local anesthetics can range from 30 minutes to 12 hours or more. The range depends on the location of the block (e.g., high blood supply equals shorter duration), the specific local anesthetic used, and its preparation (liposomal preparations create extended-release drugs).

Commonly used local anesthetics in clinical practice include the following:

**Amino Amides**

- Mepivacaine

- Lidocaine

- Etidocaine

- Bupivacaine

- Levobupivacaine

- Ropivacaine

**Amino Esters**

- Procaine

- Cocaine

- Chloroprocaine

- Tetracaine

- Benzocaine

Because of the variable pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and toxicity profile of the various local anesthesia agents, the intended procedure will dictate the agent used.

Recently the FDA approved liposomal bupivacaine for postoperative analgesia. Hopefully, this formulation will decrease the reliance on opiates in the post-surgical period.

Several reports indicate that lidocaine may also function as a tinnitus suppressing agent. The drug requires intravenous injection, but the risk of systemic toxicity remains a significant concern.