**The Response**

In response to this report, the Medical Simulation Training Center (MSTC) program was quickly established in the United States Army in November of 2005 with the intention to build, sustain, and standardize the skills of the enlisted Army Combat Medics.

Originally, the plan was to have 35 of these centers worldwide, which was later scaled back to a total of 25.

Since the assimilation of the MSTC programs into medic training, the U.S. Army Medical Department (AMEDD), medical simulation training has been declared a mission-essential imperative for both training new providers and reintegrating those from deployment.

The U.S. Navy has used simulation as a training aid in several contexts. The USNS MERCY and the USNS COMFORT are two large hospital ships that perform regular, advanced-phase training to prepare and test the capabilities of the ship and the crew.  These drills utilize cut-suit simulators and simulated patients to allow for the practice of movement of personnel and at-sea life-saving procedures. The U.S. Navy Medical Department has run simulation drills with live actors and mannequins to practice mass-causality events on many different types of naval vessels (surface ships and submarines) prior to operational deployments.

Navy medical corpsmen assigned to the United States Marine Corps (USMC) are trained at the unit level using simulators. The individual medical battalions run their own independent training with task trainers and mannequin simulators in a tactical field environment

One of the critical roles U. S. Air Force medical technicians play is air evacuation of critically ill patients. In 2002, three Centers for Sustainment of Trauma and Readiness Skills (C-STARS) was established to better train Air Force personnel in the Critical Care Air Transport Teams (CCATT) in Baltimore, St. Louis, and Cincinnati.