After a careful physical exam, diagnostic testing should include plain radiographs of the pelvis and tibia, and fibula to rule out fracture or dislocation. MRI may be indicated .in suspected plexopathies due to masses or tumors. MRI of the lumbar spine, knee, and or ankle may be indicated for potential soft tissue masses in cases of compressive neuropathies. MSK ultrasound is also utilized for evidence of swelling at or proximal to the site of compression.

In the case of collagen vascular diseases, rheumatoid factors, ANA, and other relevant labs should be checked. CBC differential and chemistry panel to rule out other etiologies should be considered.

In many cases, an electrodiagnostic study is an important test to confirm the clinical diagnosis or provide an alternate localization and diagnosis. This study can also define the injury severity and provide information regarding prognosis. This study contains two parts .1) NCS (nerve conduction studies) and needle electromyography. (EMG).

Nerve conduction studies provide information regarding the viability of myelin. Nerve compression is reflected as a delay in conduction latency.  The presence of delayed latency, slow velocity, coupled with conduction block at the involved segment, indicates nerve compression.

Needle electromyography: Monopolar needles are introduced into muscles supplied by the nerve under study. Motor unit potential thus obtained are studied for amplitude, firing rates, and recruitment patterns. Denervation of a muscle is evidenced by the presence of potentials called positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials, which indicate axonal involvement. Nerve conduction studies and EMG together help the electromyographer to identify the location, severity of the lesion and estimate the prognosis for recovery. The absence of denervation potentials coupled with the presence of sufficient, viable motor units on needle EMG points to a good prognosis.

Evidence of denervation potentials coupled with a lack of viable motor units denotes a poor prognosis for recovery.

Autoimmune and critical illness neuropathy and myopathy often exist across the spectrum, and often a thorough, extensive workup simply results in a "clinical syndrome" rather than a perfect clear-cut diagnosis.