The main contraindication to tubal ligation is a patient’s desire for future childbearing. While tubal anastomosis or in-vitro fertilization (IVF) is an option for some patients, success cannot be guaranteed, and cost can be a significant barrier for many. In one review of tubal anastomosis, pooled pregnancy rates for the procedure were 42 to 69% but varied by the method used.

Various methods of tubal ligation carry individual surgical risks. Some patients may not qualify as good surgical candidates for abdominal or laparoscopic surgery (e.g., obesity, adhesive disease, medical comorbidities). Anesthesia carries risk. Some patients, anatomically, may not be candidates for tubal occlusion techniques with clips or rings if their Fallopian tubes are abnormal.

The consent process for tubal ligation must be careful and complete. In counseling patients regarding tubal ligation, it should be made clear that the procedure is permanent and not intended to be reversible. Alternatives, such as long-acting reversible contraceptives or vasectomy, should be discussed. Patients must also understand the details of the procedure itself and any associated risks, as well as the risks and benefits of anesthesia. Counseling should include a discussion regarding the risks of failure and ectopic pregnancy. As tubal ligation does not protect against sexually transmitted infections, patients who are at risk should use barrier methods even after sterilization. Lastly, providers and patients all need to be aware of any local laws or regulations regarding sterilization.

Even if counseling is adequate, there remains a risk of regret after tubal ligation. The CREST study found a cumulative probability of regret of 12.7% over 14 years.

The following have correlations with an increased risk of regret after sterilization

- Young age (less than 30)

- Non-White race

- Marital status (being unmarried carries higher risk)

- Timing (decreasing regret with increasing interval between delivery and sterilization)

- Adequacy of counseling (less information regarding the procedure or alternatives increases regret)

- The pressure to decide (increased regret if under pressure from spouse/partner or medical indications)

Interestingly, several factors do not have an association with regret or subsequent desire for information on reversal

- Number of living children

- Postabortion sterilization, as compared with interval sterilization

For patients planning postpartum sterilization, patients and providers should consider postponing the procedure if there are intrapartum or postpartum neonatal or maternal complications.

Ethically, tubal ligation in specific populations can be challenging. For example, ensuring adequate informed consent and a lack of coercion in the incarcerated population can be difficult. Between 2006 and 2010, over 140 women in California prisons underwent publicly funded tubal ligations. Despite all of these having signed consent forms, analysis by researchers after the fact showed that many of the women felt significant pressure from both prison and hospital physicians and that many of the procedures were undesired

Patients who may be uncertain regarding permanent sterilization but who desire effective contraception should receive counsel regarding other highly-effective contraceptive options. For example, the estimated failure rate of tubal ligation is 0.5 per 100 women in the first year.

Ultimately, the choice to have a tubal ligation is an individual one.