**Surgical Repair**

Surgical repair is the definitive treatment for an inguinal hernia. As a general rule, all symptomatic inguinal hernias should be repaired when possible. In some asymptomatic or minimally bothersome hernias, watchful waiting can be an option. There is a multitude of different techniques for hernia repair with different complication and recurrence profiles.

**Open Approach**

**Tissue Repairs**

Tissue repairs are repairs where the native tissue is used to close the hernia defect with suture, and no mesh is used. These repairs are used when the operative field is contaminated or in emergency surgery where the viability of the hernia contents is in question. The 3 main primary tissue repairs are the Bassini, Shouldice, and McVay. The Shouldice has the lowest recurrence rate when experienced surgeons perform tissue repairs. McVay is the only technique that can be used in femoral hernia repair. All surgeons should have a good grasp of the technical aspects of these repairs, as a primary repair will likely be the only option in a contaminated case. Prosthetic repairs are preferred over native tissue repair due to lower incidence of recurrence.

**Prosthetic Repairs**

The prosthetic repairs are tension-free repairs, and thus, these have a lower hernia recurrence rate as compared to tissue repairs. The prosthetic repairs are the Lichtenstein tension-free repair, plug and patch, and Prolene Hernia System (PHS). Lichtenstein repair is the most popular and used most around the world. The Prolene Hernia System repair is the only one of the 3 that places a mesh in the preperitoneal space with an open repair. Mesh repairs are contraindicated in a contaminated field due to the high rate of infection.

**Laparoscopic Repairs**

**Transabdominal Preperitoneal Procedure (TAPP)**

The transabdominal preperitoneal procedure TAPP is a technique where a hernia is repaired through an intraperitoneal approach. TAPP can be useful for bilateral hernia repair, large hernia defects, and recurrence after open repair. A large mesh can be placed with this approach covering the direct, indirect and femoral spaces. The disadvantage to this approach is a complication to other intraperitoneal viscera and structures. A patient must be able to tolerate pneumoperitoneum for laparoscopic approaches.

**Total Extraperitoneal Procedure (TEP)**

The laparoscopic extraperitoneal procedure is a technique where the hernia repair is completed without intraperitoneal infiltration. This minimizes risks of injury to intraperitoneal viscera and structures when compared to a TAPP repair. The TEP procedure also avoids intraperitoneal adhesions from prior surgery making the dissection quicker and easier. The disadvantage to the TEP procedure is that the surgeon is constrained to limited space while dissecting. Visualization of the surrounding anatomy is limited as compared to TAPP repair. If the peritoneum is violated during the procedure, then conversion to TAPP may be warranted.

Laparoscopic repairs compared to open repairs have equivalent recurrence rates. The laparoscopic approach has been shown to improve postoperative pain and patients may resume normal activities sooner as compared to open repair. However, laparoscopic repair is associated with higher operative costs, and technical proficiency can be difficult to achieve. Some studies suggest it takes as many as 250 laparoscopic hernia repairs for a surgeon to reach optimal proficiency.