**Tonsillectomy**

- Surgical removal of tonsils is called a tonsillectomy.

- Hemorrhagic tonsillitis is an absolute indication for tonsillectomy.

- Relative indications for tonsillectomy include
- Recurrent or chronic pharyngotonsillitis
- Peritonsillar abscess
- Streptococcal carriage

- Tonsils are surgically removed by dissecting between the tonsillar capsule and the superior constrictor muscle using either the “hot” or “cold” technique.  In the “hot” tonsillectomy technique, electrocautery is employed to dissect and coagulate simultaneously. In the “cold” tonsillectomy technique, a superior incision is made through the mucosal layers, and blunt dissection is used to separate the tonsils from the underlying tonsillar bed. Tonsils are then separated along their inferior border using the snare method. Studies have shown a superiority of the cold technique when looking at the outcome of postoperative pain. However, electrocautery minimizes intraoperative blood loss.

- Complications following a tonsillectomy classify into three main categories: acute, subacute, and delayed. Acute complications include airway obstruction due to edema, bleeding, and post-obstructive pulmonary edema. Subacute complications include postoperative hemorrhage, dehydration, and weight loss. Delayed or chronic complications include velopharyngeal insufficiency and nasopharyngeal stenosis.

- Good practice advocates that the serious complications of tonsillectomy (profuse hemorrhage requiring blood transfusion and potentially fatal hemorrhage) be routinely discussed during the process of obtaining informed consent for tonsillectomy, despite their low occurrence rate. 'Reasonable patients' consider these complications to be significant and expect surgeons to discuss these complications with them. Surgeons, however, on the other hand, avoid discussing these serious complications with their patients.

- The literature reports cases of fatality from massive hemorrhage as a result of tonsillectomy.

**Adenotonsillectomy**

- In certain conditions, both tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (surgical removal of the adenoid) are indicated.

- Surgical excision of both the tonsils and adenoid is referred to as adenotonsillectomy.

- Absolute indications for adenotonsillectomy include
- Adenotonsillar hyperplasia with obstructive sleep apnea
- Abnormal dentofacial growth
- Malignancy

- Dysphagia, speech impairment, and halitosis are relative indications for adenotonsillectomy.

- Removal of the tonsils and adenoid does not produce any clinically significant immunologic deficiency.

- Various acquired or inherited bleeding disorders, anemia, acute infection and patients with high anesthetic risk are contraindications for adenotonsillectomy.