The determination of akinesia in a patient is mainly clinical and characterized by a delay or inability to react or execute a motor command. Quantitatively, reaction time studies are used to assess the degree of akinesia. It typically reveals a delay in simple reaction time, but a normal choice reaction time.

The neuroimaging studies employed in the assessment of akinesia include:

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

- Functional MRI

- Single-photon emission computed tomography

- Positron emission tomography

In patients with akinesia-rigidity dominant PD, in comparison to a tremor-dominant variant, a higher global functional connective density (FCD) in the akinetic-rigid dominant variant is in the left inferior frontal gyrus, right middle frontal gyrus, right superior frontal gyrus along with a lower global FCD in the akinetic-rigid dominant left cerebellum anterior lobule.

Pure akinesia with gait freezing, associated with PSP, has imaging findings showing significant cortical thinning in inferior bilateral frontal, left orbitofrontal, right anterior cingulate, bilateral insula, bilateral supramarginal, right angular and precunial, and bilateral temporal areas, often involving the parahippocampal and lingual gyri.

The current imaging strategies do not give any information on the neurotransmitter type involved in the disorder's pathogenesis. Futuristic models are likely to conduct pharmacological imaging, complex behavioral tasks along with movement analysis techniques, allowing practitioners to quantify the akinesia.

A presumptive diagnosis of fetal akinesia is made after obtaining a normal karyotype and excluding other conditions. Antenatal diagnosis can be carried out as early as 12 weeks of gestation after clinically presenting with reduced fetal movement, fetal edema, or fixed limb posturing, as observed on antenatal ultrasonography.