The physiologic volume of the brain parenchyma is a relatively constant value in adults: however, it may be adjusted by mass lesions or in the setting of cerebral edema. Cerebral edema can occur with acute hypoxic encephalopathy, large cerebral infarction, and severe traumatic brain injury. CSF and blood volume in the intracranial space will vary regularly as these are the primary regulators of intracranial pressure. CSF volume is primarily regulated via choroid plexus production at a rate of approximately 20 mL per hour physiologically and through its reabsorption at a similar rate by arachnoid granulations that drain into the venous system of the skull. The control mechanisms for maintaining appropriate CSF pressures may become damaged in neurological injuries such as stroke or trauma. Increased CSF production above the rate at which it can be reabsorbed, such as a choroid plexus papilloma, leads to increased pressure.

A failure to reabsorb at a sufficient rate to match normal secretion rate is another possibility and is seen with arachnoid granulation adhesions after bacterial meningitis. Ventricular obstruction may also induce decreased reabsorption of CSF causing hydrocephalus. The primary regulator of blood volume is via cerebral blood flow. Diseases that obstruct venous outflows such as venous sinus thrombosis, jugular vein compression, or structural changes due to neck surgery may cause blood congestion within the skull, thus increasing pressure. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension, also known as pseudotumor cerebri, is a term for increased intracranial pressure due to unknown causes with no known structural change.

The etiology of intracranial hypertension can be divided into two categories:

**Primary or Intracranial Causes**

- Trauma (epidural hematoma, subdural hematoma, intracerebral hemorrhage or contusions)

- Brain tumors

- Stroke

- Nontraumatic intracerebral hemorrhage (aneurysm rupture)

- Idiopathic or benign intracranial hypertension

- Hydrocephalus

- Meningitis

**Secondary or Extracranial Causes**

- Hypoventilation (hypoxia or hypercarbia)

- Hypertension

- Airway obstruction

- Metabolic (drug-induced)

- Seizures

- Hyperpyrexia

- High altitude cerebral edema