Treatment depends on the severity based on the Westley croup score. Children with mild croup defined as Westley croup score less than 2 are given a single dose dexamethasone. Children with moderate to severe croup defined as a Westley croup score greater than 3 are given nebulized epinephrine in addition to dexamethasone.

**Steroids**

- Corticosteroids, such as dexamethasone, results in faster resolution of symptoms, decreased return to medical care, and decreased length of stay.

- Dexamethasone is superior to budesonide for improving symptom scores, but there is no difference in readmission rates.

- Dexamethasone at a dose of 0.15 mg/kg, 0.3 mg/kg, and 0.6 mg/kg all appear to be equally effective, 0.6 mg/kg is the most commonly used.

**Epinephrine**

- For moderate to severe cases, nebulized racemic epinephrine has been found to improve symptom scores at 30 minutes, but the benefits may wear off after 2 hours. Current recommendations advocate for a prolonged period of observation in patients receiving racemic epinephrine. If symptoms do not worsen after 4 hours of observation, consider discharge home with close follow-up.

- 0.5 mL per kg of L-epinephrine 1:1000 via nebulizer was more effective than racemic epinephrine at two hours because of its longer effects.

**Oxygen**

- Deliver oxygen by "blow-by" administration as it causes less agitation than the use of a mask or nasal cannula.

**Intubation**

- Approximately 0.2% of children require endotracheal intubation for respiratory support.

- Use the tube that is a one-half size smaller than normal for age/size of the patient to account for airway narrowing due to swelling and inflammation.

**Hot Steam**

- Studies have not demonstrated a significant improvement with the administration of inhaled hot steam or humidified air.

**Cough Medicine**

- Cough medicines, which usually contain dextromethorphan or guaifenesin, are discouraged.

**Heliox**

- Little evidence supports the routine use of heliox in the treatment of croup.

**Antibiotics**

- Croup is most commonly a viral disease. Antibiotics are reserved for cases when primary or secondary bacterial infection is suspected.

- In cases of secondary bacterial infection, vancomycin and cefotaxime are recommended.

- In severe cases associated with influenza A or B, antiviral neuraminidase inhibitors may be used.