Incontinentia pigmenti is a disorder of the skin, eyes, and central nervous system (CNS) that primarily affects females and rarely males. Physical examination findings involving each organ system are listed below.

**Cutaneous findings**of IP are divided into four stages which overlap or occur sequentially. Dermatologic findings are the first to be observed in IP and present in nearly all patients. However, the absence of visible cutaneous lesions does not exclude the diagnosis of IP.

- **Stage 1, Inflammatory Stage**
- Vesicular lesions on an erythematous base following Blaschko's lines usually appear at birth or within the first eight weeks of life and persist from 2 weeks to 4 months.
- The lesions typically affect the limbs and trunk.
- These lesions usually disappear at 18 months of age. These lesions can reappear later in life, even after resolution. Reappearance is noted in the setting of febrile illnesses.

- **Stage 2, Verrucous Stage**
- Warty papules and plaques are noted in the linear distribution along the lines of Blaschko but not necessarily along the same regions previously affected by the inflammatory stage.
- These lesions usually involve the distal limb and scalp. The skin lesions generally appear within the first few months of life as stage I lesions start to resolve.

- **Stage 3, Hyperpigmented Stage**
- Whorled slate grey hyperpigmented plaques (marble cake appearance) are seen following Blaschko's lines, and these slowly regress. This is the most typical appearance of IP. 
- These lesions are not present at birth, and these usually occur at the age of 6 months to 1 year as stage 2 lesions start to disappear. The specific location is the trunk, axilla, or groin. However, the whole skin surface needs to be examined as the involvement may be minimal. These lesions usually disappear in adolescence.

- **Stage 4, Hypopigmented Stage**
- Pale, hairless linear patches and plaques devoid of sweat glands are most commonly seen on the posterior calves and arms. These lines are chronic.

**Hair:**In roughly 38% of IP patients, vertex alopecia occurs most commonly in a mild manner and often goes unnoticed. Alopecia is often associated with inflammation, vesiculation, and scarring. A rare manifestation of IP is agenesis of the eyebrows and eyelashes.

**Nails:**Approximately 7 to 40% of patients have nail dystrophy. Ridging, pitting, or nail disruption may occur intermittently and can affect all or most of the fingernails and toenails.**.**

**Teeth:**The features include microdontia, anodontia, hypodontia, and peg-shaped teeth. Some significant dental abnormalities are microdontia, delayed eruption of permanent teeth, and cleft palate.

**CNS:**Central nervous system deficits constitute a significant threat to the normal life span of patients with IP. When coupled with ophthalmic manifestations, these may significantly reduce patients' quality of life. Approximately 30% of IP patients have neurologic impairments. Neurologic involvement is often present along with retinal vasculopathy and may result from ischemia/vaso-occlusive events.

About 13% of infants develop infantile spasms and seizure disorders. There is also an increased risk of spastic paralysis, and 7.5% of patients develop motor dysfunction. Early seizures may result from abnormal neuronal and neural crest cell migration, leading to gross brain malformations. Other manifestations include congenital hearing loss, cerebellar ataxia, muscular paralysis, mental disability, and aseptic encephalomyelitis.

**Ophthalmologic:**The****risk of ophthalmologic abnormalities is 20 to 37%.

- **Retina:**Peripheral retinal capillary nonperfusion (ischemia) is noted. New vessels may give rise to vitreous hemorrhage or tractional retinal detachment. Exudative retinal detachments may also be noted. The risk of retinal detachment is most significant in infancy and childhood. The findings at the posterior pole include foveal hypoplasia, RPE (retinal pigment epithelium) mottling, areas of capillary nonperfusion surrounded by vascular loops, macular ischemia, epiretinal membrane, neovascularization of the optic disc, Roth spots, paramacular dilation of vessels, and aneurysms. The changes in the peripheral retina may also progress towards the posterior pole. The changes seen in the peripheral retina include:
- Peripheral avascular retina
- Aneurysm like dilation
- Arteriovenous anastomosis, vascular loops similar to those seen in aggressive retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)
- Retinal and extraretinal new vessels
- Preretinal fibrovascular proliferation
- Vitreous hemorrhage
- Retinal detachment (tractional or exudative)
- Exudates
- Mottling of RPE
- Hypopigmented lesions
- Coloboma

- **Other eye findings:**Strabismus, cataracts, conjunctival pigmentation, optic atrophy, retinal pigment abnormalities, foveal hypoplasia, foveal disorganization, and microphthalmia are less common eye findings.

**Breast:**The presence of abnormalities of mammary tissue, ranging from aplasia of the breast, breast hypoplasia, nipple hypoplasia, to excessive nipples, may occur, and it is more common than in the general population.