HGH is extremely important for modulating growth during adolescence. Therefore, the major aberrations in the regulation of HGH may result in growth defects. HGH hypersecretion results in gigantism or acromegaly, whereas HGH deficiency will result in a growth deficit in children and the GH deficiency syndrome in adults.

**Acromegaly**

Acromegaly typically results from an HGH secreting pituitary adenoma with an onset after the closure of the epiphyseal growth plates, typically in adulthood. Therefore, bone growth primarily affects flat bones such as the skull, mandible, sternum, hands, and feet. Often the presenting complaint is of hats or gloves not fitting anymore due to swelling of the hands and head. Because the illness is due to a pituitary mass, hypopituitarism may also develop with secondary reproductive disorders and visual symptoms. In addition to bony growth, there is the growth of myocardium resulting in biventricular concentric hypertrophy and subsequent heart failure in later disease. Because HGH counteracts the effects of insulin on glucose and lipid metabolism, diabetes mellitus type 2 and hyperlipidemia are strongly associated with this disease. Treatment consists of surgery and radiation therapy targeting the underlying adenoma as well as symptomatic relief of the secondary effects of HGH as above.

**Gigantism**

This illness is very similar to acromegaly in all aspects, except the underlying pituitary adenoma develops before the closure of long bone epiphysis. Therefore, bone growth occurs in long bones such as the tibia, fibula, femur, humerus, radius, and ulna. Since epiphyseal closure occurs before adulthood, this is typically an illness with an onset seen in children. The organ and metabolic impacts are similar to acromegaly.

**HGH Deficiency**

In children, idiopathic HGH deficiency is the most common. In adult-onset, HGH deficiency typically presents as a constellation of hypopituitary deficiencies. The triggering incident is typically a pituitary adenoma, most likely a prolactinoma. However, other treatments, such as radiation therapy or surgery, might be the cause. Childhood-onset is associated with decreased growth of all skeletal structures, leading to dwarfism. Adult-onset HGH deficiency is less easily diagnosed as it has no single identifying feature that is pathognomonic. Typically adults have decreased skeletal muscle and increased fat mass in visceral tissue as well as decreased bone density and remodeling, which leads to osteoporosis. Dyslipidemia and insulin resistance are prevalent, which lead to secondary cardiovascular dysfunction, depressed mood, increased anxiety, and a lack of energy.