After fetal echocardiogram makes a diagnosis of CCHD, specialized delivery room planning in a tertiary care center is required for prompt evaluation and management.

At birth, if a CCHD is suspected and cardiac investigation or pediatric cardiologist is not easily available, appropriate stabilization, oxygen therapy, infusion of prostaglandin E1, and prompt transportation to a tertiary care center is necessary. Prostaglandin E1 is useful for ductal-dependent lesions as bridging therapy for further interventions or cardiac surgery. Approximately 25% of children born with a CHD will need heart surgery or other interventions to survive. Balloon atrial septostomy is performed acutely in cases of TGA, allowing adequate blood mixing, and in cases of pulmonary hypertension, relieving right-sided pressures. The patient can undergo early corrective surgery or, in some cases, undergo palliation with a shunt prior to their corrective surgery. After the cardiac surgery is performed, it is essential that the primary source of each postoperative problem be identified and treated, for example, respiratory failure, cardiac rhythm disorders, heart failure, renal failure, seizures, thromboembolism and stroke, hemolysis, infections, postpericardiotomy syndrome, among others.

Routine immunizations should be given. Careful consideration for the timing of administration of live-virus vaccination is required in patients who are potential candidates for cardiopulmonary bypass, heart or heart-lung transplantation. Prophylaxis against the respiratory syncytial virus is recommended during respiratory syncytial virus season in infants with unrepaired congenital heart disease and significant hemodynamic abnormalities. Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SAB) prophylaxis is recommended for patients undergoing dental procedures for patients with high risk of adverse outcomes according to 2007 Statement of the American Heart Association (AHA). Other management considerations include treatment of iron-deficiency anemia, close observation for excessive polycythemia, avoidance of dehydration to prevent the risk of stroke. Parents who have a child with congenital heart disease require counseling regarding the probability of a cardiac malformation occurring in subsequent children.