Adenomyomatosis of the gallbladder is a rare presentation but can be mistaken for several other gastrointestinal tract disorders. Because the condition is benign, it is important for the primary care provider or nurse practitioner to consult with a gastroenterologist or general surgeon to deliver the best standard of care for such patients. Most cases do not require any treatment. However, if the RUQ (right upper quadrant) pain persists, the onus is on the healthcare provider to rule out a malignancy.

The nurse plays a very crucial role in assisting the provider during the diagnosis and management of cases with adenomyomatosis of the gallbladder. The nurse should ensure that the patients could understand the underlying pathology and their diagnosis and its implications. The nurse should help the patients and their families throughout the process of decision-making. The nurse should ensure that patients are provided with the necessary written information leaflets about their condition. The nurse should liaise with the various healthcare team members involved in patient care with adenomyomatosis of the gallbladder. The nurse should ensure that patients are well-informed about their care plans at all times. The nurse should alert the provider if any untoward changes in the course of the patient's illness. To achieve the best standard of care for patients with adenomyomatosis of the gallbladder, effective communication and collaboration among the interprofessional team are mandatory. [Level 5]