Imaging is very crucial in supporting the diagnosis of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Being a hypomyelinating disorder, PMD’s detrimental effects on myelin formation can be seen with computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with MRI being more accurate. CT reveals white matter attenuation and progressive atrophy similar to other leukodystrophies. MRI shows significant hypomyelination and can distinguish between the connatal and SPG2 forms of PMD. Normally, myelin maturation translates to an increase in T1 MRI signaling and a decrease in T2 signaling. However, in patients of PMD, maturation fails, and hyperintensities are seen on T2. The hyperintensities are seen diffusely in patients with connatal PMD and a patchy manner in SPG2 patients over various areas of the brain, including posterior limb of the internal capsule, optical radiations, and corona radiata. Patients with connatal PMD can also have cerebellar hypoplasia. According to Sumida et al., a cohort study of 19 patients that the diffuse nature of T2-hyperintensity correlates with PMD severity.

A case report from Brazil suggests that if an MRI shows pontine demyelination in a patient exhibiting clinical features of PMD, another diagnosis should be kept in mind: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease (PMLD). PMLD is a disease similar to PMD but with different etiology, the details of which will be explained in the differential diagnosis section.

Molecular analysis remains the mainstay in confirming the diagnosis of PMD. It includes methods like fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) methods and chromosomal microarray testing, with the latter being most efficient in detecting duplication mutations and their extent. According to a molecular analysis study in Poland involving 68 patients, duplications leading to increased production of PLP1 gene and its accompanying protein DM20 were found along with other missense and nonsense mutations leading to premature termination of PLP1 synthesis.

A recent study from Japan proves the efficacy of droplet-digital polymerase chain reaction (dd-PCR) in detecting PLP1 mutations and suggested that it can be used in routine clinical practice as an alternative option to the conventional ones.

Finally, neurophysiology plays a minor role in supporting the diagnosis of PMD. Brain auditory-evoked responses and somatosensory evoked potentials are abnormal in PMD along with nerve conduction studies, which show evidence of peripheral neuropathy in cases of PLP1 null syndrome.