The underlying cause of linear IgA bullous dermatosis (LABD) is circulating IgA anti-basement membrane zone antibodies directed against the 97 kDa portion of BPAG2 (bullous pemphigoid antigen 2, also known as BP180) in the lamina lucida. The 97 kDa subunit lies within the well-known NC16A domain of the BPAG2 molecule. Additionally, some patients may display autoantigens toward LAD-1 (a 120 kDa truncated domain of BPAG2). In bullous pemphigoid (BP), circulating IgG antibodies bind to the MCW-1 area of the NC16A domain which is closer to the amino-terminus, while the 97 kDa subunit lies at the carboxy terminus. The pathophysiology of the sub-lamina densa variant remains poorly understood, but it is suspected that collagen type 7 is the underlying antigen.

Various theories regarding potential causative factors in the production of the offending IgA antibodies exist and include infectious etiologies, autoimmune disease, induction secondary to malignancy, or gastrointestinal disease. There have been reports of loose associations of LABD occurring in patients with celiac disease, Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, dermatomyositis, and multiple sclerosis. The relationship between LABD and underlying malignancy is also weak, but there have been reports of LABD occurring concurrently in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders, and thyroid, bladder, colon, renal, or esophageal cancers. Numerous other malignancies have also been reported in case reports. Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection, resulting in either chickenpox or a shingles outbreak, may be the erroneous inciting factor leading to the formation of the IgA anti-basement membrane zone antibodies with other infections such as respiratory infections. Reports of an association between LABD and psoriasis have also been published.