The clinical presentation of herpes encephalitis could be acute or subacute. A prodromal phase of fever, malaise, headache, and nausea often precedes more severe neurologic symptoms. The typical clinical features of HSV -1 encephalitis include altered mentation lasting more than 24 hours and associated with other features of brain inflammation, including fever, headache, seizures, and focal neurologic deficits. Cognitive, behavioral, and personality changes have also been described. Other associated features include urinary and fecal incontinence, aseptic meningitis, rashes with dermatomal distribution, and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Benign recurrent meningitis is an atypical manifestation. The behavioral syndromes mentioned above include hypomania, Klüver-Busy syndrome, and varying degrees of amnesia. Behavioral or personality changes could often be misdiagnosed as a psychiatric disorders.

HSV-1 encephalitis can rarely manifest as recurrent brain stem encephalitis. Autoimmune encephalitis with antibodies directed against N- methyl-d-aspartate receptor for glutamate has to be considered in children and young adults who present with neurologic symptoms after a recent recovery from herpes simplex encephalitis. Rare presentations include selective language aphasia and intracerebral hemorrhage in an HIV-positive patient.

The most common physical findings include fever and altered mentation. Meningeal signs may be detected, although meningismus is uncommon. Neurologic deficits are usually acute onset with a duration often less than a week and usually include focal cranial nerve palsies, hemiparesis, dysphasia, aphasia, ataxia, visual field defects, and papilledema. The anterior opercular syndrome has been described as an initial presentation associated with encephalitis.

Childhood herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) presents several clinical features, including fever, lethargy, altered behavior, sleepiness, and focal seizures or neurological abnormalities. Herpes simplex encephalitis in the neonate usually manifests between 1 to 3 weeks of life, and features include irritability, lethargy, and poor feeding associated with tremors or fits. Herpetic skin lesions are common in neonatal encephalitis. Altered liver function tests and thrombocytopenia are common when encephalitis occurs as part of multi-organ involvement. HSV-2 may rarely manifest with associated myelitis.

The presentation could be atypical or subtle without prodromal symptoms in immunocompromised patients(for example, HIV-positive individuals or corticosteroid therapy); hence the diagnosis could often be missed.