Excessive intake of calcium can result in harmful side effects. The Institute of Medicine of the National Academies has stated that calcium intake of 2000 milligrams or more daily increases the risk of harm and adverse events.

Another interesting point regarding high calcium consumption is its pivotal role in the regulation of energy metabolism; high calcium diets mitigate adipocyte lipid accumulation and weight gain during periods of overconsumption of an energy-dense diet, increasing lipolysis and preserving thermogenesis during caloric restriction; this situation can accelerate weight loss. Intracellular Ca2+ plays a vital role in the regulation of triglyceride storage and adipocyte lipid metabolism; increased intracellular Ca2+ results in the stimulation of lipogenic gene expression, lipogenesis, suppression of lipolysis, and increased lipid filling and adiposity. These findings have received support from clinical and epidemiological data demonstrating a reduction in the odds of obesity that correlates with increased dietary calcium intake. Of note, dairy sources of calcium demonstrate an increased anti-obesity effect than supplemental calcium sources in the studies that have examined this phenomenon.

Another potential adverse event of excessive calcium intake, although controversial, is the worsening of underlying cardiovascular disease. Two separate meta-analyses demonstrated a potential marginal increased risk of myocardial infarction in patients receiving calcium supplementation versus controls. However, other studies and meta-analyses have yielded results that showed no association between calcium supplementation and risk of myocardial infarction. Currently, the National Osteoporosis Foundation has stated that "substantial evidence supports that taking the recommended amount of calcium supplements poses no risk to the heart."