**Initial Staging**

Accurate baseline staging of the lymphomas is vital for the appropriate treatment and risk prognostication. Traditionally anatomic imaging (mainly CT) was used for staging and assessing the morphological response to the treatment. Staging with CT has some limitations as it depends mainly on the size of the lymph node. Integration of FDG PET/CT has improved the initial staging with better evaluation of the smaller lesions that are normal by the size criteria.

CT has limited sensitivity for detecting extranodal disease and bone marrow involvement, as morphological changes can be very subtle. FDG PET/CT is far superior to conventional imaging in detecting extranodal disease, including head and neck lymphomas with nasopharyngeal and tonsillar involvement.

Also, PET/CT better depicts disease involving bone marrow, lungs/pleura, liver, and spleen. As PET/CT is whole-body imaging (including imaging from vertex to feet or skull base to midthigh), it not only detects more lesions but can also guide metabolically active, easily amenable sites for biopsy. Indolent lymphomas demonstrate low to no metabolic activity on the FDG PET/CT as these are slow-growing tumors. PET/CT is, therefore, not routinely used for staging indolent lymphoma. In some patients, the slow-growing indolent tumors can transform into a higher grade of disease, also known as Richter’s transformation. FDG PET/CT has high sensitivity in detecting transformed disease in these patients.

**Evaluation of Response to Treatment**

FGD PET/CT outperforms conventional anatomic imaging in assessing response to the treatment. FDG PET/CT is routinely performed after completion of the treatment to detect any residual active disease. It is often difficult to determine on the CT whether a residual lymph node represents posttreatment fibrosis or viable residual lymphoma. Resolution of abnormal metabolic activity, even if there is residual tissue seen on CT, is consistent with a complete metabolic response. A negative PET/CT after the end of treatment excludes residual disease with a high level of certainty.

FDG PET/CT is also very useful during the course of chemotherapy and is usually acquired after two cycles of treatment. The interim PET/CT scans are superior to CT as a morphological decrease in tumor size is generally slower compared to the metabolic response. Negative PET after 1 or 2 cycles of treatment is highly predictive of complete remission.

Lugano classification is routinely utilized in evaluation, staging, and response assessment in patients with lymphoma. The classification is based on the recommendations of the 11th and 12th International Conference on Malignant Lymphoma held in Lugano, Switzerland, which was attended by leading hematologists, oncologists, pathologists, radiation oncologists,  radiologists, and nuclear medicine physicians. These multispecialty providers represented major international clinical trials and cancer institutes.

Lugano classification recommends a 5-point score for response assessment, as shown below

Scores 1, 2, and 3 are consistent with a complete metabolic response with or without residual mass on CT.

Scores 4 and 5 are associated with partial, stable, and progressive disease. Partial remission is described as decreased metabolic activity, and there are no new lesions. Stable disease is defined as no significant metabolic change from baseline and no new lesions. Progressive disease is present if the metabolic activity increases compared to the prior study or if there are new nodal or extranodal lesions.

**Surveillance**

Due to high false positive rates, routine surveillance with FDG PET/CT is not recommended after patients have achieved remission.