An important goal of lip reconstruction is to maintain the competence of the oral seal to allow for mastication and phonation. Surgical repair of lesions of the lips poses a specific challenge as significant aesthetic defects are possible with even minor disruptions of the natural vermilion border, cupid’s bow, and white roll. All incisions should be limited to within a single cosmetic unit to minimize the appearance of scars. The cosmetic units of the lips include a single unit comprising the lower lip and 1 medial and 2 lateral units of the upper lip.

Regional anesthesia of the lips may be achieved via local anesthetic injection or infraorbital and mental nerve blocks for the upper and lower lips, respectively. Prior to incision, the labial arteries should be located and ligated to reduce the risk of hemorrhage.

Mohs micrographic surgery is often the preferred modality for surgical excisions of malignancies of the face, particularly the lips. If Mohs surgery is not utilized, malignancies on the vermilion may be removed via full-thickness or wedge excisions. The apex of the wedge excision serves as a Burow triangle to remove redundant tissue for ease of closure.

Options for surgical closure of lip defects include primary repair, secondary intent, and flap closure. Primary repair is indicated for defects involving less than 30% of the area of the lip. Secondary intention can be utilized for superficial wounds of the vermilion, up to 2.5 cm. Defects extending greater than 2 mm into the cutaneous lip or the orbicularis oris are at increased risk of functional and cosmetic complications. If allowing lip defects to resolve via secondary intention, patients should be closely monitored for the development of lip notching or other malalignments.

While primary and secondary repair can be utilized for management of smaller defects, advancement flaps are commonly used in lip reconstruction to minimize aesthetic complications associated with larger wounds. The foremost intention of advancement flaps is to transition the tension that would be created by a traditional closure to a more aesthetic location. These flaps mobilize tissue of the lateral lip and cheek to reduce deformation of the vermilion-cutaneous border. Defects limited to the vermilion are managed by mucosal advancement flaps, which typically heal rapidly with good cosmetic results. Interestingly, keratinized skin grafted into the oral cavity may eventually transform clinically and histologically into the mucosa. Unilateral advancement flaps, particularly Burow wedge advancement flaps, are often used to repair wounds of the cutaneous aspects of the 2 lateral upper lip cosmetic units. The incision lines may be well-hidden within the vermilion border, nasal sill, and alar crease. Bilateral advancement flaps are used to repair defects of the medial cosmetic unit of the upper lip. By incorporating tissue from both sides of the defect, the natural contours of the lip can be maintained. Additional flap types commonly used in lip reconstruction include the crescentic peri-alar advancement flap, island pedicle advancement flap, rotation flap, and transposition flap. More complex grafts are required for large, full-thickness defects to avoid complication by microstomia. Cautious planning of any flap is required to avoid distortion of free margins. Full-thickness skin grafts have also been used in lip reconstruction but are usually considered suboptimal due to color and texture mismatches. Additionally, the inability to immobilize the lip contributes to an increased risk of graft failure.

Scar lines should be oriented within the natural boundary lines if possible or angled radially along the relaxed skin tension lines to minimize visibility. As notching is a common outcome of surgical interventions to the lips, attempts should be made to avoid scar lines that extend across the vermilion-cutaneous junction. Repair of full-thickness lip defects should occur in four layers (submucosa, orbicularis oris, vermilion border, cutaneous lip), utilizing small-caliber 5-0 or 6-0 sutures. Given the ability of silk sutures to absorb fluid and soften, they are recommended for surgical closure of the vermilion or mucosa. Given the tendency of scars on the lip to depress, wound edges should be aggressively everted during suturing to ensure that the scar will lay flat after healing.

In addition to standard postoperative care, patients should be instructed to minimize talking and facial movements for 48 to 72 hours following surgery. Additionally, patients should avoid using straws for 7 days postoperatively to reduce perioral muscle motion that may disrupt the healing process. Given the proximity of the defects to the oral cavity, patients are typically administered postoperative antibiotics to reduce the risk of wound infections. If pin-cushioning of the flap occurs, intralesional corticosteroids or surgical revision can be employed to improve the appearance of the repair.