The treatment of retroperitoneal bleeding can be thought of in a stepwise approach from nonoperative management to angioembolization or, in severe cases, surgical intervention. The determination of the specific treatment strategy is dependent on several factors, including the location of the retroperitoneal bleeding, the patient’s stability, and the etiology of the bleeding. In all cases, regardless of whether or not trauma has proceeded the initiation of bleeding, initial resuscitation must begin with the use of the “ABCDE’s” of trauma. Simultaneous to the implementation of this algorithmic resuscitative approach, the search for the etiological cause and assessment of patient stability is undertaken. If at any time, the patient is noted to be hemodynamically unstable or demonstrate peritoneal signs, an urgent surgical intervention must be considered. Other indications that warrant immediate surgical intervention in trauma are based on the location of bleeding, which will be discussed here.

The retroperitoneum has been described as having three anatomical zones. Zone 1 is centrally located in the upper retroperitoneum and includes the aorta, inferior vena cava, pancreas, esophagus, and duodenum; zone 2 is located laterally to zone 1 and includes the ascending and descending colon, the kidneys and their ureters, and the adrenal glands; finally, zone 3 is located across the inferior portion of the retroperitoneum and contains the iliofemoral vessels as well as the rectum.

When retroperitoneal bleeding has been identified in trauma, the mechanism guides management. With penetrating trauma, zones 1 and 3 should be immediately surgically explored in all cases. Zone 2 is explored if bleeding is noted to be ongoing. In blunt trauma, zone 1 is always explored, and zone 2 is explored if bleeding is noted to be ongoing; however, if zone 3 bleeding is identified, surgical intervention should not be attempted in the setting of blunt trauma as the typical source is a pelvic fracture and associated venous plexus bleeding. Here, exploration can worsen bleeding by disrupting partially formed coagulum and removing hematomal tamponade.

Next, we will briefly discuss the primary survey of trauma resuscitation. The primary survey can be easily remembered using the “ABCDE” mnemonic. This begins with an assessment of the patient’s airway, “A,” to determine if it is patent. This is followed immediately by confirmation that the patient is breathing, “B.” If either a patient’s airway or breathing has been compromised, rapid intubation should be performed to maintain sufficient oxygenation and ventilation. Next, “C” stands for the obtainment of vascular access and maintenance of circulation. Massive transfusion protocol should be initiated early if bleeding is profound, especially if a patient’s presentation is concerning for hemorrhagic shock. Fluid resuscitation should follow trauma guidelines with no more than two liters of crystalloid fluid administration before transfusing packed red blood cells, platelets, and plasma in a 1 to 1 to 1 ratio.

Assessment of patient disability, “D,” then occurs and includes performing a Glasgow coma scale, spine sweep, and assessing pupils for size and reactivity to light. Finally, one must completely expose “E,” the patient’s skin, and remove their clothing to complete a comprehensive physical exam. In the context of retroperitoneal bleeding, the emphasis is paid to the abdominal exam. The astute clinician must also elucidate a focused history, typically described with the acronym “SAMPLE,” consisting of the patient’s symptoms, allergies, medications, past medical history, last meal, and events proceeding their presentation. Reversal of anticoagulation, administration of blood products, and identification of concurrent pathology are paramount to the initial assessment.

If bleeding is ongoing and the patient is sufficiently stable, angioembolization may be employed. During this procedure, a catheter is introduced into a more peripheral artery, most commonly the femoral artery, and advanced in a retrograde manner to the area of suspected bleeding. Radiopaque contrast is infused, and image processing, such as digital subtraction angiography, allows the vascular flow and potential extravasation of contrast to be identified. The benefit of defining vascular injury with interventional angiography over CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography is the possibility for immediate intervention. Once an injury is identified, hemostasis is achieved through the use of coil or particle embolization. Repeat contrast investigation demonstrates cessation of bleeding.

For all patients with retroperitoneal bleeding, especially those managed nonoperatively, frequent reassessments are paramount to successful outcomes. Nonoperative management includes the reversal of anticoagulation, crystalloid and blood product resuscitation, serial abdominal examinations, and etiological identification of bleeding. Once an underlying cause is known, it should be reversed or corrected if possible. During all stages of the resuscitative process, careful attention must be paid to the patient’s vital signs, particularly blood pressure and heart rate, as retroperitoneal bleeding can be a dynamic process from which patients may deteriorate despite resuscitative efforts.