**Administration and dosing**

Hydromorphone administration can be through intramuscular, intravenous, subcutaneous, or oral routes.

Intramuscular, intravenous, or subcutaneous:****injected at a concentration up to 10 mg/ml.

**Oral**: Patients can take it orally with or without food in the immediate or extended-release form. The latter cannot be crushed, chewed, or dissolved, because it will void immediate release of the formulation.

**Pharmacology**

Immediate-release oral formulations have an onset of action at 15 to 30 minutes, peak at 30 to 60 minutes, and last 3 to 4 hours. Half-life is 2 to 3 hours.

Extended-release formulations have an onset of action at 6 hours, peak at 9 hours, and lasts 13 hours. Half-life is approximately 11 hours but varies between 8 to 15 hours.

The volume of distribution is 4 L/kg, where 8% to 19% of the drug is protein bound. Metabolism occurs in the liver through glucuronidation where most of it converts to hydromorphone-3-glucuronide.

Excretion is mainly through urine in the glucuronidated form. The residual unchanged form gets excreted in the urine (7%) and the feces (1%).

The equivalence of hydromorphone to other opioids will follow later.

**Availabilities**

As seen above, oral tablets can be in the immediate release form and an extended-release form.

- Immediate-release oral solutions have a dosage of 1 mg/1 ml, while oral tablets can be either 2 mg, 4 mg, or 8 mg.

- The dosage of extended-release oral tablets is either 8 mg, 12 mg, 16 mg, or 32  mg. This latter does not have an oral solution form.

- Injection solutions can be found in the following concentrations: 1 mg/ml, 2 mg/ml, 4 mg/ml, and 10 mg/ml.

- Intravenous solutions are available in the following formulations: 2 mg/1 ml, 2500 mg/250 ml, 10 mg/1 ml, 500 mg/50 ml.