Reviewing the patient's urological history and understanding the anatomic considerations for the evaluation of difficult urinary catheterizations will lead to the optimal selection of the adjunctive, specialized tools available to aid in the successful placement of a urinary catheter.

As difficult catheterizations can be encountered in multiple settings, it is recommended to maintain at least one fully stocked, mobile urological emergency cart with supplies commonly used to place urinary catheters under various circumstances. Since there is no guarantee that only one urological emergency will occur at a time, two separate, fully stocked carts are recommended. Each cart should include many of the following items:

**Basic Supplies**

While many supplies commonly used for Foley catheterization can be found sterilely pre-packaged together, it is important to ensure additional supplies are available to allow for safe urinary catheterization using an aseptic technique. Commonly used items include an abundance of sterile lubricant, sterile drapes, sterile preparation solutions (at least two different types in case of allergies), sterile gloves, additional sterile water for irrigation, personal protective equipment, irrigation sets, Toomey syringes, and lidocaine jelly. A variety of urinary catheters in different sizes should be readily available. As some patients can have allergies to silicone or latex, both silicone and non-silicone catheters in various sizes should be available. Guide wires (0.035") and 18 gauge angiocaths should also be supplied.

**Foley Catheter Kit**

Foley catheters are small flexible tubes inserted into the urethra to drain urine from the bladder. The circumference of a Foley catheter in cm. is measured in French, where every French is equal to 0.33 mm. Eyelets near the end of the catheter drain the urine while a balloon located just distal to the eyelets is inflated to keep the Foley in place. Foley catheters can be made with latex, plastic, or silicone. Some additional coatings for antimicrobial protection are available as well but have limited proven efficacy.

**Coude Catheter**

Coude catheters have a slight bend just before the tip, helping to maneuver the catheter beyond obstructions in the bulbar and prostatic urethra. This curve can also help advance the catheter into an anteriorly retracted female urethral meatus. The curvature of the Coude catheter mimics the natural curvature of the male bulbar and prostatic urethra, posing less risk of creating urethral trauma or a false passage than a straight tip catheter.

**Council Tip Foley Catheters and the "Blitz" Technique**

These catheters feature a hole at the tip of the catheter. They are either used with a stylet to provide rigidity during catheterization with filiforms or are passed over a guide wire. A makeshift Council tip equivalent can be created through the "Blitz Technique," where an 18 gauge angiocatheter is utilized to punch a hole in the Foley's distal end.

**Ureteric Catheters**

Ureteric catheters are small-caliber, flexible, open-tipped catheters designed to pass into the ureters up to the kidneys. They can also be used in the urethra to traverse narrow strictures. A ureteric catheter may bypass a stricture while avoiding additional trauma or false passage creation. Some are designed to pass over guide wires. Their primary disadvantage is that they lack stiffness by themselves for easy insertion and are generally too small to drain bladders effectively.

**Instruments Used by Urologists:**

**Filiforms and Followers**

When sounds are too large to be passed, filiforms and followers may be used. Filiforms are small, flexible tubes used to maneuver past strictures and stenosis. They range from 2-6 French and come with straight, coude, or spiral tips. Filiforms are used with a follower, a plastic tube ranging from 10-24 French with a "male" screw tip, offered in straight or coude (curved) tip, and used for sequential dilation of the urethra. With a filiform in place, the tip of the follower can be screwed into the distal "female" end of the filiform and then advanced into the bladder. When the follower reaches the bladder, a hole at the end allows the drainage of urine and confirmation of appropriate positioning within the bladder. The instrument is then removed until the end of the filiform is visualized externally, the follower is unscrewed, and the next larger-sized follower is selected. The procedure is repeated until adequate dilation is achieved.

Filiforms and followers are generally reusable, but some sets are disposable. They have largely been supplanted by guide wire-based urethral sounds, which are generally preferred. Urologists should nevertheless be familiar with their use.

A "male" screw tip catheter guide can be passed through a council tip catheter and then screwed into the distal "female" end of the filiform to facilitate passage. This is somewhat awkward but effective. Be sure that the catheter guide can be easily extracted from the Foley along with the filiform once the catheter is positioned in the bladder. Blowing up the Foley balloon once the catheter is in the bladder can help prevent inadvertent removal of the Foley during this process. The internal lumen of the catheter should be well lubricated to facilitate easy removal of the catheter guide once the catheter is in place.

A few additional tips:

- Filiforms come in different lengths and stiffness with various tips. If the first filiform won't pass, try another.

- Ensure the filiform used isn't too short for the expected urethral length.

- If multiple filiforms won't pass, leave several in place and try another. The initial filiforms may fill any false passages allowing subsequent filiforms to pass.

- Avoid pressing or pushing too hard. This will only cause a new false passage and additional bleeding.

- While usually passed blindly, they can be introduced around a flexible cystoscope if necessary.

**Guide Wires**

Guide wires are useful in assuring access to the bladder. Such wires are optimally used with the aid of cystoscopic visualization to confirm passage into the bladder, though the blind passage of soft guide wires into the bladder can also be done. Passing a guide wire blindly is actually quite safe as, generally, the guide wire will either pass into the bladder or hit an obstruction and reverse direction, eventually protruding from the urethral meatus. If this occurs, a repeat attempt at blind passage can be done. While cystoscopic passage is optimal, the blind passage technique can be done safely even by non-urologists with minimal equipment without waiting for a cystoscope and light source or even a urologist to be available at the bedside.

Multiple guide wire types exist in varying stiffness, coatings, tip flexibility or angles, and lubricity. Stiffer wires provide better support for dilation, while more flexible wires or wires with angled tips may be more useful to navigate beyond strictured portions of the urinary tract.

Urological guide wires often have hydrophilic coatings and are available with variable stiffness characteristics. They are designed to overcome or bypass obstacles while maintaining a flexible tip that minimizes trauma to the urothelium.

**Urethral Sounds and Dilators**

When urethral strictures are encountered and there is a significant need for catheterization per urethra, gentle dilation with sounds or dilators can be performed. While they can be used interchangeably, sounds are intended for use in the urethra, while dilators were designed for cervical and uterine dilatation. Dilators have no holes or openings and are not designed to pass over guide wires. They are most commonly used for strictures in the fossa navicularis, urethral meatal stenosis, and female urethral strictures.

Urethral sounds are graduated straight or curved plastic or metal rods with tapered tips that can be passed blindly or over a guide wire to dilate the urethra in a sequential fashion. In difficult situations, the use of a guide wire along with a sound (Heyman or Goodwin) designed to pass over such wires is generally recommended to avoid false passages, minimize urethral trauma, facilitate safe stricture dilatation, and enable Foley placement.

**General Dilation Technique with Sounds**: The use of dilators or sounds to treat urethral strictures is relatively simple. A tight, scarred, narrowed urethral segment is identified. A lubricious 0.035" guide wire may be passed through the tightened lumen into the bladder. A small French well-lubricated sound is then passed over the guide wire and into the bladder. (While the use of a guide wire is optional, it is highly recommended) The passage of the instrument beyond the stricture can be verified by gently turning the curved sound to either side, as this is only permissible if the tip is actually inside the bladder. On removal of the sound, the tip will leak a few drops of urine. The next larger French size sound is then used, and the process is repeated. The luminal diameter of the strictured segment gradually increases due to radial expansion from the increasing larger sounds. Each sound should be left in place for at least 20 seconds to allow time for optimal radial dilation of the urethra. The dilation continues until the desired French size is reached.

While the described technique is relatively simple, it is often painful for the patient and can easily cause significant injuries if not performed correctly and gently. Small French-size sounds without guide wires are particularly dangerous as they can easily penetrate the urethral wall causing false passages and bleeding.

Multiple sound variations exist, including McCrea, Van Buren (solid metal), and Goodwin (metal with a lumen through which a wire may be passed) sounds. They come in graduated sizes from 8 up to 32 or even 40 French sizes. Many sounds are curved at one end to follow the J pattern of the prostatic urethra. Female dilators are generally straight due to the short length and lack of curvature of the female urethra.

- **Bougie-a-boules or "Bougies"**: These instruments are slim metal rods with an olive-shaped, slightly tapered tip or head and a slightly flattened handle. They come in sizes from 8 to 40 French and are about 10" long. They are most often used for measurement or calibration of the urethral lumen as well as dilation. For active dilation, other instruments are usually preferred as the effective tip is quite short and the slim metal rod can bend.

- **Dittel Sounds**: Solid metal straight sounds with a slightly tapered tip. The back end or handle is wide and flat, like the Van Buren sounds.

- **Goodwin Sound**s: Very similar to the standard Van Buren dilators with a gentle curve; Goodwin sounds have a small hole running from the very tapered tip to the end of the handle. They are designed to be passed over a guide wire and should never be used alone as their narrow tip could easily create false passages. However, when used over a guidewire placed in the bladder, they can easily and effectively open even tough strictures as they are superior dilators. Being metal, they are reusable but can be challenging to clean and sterilize due to the small, long hole through their center.

- **Guyon  Sounds**: Solid, reusable metal sounds with a flattened handle area and a continuous curve at the tip. The curve starts posteriorly and immediately begins a gradual, continuous turn anterior to the tip, roughly 90 degrees from the original shaft.

- **Hegar Dilators**: A set of 8 metal sounds with a different size on either end of each sound, totaling 16 graduated sizes. These sounds are hollow steel without any holes or openings. They are slightly curved in an elongated S shape and about 8" long. Being short, they are typically used only for meatal and fossa navicularis strictures as well as female urethral strictures. They are sized in mm, not French size. One end is 1 mm larger than the other.

- **Heyman Sounds**: A set of 4 to 8 curved sounds with a small central hole designed to fit over a guide wire or similar guide. Very similar to the Goodwin sounds described above, except Heyman sounds are usually disposable and have a wider proximal tip while Goodwin Sounds are metal, reusable, and have a smaller, tighter tip with a more gradual taper making them better dilators. Heyman sounds are usually disposable, while Goodwins are metal and reusable. Disposable sets of Heyman sounds are commercially available, but they tend to be expensive.

- **McCrea Dilators**: Very similar to the Van Buren sounds, these dilators are shorter with a gentle curve at the tip. They are intended for female patients and children.

- **Pratt Dilators**: These solid metal dilators are 11" long with an elongated S shape. There is a 15-degree angle at about 1" from each tip. They are longer and heavier than Hegar dilators. Pratt dilators are double-ended, with one end being 2 French sizes larger than the other. Size ranges from 13-43 French.

- **Rosebud Sounds:**Thin, metal, 12" long sounds with a cylindrical tip in varying sizes.

- **Van Buren Sounds**: J-shaped solid metal sounds with a flat head on one end, indicating the direction of the curved tip. The curve is about 70 degrees and located 1.5" from the tip. These sounds range from 8-30 French in size and are 10.5" to 12" long. They are reusable and represent the classic "blind" metal urethral sound.

**Urethral Balloon Dilators**

Balloon dilators can be used for short urethral strictures (less than 1.5 cm in length). These instruments are flexible tubes with very strong balloons of varying lengths (usually 4 cm or 10 cm) that can be inflated slowly under pressure at the stricture site to provide effective radial dilatation without the tearing and shearing forces produced by sounds and dilators. Each balloon dilator is disposable and has a maximum pressure recommendation, often up to 20 atmospheres. Many are designed to pass over a guide wire. Positioning the balloon exactly at the stricture site can be challenging, and the maximum balloon pressure is limited. They can be used for both male and female urethral strictures. The balloons and inflation mechanism are disposable but can be expensive to use. Some strictures may be too tough and fail to dilate even with maximum allowable pressure.

**Flexible Cystoscope**

For bedside urinary catheter placement, flexible cystoscopes can provide direct visualization of the urethra and confirm the location, source, and nature of the catheterization problem. Cystoscopy also allows visualization of the correct urethral lumen, which can then be traversed by a guide wire. The flexible cystoscope has a flexible fiberoptic cable with an eyepiece on one end, along with a port through which irrigation and guide wires can be passed. It may optionally have a video camera and monitor. The cystoscope requires a light source and irrigation fluid to distend the urethra and provide optimal visualization. The flexible cystoscope's tip is controlled by a knob or lever near the eyepiece and can be manipulated to maneuver the instrument throughout the lower urinary tract.

**Suprapubic Percutaneous Urinary Kits**

When access to the bladder via the urethra cannot be safely completed, or when a urethral stricture repair is being considered, a suprapubic tube (SPT) may be placed.

A variety of kits are available for the placement of suprapubic catheters at the bedside. Such kits commonly include a procedural tray, the suprapubic tray, a needle introducer (usually 14 Fr), some plastic dilators, a guide wire, a Council catheter stylet, a collection bag, and a pre-filled catheter balloon inflation syringe. Sutures to secure the catheter, different catheter sizes and types (Council tip is preferred), longer guide wires, spinal needles (18 gauge or larger), and local anesthetic may be included but are often omitted and will possibly be needed. Image guidance is suggested.