All patients should be assessed according to Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) principles. A non-accidental injury should be excluded from all pediatric injuries.

**Non-Operative Management**

Non-operative management is acceptable for nondisplaced Gartland I and minimally displaced Gartland IIA fractures. Management of Gartland II fractures has been controversial. Gartland II injuries can be managed non-operatively, provided that fracture alignment is satisfactory. Displacement and malunion can occur in the presence of medial column comminution. There is a risk of medial column collapse, leading to a cubitus varus deformity.

Non-operative management involves immobilization in a collar and cuff or an above-elbow cast with the elbow in 80 to 90 degrees of flexion for three to four weeks. Excess swelling can compromise the vascularity of the forearm and lead to compartment syndrome.

Traction has been used historically for displaced fractures.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical management is indicated for displaced Gartland II and Gartland III fractures. Urgent surgical management is indicated for patients with neurovascular compromise, compartment syndrome, and open fractures. Surgical management involves closed reduction and percutaneous pinning with K-wires for closed injuries. Open reduction may be required for failed closed reduction, irreducible fractures, and vascular exploration. Orthopedic surgeons managing these intricate fracture patterns with potential concomitant neurovascular injuries should ensure that they can handle the associated injuries and have a vascular surgeon on hand for assistance during the surgery.

**Closed Reduction and Percutaneous Pinning**

This is indicated for Gartland IIB and III fractures. It is also indicated for Gartland IIA fractures if an acceptable reduction is not obtained in a cast and if there are any contraindications to non-operative treatment (e.g., medial column comminution).

**Closed Reduction**

Closed reduction involves in-line traction with 'milking' of the soft tissues when a pucker sign is present. Traction pulls the fracture out to length, and 'milking' helps release the soft tissues. Traction should be applied with the elbow in slight flexion. This is followed by the correction of coronal plane displacement: medial/lateral translation and varus/valgus angulation of the distal fragment. Pronation with a valgus-directed force or supination with the addition of a varus force may be required, and these maneuvers also help correct rotational deformity. Pronation helps to correct posteromedial displacement (internal rotation) while tightening the medial periosteum, while supination can help correct posterolateral (external) rotation. The sagittal plane deformity is corrected by hyperflexion of the distal fragment in extension-type fractures. The extension may be required in flexion-type fractures.

The joystick technique has been described as a method to reduce multi-directionally unstable fractures.

**Percutaneous Pinning Technique**

Lateral pins and crossed pins (medial and lateral) bicortical constructs can be used.

Lateral pin configurations are frequently used, and they reduce the risk of iatrogenic ulnar nerve injury. Two or three lateral pins may be used. Pins must be inserted in a parallel or divergent manner with maximal separation between them. The divergent pattern is reported to be more stable than the parallel configuration.

The use of crossed pins increases the risk of iatrogenic ulnar nerve injury; however, they improve the torsional rigidity of the construct compared to the use of two lateral pins.

**Open Reduction and Percutaneous Pinning**

Open reduction is necessary when reduction cannot be achieved by the closed method. In particular, soft tissue/neurovascular structures can become trapped in the fracture site preventing anatomical reduction. Open reduction may also be necessary for open fractures. Exploration of the brachial artery via an open approach is required in cases where perfusion is not established peri-operatively following reduction and fixation of the fracture. Open exploration of the brachial artery in the setting of an absent radial pulse but perfused hand following reduction and fixation remains controversial.

An anterior approach has been recommended for open reduction.

**Vascular Exploration**

Urgent vascular exploration is indicated in patients with a pulseless, pale hand. This must be performed by a surgeon experienced in repairing small vessels or in conjunction with a vascular surgeon. An attempt at closed reduction and fixation of the fracture should be performed in the first instance to see if this restores perfusion to the limb.

The management of patients with a pink, perfused, but pulseless hand following reduction and fixation remains controversial. These patients need close observation following surgery. Non-operative management has been shown to yield acceptable results.