Initial empiric therapy for HAP and VAP should include agents active against Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and other gram-negative bacilli. The choice of antibiotics for empiric therapy should be based on the common pathogens and susceptibility patterns within the health care facilities and also based on the patient's risk factors for multidrug resistance.

- For patients with HAP who have a risk factor for MRSA infection, specificall those with prior intravenous antibiotic use within 90 days, hospitalization in a unit where greater than 20% of S. aureus isolates are methicillin resistant, or the prevalence of MRSA is not known, or who are at high risk for mortality, prescribe an antibiotic active against MRSA like vancomycin or linezolid is recommended (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Risk factors for mortality include the need for ventilator support due to HAP and septic shock.

- For patients with HAP with no risk factors for MRSA infection and not at high risk of mortality, prescribe an antibiotic with activity against MSSA like piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, levofloxacin, imipenem, or meropenem.

- For patients with HAP who have factors for Pseudomonas or other gram-negative infection or high risk for mortality, prescribe antibiotics from 2 different classes with activity against P. aeruginosa (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Other patients with HAP may be prescribed a single antibiotic active against P. aeruginosa like piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, and ceftazidime, levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, imipenem, meropenem, amikacin, gentamicin, and aztreonam.

**Continuation Therapy**

All patients with HAP or VAP should be reevaluated for clinical response and the microbiologic results after initial empiric antimicrobial therapy.

- For patients in whom the causative organism has been identified, the empiric regimen should be narrowed according to the pathogen's susceptibility.

- For patients who are clinically improving and who do not have an identified pathogen, empiric treatment for S. aureus or multidrug-resistant, gram-negative bacilli can be stopped if these organisms have not detected in culture from a high-quality specimen within 48 to 72 hours.

- Patients who have not improved within 72 hours of starting empiric antibiotics should be evaluated for complications, other sites of infection, and alternate diagnoses. If the diagnosis of pneumonia appears certain, and the patient has risk factors for drug-resistant pathogens additional pulmonary cultures should be done, and the empiric regimen should be expanded to cover additional resistant organisms.

Duration of antibiotic therapy in most patients with HAP or VAP of 7 days appears to be as effective as longer durations and may limit the emergence of a resistant organisms. However, for patients with a severe illness, bacteremia, slow response to therapy, immunocompromise, and complications such as empyema or lung abscess, a longer duration of therapy is indicated.