Preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis is defined as administering antibiotics prior to performing surgery to help decrease the risk of postoperative infections. The evidence supporting routine preoperative use of prophylactic antibiotic administration continues to grow. A 2008 study highlights the effectiveness of its administration during total hip and knee replacement, reducing the absolute risk of wound infection by over 80% compared to patients treated with no prophylaxis.

The timing of antibiotic administration may vary, but the goal of administering preoperative systemic prophylactic antibiotics is to have the concentration in the tissues at its highest at the start and during surgery.

The most common organisms implicated as causes of surgical site infections include

- Staphylococcus aureus

- Staphylococcus epidermidis

- Aerobic streptococci

- Anaerobic cocci

Other organisms, such as Cutibacterium acnes, are characteristically isolated in the setting of postoperative infections following shoulder surgery.

The preoperative antibiotic selection is generally based on the anatomic region undergoing the specific surgical procedure. When determining appropriate antibiotic selection, the goal is to have achieved a relatively narrow spectrum of activity while ensuring the most common organisms are targeted. Additionally, preoperative antibiotics are chosen based on many factors, including cost, safety, ease of administration, pharmacokinetic profile, bacteriocidal activity, and hospital resistance patterns. By addressing all of these factors during antibiotic selection, surgical site infections (SSIs) are minimized. In aggregate, SSIs constitute a significant factor driving negative patient-reported outcomes and independent risk factors for increasing the financial burden to the entire healthcare system.

Cefazolin is used most often for surgical prophylaxis in patients with no history of beta-lactam allergy or of MRSA infection. It is not used for surgical sites in which the most probable organisms are not covered by cefazolin alone (e.g., appendectomy, colorectal).

In patients requiring only cefazolin for preoperative surgical prophylaxis, clindamycin or vancomycin are often used as alternatives for those with significant allergies to the medication. Most patients with a beta-lactam allergy are able to tolerate cefazolin. In the case of MRSA colonization, or select patients at high-risk for MRSA (i.e., patients residing in nursing homes, patients with a history of MRSA infection, or patients with current positive MRSA colonization testing), vancomycin is the alternative unless additional antibiotics are required for possible gram-negative or anaerobic organisms.

Weight-based dosing should be followed per standardized protocol, and administration should occur within 1 hour of skin incision and continue 24 hours postoperatively. Furthermore, surgical durations of greater than 4 hours or estimated blood loss over 1,500 mL necessitates repeat intraoperative dosing of antibiotics.

- Cefazolin: 2 g (3 g for weight >120 kg) — standard adult surgical prophylaxis guidelines

- Vancomycin: 15 mg/kg

**Wound Classifications**

Wound types can be classified as clean, clean-contaminated, contaminated, or dirty/infected, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN). Clean wounds are not infected, without inflammation, primarily closed, and do not include the organ systems outlined in a clean-contaminated wound. Clean-contaminated wounds involve the respiratory, alimentary, genital, and urinary tract as long as the tract is entered without unusual contamination. Contaminated wounds include open, fresh accidental wounds, including those with non-purulent inflammation. Contaminated wounds also include procedures with significant breaks in sterile technique or gross spillage from the gastrointestinal tract. Dirty or infected wounds are old traumatic wounds with devitalized tissue, existing clinical infection, or perforated viscera. During clean procedures, skin florae such as coagulase-negative staphylococci (e.g., Staphylococcus epidermidis or Staphylococcus aureus) are predominant pathogens in surgical site infections. In clean-contaminated procedures, the most commonly found organisms causing surgical site infections are skin flora, gram-negative rods, and Enterococci.

**Skin Preparation**

Other preoperative actions include basic infection control strategies, instrument sterilization, and a patient's skin preparation (e.g., methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSA] decolonization, appropriate hair removal, skin antiseptic).Staphylococcus (CNS), a significant decrease in the rate of positive cultures for CNS and Corynebacterium, and a significant decrease in overall bacterial burden compared to soap-and-water shower alone.

MRSA screening via swabs of the anterior nares weeks before elective arthroplasty procedures and reflexively treating patients based on culture results is generally institution-dependent. Positive MRSA culture results can be treated with either 2% mupirocin twice daily for five days preoperatively to the nares or 5% povidone-iodine solution to each nostril for 10 seconds per nostril, 1 hour prior to surgery, in addition to vancomycin administration at the time of surgery.

**Splenectomized Patients**

Another area requiring special attention and consideration is infection prevention in patients with hyposplenism (or status post splenectomy). Davies et al. provided updated guidelines for the prevention and treatment of infections in patients with dysfunctional (or absent) splenic function:

- Pneumococcal immunization

- Haemophilus influenza type B vaccination

- Meningococcal group C conjugate vaccination

- Yearly influenza immunization

- Lifelong prophylactic antibiotics (oral phenoxymethylpenicillin or erythromycin)