In the clinical setting, each of the cranial nerves that innervate the eyes and the structures around the eye can present with specific signs and symptoms. These signs and symptoms can aid clinicians in identifying the cranial nerve that is affected.

**Optic Nerve**

Visual field defects: Since the optic nerve is responsible for vision, any lesions along the length of the optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, or optic radiation will present with different visual field defects. Optic nerve lesions can result in complete loss of vision in the ipsilateral eye (anopia). Proximally to the optic nerve is the optic chiasm. Lesions that affect the center of the optic chiasm result in bitemporal hemianopia. Bitemporal hemianopia is a loss of vision in the temporal region of the visual fields of each eye. Optic chiasm defects are classically due to mass effects such as pituitary lesions. While lesions that affect the lateral aspect of the optic chiasm will result in ipsilateral nasal visual field defects. Classically, lesions that affect the lateral region of the optic chiasm are due to the internal carotid artery compressing on the lateral aspect of the optic chiasm. Proximal to the optic chiasm is the optic tracts. Lesions that affect the optic tracts will result in homonymous hemianopia. An example of homonymous hemianopia is a lesion in the right optic tract that will result in defects affecting the left half of the visual field in both eyes. Now moving more proximal, the optic tract will become the optic radiations. The optic radiation divides into the upper and lower optic radiations. The upper optic radiation is located in the parietal lobe, while the lower division of the optic radiation is in the temporal lobe. Any lesion that affects the optic radiation will only result in a quarter of the visual field being affected. For example, if the lower division of the optic radiation (Meyer's loop) is affected, it will result in the contralateral upper and outer aspect of the visual field defects. As for the upper division of the optic radiation (Baum's loop), lesions here will result in the contralateral inferior outer visual field defects. Lesions that commonly affect the optic radiations are classically due to strokes from the middle cerebral artery. The optic radiation ends in the occipital lobe. Lesions that affect the occipital lobe will result in contralateral hemianopia with macular sparing. The reason that the macula gets spared because the macula receives its blood supply from the middle cerebral artery. Classically, lesions that affect the occipital lobe originate from the posterior cerebral artery. Lastly, lesions that affect the macula itself will result in defects in the central vision loss called central scotoma. A central scotoma is classically a result of macular degeneration.

Multiple sclerosis: In multiple sclerosis, the central nervous system becomes damaged due to autoimmunity. This condition usually presents in a young caucasian female of childbearing age. Multiple sclerosis results in demyelinating of the central nervous system, so affected individuals will have upper motor neuron symptoms. One of the classic symptoms is transient unilateral vision loss with painful eye movements, called optic neuritis. It's a condition due to extensive inflammation of the optic nerve. Unfortunately, multiple sclerosis is incurable.

Vasculitis: Lesions that affect the optic nerve can be due to the neural tracts, or it can be from ischemia. One critical condition that affects the superficial temporal artery is called "giant cell arteritis." Giant cell arteritis is vasculitis of large vessels that presents with an elderly female with unilateral headaches, jaw claudication, tender temporal artery with palpation, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate. On histology, this condition will show focal granulomatous inflammation of the temporal artery with giant cells. The fear complication of this condition is occlusion of the ophthalmic artery. The occlusion of the ophthalmic artery will result in permanent vision loss in the ipsilateral eye. The immediate treatment for this condition is high potency corticosteroids. The definitive diagnosis of Giant cell arteries is a biopsy of the temporal artery, but therapy should still be initiated promptly before the biopsy.

**Oculomotor Nerve**

The oculomotor nerve is unique; it carries parasympathetic nerve fibers on its surface. While the central part of the oculomotor nerve contains the motor nerve fibers. Lesions that affect the oculomotor nerve will manifest either as a motor or parasympathetic defect, depending on which part of the nerve gets compromised.

Parasympathetic: Lesions that affect the surface of the oculomotor nerve will manifest as a dilated pupil or absent pupillary light reflex. The dilated pupil is due to the unopposed sympathetic stimulation. The surface of the oculomotor nerve can become compromised due to masses compressing on it. Lesions that compress the surface of the oculomotor nerve can be due to aneurysm from the posterior communicating artery, uncal herniation, and cavernous sinus thrombosis. The parasympathetic nerve fibers can become ischemic from severe atherosclerosis or occlusion of the blood supply.

Motor: Compromised of the motor function of the oculomotor nerve will manifest as a down and out gaze with ptosis. The reason behind this eye position is the unopposed action of the trochlear and abducens nerve pulling the eye inferiorly and laterally, respectively. Causes of compromise to the motor function of the oculomotor nerve can be from ischemia from vascular disease or due to the build-up of sorbitol from diabetes. This ischemia is due to poor perfusion. The motor nerve fibers of the oculomotor nerve can be affected along with the parasympathetic nerve fibers with severe compression. The compression of the oculomotor nerve first affects the parasympathetic nerve fibers; then, it can progress to compression of the arterial blood supply.

**Trochlear Nerve**

Lesions that affect the trochlear nerve will manifest as the loss of function of the superior oblique muscle. A defected superior oblique muscle will cause the unopposed action from the other eye muscles, which will manifest in the affected eye as a higher resting pupil when compared to the unaffected eye. An individual with trochlear nerve palsy will tend to tilt their head toward the unaffected side to compensate for the defect. These individuals that suffer from trochlear nerve palsy complain of trouble with reading and descending stairs due to the inability to look down and medially.

**Trigeminal Nerve**

Since the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve provides sensory innervation to the corneal. If this nerve were to become compromised, there would be a loss of sensation on the surface of the eye, and this could lead to defected corneal and lacrimation reflexes. Complications of defected lacrimation can be dry eye. While a defect in corneal reflex can result in injuries to the eyes due to the impair blinking if a foreign object was to touch the eye.

**Abducens Nerve**

Lesions that affect the abducens nerve will result in the impairment of the lateral rectus muscle; this will result in the affected eye being more medial during rest as compared to the unaffected eye. This presentation is due to the unopposed action of the medial rectus muscle pulling the eye medially. Individuals with an abducens nerve palsy suffer from the inability to look laterally with the affected eye.

**Facial Nerve**

The facial nerve is responsible for closing the eyes by contracting the orbicularis oculi muscle. A lesion affecting the lower motor neuron part of the facial nerve (Bell palsy) will result in the unilateral facial drooping. The ipsilateral orbicularis oculi muscle will be affected, resulting in incomplete eye closure. The incomplete eye closure can lead to dry eyes and corneal ulceration due to the defected blinking. Other symptoms that accompany facial nerve palsy is ipsilateral hyperacusis, loss of taste sensation of the anterior tongue, and drooping of the forehead.****