**Arterial**

The blood supply of the biliary system originates from the celiac trunk, which branches off of the abdominal aorta at T12 level, giving rise to the splenic artery, common hepatic artery, and left gastric artery. Arterial supply to the biliary tract is well documented due to its clinical relevance in the liver transplant procedure. In general, the common hepatic artery plays a crucial role in providing oxygenated blood to the liver. Supplies to the biliary tree rely on an intricate network of plexuses from subsidiary branches of larger vessels, including hepatic proper, cystic, gastroduodenal, and posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. Paracholedocal plexus, as the name implies, supplies the medial and lateral side of the biliary duct, while epicholedocal plexus trails on the top of the duct. However, not all portions of the biliary tree receive equal blood supply from the nearby arteries. For example, the supraduodenal CBD (immediately inferior to the confluence between the cystic duct and the CHD) receives the least amount of blood supply, thus predisposing it to ischemic attack; the implication is especially strong in liver transplantation where the arterial supply is often disrupted.

**Venous Drainage**

The venous network that drains the biliary tree is parallel to that of its arterial counterpart. The main difference being that epicholedocal venous plexus drains into epicholedocal plexus. Epicholedocal plexus has a superior and an inferior outlet; the former joins the portal vein near the hilar of the liver, whereas the latter drains into the superior mesenteric vein before merging with the portal vein.

**Lymphatics**

The lymphatic drainage of the gallbladder is more commonly described than that of the biliary ducts. From the gallbladder, lymph flows through the cystic nodes, hepatic nodes, and finally, the celiac chains.