The most significant component of evaluation for a patient who presents with signs and symptoms of sinus bradycardia is history and physical exam. These should include vital signs (respiratory rate, blood pressure, temperature, and heart rate) and an electrocardiogram. During the evaluation, it should be established whether the patient is hemodynamically unstable; evaluation for this includes high blood pressure, altered mental status, or difficulty breathing. If the patient is healthy, athletic, and has no symptoms, then no further medical intervention is required. On the contrary, in older individuals, sinus bradycardia may point towards an unhealthy sinus node. Patients with congestive heart failure often have sinus bradycardia. These patients may have compromised blood supply from the right coronary artery or left circumflex artery to the sinus node secondary to some underlying ischemic heart disease.

Laboratory studies that should be ordered include:

- Glucose level

- Electrolytes

- Calcium, magnesium

- Thyroid function

- Troponin

- Toxicological drug screen

A 12-lead ECG is necessary to make the diagnosis.

If there are no signs or symptoms of acute myocardial infarction in a hemodynamically stable patient, then workup should be initiated for an infectious etiology (including chest x-ray, blood cultures, urinary analysis, viral panel) together with thyroid function tests. If a patient is found to have an infectious etiology or a thyroid abnormality, the patient should be appropriately treated for these underlying etiologies and re-evaluated. Upon re-evaluation, if this patient is no longer symptomatic and his heart rate returns to within normal limits patient could be evaluated for a possible sick sinus syndrome or a long-term implantable loop recorder.