Pain is a common reason patients seek medical care. Pain occurs due to both emotional and sensory inputs and has acute or chronic components. Acute pain has associations with the sympathetic nervous system with physical findings that include an elevated heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure. Pupillary dilation and diaphoresis may be evident.

Chronic pain usually does not involve the sympathetic nervous system and may be associated with depression, fatigue, loss of appetite, and loss of libido.

**Acute Pain**

It typically occurs in response to acute tissue injury and results from activation of peripheral pain receptors and specific A-delta and C sensory nerve fibers (nociceptors).

**Chronic Pain**

It typically occurs in response to ongoing tissue injury and is thought to be caused by persistent activation of A-delta and C sensory fibers. The severity of tissue injury does not generally predict the severity of the pain. Chronic pain may result from damage or dysfunction of the peripheral or central nervous system causing neuropathic pain.

**Nociceptive Pain**

Nociceptive pain can be somatic or visceral.

Somatic pain receptor stimulation produces dull or sharp local pain; burning is uncommon unless the skin or subcutaneous issues are involved. Locations of these receptors include the skin, fascia, subcutaneous tissues, periosteum, endosteum, and joint capsules.

Visceral pain receptors result in pain due to an injury of organ capsules and connective tissue. Pain can be localized or sharp. Visceral pain resulting from obstruction of a hollow organ is poorly localized, deep, cramping, and possibly referred to remote cutaneous sites.

**Pain Modulation and Transmission of Pain**

Pain fibers enter the spinal canal and the spinal cord at the dorsal root ganglia and then synapse in the dorsal horn. Fibers cross to the other side and up the lateral columns to the thalamus and then to the cerebral cortex.

Repeat stimulus from a chronic pain condition may sensitize neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. As a result, a lesser peripheral stimulus may cause pain. Peripheral nerves and nerves at other levels of the CNS may become sensitized, producing long-term synaptic changes in cortical receptive fields that exaggerate pain perception.

When tissue is injured, substances are released, causing an inflammatory cascade that can sensitize peripheral nociceptors. These include chemical messengers such as serotonin, bradykinin, epinephrine, calcitonin gene-related protein, substance P, neurokinin A, and prostaglandin E2.

Pain signals are modulated at multiple points in both ascending and descending pathways by several neurochemical mediators, including endogenous opioids such as methionine enkephalin and beta-endorphin, and monoamines such as norepinephrine and serotonin. These mediators are thought to increase, sustain, shorten, or reduce the perception of and response to pain. They mediate the potential benefit of CNS-active drugs such as antidepressants, anticonvulsants, opioids, and membrane-stabilizing agents that interact with specific receptors and neurochemicals in treating chronic pain.

**Psychologic Factors Causing Pain**

Psychogenic factors can modulate pain intensity. Emotion has a vital role in an individual's perception of pain. Patients in chronic pain have a high degree of psychological distress, often suffering from anxiety and depression. Patients with poorly explained pain may be incorrectly diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder rather than a legitimate underlying cause of the pain and are inappropriately denied pain relief, exacerbating the cycle of anxiety and depression.

Acute and chronic pain may impair concentration, memory, and thought processes. Pain may be multifactorial. Often the pain is due to both nociceptive components as well as neuropathic (due to nerve damage).

Psychologic factors may modulate pain. It affects how patients describe the pain and their response. The psychologic reaction to long-standing chronic pain interacts with CNS factors to induce changes in pain perception. Psychologic factors generate neural output that modulates neurotransmission along each pain pathway.